A Door opening into Christian Religion: Or, A Brief Account, by way of
QUESTION and ANSWER, Of some of the PRINCIPAL HEADS OF THE GREAT MYSTERY OF
Christian Religion.

Wherein is showed, by the way, That the Great Doctrines, here asserted, are no
ways Repugnant, but sweetly Consonant, unto, the light of Nature and
Principles of sound Reason.

By a Cordial Well-willer to that Unity and Peace, which are no Conspiratours
against the Truth.

-- Ye have need that one teach you again which be the first Principles of the
Oracles of God, etc. Heb. 5.12.

-- To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you
it is safe, Phil. 3.1.

Inter paganos quoque non defuerunt, qui dixerint singula, quae nostra Religio
habet universa. Hug. Grot. de verit Relig. Christ. lib. 4. 12. p. 151.

Fundamentis been jactis, non facile potest Aedificium infeliciter assurgere.

London, Printed, and are to be sold in Popes-head-alley, and at the Gray-hound
in Paul's Church yard, and in Fleetstreet, 1662.

An Advertisement to the Ingenuous READER.
Good Reader,
THere is no man but owes unto the world an account of his actions, when,
being necessary, they appear, or are like to appear impertinent. For that which
is impertinent, whether so really, or in opinion only, whilst so apprehended,
is a nuysance, or offense unto men: whereas that which is necessary, is an ease
and convenience. The numberless variety of Catechisms already extant in the
English tongue, scarce leaves a place in the judgments of many to judge this
necessary: any addition unto fullness, seems rather a superfluity. Though
these Papers entitled, A Door opening into Christian Religion are drawn up by
way of question and answer after the manner of a Catechism, yet is it much
larger and more fuller than ordinarily such things are. The great Doctrines
herein treated of, will be found by considering persons very Christian,
Evangelical, truly comporting and agreeing with the Scriptures, and are very
proper to build men up in their most holy Faith, and to promote the power of
Godliness in their hearts and lives: And upon these accounts, I presumed to
cause them to be printed for public benefit, having no other design in my eye,
but the honor of God, and the general good of mankind. It is possible here may
be some things treated of, both for matter and manner which ordinarily are not
found in other pieces of this nature; yet (I presume) thou may assure thy
self, that they all conspire together to make thee complete in the true and
saving knowledge of the great Mysteries of thy salvation. It is true, this
piece of Catechism (if so thou please to call it) is molded and contrived in
the nature of a Directory, Guide, or Assistant unto Masters of Families,
Parents, and Instructors of Youth, to put them into a way, and to furnish them
with matter, for the seasoning of the greener years and weaker capacities of
those under them, with saving knowledge, rather then to be immediately
propounded unto children, or such as are capable of feeding upon milk only, or
to be imposed upon these to be learned and understood, without the help of some
more able to explain now and then, some words and passages unto them.
Notwithstanding great care has been taken for perspicuity and plainness in
the framing and carrying of all things in it: only the matter rising sometimes
more spiritual then ordinary, may have occasioned some degree of obscurity, at
least to understandings not so expert, or skilful (as the Apostle speaks) in
the word of righteousness.

Good Reader, I shall detain thee no longer by the way, only wishing that the
spirit of the little body now in thy hand, were in thy heart and soul, being
fully assured, that it would both quicken and strengthen thee in thine
approaches unto God.

Farewell.
A DOOR OPENING TO Christian Religion.
CHAP. I.
Question 1.

WHat is Catechism?

Answer.

A Collection of the chief Points in Christian Religion, in a short and plain
way, for the instruction of young beginners in the profession of this Religion,
by way of Question and Answer: whereby they may be prepared and made more
capable of further knowledge therein.

Quest. 2.

What is Christian Religion?

Answ.

Christian Religion is that way of worshipping and serving God, which was
taught the world by Christ, that men might know how to please God, and so be
loved of him, and eternally saved by him.

Quest. 3.

Who is Christ?

Answ.

The Son of God, and of the Virgin Mary; being both God and Man, in one and the
same Person.

Quest. 4.

Who is God?

Answ.

God is a Spirit, Infinite in all Perfections, as in Goodness, Mercy, Bounty,
Wisdom, Knowledge, Power, Justice, Holiness, etc.

Quest. 5.

What is a Spirit?

Answ.

There are two kinds of Spirits: the one created; the other uncreated. A
created Spirit (properly so called) is a Substance, or Being endued with
Understanding, Reason, Will, Immaterial, Invisible, Immortal, etc. Such are the
Angels, both Elect, and Reprobate, as also the Souls of men, whether good, or
evil. There is only One uncreated Spirit, which is God; who is in Scripture
called a Spirit, not because he is of the same substance or nature, with
created spirits, but, because he resembles these in some of their properties,
as Immateriality, Invisibility, Intellectuality, Activeness, and such like.

Quest. 6.

How do you know that there is such an uncreated Spirit who is called God? or,
How can it be proved that there is a God?

Answ.

1. By the express testimony of the Scripture, which speaks often, and plainly
of him, and ascribes many great, and worthy, and wonderful things unto him.

2. By the testimony of Conscience within us, which accuses, troubles, and
condemns us for our evil and sinful doings, and cheareth and comfort us
upon our righteous and well doings. Neither of which it would do, but by reason
of a secret sense and persuasion it has, that there is such a Being as God,
knowing all that we do, whether good, or evil; rewarding the former, and
punishing the latter.

3. By the Creation of the World, which could neither make it self, for
nothing, whether created, or uncreated can do this: nor yet be made by any
other, but only by an Omnipotent and All-wise Being, and who is no part of it,
and which can be no other, but that Being, which is God.

4. By the works of Providence, the wise and gracious ordering and governing of
the World, in which, duly considered, there appears more wisdom and goodness,
more righteousness and power, then can reasonably be imagined, or supposed, to
be in any finite being whatsoever; or in any other, then that which is truly
called God.

5. (And lastly), By the testimony and consent of the whole World, or at least
of all the Nations far and near, under the whole Heaven, of which there is none
that is not touched with some sense of a Deity, or which acknowledges not that
Being, which is, and is accordingly called, God.

Quest. 7.

How many Gods are there?

Answ.

Only one, truly and properly so called, and no more. The Idols of the Heathen
are but Gods falsely so called: and Rulers and Judges of the Earth are but
Gods, figuratively and unproperly so called.

Quest. 8.

How do you know, or can prove, that there is only one true God?

Answ.

1. By the testimony of the Scripture, which often speaks very positively of
the oneness of the Godhead, or of God, and rejects all plurality of Gods.

2. The light of Reason plainly shows that there neither are, nor can be, any
more Gods, then one. For 1. If there were more Gods then one, there must be
more Omnipotents then one: for he that is God, must needs be Omnipotent. But
more Omnipotents then one there cannot be, because all the rest, but one, would
be superfluous in respect of the Creatures, or of any thing needful to be done
for the well-being, or happiness of any of them; and consequently, might,
without danger, be neglected and despised by them. For one Omnipotent is fully
sufficient to do all things, that any creature, yea, or all creatures, can
require, or stand in need of, to be done for them. But it is contrary to
Reason, that He, who is Omnipotent, or (which is the same) is God, should be
neglected, or despised by any creature without danger of being punished, yea,
or destroyed for it. 2. To suppose that there are more Omnipotents then one, is
in effect, and by consequence, to deny that there is any at all For he that
cannot do more, or greater things, then any other, is not Omnipotent: because
he may be prevented in the exercise of his power by the others doing, or making
all those things, unto the doing, or making of which, his power, being
Omnipotent, must be supposed to extend. And the things (I mean, the same
individual things) which are once done, or made, cannot be done, or made over
again, or the second time, no not by an Omnipotent power it self. 3. If there
were more Gods, then one, the world would be at a loss, and in distraction,
which of them to choose for their God, to love, fear, worship, serve, and depend
upon. For upon the supposition that there are many Gods, all truly and really
such, there can be nothing imagined that should determine the wills of men in
choosing from amongst them, which, or whom, to serve, and to worship, as their
God; because, upon the supposition, they must all be apprehended every ways,
and in all respects whatsoever, equal and alike eligible. And if there were an
universal suspension of the wills of men in this kind, so that no man did choose
any God at all, whom to love and serve as his God, the world must needs be
filled with profaneness: Nor could men choose many Gods to love and serve, in
case it be supposed there are Many; because the engaging, or giving out, of the
whole heart in love and service, is but a reasonable and meet allowance of
devotion and homage for one God. 4. (And lastly,) A plurality of Gods cannot
stand, because then no Creature could know his Creator, nor unto which of these
Gods to apply it self in acknowledgements and thankfulness for so great a
benefit, and vouchsafement. Nor is there the least glimmering of any Revelation
made unto any Creature, either in nature, or by grace, or in the Scriptures,
whereby to distinguish, or discern it is Creator amongst many Gods.


3. As the light of Reason contradicts and opposes a plurality of Gods; so
have the wisest and most considering men amongst the Heathen, as Socrates,
Plato, Aristotle, etc. accordingly declared themselves against it, asserting
and maintaining the being of one God only.

Quest. 9.

Whether is the Opinion, or Doctrine, concerning the Trinity, or the manner of
the subsisting of this one God in three Persons (so generally received amongst
Christians) to be believed or no? Or, Does it not imply a contradiction, or
impossibility that one in Essence or Substance should be three in Person?

Answ.

To the former part of this Question, The Answer ought to be Affirmative: to
the latter, Negative. The Doctrine of the Trinity (mentioned in the Question)
is to be believed, as being frequently insinuated, and sometimes plainly enough
delivered and expressed in the Scriptures: So that it has as much in Argument
and Proof, and as many Reasons for the Confirmation of its truth, as the
Scriptures themselves have to evince their Authority to be divine, and their
descent from God.

Besides, This Doctrine of the Trinity, does so marvellously accommodate, and
gives that credit and countenance to the great mystery of the Gospel, (I mean,
the counsel and design of God for the salvation of the world by Jesus Christ)
that it would hardly be (...) worthy to be believed, without it. For neither
would that redemption, or salvation of the world, which is ascribed unto Christ
by his death, be rational enough to become the wisdom and righteousness of
God, unless it were supposed, and taken for granted, that Christ is truly, and
by nature God: Nor would the work of sanctification which is ascribed unto the
Holy Ghost, the manner and terms considered, according unto which it is
ascribed unto him, be at all probable, or likely to subdue the judgments of men
unto it, unless they shall first believe, or understand, that he also is truly
God.

Nor is it a Testimony of slender value unto the Doctrine of the Trinity, that
the ancient Fathers of the Christian Church, famous both for learning and
piety, have so unanimously, all along from the times as near to the Apostles as
any authentic record will lead us unto, and with so little, and so
inconsiderable a difference in judgment amongst them about so great a mystery,
expounded the Scriptures in perfect consonancie to the said Doctrine. And this
Testimony of theirs, in the case in hand, is so much the more valid and
weighty, because it cannot be pretended (as in some other points it may, yea
and in some, is) that in this Argument they did securitis bequi, spoke, or
wrote, less attentively, or considerately as having none to question, or
oppose them, in what they did deliver therein. For they had several conflicts
upon the account of this Doctrine, as with the Arrians, Anti-Trinitarians, and
their Disciples. And though a man may without sin, and without making a breach
upon any principle in reason, in some cases dissent from Antiquity, especially
when it is not the main body of antiquity, but some particular members only,
from which he dissenteth; yet in a point of that transcendent consequence, as
the Doctrine of the Trinity is, for a private person, or some few
(comparatively at least strangers to the Scriptures) to say to the Congregatio
magna, or a great Congregation of antiquity assembled together in one, Ye are
all Deceived, and Deceivers of the Christian World, practicing your selves and
teaching others the same Trade of Abomination, as foul, as horrid Idolatry (in
a manner) as ever the poor blind Heathen practiced; For their Idolatry (as the
Apostle Paul described it, Romans 1.25.) stood chiefly in this, that they
worshipped and served the Creature, (...), that is besides the Creator? (as
the Praeposition (...) signifies elsewhere in this Epistle, Chap. 16. verse.
17.) For that they worshipped the Creator also, as well as, or together with,
their Idols, or Creatures which they worshipped, appears, Act. 17.23.
Therefore if the ancient Fathers all along their successive generations,
together with the universe of Christians taught by them, worshipped and served
Christ, and so the Holy Ghost, as God, as one and the same God with God the
Father, they must be judged, and condemned, as most gross, and grievous
Idolaters, if these ( Christ I mean, and the Holy Ghost) prove creatures only,
and not God. Yea Idolatry being one of those sins, which, without Repentance,
excludes from the Kingdom of God (1 Cor. 6.9.10. Revel. 22.15.) it cannot
well be conceived, how any of them should be saved, in case it be supposed that
they lived and dyed worshippers, and servers, of Christ. And the truth is, that
he had need have a very high esteem of his own understanding, and a confident
persuasion of much more then ordinary in it, that shall undertake to prove, or
conclude, that the whole Christian world (upon the matter, and an
inconsiderable number of persons only excepted) both teachers and people, for
so many ages together as have passed over the world since Christ was first
worshipped, as God, lived and dyed under the guilt of that Soul-destroying sin
of Idolatry. This for Answer to the former part of the Question.

Concerning the latter part of the Question; That one and the same Divine
nature, or Being, which we call God, should subsist in three, which we call
Persons, distinct each from other, may be numbered amongst the Apostle Peter's
(...) things hard to be understood [2 Pet. 3.16]: but not amongst the Logicians
(...) sayings involving a contradiction, or carrying in them an impossibility
of truth. For

1. The Divine nature, or being, differing on the right hand plus quam toto
genere, more then by the whole genus, from all created beings whatsoever, and
being supertranscendently, and incomprehensibly, excellent above the most
perfect and excellent of these, it is but reasonable to conceive that the
manner of it is subsisting should be proportionable, and appropriate to the
unparallable dignity of this Being; and consequently, that it should have no
communion with the manner, according unto which any created nature, or being
whatsoever, subsisteth. Upon which account it must needs be unconceiveable,
incomprehensible, by any created or finite understanding.

2. It is most agreeable unto reason that the Divine nature, or God, should
subsist in such a manner, or upon such terms, wherein he might enjoy himself
in the greatest and highest contentment that can be imagined; Yea in such
contentment, that infinitely surpasses the imaginations of men. Nor does it
bear hard upon any principle in reason to conceive, that it should be matter of
contentment unto God or unto the Divine nature, or being, to subsist in three,
equally partaking all the essential attributes and perfections of it; yet
really distinct one from the other in relative Considerations or Properties.
For by this means, God, or the Divine nature, thus subsisting in three, equal
in knowledge, equal in understanding, in goodness, holiness, and all Divine
qualifications and perfections, may well be apprehended to enjoy himself upon
terms best agreeable unto his nature, I mean in a way of a divine and meet
society, fellowship, and Communion. And Zach. 13.7. God the Father terms
Christ the second in order of the three, his Fellow, which must be meant in
respect of his Godhead. Awake, O sword, against my Shepherd, and against the
man that is my Fellow, etc. And when God [that is, the three subsisting in the
Godhead, or Divine nature] at the time of man's Creation spoke thus, Let us
make man in our Image, after our likeness, amongst other particulars intended
in, or by, this likeness, he might possibly include that aptness to society
with his own kind, which is found in the nature of man.

Why the Divine nature, or essence should subsist in three, and neither in more
nor in fewer; and so, why the first in order of the three, should make himself
known by the relation of a Father; The second, by the relation of a Son; The
third and last, by the appellation of Spirit, (with some other heights, and
depths belonging to this mystery) though some have essayed to give an account;
yet full satisfaction to the minds and understandings of men in such sublime
Notions, is (I suppose) reserved by God amongst many other heavenly
contentments unknown in this world, for the entertainment of his Saints in the
World which is come. But

3. Some diligent searchers into the hidden things of nature, have with much
confidence affirmed, that in several of these they have discovered and observed
the express footsteps of the Trinity, and have found plain Characters
representing their Creator as One in Three.

4. Some ancient and learned Philosophers, and Poets, amongst the Heathen, have
uttered several sayings, though in somewhat an obscure broken and indistinct
manner, by which notwithstanding it sufficiently appears that they had some
impressions upon their understandings of the subsisting of the first and
supreme Being, in Three: who yet constantly maintained the oneness of this
being. Therefore neither did these judge the opinion or doctrine of the Trinity
to involve any contradiction, or to wrong, or offer the least violence to the
reasons or understandings of men.

5. (And lastly) Neither is it credible, that Jesus Christ so unparalleld a
pattern of humility and self-denial, would have uttered with his own mouth such
expressions from time to time as the Gospel ascribes unto him; by which the
reasons and understandings of so many sober, pious, learned, and well advised
men, should be tempted into a conceit, or belief, that he is truly God, one and
the same God with the Father, in case he were a Creature only, and had no
communion by nature in the same divine essence with him. Nor is it any whit
more worthy belief, that the Holy Ghost, being the appropriate, inditer of the
body of the Scriptures, should prompt his holy Amanuenses, or Penmen, with so
many sayings as stand upon record here, by which the minds and judgments of so
many faithful and dear friends of God, should be so bewitched, so potently
drawn as they have been, into so gross, so foul, so dangerous and distructive
an error, as to believe him to be truly God, and consequently to worship and
glorify him as God indeed, if it be supposed, that, notwithstanding all that
he caused to be written upon the account of his own Honor and Dignity in this
kind, yet he was conscious to himself that he was but nihili nepos, of kin unto
nothing, and of the creature race. Doubtless the Holy Ghost, had he been a
creature, though an Angel, though an Archangel, and of an order nighest unto
God himself, would upon an occasion of any thing said by him that might with
the least probability induce men to think he were God, and so to worship him,
have rather cautioned them to take heed of such a snare, then leave it in the
way (as it were on purpose) for their foot to be taken in. For this is recorded
by him to have been the genius and manner of those excellent Creatures, the
Angels; I mean, to take men off from worshipping, or ascribing divine honor
unto them. See Judge. 13.16. Revel. 22.8, 9. Therefore certainly the Doctrine of
the Trinity as it is commonly taught? and believed, by Christians, contains
nothing in it that needs offend the minds reasons; or consciences of any men.

Quest. 10.

Whether is it safe, or meet, to use the word Person when we speak of the
Trinity, or of the three subsisting in the Divine nature, as to say; There is
one God and three Persons?

Answ.

Although the word Person, is not found used in the Scriptures about the matter
in hand (as neither is the word Trinity) yet may it conveniently enough, and
without offense, be applied to any of the three subsisting in the divine
nature. For by a Person is only meant an intellectual Individuum, or one who
partaketh with others in some intellectual nature, yet is distinct in his being
or subsisting from all those, with whom he thus partaketh. In this sense every
of the three in the divine nature, may be termed, a Person, because he
partaketh with the other two in this nature, being intellectual, and yet
subsisteth in this nature in a differing and distinct manner from them. Thus
God the Father subsisteth in the same intellectual nature, with the Son, and
with the Spirit [or the Holy Ghost]; but after a different and distinct manner
from them both, as, viz. in relation of a Father, or as generating a Son; in
which propriety, or manner of subsisting, neither of the other two partake with
him. In this respect he may be said to be a Person. In like manner, the second
(in order) of the three subsisting in the same intellectual nature with the
Father and the Spirit, but after a manner appropriate to himself, as viz. in
the relation of a Son, or one begotten, may be termed a Person also. There is
the same consideration of the third, who likewise may be termed a Person
because he subsisteth in the same nature with the other two, but in a manner
peculiar to himself; viz. as proceeding from the other two by way of Spiration.

CHAP. II. Of the Scriptures, their Authority, and Interpretation.
Quest. 1.

YOu still allege the Scriptures, for the confirmation and proof of what you
hold in the Questions propounded to you: Of what Authority and Credit are the
Scriptures, that you build upon them with so much confidence in matters of such
great Concernment unto you?

Answ.

The Scriptures are of the greatest and least questionable authority and credit
that may be; and are to be believed in whatsoever they either affirm, or deny,
before the apprehensions, dictates, or sayings of any man's sense, reason, or
understanding; yea before the most confident affirmations, or denials, of all
the men in the World, though agreeing and consenting in one upon the testimony
or credit of all their senses, reasons, judgments and understandings
(repectively.)

Quest. 2.

What makes the Authority of the Scriptures so sacred, and irrefragable, that
they ought not to be rejected, gainsaid, suspected, or doubted of, in any
thing they affirm or deny?

Answ.

The infallibility of their Author, which is God, his infallibility I say, as
well in the active as passive signification of the word. For as he perfectly
knows the truth of all things and is not liable to any error, ignorance, or
mistake in any thing; so neither is he capable of speaking, declaring, or
revealing any thing contrary to his knowledge. It is utterly impossible for him
either to be deceived, or to deceive any man.

Quest. 3.

How can it be proved that God is the Author of the Scriptures? or that they
proceed from him?

Answ.

This may be proved by sundry arguments, some taken from the Scriptures
themselves; others from other considerations.

Quest. 4.

By how many arguments taken from the Scriptures themselves, that is, either
from the matter of them, and the nature and quality of things contained and
revealed in them; or from the manner of the Language, style, or phrase, wherein
they are written, may they be proved to come from God?

Answ.

The subject matter of the Scripture, of the nature or quality of the things
contained, and revealed in them, afford five arguments to prove them to be from
God.

Quest. 5.

What is the first of these Arguments?

Answ.

The two great and heavenly designs, revealed, and discoursed in the
Scriptures: The one, the eternal Salvation of a miserable and lost world; The
other, the exaltation of godliness, righteousness, and true holiness in the
world. These plainly testify on the behalf of the Scriptures, that they are of
no meaner parentage, or descent, then from God himself. Reason does not permit
any man to conceive, or think, that any creature should ever conceive, or be
delivered of two such births, so transcendently glorious, and adorable as
these; nor yet that any Creature, whether good or bad, would ever falsely father
upon God any such excellent or worthy projections, as either of these.

Quest 6.

What is the second argument from the matter of the Scriptures, which proves
them to be from God?

Answ.

The most profound contrivances, and never sufficiently admired streins of
wisdom, by which the bringing to pass the two great designs mentioned, is,
acording to the Scriptures, intended by God, are good evidence and proof that
they [the Scriptures,] proceed originally from no other Author, but God.

Quest. 7.

What is a third argument drawn from the matter of the Scriptures, by which
they may be known to proceed from God?

Answ.

The discoveries that are made in the Scriptures of things so far remote from
the thoughts and apprehensions of men, as many things are, which are brought
forth into a clear and perfect light by them, as that manner, method, and time
of the Creation of the Heavens and the earth, with all the hosts of them; the
destruction of the old world, for the wickedness of it, by a flood; the
mystery of the Trinity, of the Incarnation of the Son of God, (with many
others), undeniably prove they came from an Author, that is greater in
knowledge and understanding, then all creatures.

Quest. 8.

What is a fourth argument affording proof from the matter of the Scriptures,
that their Authority is divine.

Answ.

The many predictions found in the Scriptures of contingent events, many years,
yea some ages, before they were to take place or come to pass, yet being duly
fulfilled, and coming to pass in their seasons, demonstratively prove them to
be of as divine Inspiration.

Quest. 9.

What is a fifth argument drawn from the subject matter of the Scriptures, to
evince their descent to be from God?

Answ.

That heart-searching property, which often discovers it self in the preaching
and opening of them by learned and faithful Ministers; yea and sometimes in the
diligent and attentive reading and meditating of them by men themselves. Many
times the secret thoughts, inclinations, and intentions of men's hearts are
presented unto them, in, and by the Scriptures, as their natural faces are
showed to them in a glass. Therefore he, who only searches the heart, and
tries the reins of the Children of men [that is, God] can be the Author of the
Scriptures.

Quest. 10.

What is there in the words, phrase, or style of the Scriptures, which gives
any light whereby to discern them to be from God?

Answ.

There is a kind of majestique plainness and simplicity in the style of the
Scriptures, very unlike the strein of humane Eloquence, and greatly differing
from the style of other writers, which gives strong evidence that their Author
and Inditer, is God. This argument the Apostle Paul takes notice of, where he
writes thus; Which things, [speaking of the things of the Gospel] also we
speak not in the words, which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches; Comparing spiritual things with spiritual, [or rather, fitting
spiritual things or spiritual matter, with spiritual words or with a spiritual
style,] 1 Cor. 2.13. The force of this argument cannot be well apprehended, but
by those that are in some measure acquainted with the books and writings of
other Authors; and so, able to compare them, in point of style, with the
Scriptures.

Quest. 11.

What other considerations are there, besides these taken from the Scriptures
themselves, which any ways prove them to be from God:

Answ.

There are several others of this import: but amongst these there are two,
which seem to have in them a great weight of proof in this kind.

Quest. 12.

What is the first of these?

Answ.

The special care and interposure of God by his providence, in all ages, that
they, neither in whole nor in part, should miscarry, or be lost; no nor yet
suffer any such defacing, or corrupting, but what might, and may be healed and
restored by men; notwithstanding the many revolutions, and turnings upside down
even in those parts of the world, where they have had their beings: whereas the
rarest, choysest, and most desirable writings of men otherwise, are wholly
perished, and lost. The names of some of them, as of Solomon's natural History?
(who spoke, as the Scripture testifies, of trees, from the Cedar that is in
Lebanon, even unto the Hyssop that springs out of the wall; as also, of
beasts and of fouls, and of creeping things, and of fishes, 1 King. 4.33) only
remaining: and of many others of them, some fragments and imperfect sentences
only.

Quest. 13.

How can you prove that no part of the Scripture is lost?

Answ.

The Scriptures of the old Testament, called the Oracles of God, are said to
have been committed unto, or entrusted with, the Jews ( Romans 3.2.) who are
known to have been and yet to be very solicitous, exact, and careful preservers
of this Treasure. Nor were there any more writings, or any other then those now
called the books, or scriptures, of the old Testament, committed unto them by
God, as his Oracles, or as given by divine inspiration; nor did Christ, nor any
of his Apostles, nor any of the Jewish Nation, and Religion, ever complain or
give the least intimation, that these Scriptures were any ways maimed, or any
part of them lost; but rather give Testimony unto their entireness and
compleatnesse. See Job. 5.39. compared with 2 Timothy 3. 15.16, 17. and Romans 15.4.
And for the Scriptures of the New Testament, the same books which are now
extant under this account, are found named, and reckoned accordingly, in very
ancient Records. Neither have any other been owned, or cited, by the Fathers,
who have lived and written since the days of the Apostles, as any part or
parts of the new Testament, but these only.

Quest. 14.

Is every thing to be believed as a truth of God, which is proved by the
Scriptures?

Answ.

Every thing that is substantially, that is, by sound and evident proof, proved
from the Scriptures, ought thus to be believed. But many things are pretended
and said to be proved by the Scriptures, when as there is no more but only a
color of proof brought from hence to prove them; as when the places urged and
insisted on by way of proof, are either mis-understood, or else mis-argued, or
misapplied.

Quest. 15.

How may a solid and sufficient Proof of a Doctrine from the Scriptures, be
distinguished, from that which is only colorable and in show?

Answ.

In many cases it requires a great exactness and profoundnesse of judgment, and
which few Christians, if any, do attain unto, to distinguish between the one,
and the other. But it is much more easy of the two, and will in a great
measure relieve a Christian under such a defect, to be able to distinguish
between a true Doctrine, or Opinion, and that which is erroneous or false. For
certain it is, that every true Doctrine may be substantially proved from the
Scriptures, though sometimes the proofs that are brought for such a Doctrine,
be impertinent and weak.

Quest. 16

But how may a true and sound Opinion, or Doctrine, be discerned from that
which is false?

Answ.

The Gospel, it self, being a body or pile of Doctrine (...) [1 Timothy 1.1.] that
is, made, and (as it were) purposely contrived for the advancement of
Godliness, it must needs be that every particular Doctrine, or Opinion, which
in the native tendency of it, is really apt and proper to promote Godliness in
the hearts and lives of men, is of correspondency with the Gospel, and either a
branch of it, or a true consequence of some branch of it; and consequently, a
truth.

Quest. 17.

What is your other Argument of the latter kind, to prove the descent of the
Scriptures to be from God?.

Answ.

The wonderful success which the Gospel The Gospel so frequntly avouching the
authority of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and universally according
with them; the same Argument, one and all, which prove it to be from God, prove
the whole Systeme or Body of the Scriptures, to be of the same Parentage and
Original with it.
found on the first going forth, and publishing of it, in the world. For,
notwithstanding the Persons, that were employed in the ministry and publishing
of it, were but few in number (comparatively); and these of mean rank and
quality in the world, some of the chiefest of them being bur poor Fishermen,
they and others of them illiterate and unlearned; yea, and notwithstanding the
Doctrine and Contents of this Gospel so strongly opposed, and were so highly
offensive unto, the wisdom, ways, and doings of the world, especially of the
Rulers, and Greatmen here: yet within a very short time it insinuated and
wrought it self into the most considerable parts of the then known world
planted it self, took root, and prospered in the chief Cities and places
thereof, notwithstanding the Powers of the Earth set themselves, as one man,
with all their policy, rage, and indignation to extinguish it, and to hinder
the course and progress of it.

Quest. 18.

What are the Scriptures? Or of what Books, or Writings do they consist; so
that none but these, and the things contained in them, ought to be reputed, the
Scriptures, or any part of them?

Answ.

The Scriptures consist, partly of the Books of the Old Testament, and partly
of those of the New; and not of any other Books, or Writings, or of any
Traditions whatsoever.

Quest. 19.

What are the Books of the Old Testament, which make one part of the
Scriptures?

Answ.

The five Books of Moses, which are these, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
Deuteronomie: Besides these, the Books of Joshua, the Judges, Ruth, the first
and second of Samuel, the first and second of the Kings, the first and second
of the Chronicles; the Books of Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job: the Books of the
Psalms, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, [or, the Song of Solomon]: the
Books and Writings of the Prophets, as the Prophecy of Isaiah, Jeremiah, the
Lamentations of Jeremiah; the Prophecies of Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos,
Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggie, Zachariah, Malachi.

Quest. 20.

What are the writings of the New Testament, which make up the other part of
the Scriptures?

Answ.

The writing of the Gospel by four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John;
the Acts of the Apostles (written by the Evangelist Luke); the Epistle of Paul
to the Romans, his first and second to the Corinthians, his Epistle to the
Galathians, to the Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the Colossians: his first
and second Epistle to the Thessalonians, his first and second to Timothy: his
Epistle to Titus, to Philemon: the Epistle to the Hebrews: the Epistle of
James: the first and second Epistles of Peter: the first, second, and third
Epistles of John: the Epistle of Judes the Apocalypse or Revelations.

Quest. 21.

Why should these Books, and none but these, be accounted the Scriptures?

Answ.

A sufficient account hereof has been given already in this Chapter, viz. in
those Arguments and Considerations, by which proof was made, that God is the
Author of the Scriptures. Besides this, the Books of the Old Testament, lately
mentioned, and no other but these, were (as has been also said) committed unto
the Jews as the Oracles of God, [that is, to teach and instruct the world in
things appertaining unto God, and to salvation.] And for the Books of the
New Testament (now rehearsed); these, and no other but these, have from the
Apostles days, been received upon the same account, by the general consent of
all Churches, that have been, and are accordingly judged truly Christian and
sound in the Faith.

CHAP. III. Of Christ, his Person, Eternal Generation, and Incarnation in time.
Quest. 1.

YOu have affirmed Christ to be the Son of God, and of the Virgin Mary: In what
sense, or respect, do you mean, that he is the Son of God?

Answ.

Christ may be called the Son of God three ways. First, by Nature. Secondly, by
Creation, or miraculous Production. Thirdly, by Adoption.

Quest. 2.

How is he, or why do you call him, the Son of God by Nature?

Answ.

The Scripture frequently calls him, in respect of his Divine Nature, or
Godhead, the Son of God, and the only begotten of God, Joh. 1.14, 18. Joh.
3.16; 18. 1 John 4.9. Heb. 1.2, 3, 5, 8. (besides many other places). So that
Christ considered as God, is, and may be called, the Son of God by Nature;
because he received this his Being from God the Father in such a way, or by
some such Eternal and Divine act, which holds the best proportion, and
nearest resemblance, amongst all actings known unto men, and whereof they are
capable, with the act of natural Generation.

Quest. 3.

How is Christ the Son of God by Creation, or miraculous Production?

Answ.

Because, in respect of his Humane Nature, and as Man, he received his Being
from God by the secret and extraordinary operation of his Spirit in the Virgin;
by which she was enabled to conceive him, and did conceive him without the
knowledge and cooperation of man.

Quest. 4.

How is He the Son of God by Adoption?

Answ.

Inasimuch as God the Father chose Him, to be. and accordingly has made Him
Heir of all things, [that is, Proprietour, and Lord, of all things, under him,
and for him,] Heb. 1.2. Joh. 3.35.

Quest. 5.

Why do you affirm him to be also the Son of the Virgin Mary?

Answ.

Because as Man he was conceived in her Womb by means of the coming of the Holy
Ghost upon her, and her being over-shadowed by the power of the most High, and
was accordingly brought forth by her according to the orderly course of Nature,
and as other children are usually born of their Mothers (respectively) Luke
1.31, 35. Mat. 1.20, 21.

Quest. 6.

But is it not contrary to reason, and above reason, to believe, that a Virgin
should conceive, and bring forth a Child?

Answ.

It is neither contrary to reason, nor above reason, to believe that God is
able to make a Virgin to conceive and bring forth, Nor is it contrary to reason
or above reason, to believe, that God should be willing to cause a Virgin
actually to conceive and bring forth, when he has a design requiring such an
exercise or interposure of his Power, for the regular and due accomplishment of
it. But it is most contrary unto reason, not to believe, that a Virgin has
conceived, and brought forth, when God has said it, and given sufficient proof
that he has said it; yea, and has given a most rational account both why such
a thing should be (I mean, that a Virgin should conceive), as why he should say
and declare it unto the world. All this He has done in the Gospel.

Quest. 7.

But is it possible that the two Natures, Divine, and Humane, so vastly, yea
infinitely differing the one from the other, should meet together so as to
constitute and make one and the same Person?

Answ.

With God (the Scriptures says) all things are possible, Mat. 19.26. And
again, The things which are unpossible with men, (that is, which men are apt to
judge, or think to be impossible] are possible with God, Luke 18.27. A kind of
shadowey proof of the possibility that two very different Natures may conspire
to constitute the same Person, we have continually before our eyes in the
course of Nature, where that spiritual Substance, which we call the Soul, in
due conjunction with an earthly Body, make one and the same Person of a Man.

Quest. 8.

But was not Christ a complete Person, whilst he yet subsisted in the Divine
Nature only, and before his assuming of the Nature of Man unto him?

Answ.

He was, in simple consideration, a most complete Person, whilst he subsisted
in the Godhead only, before, and without his being made Man. But he was not a
Person, actually, and every ways accomplished and fitted to perform the great
works, of the Redemption and Salvation of the World, until (as the Scripture
speaks, Joh. 1.14) He was made flesh, that is, assumed the Humane Nature into
personal union with his Godhead.

Quest. 9.

But did not his assuming the Nature of Man into Union with his Divine Person,
destroy the truth of his being a Person; causing him to cease from being a
Person any longer, and to become some other thing?

Answ.

In no wise: Because he did not take, or unite, another Person to his Divine
Person, but only another Nature (namely, the Nature of Man) wherein his Divine
Person subsisted without any breach made upon any personal propriety in Him.
For that Humane Body, and Humane Soul, which He assumed, was no Person of
Mankind, nor did they ever subsist of, or by themselves, or apart from his
Godhead; only his assuming and uniting them unto his Divine Person, made this
of a consideration by it self, far differing from all other persons,
subsisting, either in the one nature, or the other; I mean, either in the
Divine Nature, or Humane.

Quest. 10.

What occasion, or necessity, was there for the Incarnation of the Son of God;
or that Christ should become Man?

Answ.

As it was one of the greatest, highest, and most wonderful dispensations
wherein God ever appeared, to clothe his Son with flesh, and to invest him with
the Nature of Man, So was there the greatest occasion before him, that can
lightly be imagined, to put forth his hand thereunto, viz. The saving of a
miserable, lost, and ruined world, in a way which pleased him, as excellently
comporting with his Infinite Wisdom and Righteousness.

Quest. 11.

Was it then necessary for the Salvation of the World, that Christ should
become Man?

Answ.

Had it not been some-ways (at least), or in some respect, necessary hereunto,
it is not likely that God would have lift up his hand to so great a
Dispensation, in order to it; it being repugnant to Infinite Wisdom to levy
great and more then ordinary means, when the end may be otherwise obtained.

Quest. 12.

In what respect was it necessary for the Salvation of the World, that Christ
should be Incarnate, and made Man?

Answ.

That God might save the World, in a way, and by means, pleasing unto himself,
and well becoming him.

Quest. 13.

But might not God have saved the World, without the Incarnation of his Son?

Answ.

It is the opinion of many pious and learned men, both Ancient and Modern, that
He might. And if we respect the absoluteness of his Power, and the justness of
his Prerogative to do with his own what he pleases, (unto which, neither his
Justice, though Essential to him, nor his Severity against sin, are any
Enemies) it seems very reasonable to conceive that (indeed) he might. But, if
we respect the Infiniteness of his Zeal, not unto things or ways, that are
simply good or lawful, but unto such which are best, and most excellent and
honorable for him; it seems more probable that he could not, inasmuch as he
could not will so to do it.

Quest. 14.

But does the Scripture afford any ground to conceive? that it was more
honorable for Him to save the World by means of his Sons being made Man, then
it would have been to have done it in some other way?

Answ.

The Scripture plainly affirms, That it became him, intending to bring many
Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through
sufferings, ( Heb. 2.10.) Which words imply, that no other way of saving the
World would have become, at least so well become, him [that is, have been so
honorable unto him] as that which he has now taken, as viz. by such a
Mediator, or Undertaker of the work, whom he might Consecrate unto it, or put
into the most regular capacity for the performance of it by the suffering of
death. Now Christ had not been capable of this Consecration unto the great work
you speak of, the saving of the World, by suffering death, had he not assumed
such a Nature, wherein he might suffer it. Besides, if it should he said, or
thought, that there is, or was, any other way of saving the World, equally, or
as well becoming God, as to save it by the Incarnation of his Son (as now he
has done), he cannot be said to have chosen, or taken up this way by counsel,
but rather that he fell upon it (as it were) by lot. For where several means
are equally and in every respect alike expedient, and this equality perfectly
known before hand, there is no place for counsel, or for choice (properly so
called).

Quest. 15.

But why might not God, with as much honor to himself have saved the World by
an Angel, or by the Incarnation of an Angel, as by the Incarnation of his Son?

Answ.

First, The just severity of God against Sin being provoked by Man, could not
so well, or so observeably, satisfy or content it self, by the Sacrifice of an
Angel, being a creature of another nature, differing from that which had
provoked it.

Secondly, There being a world of men that had provoked God, the death or
annihilation of an Angel; or of the Humane Nature, though personally united to
an Angel, (if such a thing could, or should, be supposed) would have been a
Sacrifice of no considerable Balance in the Eye of Justice, to make an
atonement for such a vast number of Creatures so considerable, as Men are.

Thirdly, (and lastly), The Honor and Dignity in Equity belonging to so great
an Undertaking, prosperously achieved and performed, as the Salvation of a
lost World, were too high and glorious an Investiture for the greatest of
Angels, and only becoming the only begotten Son of God. See Phil. 2. v. 9, 10,
11.

Quest. 16.

But though it be granted that the Incarnation of the Son of God was necessary
for the Redemption and Salvation of the World; yet whether was it necessary
that he should be conceived and born of a Virgin, and not in the ordinary way
of natural Propagation?

Answ.

There may be several reasons why it should be necessary, or at least why it
should be more expedient, and better becoming the Wisdom of God, that he should
be born of a Virgin, then according to the course of ordinary Propagation. Of
which reasons one of the chief may be this: It being the will and pleasure of
God to involve Adam's whole posterity [ viz. which should according to the
course of nature descend from him, and which was seminally, in his Loyns] in
the guilt of his first sin, and condemnation due thereunto; it was necessary
that Christ, should be conceived and born in a way besides the course of
Nature, that so he might be born free from this guilt and condemnation, and so
be in a due capacity to make atonement for those, that were liable unto them.

Quest. 17.

But if Christ were the Son of a Virgin, or of a Woman only, and not of a Man
also; Why is he so frequently in the Scriptures, especially in the Gospel, both
by himself and others, styled, the Son of Man, and never the Son of a Woman?

Answ.

Although he be no where expressly called, the Son of a Woman, yet he is said to
have been made of a Woman, Gal. 4.4. And he is called the firstborn Son of
Mary, Mat. 1.25. where it is likewise said, ver. 23. that a Virgin should
conceive, and bring forth a Son. But when he is so often termed, The Son of Man,
the word, Man (...), (in the Greek) rather notes the kind, then the sex; being
a word as well of the Feminine, as Masculine Gender, and comprehended both
sexes. And though Christ was not the Son of any Man, by immediate Propagation,
as all other men have been, are, and will be; yet he was the Son of many
Male-Progenitours, as of David, Abraham, Adam, and many others, as is to be
seen, Mat. 1. compared with Luke 3.

Quest. 18.

But is Christ^ so often styled the Son of Man, for no other reason, but only
because he was a male-member of Mankind, or because he had Men to his
Progenitors?

Answ.

Although he could not properly be styled, The Son of Man, without the one and
the other of both these; yet neither the one of them, nor the other, nor both
together, seem to be the adequate, or chief, ground of that so frequent a
denomination of him.

Quest. 19.

What then do you conceive, or judge, may be the chief reason, or ground of
that Appellation?

Answ.

I suppose, to accommodate and relieve the infirmity, or weakness, both of the
Faith, and of the flesh of men. For Christ, being a Person so infinitely above
them as in respect of his Divine Nature, or Godhead; so in Glory, Majesty,
Holiness, Power, place of Residence, etc. as he is; the very thought of him,
without some allay or other to quallifie it, must needs be burdensome, if not
overwhelming, to their frail and weak flesh. But the consideration, that in
the midst of all this his super-transcendent elevation above them, yet is he
bone of their bone, and flesh of their flesh, and communicates in the same
nature with them, that he is the Son of Man, as well as the Son of God; this
much sweetneth their meditation of him, and strengthens their flesh to bear
the weight of his glory, and of the apprehension of it much more comfortably.

CHAP. IV. Of the Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Glorification of
Christ; and of his coming to Judgment.
Quest. 1.

WHat necessity was there, that Christ, for the Redemption and Salvation of
Men, besides his being incarnate, or made Man, should live, and converse in the
world, for several years, amongst men? Or, If his life had been taken from him,
as soon as he received it, or as soon as he was born into the world, had ii not
been sufficient?

Answ.

It was necessary in sundry respects, that Christ, should not only be
conceived, and born into the world; but, that he should also live to a good
maturity of years, walk and converse with men on Earth for a competent time,
etc. This was necessary chiefly in four respects.

Quest. 2.

What is the first of these?

Answ.

It was necessary that the Captain of the Salvation of those that should
believe, should go before them in such a way of life and conversation, wherein
God judged it meet to impose it as a law upon all those, that were to be saved,
to walk; that is, in a way of Innocence, Holiness, and all submissive Obedience
unto God, Heb. 7.26. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Mat. 11.29.

Quest. 3.

What is a second consideration, in respect of which it was necessary that
Christ should live to the complete age of a Man in the world?

Answ.

That he might kindle the fire of the Gospel in the world, for which he was
sent, before he left it ( Luke 12.49.); that is, that he might plant the
Doctrine of it (as it were) by his own hands, and make choice of men for
Apostles, whom he might send forth with a charge and instructions, to publish
and preach the same far and near throughout the world, Heb. 2.3, 4. Mat. 28.18,
19, 20. Mar. 16.15, 16, 17.

Quest. 4.

What is a third Consideration inducing the said necessity?

Answ.

That the laying down of his life might be a voluntary Sacrifice, or
Free-will-offering, and, consequently, of the higher acceptance with God. For,
had he not lived to years of discretion, and to the use of reason, he could not
have offered himself unto God, nor have given himself a ransom for all, nor
have laid down his life of himself, etc. In which voluntary resignments of
himself into the hands of death according to the will of his Father, the
Scripture places much of the efficacy of his Death for the work of Redemption,
Heb. 9.15. 1 Timothy 2.6. Joh. 10.17, 18. (with other places).

Quest. 5.

What is the fourth and last of the said Considerations?

Answ.

That by this means the truth of such Scripture-Predictions might be salved,
which either directly, or implicitly, presignified that his life should be
continued unto him in the flesh, until he arrived at the just age, or years of
a Man.

Quest. 6.

But Christian Religion does not only teach that Christ was made flesh, and
that he lived in the world to Man's estate, but that he suffered death also; Was
there any necessity of this for the work of Redemption, and Salvation of men?

Answ.

It was declared in the former Chapter Q. 16.
, how and in what respects the death of Christ was necessary for the Salvation
of Men. In that way of saving them, in which only, as being most honorable
unto him, God has been graciously pleased to do it, the death of Christ is
soveraignly necessary hereunto; yea, so necessary, that it may be truly said,
No death of Christ, ho life of Man.

Quest. 7.

How, or what, does the death of Christ contribute toward the Redemption, or
Salvation, of the World?

Answ.

It contributeth toward these by way of Ransom, or Atonement; that is, it is
in the Eye of Gods Justice, or just severity against Sin, a valuable
consideration for the Sin of the whole World, or for the discharge of all
those, from guilt and punishment, who have sinned against him, how many, or how
great soever their sins have been. So that he judges (and this according to
the most apparent truth) that he has as fully manifested his just displeasure
and indignation against sin, by delivering up his Son Christ unto death, as he
should, or could, have done by inflicting the vengeance of Eternal fire upon
all, and every person of mankind, that have sinned.

Quest. 8.

But for whom, or for the expiation or taking away of whose sins, did Christ
suffer death? Or, Whose salvation did God intend by it?

Answ.

Doubtless Christ suffered death for all men, and the Salvation of all men was
intended by God, by it. For the Scripture expressly says, that he gave himself
a ransom for all men, 1 Timothy 2.6. And Christ himself says that he would give
his flesh for the life of the World, Joh. 6.51. Elsewhere it is said of him,
that he was made a little lower then the Angels, by suffering of death that he
by the grace of God might taste death for every man. Heb. 2.9. And of God it is
said, that he will have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. and again, that he is
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance,
[and so be saved] 2 Pet. 3.9.

Quest. 9.

But if Christ dyed for all men, and God intends, or wills, the Salvation
of all men by him, How comes it to pass that all men are not saved? Or, Shall
all men be saved by him?

Answ.

The Scripture plainly declares, that all men will not be saved, yea that far
the greater part of men will perish, Mat. 7.13 14. Luke 13 24. But the reason
why any man perishes, or is not saved, is not, because Christ dyed not for
him, as well, or as much as he dyed for those that are saved; but because he
believed not in him, or on God by him, with such a Faith as those others did,
viz. which works by love.

Quest. 10.

Does then the Faith of men give efficacy, or virtue to the Death of Christ, so
that with it, it is able to save them, but without it, it is not able?

Answ.

The death of Christ is able to save men, that is, has a complete saving
efficacy in it, whether men believe or no. Yet this saving efficacy of it
takes place in no man, unless he believes (if by years and discetion, he be
capable of believing.) Nevertheless that which gives unto it the actual
efficacy of saving those that do believe, is not their Faith or believing, but
the authority of the gracious Decree or appointment of God, wherein he has
ordained, that all those shall be saved by the death of Christ, that shall
believe.

Quest. 11.

But if God intends the Salvation of all men, in or by the death of Christ,
Will not his intentions in this kind be made frustrate, unless all men be
saved?

Answ.

No: The reason is, because though he really intends the Salvation of all
men, in the death of Christ; yet he intends it not, nor (indeed) the
salvation of any man, any otherwise, or upon any other terms, then only in case
they shall believe. Therefore his intentions of the Salvation of all men by the
death of Christ, cannot be made frustrate, but only by the non-salvation of all
men; in case, or although, all men should believe.

Quest. 12.

But if Christ by his death satisfied for the sins of all men, is not God
unjust to punish any man for that, for which he has received full satisfaction?

Answ.

If the Intent, and Agreement of him that made or gave the Satisfaction, was,
that the benefit of this satisfaction should not inure, or accrue unto any
person, but only unto such, who should own, and acknowledge the same by
believing (which clearly is the case in hand), then is not God unjust to punish
unbelievers, notwithstanding the satisfaction made for them. He should in this
case rather be unjust, in case he should discharge any of the debtors, contrary
to the will and desire of him that has tendered the satisfaction, or contrary
to the Covenant which he has made with him.

Quest. 13.

But was it necessary for the work of Redemption, or expiation of sin, that
Christ should suffer death? would not lesser, or lighter sufferings sustained
by him, in respect of the dignity of his person, have been sufficiently
availeable thereunto?

Answ.

It was not simply, and barely the Redemption of the World, or the expiation of
sin, which God intended by Christ, but the effecting of both upon the most
honorable terms, both for his wisdom, righteousness, and severity against
sin. Therefore though it might be a question, or matter of doubt, whether some
under-sufferings of Christ, might not have effected the Redemption of the
world, simply considered, or without any breach made upon equity; yet it can be
neither, but that the death it self of Christ was necessary hereunto, in that
way of effecting, or procuring it, which was only pleasing in the sight of God.
And it is a clear case that God's just severity against sin, could not have
been so fully manifested by any lighter sufferings of Christ, as now it has
been by his Death.

Quest. 14.

What manner, or kind, of death was it that Christ suffered?

Answ.

The death of Crucifying, or of hanging nailed upon a Cross, until he were
dead.

Quest. 15.

Why did he suffer this kind of death rather then any other?

Answ.

This was that kind of death, which the Romans, under whose jurisdiction Christ
suffered, usually inflicted upon their Malefactors, being both ignominious and
painful. And besides, there was a special hand of Gods providence in Christ's
suffering this kind of Death; for by this it was the more lively declared, that
he was made a Curse for those, that were under the curse of the Law; According
to the saying in the Law it self, Deu. 21.23. he that is hanged is accursed of
God. See Gal. 3.13.

Quest. 16.

But if Christ by his death fully satisfied the justice of God for the sin of
man, or of mankind, how comes it to pass that men themselves, yea believers,
as well as others, are punished by him with death, and with many other
afflictions, notwithstanding this Satisfaction?

Answ.

Although Death, with the sad retinew of other Sufferings, at first came into
the world upon the account, and by means of, sin already committed; and came in
the nature and notion of punishments for it; yet Christ by his satisfaction
has so altered the property of them, that they are not now properly
punishments for sin committed, (though sin committed may occasion, or cause
them to be inflicted by God; as 1 Cor. 11.30.) but chastisements to prevent the
commission of sin, and so to prepare and render them meet for salvation; being
inflicted, though justly, yet not out of justice, but out of love and mercy, by
God. See and compare Heb. 12.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 11.32. 2 Cor. 6.9.
Revel. 3.19. Deu. 8.5. Esa. 26.16. Psalm. 94.12. Jer. 31.18. (with some others);
yea Death it self, is, and may, in this respect, be called a Chastisement, and
not a punishment, viz. because it prevents further sinning, and makes way for
the Saints into their Glory. Notwithstanding, because chastisements are like
unto punishments, and the same in the letter, and substance with them; they may
sometimes (according to the rule, Similiae similium nominibus gaudent, Things
alike are often expressed by the same names) be called, Punishments, as Levit.
26.41.43. Lam. 3.39. Am. 3.2. and elsewhere. So likewise, because when they are
very grievous and sore, they are like unto the effects of wrath and anger, they
are sometimes ascribed to these passions in God, as the cause of them. Esa.
12.1 Psalm. 79.5. Zech. 1.15.

Another Answer to the Question may be; that Christ has not made by his death
full satisfaction to the justice of God for men's sins, upon any such terms, as
either to indulge or harden any man in the practice of sin by securing him from
the stroke of Gods displeasure when he offends; nor yet to deprive God of his
Liberty to govern the World, or particularly, his own house, the household of
Faith in wisdom, righteousness, and equity, and consequently, to judge and
punish delinquents in either, when he sees just cause; but the compleatness,
or fullness of this Satisfaction, stands in this; that God may, in
consideration thereof, without the least reflection upon, or disparagement
unto, his justice, or perfect hatred of sin, forgive all men all their sins
upon their unfeigned Faith and Repentance; notwithstanding he may in some cases
(as in that of David* 2 Samuel 12. ver. 13, 14.) upon another account (as viz.
for the vindication of his righteousness, and impartialitie in the Government
of the world, before the men thereof) correct with temporal chastisements,
great and known Offenders; the truth of their Faith and Repentance
notwithstanding.

Quest. 17.

How long did Christ remain in the state of death?

Answ.

By the space of three days and three nights ( Mat. 12.40) that is, of one
whole natural day (in the middle) and part of two other of these days. Now a
natural day consisting of 24 hours, and so comprehending the night in it, our
Savior by the figure Synecdoche, expresses two parts of two of these days,
and one entire one, by three days and three nights: So that he reckons that
part of the sixth day of the week, on which he was crucified (which we call
Friday) which remained after his being crucified, dead, and laid in the grave
being between three and four of the clock in the afternoon, unto the end of it;
this part (I say) of this natural day he reckons for the first of the three
days, and three nights, of which he speaks. The seventh day of the week
(called Saturday) the whole time whereof he remained in the state of death, and
in the grave, he accounts for the second. That part of the first day of the
week (by us called the Lords day or Sunday) which was before his resurrection,
he computeth for the third, and last, of these three days and three nights.

Quest. 18.

Why did Christ remain thus long (viz. three days, and three nights, in the
sense declared) in the hand, or state of death?

Answ.

Because God judged this a sufficient time, to evince and prove the truth and
certainty of his death, for the full satisfaction of those, whom it concerned
to believe it; some having been thought to be dead for several hours together,
who yet were not dead, but in a trance only.

Quest. 19.

Why did he remain no longer in the state of death, but only for three days,
and three nights?

Answ.

First, because by this time (as was even now said) he had sufficiently
confirmed the truth of his death, by which he had wrought the great work of
Redemption, and made atonement for the World. So that there was no further
necessity, or occasion of his remaining in the bonds of death. And it was most
contrary to his will and pleasure to cause or suffer, his Holy one to suffer
impertinently, who takes care that his ordinary Saints be not in heaviness,
except it be when need requires it, 1 Pet. 1 6.

Secondly, it was the unchangeable will of God, according as it was foretold by
David long before ( Psalm. 16.10. compared with Acts 2.27. etc.) that his Holy
one, [meaning Christ] should not see corruption. Now it has been the
observation of some, and is (I conceive) the judgment of more, that a dead
body, after three days lying in the Grave, begins to putrify and corrupt;
which seems also, by that saying of Martha (concerning the interred body of
her Brother Lazarus, Lord, by this time he stinketh: for he has been dead four
days Joh. 11.39.) to have been received for truth among the Jews. So that
God, to keep his Holy one in the grave longer then three days, from seeing
Corruption, must have wrought a Miracle, and not long after another Miracle
greater then that, viz. in raising him from the dead. But God is not pleased to
multiply miracles, but only to accommodate great necessities, or occasions.

Quest. 20.

But if the death of Christ was only temporal, and of no longer Continuance
then three days, and three nights, how can it be a reasonable compensation to
the justice, or just severitie of God against sin, which required the eternal
death of so many millions as should sin?

Answ.

To this Question, Answer has in part been given formerly, where it was (in
effect) said, that, the infinite dignity of the person considered, it was
altogether as high ah act, or as high an expression of Gods just hatred and
severity against sin, not to absolve those, or any of those, that had sinned,
but only upon the account of the death, yea be it but of the temporal death of
Jesus Christ, as it would have been to have punished all, and every one of the
said sinners, with death eternal. Unto which this may be added; that it was not
eternal death, as such (I mean, as Eternal) which the justice of God required
of those that should sin, or had sinned, but death simply; In that day that
thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die [or, according to the Hebrew, dying
thou shall die] Genesis 2.17. This death (indeed) consequentially, and (as it
were) by accident, would have been eternal, viz. through the weakness and
inability of the creature, on whom it was to be inflicted, being not able to
deliver it self from it. For if (for argument sake) it could be supposed, that
any creature, on which God shall inflict death for sin, (be it that death which
we call temporal) could recover it self from under this death, or restore it
self unto life again, it is not reasonable to think that God would punish this
creature with another death, or inflict death upon it the second time, for that
sin, for which the first death was inflicted. The Apostle Paul (I conceive)
insinuates this notion, where he says (though by way of allusion) that he that
is dead [or, that has died, (...) is justified [(...)] from sin, Romans 6, 7.
meaning that a perfon having once suffered the sentence of the Law, which is
Death, is not further responsible for his miscarriage, but stands in the eye of
this Law, as innocent or righteous. So that the death of Christ, though but
temporal, yet is, not only upon a geometrical, or upon an equitable account,
but even upon an arithmetical, strict, or literal account, a full compensation
to the justice of God against sin uttering it self in that threatening, In the
day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death.

Quest. 21.

Was there then any occasion, or necessity, for the Resurrection of Christ from
the dead, save only for his own benefit, and advancement?

Answ.

Yes: The Apostle Paul expressly teaches us, that he was raised again [ viz.
from death] for our justification, Romans 4.25. which the Apostle Peter
interprets, at least in part, where he says, that God raised him up from the
dead, and gave him glory, that your Faith and Hope might be in God. 1 Pet.
1.21. And the former Apostle elsewhere says; If Christ be not risen then is
our preaching vain, and your Faith is also vain. 1 Cor. 15.14.17. If Christ had
still remained, or been deteyned by God, in the prison of Death, it would have
argued that he had failed, or fallen short, in giving that satisfaction unto
the justice of God for sin, which was undertaken by him, and consequently,
there could have been no sufficient ground for any man to believe in God for
the forgiveness of his sins upon the account of his death; without which
Faith, there can be no justification. Whereas his being discharged by God from
his imprisonment in death, effectually proves that he had made full payment
unto him of that debt, which he had taken upon himself to discharge. And upon
this account there is firm footing for every man to expect by Faith the
forgiveness of his sins at the hand of God.

Quest. 22.

By what, or whose power, was Christ raised from the dead?

Answ.

The Scripture ascribes his raising, or riseing again from the dead, sometimes
unto himself, or his own power; and sometimes [and more frequently] unto God
[the Father], and his power. See, and compare Joh. 2.19. Romans 1.4. Joh. 10.18.
1 Pet. 3.18. Romans 14.9. Act. 24.32. Act. 5.4.10. Act. 5. 30. 1 Cor. 15.15. Ephesians.
1.20. (with many others.)

Quest. 23.

Why is the resurrection of Christ attributed unto himself, or his own power?

Answ.

For the confirmation of this great Article of our faith, that he is truly, and
by nature God, or the natural Son of God ( Romans 1.4.) inasmuch as none but God
is able to raise the dead. Ephe. 1.19, 20.

Quest. 24.

Why is his resurrection ascribed unto God [the Father]?

Answ.

Partly to make the belief of it more passable with men; inasmuch as it is no
ways incredible, but that God should be able to raise the dead ( Act. 26.8.)
though such a thing exceed's the power of every created being; partly, to
confirm and satisfy us in this so great a matter of concernment to us, that he
is fully satisfied with the death and sufferings of Christ for the sins of the
world, and upon this account has (as it were) with his own hands brought him
out of the prison of death, wherein he had been detained for a season.

Quest. 25.

What does the Apostle Paul mean, by a man's knowing the power of Christ's
Resurrection, as likewise the Fellowship of his sufferings? Phil. 3.10.

Answ.

By knowing the power of Christ's resurrection, he means an inward and real
sense, or apprehension, how mighty and glorious an encouragement the
resurrection of Christ is unto any man to believe in God for salvation. Or
else, how powerful an influence the resurrection of Christ, rightly
apprehended, has upon the Consciences of men, to forsake all their dead works,
and to walk in newness of Life. Romans 6. verse 4. Compared with verse 5.

By Fellowship with Christ in his Sufferings he means, a man's dying [that is,
his declining in love and affection] to this present World, and to all vain and
sinful Contentments, ingageing and provoking himself hereunto by the
Consideration of the Sufferings of Christ for him. He (says Peter) that has
suffered in the Flesh, [that is, who has conformed himself unto Christ, who
suffered in the flesh for him] Has ceased from Sin. (1 Pet. 4.1.)

Quest. 26.

How long after Christ's Resurrection, was it before his Ascension?

Answ.

The space of forty days. Act. 1.3.

Quest. 27.

Why did he make his abode on Earth for so long a time after his Resurrection,
before he asscended?

Answ.

Because God judged this space of time, necessary, and competent, for him to
give full assurance of the Truth and Certainty of his Resurrection, unto his
Apostles, by exhibiting several enterviews of himself unto them, and this at
times somewhat distant, for their better satisfaction; as also to give
instructions unto them about managing that great, and weighty affair of
preaching, and publishing the Gospel throughout the World, which they were now
shortly to enter upon, with such other things as related hereunto, as the
raising, and ordering of Churches, etc.

Quest. 28.

Whither did Christ ascend?

Answ.

Far above all Heavens, ( Ephesians. 4.10.) that is far above all visible
Heavens. For otherwise God himself is said to be in Heaven. Mat. 6.9. and
elsewhere; yea and Heaven is said to be his dwelling place. 1 King. 8.49.
Elsewhere he is said to be gone into Heaven, (simply) as Act. 1.11. and 1 Pet.
3.22. So to have entered into Heaven. Heb, 9.24. Therefore it is like that the
Apostles meaning is, that he asscended into that Heaven which is called the
Heaven of Heavens, Deuteronomy. 10.14. where God converseth face to face with his Holy
Angels, revealing himself in all his glory unto them: The situation of which
Heaven is far above all those other globes, or Spheres, which in respect of
their feat above the Earth, are called Heavens.

Quest. 29.

Was the Ascension of Christ any ways necessary, or conducing to the benefit
of the world, or the salvation of men?

Answ.

His Ascension, as it includes, or implies, his inauguration or entrance into
his great Dignity and Glory? (in which notion the Scripture commonly speaks of
it) was necessary to minister an opportunity unto the Father, together with
himself, to send forth the holy Spirit into the World, after another manner,
and upon far more gracious and glorious terms, then according to his being
in it formerly. The reason why the Holy Ghost was not thus given some-while
before, is said to be, because Jesus was not yet glorified that is, entered into
his glory] Joh. 7.39. So a little before his Death, he tells his Disciples,
that it was expedient for them that he should go away [meaning that he should
ascend into Heaven, or go up unto his Father] For (says he) if I go not away,
the Comforter, will not come unto you: But if I depart, I will send him unto
you. Joh. 16.7. And Ephesians. 4.8. when he ascended up on high, he led Captivity
Captive [that is, that his triumphant Ascension declared, that he had conquered
Sin, Death, and Hell; and so had dissolved, or turned that great and sad
Captivity, or Thrauldome, wherein the World was detayned by Satan as having
been conquered by him] and gave Gifts unto men: and ver. 10 it is said, that he
ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things [that is,
that he might heal the emptiness and vanity of the World, by filling men with
the sound and saving knowledge of God; which he did by giving the gifts
mentioned, ver. 11. And he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc.

Quest. 30.

In what respect, or how, did the Ascension of Christ, give an opportunity unto
the Father, and to himself to pour out the Spirit, as they did, upon it, on
all flesh, and give those great and rare gifts mentioned?

Answ.

As Kings and Princes are wont to show their bounty and magnificence unto their
poor Subjects in some signal manner, as by scattering Gold and Silver
plentifully amongst them, at their Coronation, and first Solemn entrance into
their Kingdoms, a time of joy and gladness of heart being most natural and
proper, wherein to exercise acts of Grace and Bounty; So God the Father to
express his great joy and high contentment in the advancement of his Son to
that Royal Dignity wherein he was now invested; and the Son also to express the
fullness of his joy, in that glory which his Father had now conferred upon him,
agreed in one to declare the riches of their munificent bounty unto the world,
by a liberal donation of that Heavenly Treasure, the Holy Ghost (the joint
possession of them both); and by a collation of such gifts unto men, which were
sufficient to enrich the world for ever, and to raise up the Tabernacle of
Adam, which was fallen and sunk as low as Hell.

Quest. 31.

What is the Glorification of Christ?

Answ.

That act of God the Father, whereby he has given unto him all power in
Heaven, and on Earth, (Matthew. 28.18.) and has set him at his own Right Hand in
heavenly places, far above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and
Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in
that which is to come: And has put all things under his feet, and given him to
be the Head over all things unto the Church (Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22) That at the
Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things on Earth,
and things under the Earth, etc. Phil. 2.10, 11.

Quest. 32.

What does this glorifying of Christ by God the Father, import or signify unto
the world?

Answ.

First, It is an higher ground, or larger foundation, whereon to build our
Faith, and Hope in God, then his Resurrection: because it more fully argues
and confirms, that he was very highly satisfied and pleased with his Death
for the Sin and Salvation of Men; inasmuch as it was upon, and for, this
service performed, that he so highly dignified and exalted him, Phil. 2.8, 9,
10. compared, Who by him do believe in God, who raised him from the dead, and
gave him glory, that your Faith and Hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. See also
Romans 8.34. Ephesians. 1.20.

Secondly, It much enliveneth and strengthens our comfort about the
effectualness and success of his Intercession for us. The more he is honored
and advanced by God, the higher he must needs be conceived to be in grace and
favor with him: and according unto these, his prevalency with him in all his
motions and applications unto him, must in reason be estimated and believed.

Thirdly, The excellency of the glory, unto which Christ is advanced by God,
renders the Gospel so much the more authoritative, and awful, in and over the
hearts and consciences of men; and makes the neglect of it, and every sin
committed against it, the more detestable and threatening. For, what can
reasonably be judged a greater abomination, and more provoking in the sight of
God, then for that silly creature called Man, to despise, or neglect him, whom
he, in the presence of Heaven and Earth, has judged worthy of that
unconceiveable weight of Glory, which he has laid upon him.

Fourthly (and lastly), It highly commends his service to the Judgments and
Souls of Men, making it the most rational and connatural engagement unto the
Intellectual Creature, of all others. Many (says Solomon) [ seek the face [or
favour] of the Ruler, (Prove. 29.26.) which shows it to be very agreeable to
the nature of flesh and blood so to do. And the greater in place, and power any
Ruler is, the hearts of men are so much the more inclinable, and easily drawn,
to seek his favor, especially when they have any promising Door of Hope open
before them, that by seeking they may obtain it. Therefore the
supertranscendent greatness of the Glory and Power wherein Christ reigns, is
of excellent consequence and import to draw all men unto him, ( Joh. 12.32.) to
persuade the world to seek his favor, and to work their hearts to so much the
more readiness and willingness to accept of his most gracious offer to
entertain them in his service, if they desire it.

Quest. 33.

You lately made mention of the Intercession of Christ: What is this
Intercession of his, or, How may we conceive of it?

Answ.

The Intercession of Christ does not signify, or import, any Deprecation, or
Supplication made by him unto God, for mercy, grace, or favor to be showed
unto men; for, such a thing might seem to argue the insufficiency of the
Sacrifice (of Himself) offered by him: but it implies, that his perpetual
presence in all blessedness and glory with God, does continually, and without
ceasing (as it were) argue and plead the efficacy and vigor of that his
Sacrifice with him, as being fully sufficient or meritorious, for the obtaining
of him all those great favors and blessings for men, for the procurement of
which it was offered by him; The only showing, or presenting of Himself, before
God, in that great Glory which himself has conferred upon him, and upon the
account of that his Sacrifice, is an argument or proof attested by God himself,
and subscribed (as it were) with his own hand, that the Sacrifice which he
offered, is worthy to be honored by him with showing all that grace and favor
unto men for the obtaining of which it was offered. According to this notion,
the Intercession of Christ we speak of, is described to be, His appearance in
the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. And his being at the right hand of God,
[that is, his great Dignity and Glory given unto him by God] is mentioned as
precedaneous to his Intercession, and making way for, or giving efficacy unto
it, Romans 8.34. See also Heb. 7.25. Heb. 9.24.

Quest. 34.

For whom does Christ Intercede? for the Saints or Believers only, or for some
other with these, or, for all men?

Answ.

The Intercession of Christ answers his Death, and is commensurable unto it
in the ends and purposes of it, as appears (in part) from what was even now
said concerning it. Therefore as Christ (according to what was formerly in this
Chapter showed from the Scriptures) died for all men; so there is little
question, but that he intercedes for all men likewise. But as he dyed not to
obtain, or procure, the same things, or favors, for all men considered as now
differenced, or distinguished, some from others, by Faith and Unbelief, by
Repentance and Impenitency, etc. So neither does he intercede for all men, thus
considered, upon the same terms; my meaning is, That he does not intercede with
God to obtain the same respects, benefits, or favors from him, for Believers,
and for Unbelievers; for Apostates, and for persevering Saints; for those who
are grown old and obdurate in sin and wickedness, and for those in whom the
weakness of Nature has newly put forth in actual miscarriages of sin and
disobedience, etc.

Quest. 35.

With what difference then does he Intercede for both sorts of Men, for those
that are good, and for those that are evil; for those that believe, and for
those that continue in unbelief?

Answ.

Look what mercies, favors, and good things the one sort of these men receive
from God, and what the other receive likewise; and by this it may be known with
what difference Christ Intercedes for the one and for the other. For certain it
is, that what grace, mercy, favor, or good soever, is showed by God unto the
world, (I mean, unto persons of all characters, whether of righteousness, or of
sin, respectively) is the genuine fruit of the Intercession of Christ. For, it
is for his sake, and by means of his mediation, that the iniquity of the world
is not every moment the ruin of it. So that as Christ intercedes on the behalf
of his Saints, that their infirmities and weaknesses may make no breach between
his Father and them; that God will enable them by his Spirit to continue in
Faith and Love unto the end, that he will afford them sufficient means for
their spiritual Edification, that he will supply them with all things needful
for this present life, etc. So, on the behalf of other men, yet sinful and
unconverted, he Intercedes that a larger space of Repentance may be granted
unto them, that God will give them sufficient means for their Conversion, and
making themselves new hearts, [ Ezekiel. 18.31.]; that of some of them God will
fill their hearts with food and gladness, that hereby they may be provoked to
love him, and believe on him for greater things; that unto others of them he
will administer seasonable corrections, by which they may be admonished to look
up unto him, and seek after him, etc. as in his Wisdom, Righteousness, and
Goodness in the Government of the World, he shall judge best, and most for his
glory, and that obstinate and careless sinners may be left without excuse in
the day of Judgment.

Quest. 36.

How know you, or how can you prove, that there will be a day of Judgment?

Answ.

The Scriptures speak nothing more plainly, more convincingly, more frequently,
then this; Witness these, and several other like places, Joh. 5.28, 29 Act.
17.31. Romans 2.5, 6, 7, etc. Romans 14 10. 2 Cor. 5.10. Matthew. 16.27. Matthew.
25.31, 32, etc. 1 Pet. 4.5. 2 Pet. 3.7. Jude v. 14, 15. Rev. 20.11, 12, 13, etc.

Quest. 37.

But is not every man judged at, or immediately after, the time of his death?
If so, What occasion, or need is there of a General Judgment afterward?

Answ.

The Scripture no where teaches, that either good men receive the Sentence of
Absolution from God, or from Christ; or evil men the Sentence of Condemnation,
at, or immediately upon their death, but the contrary rather; as viz. that the
judgment both of the one, and of the other, is respited, or suspended until
the great day of the General Judgment. Concerning the bodies of either;
evident it is, that the same execution is done upon them at the time of their
respective deaths: they both return alike unto the Earth, [Eccles. 12.7.]
Therefore neither is the Sentence of Absolution then passed upon the one, nor
the Sentence of Condemnation upon the other. The Sentence which is then
executed both upon the one, and the other, is, only that which was long since
threatened against (and so conditionally passed upon) all flesh, in case of sin;
viz. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death, Genesis 2.7. The
execution of which Sentence or Threatening, after sin committed, is positively,
and without condition, threatened, and the Sentence it self interpreted, in
these words; Dust thou art, and unto it thou shall return, Gen 3.19. However
there may be several weighty reasons given, why God should appoint a day, or a
time, for the General Judgment of the World; more especially three.

Quest. 38.

What is the first of these Reasons?

Answ.

That his knowledge, wisdom, righteousness, equity, and impartiality in
judging the ways and doings of his Creatures, and in awarding and assigning
them rewards, and punishments, accordingly might be the more conspicuous and
gloriously manifested to the whole Creation. Romans 2.5, 6.

Quest. 39.

What is your second Reason?

Answ.

That as in Christ's humiliation [that is, by occasion of that poor and low
condition, wherein he lived in the world, especially by means of his
ignominious death] his judgment was taken away [that is, the honor due unto
his infinite worth and dignity was denied unto him] Act. 8 33. So in the great
day of his appearance to judge the world, it might be restored again unto him,
wherein he shall appear like unto himself, and be acknowledged and owned by the
whole Creation accordingly. In this respect the day of the general judgment, is
termed, the day of Christ: and the day of the Lord, meaning Christ; [that is, a
day, as it were calculated, contrived, and appointed by God for the honor, or
interest of Christ: As a day, or time, which is benedict, commodious, or
pleasing unto any person, or persons, is said to be their day, hour, or time,
to whose benefit it thus relates, Luke 19.42. Luke 22.35. 1 Cor. 4.3.] See
Phil. 1.6 10. Phil. 2 16. 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. 1 Cor. 5.5.2 Cor. 1.14. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.
(to omit several others.)

Quest. 40.

What is your Third and last Reason?

Answ.

God, by his appointment of a day for the general judgment of the World,
wherein the secrets of the hearts of all men, both good and evil, together
with their words, actions, and doings, shall be brought to light, and sentenced
(respectively) without all partiality, according to the most absolute rules of
righteousness and equity in the presence and audience both of Heaven and
Earth, and of the whole Creation of God, has furnished himself with a most
potent Argument, as well for the promoting of godliness, as for the
restraining of sin and wickedness, in the mean time, amongst men. And we find
him often making use of this Argument accordingly. See Mat. 16.26, 27. Act.
17.31. Compared with verse 30. Romans 2.5, 6. etc. 2 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. 2 These.
1.7, 8, 9. etc.

Quest. 41.

By whom shall this great and general judgment of the world be administered?

Answ.

By the Lord Jesus Christ. This is evident from many Scriptures. Mat. 16.27.
Mat. 25.31. etc. Joh. 5.27, 28, etc. Act. 17.31. 2 Cor. 5 9 etc

Quest. 42.

Why shall Christ be the judge, or why is he appointed by God to execute the
great and general judgment of the World?

Answ.

Because of his subsisting in the humane nature, or of his being Man as well as
God; a consideration distinguishing him from the other two, the Father and the
holy Spirit, (who subsist in the Divine nature only) and peculiarly qualifying
him for this great dignity and office of being the supreme [visible] judge of
the world, according to the account which himself gives, where he says that
the Father has given him Authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son
of Man. Ioh. 5.27. God (it seems) judging it meet, and most agreeable to his
Wisdom, as being least liable to exception, that men should be (finally)
judged by a person taken out from among themselves, by one, who is no ways
like to oppress them in judgment, or not to weigh every man's cause in the
balance of equity, and in all his penal awards to make all reasonable
allowance for temptations, natural incapacities, inclinations, and
indispositions, for all disadvantages by Education, want or weakness of means,
etc. having himself been partaker of the same flesh and blood with them who
shall be judged by him, and experimentally acquainted with the force of
temptation, though without sin.

Quest. 43

Whether may the time of his coming to the great judgment of the world you
speak of, be known unto men? Or, is it revealed in the Scriptures?

Answ.

It seems from Mat. 24.36. that the just or precise time of this his coming was
not known unto Himself [ viz. as Man]; nor yet unto any of the Holy Angels,
before his death and resurrection, but was kept up close as a divine Secret, in
the breast of God only. But it is the judgment of some learned' men, and this
very probable, that this great Secret was imparted unto him after his
Resurrection, and Reception into glory, by God the Father, in that Revelation
which he is said to have given unto him, to show unto his Servants, etc. Revel.
1.1.

Quest. 44.

But if the time of Christ's coming to judgment, be contained and declared, in
that Revelation you mention, how is it that the Saints themselves are generally
so ignorant of it? And why are there so many divisions in judgment amongst
learned and good men about it?

Answ.

There are many things, which may be wrought out of the Scriptures, and deduced
from them, by the blessing of God upon a conscientious, diligent, and dexterous
inquiry after them, which yet are hid so deep in mysterious and covert
expressions, that few will be at the cost and charge of time and study for the
steady and full discovery of them, which God judges competent and meet to
reward, or bless with such a Treasure. And Solomon teaches us that it is the
glory of God to conceal a thing [that is, that it makes both for the glory of
his wisdom, and of the worth also of the thing it self so concealed by him, to
discover many of his heavenly matters so sparingly, and upon such terms, that
men shall not be able to attain the knowledge of them, nor be counted worthy of
so great an honor, but only upon the engaging of their hearts and minds
liberally and freely, in order to the attaining thereof] Prove. 25.2. So that
though it be supposed that the just time of Christ's coming to Judgment may be
gathered from the Revelation, or some other place in the Scriptures, yet it is
very possible that few, or none may come especially with any certainty, or
satisfaction, to discover or find it out; Yea and those that do hit right upon
it, and find it out, may not be able to give a satisfying account unto others
of such their apprehension, no nor (possibly) unto themselves,

Quest 45.

But is it any great loss, or disadvantage, unto a good Christian, either in
respect of his comfort or his progress in righteousness and holiness, not to
know the day or hour of Christ's coming?

Answ.

I suppose, Not: especially if he knows, and minds, the signs of this day and
hour [near approaching] which are with all plainness and clearness made known
by God in the gospel. Yea unless a Christian should be very well principled,
and raised to a considerable pitch in grace and holiness, the knowledge of
this day at any long space of time, before the coming of it, might, through the
weakness of the flesh, betray him into the hand of much sinful security and
many evils.

Quest. 46.

What are the more immediate signs foregoing the day and hour, of which you
speak?

Answ.

They are these three (possibly) with some others.

First an extraordinary Spirit of security, sensuality, and
earthly-mindednesse working at an high rate in the generality of men -- they
were eating, and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage, until the day
that Noah entered into the Arc, and knew not until the flood came, and took
them all away; So shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. Mat. 24.38, 39
See also Luke 17.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.

Secondly; A great despondency and fainting of heart in the generality of the
Saints, and people of God, by reason of that low and most sad condition, unto
which they shall be brought by their enemies, as if there were no ground of
hope or expectation of any deliverance. Nevertheless [that is, though God most
certainly will avenge, and that speedily, his people crying day and night unto
him, yet] when the Son of Man comes [ viz. to judge the world, and to execute
vengeance upon the Enemies of his People, and to give deliverance and rest unto
these. 2 Thessal. 1.6, 7.] shall he find faith on the Earth [meaning that even
amongst those, whom he shall come thus to avenge, and deliver, he shall find
little or no belief or expectation, that God will deliver them] Luke 18.8. See
also Revel. 11.7, 8, 9.

Thirdly (and lastly) a triumphant confidence amongst the enemies of the Saints
and Servants of God, that their mountain is now made so strong that it shall
never be moved, and the world is now become theirs, and their posterities, for
an everlasting possession. 1 These. 5.2, 3. Rev. 11.10. and 18.7.

Quest. 47.

But why does the Scripture so often speak of a day of Judgment, as if the
general judgment of the World, could be transacted, and dispatched within the
compass of 12 or 24 hours? Or, is not such a thing as this very incredible?

Answ.

The Scripture frequently uses the word day, in an indefinite sense, not
always in a strict or proper; as either for the whole duration, or space of
time, be it longer or shorter, wherein any thing is under transaction, or in
doing; or else for the beginning of such a time. So that by, a day, or the day
of Judgment, in the Scriptures, is meant, that whole tract, or continuance of
time, wherein the judgment of the world shall be begun, proceeded in, and
carried on by Christ, until it be finished: which space of time, men of
sharpest insight into the Scriptures conclude from them, to be a thousand
years, affirming withal, that this day of judgment, consisting of a thousand
years shall enter and begin with one Resurrection of the Dead, [ viz. of all
the Saints that have dyed before it from the beginning of the World] and shall
end with another [ viz. of all ungodly and wicked persons from the first to the
last] But to set forth all the particulars of this judgment, or to declare how,
and after what manner, the Lord Christ will proceed in it from the first to the
last, is a matter of very great difficulty, and which has not prospered in the
hand of any undertaker, that I know of.

CHAP V. Of Justification, Faith, Repentance, and good Works.
Quest. 1.

HOw, or by what means may a Creature that has sinned, come to be eternally
saved, his sin notwithstanding?

Answ.

By his being justified from his sin, before God.

Quest. 2.

Why will not God save any, but only those, that are justified from their sins,
in his sight?

Answ.

Because though he be exceeding patient, yet is he a God of judgment,
infinitely just and holy, and therefore cannot admit any person under the guilt
and pollution of sin, into that near communion and fellowship with himself in
his blessedness and glory, which salvation imports.

Quest. 3.

Is there a way or means for every Creature that has sinned, to attain
justification in the sight of God?

Answ.

No: The Devil and his Angels have all sinned, with whom notwithstanding God
has made no Covenant of Peace, or of justification; neither has he vouchsafed
unto them any means of reconciling themselves unto him. Yea (it seems) their
misery by sinning came not near unto his heart at all, nor was he solicitous in
the least about their recovery. Heb. 2.16. Only his Creature man, he has, in
great tenderness of mercy put into a way of justification.

Quest. 4.

What is it for a man to be justified from his sins? Or, what is justification?

Answ.

The word, Justification, is sometimes used in an active signification, and
sometimes in a passive (as many other words of a like form also are, as
Regeneration, Sanctification, Mortification, etc.) In the former of these
senses, that Justification, which (I suppose) you inquire after (for there are
several kinds of Justification) is, an act of God absolving a sinner from the
guilt and deserved punishment of all his Sins, upon the consideration of the
atonement made for him by Christ in his Death: and accepted by him by Faith:
which act being rightly interpreted or understood, either is, or includes, an
imputation of perfect Righteousness unto him. In the latter, or passive
signification of the word, Justification imports the effect, or product, of
the said act of God; which is, that new and happy state or condition, of
absolution or freedom from guilt, into which the person justified, is
translated by means of it. So that for a man to be justified from his sins, is
to be exempted by God from amongst those that are liable to death and eternal
condemnation for their sins, and to be numbered amongst those that are heirs of
life and salvation.

Quest. 5.

After what manner, or how, does God justify those, that are justified by him?

Answ.

Not by exerting or putting forth, any particular, or new act, but by the
authority and virtue of his Eternal Decree concerning justification; which
being one and the same, (at least in respect of persons, capable by years and
understanding, of believing) yet justifies (or rather God by it justifies,)
all those that come under it, that is, that perform the terms of it.

Quest. 6.

What are the terms of that Decree of God you speak of, concerning
Justification; by which Decree, and according to the terms specified in it,
you teach, that he justifies all that are justified by him, at least all, whom
the use of reason distinguishes from Children and Idiots?

Answ.

The terms of this Decree, are, that men believe in God through Jesus Christ,
with a Faith unfeigned, and which is operative through love, 1 Pet. 1.21.
compared with 2 Timothy 1.5. and Gal. 5, 6. God has decreed from eternity to
justify all those, who shall thus believe in him.

Quest. 7.

But has he decreed to justify none other, but such as these? What shall
become of Infants aying in their Infancy, or before years of discretion, as
likewise of such, who scarce know their right hand from their left through want
of common understanding? Must these all perish? Or shall they be saved without
being justified? Or, if they be justified, must it not be without Faith, since
hereof they are incapable?

Answ.

Far be it from us to think that God excludes any person of mankind from the
common Salvation purchased by Jesus Christ, for the nonperformance of things
unpossible unto them, or that he should estimate any of them according to that
they have not, and not according to that which they have. Therefore although
the Scriptures speak nothing so expressly either of the justification, or
Salvation, either of Infants or of Idiots, as they do both of the
justification, and Salvation, of men and women, who believe; Yet that as well
the one, as the other are both justified, and saved by Christ, may be
substantially proved and concluded from many considerations and grounds plainly
delivered and asserted in the Scriptures, as has been showed and made good by
many. And if this be the condemnation of the world (as Christ himself
affirms) that men love darkness rather then light because their deeds* are
evil; Evident it is, that both the said sorts of persons are free from
condemnation (and consequently are partakers both of that justification, and
salvation, which have been purchased by Christ) inasmuch as the guilt, or sin,
of loving darkness rather then light, is no ways chargeable upon them.

Quest. 8.

What is that Faith or that Believing, which brings men and women under Gods
Decree of justification, and so justifies them?

Answ.

The Scriptures express it under a great variety and difference of words and
phrases. Sometimes it is called, a believing God, or. Christ. Romans 4 3. Gal.
3.6 Joh. 3.36 Sometimes a believing in God, or in the Lord, or Christ, Genesis
15.6. Ioh. 1.15, 16. and 14; 1. Act. 10.43. Romans 10.14. 1 Pet. 1.21. Sometimes
again (and more frequently) a believing on God, or on Christ, or on the Son of
God. Ioh. 2.11. and 6.29 and 7.39. Act. 16.31. and 19.4. Romans 4; 5. Ioh. 5.10.
Elsewhere it is called a believing on the name of Christ, or of the Son of God.
Ioh. 1.12. 1 Ioh. 3.23. and 5.13. It is sometimes likewise expressed by a
believing the Gospel, the word, testimony, or record, of God concerning his
Son: as also by a believing the word or words of Christ, Mar. 1.15. 1 Ioh. 5.9,
10. Ioh. 5.47. Act. 4.31. compared with ver. 32. Act. 28.24. and elsewhere.
Lastly, it is often signified by a believing Christ to be He [that is, the
Messiah, or Savior of the world] or, to be the Son of God, and the like. Ioh.
8.24. and 11.27. and 20.31. Act. 8.37. 1 Ioh 5.1.5. The Holy Ghost by
expressing that Faith which justifies, under all this diversity, seems
desirous to prevent or remove many of those scruples, or doubts which are
incident to many weak believers, about the nature and truth of their Faith. For
let the inward impression, motion, or acting of the Soul, answer any of these
notions, or descriptions, if it otherwise purify the heart, or be operative
through love, there needs no question be made but that it is true Faith, and
will justify him that has it.

Quest. 9.

But may there not be a commodious definition or description given of this
Faith, according to the Scriptures, and which may make for the Edification, and
Comfort, of those who do belive?

Answ.

There can hardly (I conceive) any such particular description of it be given,
but will endanger, or prejudice the joy of the Faith of some, though it may
accommodate the faith of others; unless (happily) it should be explained with
much wisdom and caution. The best and safest description of this Faith that
can be given, is that which shall take in and comprehend the lowest degree of
it that is to be found in any person, that so the bruised reed may not be
broken by it, nor the smoking flax quenched. Therefore I conceive it may be
thus, or after some such manner as this, described without much danger, or
inconvenience: Faith is such a persuasion in heart, or belief, of the truth of
the Gospel, or that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, which disposes a person to
manifest, or make it known, by the fruits of Love both to God, and Men.

Quest. 10.

What is it in Faith, or relating unto Faith, that gives it the force, or
privilege, to justify?

Answ.

Not anything that properly is in it, or in the nature of it, but (as was
lately said) the Decree of God, wherein he has enacted it for a Law, or
decreed, that such a faith shall justify men, which decree is extrinsecall to
the nature of Faith and no ingredient in it.

Quest. 11.

Can there any Reason be given why God should single Faith from amongst all
other holy qualifications and graces of his Spirit, to confer upon it the
Office and Dignity of justifying men?

Answ.

None (I suppose) but only that, which the Holy Ghost himself ssigneth (in the
general) viz. that the justification of men, that have sinned, might be of
grace; Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be of Grace, Romans 4.16. Which
Saying seems to imply, that either the wisdom, or righteousness of God, or
both, could not he satisfied with making any other qualification, act, gift, or
indowment whatsoever, instrumental for the justification of a sinner, but Faith
only. For if (for example) such a justification might have been by love, by
patience, humility, or any other grace, the Apostle could not have truly said,
that it was by Faith, that it might be by Grace: because, upon such a
supposition, it [justification] might have been of Grace although it had not
been by Faith.

Quest. 12.

But if justification be by Faith, and of Grace; why is it sometimes ascribed
unto works, as Jam. 2.21.24? And why is it said, that not the hearers, but the
doers of the Law shall be justified?

Answ.

Justification is sometimes taken for the justification of a man's Faith, [that
is, either for the making of a sufficient proof of the truth and soundness
thereof; or else for the giving of a testimony, whether by word or by deed,
unto the truth of it] and consequently, for the justification or approbation of
the Person himself. For he that justifies, or approves any man's faith as
sound and good, in a consequential sense, justifies and approves the person
himself, at least in respect of his faith, and of all things depending thereon.
Such a justification as this is proper unto works [that is, unto such works,
which give a due and sufficient proof of the soundness of a man's faith] and is
accordingly in Scripture attributed unto them. In this sense Abraham is said to
have been justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his Son upon the altar.
Iam. 2.21. that is, to have received such a Testimony from God, which did
amount to the justification of his Faith, as sincere and sound; and
consequently of his Person also. See Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. But concerning the
justification of a man's person, strictly and properly so called, and which (as
was lately said) stands in remission of sins, Faith only, and not works, has
to do in the obtaining of it from God. And in this sense Abraham was justified
before his offering up his Son upon the Altar. Compare Genesis 15.6. with Genesis
22.9.10.16. etc. And yet on the other side it is true again, that Faith shall
never obtain that full benefit or fruition of that justification, which it
alone obtains (I mean, the great blessing of Salvation) without the
Conjunction and Cooperation of works with it (as the Apostle James speaks
Chap. 2.22.) And in this respect the Apostle Paul is to be understood, when he
says, that not the Hearers [that is, not those that are only hearers] of the
Law, but the doers of the Law, [that is, the conscientious observers of it,
though not without many slips and frailties] shall be justified [that is, shall
enjoy the great benefit of justification the saving of their souls]. Take the
word, Justification in any of the Senses now mentioned, it may truly be said to
be of Grace, because God was at perfect liberty whether ever he would have
justified man being fallen, or any person that had ever sinned in one kind or
other, either by faith or by works, or in any other way whatsoever.

Quest. 13.

What works are they, which are sufficient to justify a man's Faith, or to
render him actually capable of Salvation?

Answ.

It is said (as we lately heard) that Abraham was justified by works, when he
offered Isaac his Son upon the altar. Iam. 2. 22. So that it seems that in
persons professing faith in God, any notable or singular strain, or act, of
devotion and obedience unto him, is sufficient for such a service, I mean to
justify the faith of such a man. Otherwise a conscientious and uniforme
observance of the will of God concerning us, expressed in both tables of the
moral Law, though with many weaknesses and humane frailties (for in many
things we offend all, Iam. 3.2.) is of sufficient authority that way. Amongst
particular good works, which seem authorized by God in Scripture, to give
evidence for the truth of any man's faith, works of Mercy if men be fruitful,
and persevering in them, suffering for the truth with patience and meekness,
together with forgiveness of injuries, and love showed unto enemies upon
occasion, have the pre-eminence. Compare Iam. 2.15 Heb. 6, 10, 11. Mat. 5.7.
Mat. 19.29. 2 These. 1.6, 7.2 Tim. 2.11, 12. with Mat. 6. 14. Mark. 11.25. Luke
6.37.

Quest. 14.

If justification consists (as has been said) in forgiveness of sins and is
obtained by Faith, why is forgiveness of sins in Scripture sometimes ascribed
unto Repentance, as it seems to be in these, and many other places? Esa.
1.16, 17, 18. Psalm. 32.5. Ezekiel. 18.27.30.32. Mar. 1.4. Luke 24.47. Act. 3.19.
Acts 5.31. Is Faith and Repentance one and the same thing?

Answ.

Although true faith, and true Repentance be not formally, and in definition,
the same thing, yet they are as Twins receiving life together at one and the
same time in the soul; Yea they are so near of kin, that they still embrace and
infold one the other, and are never parted: Yea they may seem to take place and
to be effected and wrought by one and the same motion, or conversion, of the
heart or soul; Even as a man by one and the same motion or turning about of his
body, turns himself from the west, toward the east, although turning from
the West, and turning to, or toward the East, be two things of a different
consideration. In like manner, when a man works off or turns his heart from
sin, that is (in effect) when he repents, by the same act of altering, or
changing his posture, he turns himself toward God, or toward Christ, that
is, he believes. The Holy Ghost himself seems to state the case much after
this manner between Repentance and Faith, 1 These 1.9. in this short clause, And
how ye turned unto God from Idols: which clearly implies, that their turning
unto God, which imports their believing; and their turning from Idols, which
notes their Repentance, took place in them, and were effected, by one and the
same act of turning: So that if forgiveness of sins be ascribed unto
Repentance: it is ascribed but unto that, which is materially the same with
believing. Otherwise it may be said to the question propounded; that, by
forgiveness of sins in Scripture, is often meant not that general or universal
forgiveness by which a person is translated from the state of condemnation
into the state of life and salvation; but only an exemption or discharge from
the guilt, and punishment due unto such or such particular sins, according to
the course of divine justice. As when Christ prayed for those who crucified
him, Father, forgive them: for they know not what they do, Luke 23, 34. So
likewise Stephen for those who stoned him, Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge, Act. 7.60. So the Apostle Paul for those who forsook him, I pray God it
may not be laid to their charge, 2 Timothy 4.16. I is plain, that the intent of
their prayers (respectively) only was, that God would not judge, or punish
them for the particular sins committed against them. When men have sinned
greatly against God, whether believers or unbelievers, and are liable to
punishment for it, he judges it a righteous thing, and well becoming him,
either to pardon and pass by their sin, and to remit the punishment deserved
by them, upon their Repentance; or to inflict this Punishment upon them, in
case of their impenitence. I suppose, it is only in some such sense as this,
that forgiveness of sins is ascribed unto Repentance. Or if that forgiveness
of sins which acompanieth salvation, be any where in 'Scripture ascribed unto
repentance, it is ascribed unto it only as such a means or cause of it, as that
which Logicians call, Causa sine qua non, that is, not as a cause operating
toward the procuring of it, but as a condition without which it cannot be
obtained.

Quest. 15.

What is Repentance?

Answ.

Answer (at least in part) was given to this, in the Answer to the former
question, where it was said, that Repentance is the turning away the heart from
sin. A larger description of it may be drawn up in these, or the like words.
Repentance is a deliberate act of the Soul, performed upon the motions, and by
the assistance, of the good Spirit of God, whereby a man being touched with
unfeigned sorrow and remorse for all that he has sinned, whether inwardly or
in secret, or else openly and in the sight of men, armeth himself with a firm
resolution and purpose of heart, never by the grace of God, willingly to sin
more.

Quest. 16.

Whether is it in the power of any man to repent, or to believe unto Salvation?

Answ.

To do either of these is in the power of no man, considered simply as a man,
or as fallen in Adam, or by any ability or endowment found in him or belonging
to him, in either of these considerations. But all men without exception, of
whom Repentance and faith are required by God as necessary unto salvation,
considered as having part and fellowship in that great and blessed
Restoration, or Redemption of mankind by Jesus Christ, are enabled by him, and
by his grace, both to repent and to believe. Otherwise God must be thought to
have dealt more graciously and favorably with the Devils, then with far the
greatest part of mankind, inasmuch as they were enabled by him to have
continued in that glory, wherein they were created; and to have prevented that
misery, into which they are now irrecoverably plunged.

Quest. 17.

If the generality of men be enabled by God to repent, and believe unto
Salvation, how comes it to pass that the greatest part of them perish
notwithstanding, through impenitencie, and unbelief?

Answ.

Men voluntarily suffer the zeal of this present world, and of gratifying the
desires of the flesh to eat them up: So that they reserve a very inconsiderable
proportion, either of their hearts, or of their time, for seeking after God, or
for pursuing the great concernments of Repentance and Faith. Whereas the nature
of these, being spiritual and heavenly, the effectual pursuit and obtaining of
them requires much abstraction of mind and affection from the things of this
present world, and much contention and engagement of the faculties and powers
of the Soul about them. Luk 13.24. Joh. 6.27. 1 Cor. 9.24. 2 Timothy 2.5. Heb. 4
11. and 6.12. (with many other places). Now flesh and blood being generally
loath to be at any great cost and charge about the things of Heaven, and the
world to come; being much more willing to give the price, which God has put
into their hand to get true wisdom, for the light and empty contentments of
this present world, then for the purchase of true wisdom; from hence it must
needs come to pass that flesh and blood should go miserably^ to wreck, and that
though the number of them be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them only
(in comparison) should he saved.

Quest. 18.

What ground has any particular person to betieve in God, or in Christ, for
his justification, and Salvation?

Answ.

More, then to walk upon the firm ground as men generally do; I mean, without
the least scruple or fear, that it should open under them, and swallow them up
quick; Yea, and with the greatest confidence and security that it will bear
them without the least danger, or inconvenience. For the Earth has sometimes
opened her mouth, and swallowed up quick those that walked, and were secure
upon it. Numb. 16.31, 32, 33. Psalm. 106.17. Neither has God made any promise
to any the Sons or Daughters of Men that it should never do the like unto any
of them. Whereas it is most certain that God never yet denied justification
unto life, unto any that relied or trusted on him for it; yea he has made many
promises great and precious; pregnant and express unto the World, yea and has
bound them wirh the greatest oath, that himself, or any other is capable of
swearing, that he never will deny it unto any such.

Quest. 19.

What encouragements, or motives, have men and women, to believe in God, and in
Christ?

Answ.

Great and many; yea greater, and more, then unto the performance of any other
duty, yea or action, whatsoever; and more especially Ten.

Quest. 20.

What is the first of the Ten?

Answ.

The most great and invaluable Recompense of Reward, which God has annexed
unto Faith, both by an unchangeable Decree, and by a Promise that can never
fail. Heb. 10.35. Silver and Gold and precious Stones, Crowns and Kingdoms of
the Earth, with all the Pomp and Pleasures attending them, are but dark and
dull colors to shadow out, or make a representation of, the glorious
Blessedness of those that believe.

Quest. 21.

What is another of these encouragements or motives to believe?

Answ.

That whatsoever a man's sins has been, or how great soever his present
unworthiness is, he shall not be rejected by God, or by Jesus Christ, in his
believing, nor upbraided with presumption, boldness, or the like, but shall
most certainly be accepted with favor, and heavenly indulgence. And him that
comes unto me (says Christ Joh. 6.37. that is, whosoever believes in me, as
ver. 35.) I will in no wise cast out: which is as if he should have said; I
will sooner do that, which is most abhorring to my nature and disposition, yea
or most repugnant to my glory, then offer the least indignity or unkindnesse,
or send empty away, any person whatsoever that shall come unto me by Faith, for
Justification or Saltion.

Quest. 22.

What is your third motive unto Faith?

Answ.

That the greater, and more notorious, and public, any man's sins have been;
the greater and more weighty will his Testimony be by believing both to the
freeness and fullness of the grace of God in Christ, and to his truth and
faithfulness also in his greatest promises, as likewise unto the perfection
and fullness of the atonement made by Christ in his death for the sins of men.
And therefore the acceptance of such persons with God, and with Jesus Christ,
upon their believing, is of all other men's the least questionable?

Quest. 23.

What is a fourth motive or encouragement to believing?

Answ.

That God is a great lover of that Creature of his, which is called Man, and
that men have the precedence of the Angels themselves in his affections and
good will: and that he has from the beginning of the world plainly declared
such his inclinations and respects toward them, by admitting such of them as
were meet, and capable of so great honor, into friendly and familiar communion
and fellowship with his Majesty, imparting such of his secrets unto them, as
were expedient for them to know. The Scripture-records concerning Abel, Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Samuel, David, Solomon, with all the
Prophets (generally), and many others, give ample Testimony hereunto. And Jesus
Christ, under the notion and name of the Wisdom of God, is said to rejoice in
the habitable part of his Earth [not of his Heavens; that is, amongst men, not
among Angels, as it followeth] and my delight were with the Sons of Men. Prove.
8.31.

Quest. 24.

What is your fifth motive to stir up men to believe?

Answ.

That God in the height of his glory, and unconceivable Splendour and
brightness of his Majesty, is altogether unlike the generality of those that
are called Gods upon Earth, Kings, Princes, Potentates, and Grandees of the
World, who are more ready to tread and trample upon, to grind the faces, and to
break the bones of those that are beneath them, and under their power;
especially, if they have at any time provoked them, or been disobedient unto
them, then to commiserate or relieve them in their distress, or to lift up
from dunghill, or take them into any part or degree of fellowship with them in
their worldly felicity. The Lord (says David) is high above all Nations, and
his Glory above the Heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on
high; who [yet] humbles himself to behold the things in Heaven, and in the
Earth? He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the
dunghill: That he may set him with Princes, etc. Psalm. 113.5, 6, 7, 8. There is
nothing at all in God; but what, rightly considered, rendereth him lovely and
desirable, especially in the eye of his Creature-man: Yea his Attributes, and
all his perfections, as they stand declared in his word, duly weighed, and
laid together, commend and set him forth, as a God (to speak with all due
reverence) made on purpose to be trusted, and depended on, for every thing good
and desirable.

Quest. 25.

What is your sixth encouragement or motive to believing?

Answ.

The consideration of that absolute and utmost necessity that lies upon all
men to believe, if they mean, or desire, either ever to be truly happy or to
escape the heavy doom of being for ever most miserable. Neither is there
Salvation in any other (said Peter to the Jews, being filled with the Holy
Ghost when he spoke, Acts 4.8.12.) for there is none other name under Heaven
given among men whereby we must be saved. And as there is no other name undr
Heaven given by God unto men, whereby to be saved but only the name of Christ;
so there is no other way, or means, whereby persons capable by years and reason
of believing, may be saved by this Name, but only by believing in it. See Ioh.
3.18. Mar. 16.16. (with very many places beside.)

Quest. 26.

Your seventh motive, or encouragement the same way, what may it be?

Answ.

Seriously to consider, that to believe, is not only, if so much, the benefit
or advancement of the Creature believing, as the honor and magnifying of the
name of God, of his grace, and faithfulness in the great promises of the
Gospel; and so of the name of Jesus Christ, and of the efficacy and fullness of
that ransom, which he has paid for the Redemption of the World: which are
matters more highly considerable, then the Salvation of any particular person,
that shall believe. He that has received his Testimony (says John, that is,
that believes him, teaching and affirming that God sent him into the World for
the Salvation of all those that shall believe in him) has set to his Seal that
God is true. Ioh. 3.33, meaning, that in doing this, in that avouching of the
truth and faithfulness of God in the Gospel, which is done by any man's true
and cordial believing, he performs a very notable service unto him, and of
high acceptance with him. And Abraham, in respect (doubtless) of the signal
service of his believing, was counted, and called the Friend of God, Iam. 2.23.
The act of believing is frequently spoken of, as an act of obedience unto God,
and under the like notion with the performance of any other duty commanded by
God. Romans 1.5. and 16.19.26. 1 John 3.23.

Quest. 27.

What is the effect, or substance, of your eighth motive unto men to believe?

Answ.

They may, by the exemplarinesse of their believing, be great and blessed
Benefactours unto many others, and cause them also to glorify God in the day
of their visitation; according to what the Apostle informed the Corinthians in
somewhat a like Case; And your zeal (says he) has provoked many. The greater
and thicker the cloud of witnesses is, wherewith men shall be compassed about
(as the Apostles phrase is, Heb 12.1.) the greater (proportionably) is their
encouragement to believe: and it is much more easy to fall in with a multitude
in any way they shall go, then to adventure solitarily upon any great action,
or to cast in our Lot, in such a case, only with a few. The Faith of Abraham
alone, how generative has it been, filling the world all along the succeeding
ages thereof, with believers like unto the stars in the firmament of Heaven for
number? Upon the account of which service, God himself honored him with the
signal Title, or Appellation, of being called, The Father of Believers. Romans
4.11.16.

Quest. 28.

What may be your ninth Encouragement unto Believing?

Answ.

To consider that a man by means of his Faith, especially when it shall be
grown to any maturity and strength, may live at a very excellent and
Prince-like rate of Comfort, Peace, and Joy; Yea and this under the greatest
tribulations and afflictions that he is like to suffer in this World. Romans
5.2.3. and 15.13. 2 Cor. 1.24. and 8.2. Heb. 10.34. 1 Pet. 1.6.8. How costly or
chargeable soever, in one kind or other, a man's Faith may be unto him either in
maintaining or keeping of it, or in the managing or profession of it in the
world, it will bear its own charges with a great overplus of Satisfaction. The
life that the Apostle Paul lived in the flesh (and he lived like a Prince,
always rejoicing, and in possession of all things, 2 Cor. 6.10.) He lived by
the Faith of the Son of God, who loved him, and gave himself for him. Gal. 2.20.

Quest. 29.

What is your tenth (and last) motive to invite any man to believe?

Answ.

To consider, that all that he adventures upon the truth and certainty of the
Gospel in his believing it, all the hazard he runns by depending upon God for
Salvation, is not much considerable. Suppose that a man's believing should
expose him to the loss of all that he possesses, or might enjoy in this
World; yea and that he should have no return of his Adventure but that
impossibillities should interpose between him, and his hopes and expectations,
as that the Gospel should prove a devised fable, or that God should suffer his
truth and faithfulness to fail, or the like, yet the lose which the person we
speak of should even in this case sustain by his believing, would amount to no
great matter of lamentation, or despondency, it would be of nothing more, then
what many wise and sober men amongst the heathen despised, and made little
reckoning of; I mean the transitory and empty enjoyments and contentments of
this World. Whereas on the other hand, the matters of benefit and gain, with
the promise and hope whereof the Gospel inviteth men to believe, are so
unmeasurably rably vast and great, that if the credit of the Gospel holds, so
that a man's Faith (returns safe laden with the Treasures of Life and
Immortality, he is a made man for ever, all the desires of his heart will cease
through an abundance of Satisfaction and Joy. Now such opportunities, wherein
little is expended, or put to the venture, and yet many hundreds and thousands
of profit and advantage under the greatest probability, expected, are wont to
be much taking with men of ordinary reason and understanding in the affairs of
this woe ld, and improved accordingly. How much rather should men put to hazatd,
or were it to part with, only that which is not (for this is the Character, or
description, of the best of this world, given by the Holy Ghost. Prove. 23.5.)
upon the credit of the Gospel; when as there are greater and richer
probabilities, yea and higher assurances, of all the great things, mentioned
and promised therein, then ever any Merchant, or any the wariest adventurer of
this world, ever had, to receive that which he parted with, with advantage.

Quest. 30.

You have spoken much of Faith: is not the grace of hope of much affinity with
it? Or, how do they differ or agree?

Answ.

They differ in four things: they agree in three.

Quest. 31.

What is the first particular, wherein they differ?

Answ.

Faith, or believing is before Hope, in order of nature, if not of time also.
Faith is said to be the substance, or (according to our former Translation) the
ground of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. And is for the most part, if not
always, mentioned before hope in the Scriptures, where they are both named.
See 1 Cor. 13.13. Col. 1.23. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.21.

Quest. 32.

In what do they differ besides?

Answ.

Faith respects the word, or promise, wherein good things are promised,
together with the faithfulness, and power of him that promises: whereas hope
properly respects the good things themselves contained in the promises, and
the receiving and enjoyment of them in due time.

Quest. 33.

What is your third difference between them?

Answ.

The object of Faith (in the proper notion of it) is somewhat in present
being: The object of hope is always somewhat that is future, or to come;
according to that of the Apostle: How can a man hope for that which he sees.
Romans 8.24.

Quest. 34.

What is the fourth (and last) difference?

Answ.

Faith bears the relation of a Parent, or of a Mother in respect of Hope: and
Hope the relation of a Daughter, in respect of Faith. For hope is a kind of
natural result from Faith, as the light is from the body of the Sun, and has
it is dependence upon Faith, both for the reception and continuance of it is
being: whereas Faith seems to have no dependence upon Hope for either. For a
man must believe the truth and certainty of such a promise, wherein any good
thing one, or more is promised unto him, or (which is in effect the same) the
faithfulness of him that makes this promise, together with his ability to
perform it, before he can (reasonably) or upon any good ground, hope for, or
expect that good which is promised: especially when he that shall make such a
promise was no ways obliged unto him, unto whom he makes it; and most of all,
if he shall moreover have been greatly provoked by him: which is the case
concerning that Hope, of which we now speak. But when once the person, to who
many such promise is made, shall really and firmly believe his promise, it is
but natural and (as it were) matter of course for him to hope for all the good
contained in such a promise. And if he, that shall at first, or for a time
believe such a promise as we speak of, but, before the time wherein the promise
is to be performed, shall upon any suggestion, or occurrence, cast away, or let
go such his believing, his hope must needs at the same time, and by means of
the failing of his belief, fall to the ground. Only this would be here
mentioned by way of caution: that although a promise of good things be made
unto such or such a particular person in common with many others, and as well
and with equal intention of good unto him, in him that makes this promise, as
unto any of the rest, yet if this person shall either be ignorant that, or
doubtful whether, this promise be made unto him, as well as unto others; he may
believe the said promise with the greatest certainty and steadfastness of
Faith, and yet remain without all hope of the good things contained in this
promise.

Quest. 35.

You have showed how, and wherein, Faith and Hope differ: Can you show likewise
how, or wherein they agree?

Answ.

Their Agreement stands chiefly in these three things.

First, in the Causes, or Means, producing them.

Secondly, in the Effects produced by them.

Thirdly, in the Subjects in which they are found.

Quest. 36.

What are the Causes or means, producing them, wherein they agree?

Answ.

They are chiefly these three,

First, the word of God, or the great and precious promises of the Gospel,
together with the Arguments and grounds here hinted, or delivered why they
should be believed.

Secondly, the hearing of this word, as it includes the understanding and
consideration of it.

Thirdly, (and lastly) the gracious operation, or interposure of the Holy
Ghost, opening the hearts of men to attend unto this word, when it is preached,
or otherwise presented, or set before them. Act. 16, 14. It is expressly said,
Romans 10.17. that Faith comes [or is] by hearing, and hearing [that hearing by
which Faith cometh] by the Word of God. If Faith comes by hearing, and Hope
(as has been showed) proceeds from Faith then must hope also proceed from,
or come by, the word of God, and Hearing, as the remote Causes, (at least) or
means thereof.

Quest. 37.

What are the effects, which are common unto Faith, and Hope, and wherein they
agree?

Answ.

They are principally four.

Quest. 38.

What is the first of them?

Answ.

A cleansing and purifying of the heart, and consequently of the lives and
ways of Men. That Faith, or (which is the same) God by Faith, purifieth the
heart, appears Act. 15.9. And because of this property, or effect of it, it is
elsewhere called Holy, yea, most Holy, Jud. v. 20. See also 1 Pet. 1.22. Again,
the same or the like property of cleansing, or purging, is ascribed unto Hope
also, 1 John 3.3. where it is said: And every man that has this hope in him,
purges himself, even as He is pure. See 2 Cor. 7.1.

Quest. 39.

What is a second effect, wherein they agree?

Answ.

The inabling, working, or disposing of the heart to a patient and humble
waiting upon God for such help, or supplies from him in every kind, whereof men
stand in need. See and compare Esa. 28.16. Romans 8.25. Psalm. 119.81. and 27.13,
14. Lamen. 3.26. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.

Quest. 40.

What way be a third effect wherein Faith and Hope agree?

Answ.

They are both Joy-makers in the hearts and souls of men. See and compare, Romans
15.13. 2 Cor. 1.24. Philip. 1.25. 1 Pet. 1.8. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19. Romans 5.2. Heb.
3.6. Romans 12.12.

Quest. 41.

What is the fourth (and last) property, or effect wherein they communicate?

Answ.

They, each of them, never fail to deliver their respective Subjects from
disappointment in their greatest expectations; and consequently from such shame
and confusion which are wont to accompany frustratio^s, especially in matters
of moment, and great concernment. Concerning Faith, it is thus contained in the
Scripture; Behold I lay in Sion a chief cornerstone, elect, preacious: He that
believes on him, shall not be confounded: 1 Pet. 2.6. Concerning Hope, it
speaks: And hope makes not ashamed. See further and compare Psalm. 22.4, 5.
Jer. 17.7.8. Heb. 6.19. Phil. 1.20. Psalm. 33.20.21.

Quest. 42.

How do they agree in their Subject?

Answ.

Hope (as has been said) being a kind of natural result from Faith, where
this is, that must needs be also. And the Scripture frequently places them in
the same person. 1 Pet. 1.21. Romans 4.18. and 5.2. (with some other.) He that
believes a promise of good things made unto him, if he knows or believes,
this promise to have been (indeed) made to him, cannot but hope for all the
good things contained in this promise. Review the case proposed toward the
latter end of the Answer to the 34 Question in this Chapter.

Quest. 43.

You have declared many things concerning Faith: Can you yet further declare
what the first great privilege, or benefit is, which flows from this grace,
or work of Faith more immediately, and upon which many others depend?

Answ.

This privilege is the great and high dignity of Adoption, or being made the
Sons of God. The wisdom, goodness, and love of God to the Children of men,
have together consulted and decreed this great honor and happiness unto them,
that as many of them as shall join themselves by an unfeigned Faith, unto his
Natural (and in that respect only Begotten) Son, Jesus Christ, shall partake
with him in his glorious relation of Sonship unto God, as far as their
nature, and line of creation, will admit. This the Scripture declares in
several places. But as many as received him [meaning by Faith as it is
explained in the end of the verse] to them he gave power [or prerogative, as
the former translation had it, or else right, privilege, as the margent of the
last has it] to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name,
Joh. 1.12. For ye are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. Gal.
3.26. See also Romans 8.14, 15, 16. Gal. 4.4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Ioh. 3.1, 2.

Quest. 44.

What is the great benefit of Adoption, or of Sonship unto God.

Answ.

By virtue hereof there accrueth unto us a right and title unto that immortal
and undefiled inheritance, which fades not away, and which is reserved in the
Heavens, for those who believe. 1 Pet. 1.4. Yea Believers, by virtue of their
Adoption, become joynt-heirs with Christ. But ye have received the Spirit of
Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father. The Spirit it self bears witness with
our Spirit, that we are the Children of God. And if Children then Heirs,
Heirs of God, and joynt-Heires with Christ. Romans 8.15, 16, 17. But when the
fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made
under the Law to redeem those that were under the Law, that we might receive
the adoption of Sons. And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit
of his Son into your hearts, Crying Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a
Servant, but a Son; and if a Son, then an Heir of God through Christ. Gal. 4.4,
5, 6, 7, Concerning the Sons of men and earthly inheritances, it is no good
consequence to argue. If a Son, then an Heir: but, speaking of the Sons of God,
and the inheritance promised uuto them, the Argument is rational and valid. The
reason of the difference lies chiefly in the different natures, or conditions,
of that inheritance, which God intends to confer upon his Sons, and those
earthly inheritances which men have to bestow upon theirs. An earthly
inheritance has that imperfection in it, that it cannot be, at once, enjoyed
whole and entire, by many, nor yet given unto, or settled upon, a plurality of
Children, but that every one will have the less, because there are more to
share with him. Were it otherwise, and so that an earthly estate, or
inheritance, could be given unto many upon such terms, that the whole might be
possessed and enjoyed by every one of them respectively, ordinarily, and in
most cases (at least) the consequence would be good, even amongst the Children
of men, If a Son, then an Heir: For there is scarce any Father, but would give
his whole Estate unto all his Children (respectively) had he never so many, if
it could be given by him, and enjoyed by them, upon such terms. Now that
heavenly Inheritance, which is reserved by God for his Children, is so happily
conditioned, that the Collation of it upon never so many, and the Enjoyment of
it likewise by never so many, and this together and at the same time,
prejudiceth none (in the least) of those to whom it is given, or by whom it is
enjoyed: but every one of them, respectively and apart, enjoieth it as fully,
as entirely, at as great a rate and height of contentment joy and glory, as if
he were the sole possessour and enjoyer or proprietour of it. And for this
reason (I suppose) it may be called by the Apostle, the inheritance of the
Saints in Light. Coloss. 1.12. Namely because as no man sustain's the least
loss, or inconvenience in his enjoyment of the Light, by the vast multitude of
persons in the world that share with him therein; so neither is the joy or
glory of the inheritance of the Saints in any degree the less unto any one
amongst them, because the number is so great that are partakers with him
therein.

CHAP. VI. Of Sanctification, Regeneration, Mortification, and Self-denial.
Quest. 1.

OF what consideration are these in the practice, or Profession, of Christian
Religion? and how come they to have place here?

Answ.

They may be considered either in their several and respective natures; or in
their introductions, or first raisings in the hearts and souls of men; or else
in their exercises and actings. In respect of their natures, God judged it
reasonable and meet to require them in both the other considerations of men, as
simply necessary to render them capable of Salvation.

Quest. 2.

What is the nature common unto all the four, that because of this it should
seem equitable and good in the sight of God to impose upon men and women, both
the planting of them in their hearts, and the practice of them in their lives,
and both upon the highest terms that may be; I mean, as such conditions
without the performance of which, there is no Salvation, to be expected from
him?

Answ.

They are (respectively) a kind of Holy impression, qualification, habitude, or
disposition, which excellently well become, and adorn the Sons and Daughters of
men, rendering them lovely both in the eyes of their heavenly Father, Angels,
and Men: as on the contrary, under the neglect, or want of them, their
conversations, behaviors, and doings in the world must needs be unworthy the
Gospel, and such which become not the Sons or Daughters of God.

Quest. 3.

But are men and women able to raise such great works as these in themselves,
or in their inward parts? Or lies it within the reach of their abilities or
power, either to sanctify or regenerate themselves, or to mortify the deeds
of the body, or to create that High and Heavenly principle of Self-denial, in
their hearts or souls?

Answ.

They are not able to do any of these things by any abilities, or power, that
are properly and originally their own; I mean, which remained, and were left
unto them of the stock and store of their first Creation, after their Fall in
Adam, and of which they did not sinfully divest and deprive themselves as being
in his loins, when he sinned: but by that reinvestiture with grace and
strength, and those new supplies of the presence and help of the Spirit of God
for all spiritual and saving purposes, which accrue unto them of the free and
unspeakable gift of God, in their Restoration by Jesus Christ, they are
enabled to do all those things (with many others like unto them)

Quest. 4.

But how can you prove that men and women (generally) do receive from Christ,
or from God upon the account of Christ, a sufficiency of power to raise, or
work in themselves the works mentioned, or the like? For there are many that
judge otherwise.

Answ.

The truth of that Tenent may be sufficiently cleared, both by the light of the
Scriptures and of reason. A ready account likewise might be given (if it were
needful, or here cohvenient) how the judgments of many came to be turned into
the way of the contrary opinion.

Quest. 5.

How can you prove from the Scriptures the truth of what you now affirm? Or by
what places, or passages here, can you make it appear to conviction, that men,
or the generality of men, are enabled by him, or by the means by him vouchsafed
unto them, to sanctify, or regenerate themselves, or to do any other thing
that accompanies Salvation? (For there seems to be the same consideration of
all things of this kind.)

Answ.

The Testimonies and Texts of Scripture which make for the proof you demand,
are not a few. Only for brevity sake, and inasmuch as the Scripture it self
says, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be
established (2 Cor. 13.1.) I shall not exceed this number.

Quest. 6.

What then are the places, on which you build your belief of what you now
undertake to prove?

Answ.

They are these three. Ier. 4.3, 4. (unto which Deuteronomy. 10.16. is parallel)
Ezekiel 18.30, 31, 32. (with which may be compared Ezekiel. 33.11. Esa. 1.16, 17.
with others) The third and last is Mar. 6, 6. (of like notion whereunto, are
these places, Ioh. 12.37. Mat. 11.20, 21, 23. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. with some others.)

Quest. 7.

What are the words of the first of these places and how do you argue from
them?

Answ.

The words are these: For thus says the Lord to the men of Judah and
Jerusalem, Break up your fallow ground, and sow not amongst thorns. Circumcise
your selves unto the Lord, and take away the foreskins of your hearts, lest my
fury come forth like fire, and burn, etc. Supposing first, that the men of
Judah and Jerusalem, to whom this Doctrine, at the appointment of God, was
preached, were at this time persons unregenerate; and Secondly, that the
several callings upon them in the metaphors of breaking up their fallow ground,
of circumcising themselves unto the Lord, of taking away the foreskins of their
hearts, were admonitions or injunctions unto them from God to alter the sinful
property of their hearts and souls, or (in the Prophet Esai's expression) to
wash, and make themselves clean, or (in the more plain, and direct Language of
Ezekiel) to make themselves a new heart and a new spirit, all which expressions
import the work of Regeneration, or Sanctification, or Mortification, (or
rather indeed, include them all): these two things (I say) supposed (which I
presume are not denied by any) from the said words; I plead the cause in hand
thus: If God requires it of unregenerate men to sanctify or regenerate
themselves, threatening them with his wrath and fury to their utter destruction,
if they shall not obey him therein, then (certainly) they have power to do the
one or the other; otherwise he should threaten to destroy his Creature for that
which is no ways sinful, nor a Transgression of any Law. For it is no ways
sinful for a Creature not to do things that are impossible for him to do; or
not to do that, which is possible only for God himself to do. Therefore
(without controversy) God does afford unto unregenerate men (at least if they
be not many degrees worse, and more hateful unto him, then simply as such)
sufficient abilities, and means, whereby to become new men, or make themselves
new hearts. There is hardly to be found amongst men a Tyrant so Barbarous,
Bloody, or Inhumane, who when he has cut off the legs, or feet, of any of his
Subjects, though for some misdemeanour, will further threaten him with Death,
unless he shall runn as fast as his lightest Footman, or swiftest Horse in his
Stables.

Quest. 8.

What is the tenor of your second place? and how do you argue from thence for
the point in question?

Answ.

This place contains these words: Therefore I will judge you, O house of
Israel, every one according unto his ways, says the Lord God: Repent, and
turn your selves from all your Transgressions: So iniquity shall not be your
ruin. Cast away from you all your Transgressions; whereby ye have
transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will ye die,
O house of Israel. For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says
the Lord God, wherefore turn your selves, and live ye. In these words the
great duties, or works of Repentance, Sanctification, Regeneration,
Mortification, (I might add, of Self-denial also,) are not only, or simply
required by God of men themselves, but with a very gracious, and compassionate
expostulation about the misery, which they would certainly bring upon their own
heads, if they did not perform them [ for why will ye die, etc.] together with
promise upon promise, of favor, life, and peace, in case they did perform
them: [so iniquity shall not be your Ruin:] and again [turn your selves and
live ye; That is, and ye shall certainly live.] Now it is broadly
inconsistent with that most gracious and merciful disposition unto the Children
of men, which the Scriptures in a thousand places ascribe unto God, to promise
good things unto them, as life, peace, safety, etc. only upon such conditions,
or terms, which he knows to be utterly impossible for them, yea with all the
help, or means which he intends ever to afford them, ever to perform. This
would rather be most cruelty to insult over poor creatures in misery, then
either to compassionate them, or to counsel or direct them how to deliver
themselves and make an escape. Therefore (doubtless) this contexture of
Scriptures makes it as clear as the light at noonday, that men, even whilst
they are yet in their sins, and unbelievers have a sufficiency of Grace, power,
and means vouchsafed unto them by God, to make themselves new hearts, and new
spirits; to repent, and turn themselves from all their Transgressions, etc.

Quest. 9.

What is your third (and last) place of Scripture, to prove your Assertion?

Answ.

This place contains only these few words And he [the Lord Christ] marvelled
because of their unbelief. If the people, at, or because of, whose unbelief,
Christ is said to have marvelled, were in no sufficient capacity by all the
grace, nor by all the means of grace, granted unto them, to have believed [and
consequently, to have made themselves new hearts, to have sanctified
themselves, etc.] there had been no reasonable, nor (indeed) tolerable cause,
why Christ should marvel at their unbelief; at least, if it be supposed that
this their incapacity of believing, was known unto him: and ignorance in this
kind cannot he supposed in him, who searches the hearts, and the reins of the
Children of men. Revel. 2.23. For what occasion is there in the least, that a
man should marvel, because a Creature acts not, beyond, or above, the sphere
of his activity, as that a man should not fly like a bird in the air, that an
ox should not run swifter then a greyhound, or the like? For a person to
marvel that a man does not believe, whom he knows to have no power of
believing, and to marvel that a stone does not speak Hebrew or Greek unto him,
are passions much of one and the same consideration.

Quest. 10.

What are now your Reasons, and grounds, which strengthen your belief of the
Doctrine you maintain, concerning a sufficiency of power given by God unto men,
whereby to sanctify, and regenerate, and deny themselves, to mortify the
deeds of the Flesh, etc.

Answ.

There are many Reasons, which prevail over my judgment to conclude the said
Doctrine to be a Doctrine of Truth; but more especially, Seven.

Quest. 11.

What is the first of these Reasons?

Answ.

If God should not, upon the account of Christ, and of the Grace brought by him
unto the World, invest Adams posterity with a sufficiency of power to do all
things, simply and absolutely necessary for their salvation (and oonsequently,
to perform the duties of Sanctification, Regeneration, Mortification, and
Self-denial; these, at least in some degree, being absolutely necessary unto
Salvation) be should deal with much more rigor and severity in the second
Covenant, which yet is a Covenant of Grace, and usually so called, then he did
in the first, which being a Covenant of Works, was very peremptory, though
righteous and just, denying all mercy to transgressors. For, although in the
first Covenant, he was very strict and severe against Transgressors, yet he
was thus far gracious and indulgent unto his creature Man, that he required
nothing of him, no service, no act, or acts, of obedience to perpetuate himself
in a state of blessedness, but what he was fully enabled by him to perform.
Therefore if it should be supposed, that now under the Covenant of Grace, he
imposes such duties, services, or works, upon men, as absolutely necessary
unto Salvation, which are impossible for them to perform, he must needs be much
more hard and severe in, or under this Covenant (at least to the generality of
men) then he was in the Covenant of Works?

Quest. 12.

What is your second Reason?

Answ.

Because, the Scripture very frequently, reproves, shameth, and condemns,
those who do not repent, do not believe, are not sanctified, are not regenerate
etc. by the examples and worthy behavior of those who do repent, and believe,
who are sanctified, regenerate, etc. Passages of this import are at hand in
great numbers Matthew 12.41. Luke 11.32. Mat. 21.31, 32. Heb. 11.7, etc. Now if
those who do repent, and believe, who are sanctified, regenerated, etc. have a
sufficiency, yea, a super-sufficiency of power, a power which necessitateth
them unto all these; and those who, on the other hand, do not repent, do not
believe, are not sanctified, nor regenerated, etc. shall be supposed to want a
sufficiency of power, and to be utterly unable, to attain unto them; the
atcheivements and seize of the former, do no ways put to rebuke, or
shame, the fallings short, or nonperformance, of the latter. As the rich-men,
who (as our Savior observed) out of their abundance, cast in much into the
Treasury, did not by their liberality upon such terms, at all condemn, or
shame, the poor widow, who cast in two mites only: Nay, she with her two mites
received a more honorable testimony from the Lord Christ himself, then all
they with their great gifts; because what they gave, they gave out of their
superfluity, and so much coming from them, was less considerable; whereas the
widows two Mites was all her Substance. In like manner, if men, as yet unholy,
and unregenerate, be supposed to want power, and ability to believe, to become
holy, regenerate, mortified, etc. yet doing what lies in them, and is in their
power to do, toward believing, sanctifying of themselves, etc. they may well
be had in greater honor for this, how little soever it shall be supposed to
be, then those that shall believe, become sanctified, regenerate, etc. upon the
account of their attaining unto all these, if it be supposed that they had a
redundancy of power to perform them; or however, cannot be shamed, or justly
censured, by their seize.

Quest. 13.

What is your third Reason?

Answ.

If men merely carnal, and unbelieving, want power and means sufficient to
believe, or to attain unto things simply necessary to salvation, as
Sanctification, Regeneration, etc. then are they not in equity liable unto
punishment for the want of these things, or for their disobeying those commands
of God, wherein he requires them at their hand. As Adam had not contracted any
guilt of sin by eating of the forbidden fruit, had he not been endued with
power to have refrained: So neither do any of his posterity incur any penalty
due unto sin, either by doing any thing, which is not possible for them to
forbear; or by not doing any thing, which is impossible for them to do. For
according to the proceed of that equitable Rule amongst men (approved by our
Savior, Luke 12.48.) To whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the
more; and consequently, to whom they have committed little, of him they will
ask little; follow we still the said Rule close, it will lead us unto this;
that to whom men have committed nothing at all, of him they will ask nothing:
according (I say) to the ducture of this rule, it clearly follows, that where
God withholds or denies, power to obey, he requires not the debt of
transgression; I mean punishment. Only those Servants were called to account by
their Master, to whom he had delivered his goods, and who had received talents,
one, or more; that is, a sufficiency of power to do the things required of them.

Quest. 14.

What is your fourth Reason?

Answ.

If men have not a sufficiency of power vouchsafed unto them by God, whereby to
repent, believe, to be sanctified, regenerated, mortified, etc. then have
wicked, unholy unregenerate men, etc. a sufficient excuse to plead before God,
for, and under, their disobedience to those Commandments of His which require
these, and such like duties, of them. An impossibility to obey, or to perform
what is commanded, is a just and reasonable excuse, not only for not obeying,
or not performing the things commanded, but even for a neglecting, or
non-endeavouring such performances. As he, that for the saying of his life,
should be commanded to fly through the air like a Bird beyond the Seas, were
excuseable, although he should never go about the making of himself wings. Yea,
if wicked men were before the Judgment Seat of God, capable of the grand
excuse, impossibility to do that, which was absolutely necessary unto
Salvation, he should suffer disappointment in that great Projection of his
wherein he has projected (as the Scripture testifies) the making them
inexcuseable, or the leaving them without excuse, Joh. 15.22. Matthew. 22.12. Rom
1.20 Romans 2.1. Romans 3.19.

Quest. 15.

What is your fifth Reason?

Answ.

Because, if wicked men had not a sufficiency of power and means from God, to
do the things under present consideration, and oft-mentioned, there could be no
matter, of which the worm that never dies, should be bred (of which worm our
Savior speaks twice, Mark. 9.44, 46. and the Prophet Esa. once, chap. 66.
ver.24.) and so a very great part, if not the greatest, of that punishment,
with the suffering whereof in Hell wicked men are threatened by God, to work
their hearts to a dread and abhorring of sin: would be taken out of the way;
and so Hell it self, in effect, abolished. For this worm of wicked men, that
never dies, can in reason be nothing else, then what Jerome of old conceived,
and described it to be, (whose notion herein is more generally embraced by men
learned in the Scriptures, since) viz. the Conscience of wicked men tormenting
them, because, through their own default and sin, they are now deprived of that
good, which the Elect of God enjoy Vermi^ qui non morietur, and ignis qui non
extinguetur, a plaerisque accipitur conscientia peccato-^ rum, quae^orqueat in
suppliciis constitutos, quare viti^ suo atque peccato caruerint electorum bono.
Hieron. in Isa. 66. ult.
If such men were not fully convinced in Hell, that it was in their power,
whilst they were yet living in the world, to have kept themselves out of that
place of torment, which must have been by doing all things absolutely necessary
to Salvation, tlheir Consciences would be so far from increasing their
punishment by tormenting them, that they would rather comfort them against
their sufferings otherwise, by suggesting to them that had they, in the days of
their flesh, done their uttermost, yet could they not have escaped the coming
into that place of torment, whither they have been sent by the irrevocable and
irresistible eternal Decree of God. Any circumstance, which qualifieth the
guilt of the offense, for which a man is punished, eases the bitterness or
evil of the punishment (proportionably).

Quest. 16.

What is your sixth Reason?

Answ.

If wicked men could truly plead, that God gave them not power, whereby to
believe, to sanctify, to make themselves new hearts, etc. we generally to do
all things absolutely necessary for their Salvation, they might wash their own
hands in Innocence from the blood of their Souls, and resolve their destruction
into the will and pleasure of God, as the principal, yea, (in effect) the sole
cause of if. For he that can, without sinning himself, prevent the sinning of
another, who cannot but sin, unless he be kept from it by the interposure of
the other, and shall refuse, or neglect to do it, is more justly chargeable
with the sin committed in such a case then the actor in it, and he that
commits it; how much more, when he might without the least trouble, loss,
or inconvenience to himself, have prevented the committing of it? He that shall
build an House with rotten or insufficient Timber, especialiy when he might
have built it as cheap, with that which is found, and substantial, is more the
cause of the downfall of it, then the crazinesse or insufficiency of the Timber.
This would be the case between God, and wicked men, if it should be supposed
that he sets them forth into the world, lamely and defectively provided of
strength and means, whereby to do what he peremptorily and indispensably
imposes on them for their Salvation; at least, if it be not supposed withal,
that he supplyeth them afterward, with what is sufficient in this kind. Nor is
it either true, or pertinent, to plead, that God gave unto men that sufficiency
of power, which we contend for in Adam, and that they deprived themselves of
it, by sinning in his loins. For first, It is not like, that God should furnish
a creature, being in an Estate of Righteousness, Innocence, and Purity, with
means and abilities sufficient and proper, to recover and save it self in a
sinful and lapsed estate. Secondly, neither does God now treat with Men, one,
or other, upon the terms of the Covenant made with them in the loins of their
Father, the first Adam, and so not according to those abilities, which they
received in him, for the performance of that Covenant; but according to those
abilities wherewith he has furnished them in the second Adam, for the
performance of that second, or new Covenant, which in him he has made and
established with the World; according to the tenor and terms whereof he will
judge the World, as our Savior plainly enough implies in his Doctrine, Joh.
3.19. And this is the Condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil. See also
(very express to this point) Mark. 16.16. Joh. 3.18. (with may others).

Quest. 17.

What is your seventh and last Reason?

Answ.

To teach men, that God requires of them Sanctification, Regeneration,
Mortification, Self-denial, etc. and all this as peremptorily necessary unto
Salvation; and yet to teach them withal; that they have no sufficient power
given them whereby to perform, or attain unto, any of these; directly tends to
beget a very dishonorable and hard notion and conceir of God in the hearts and
minds of men, as that he is an hard Master, reaping where he has not sown, and
gathering where he has not strawed: add in this respect (as in some others
also) must needs be a doctrine of express consequence to quench and stifle all
thoughts, purposes, and inclinations in men toward seeking the face of God,
and exercising themselves in duties of Piety and Religion, and using the means
of Salvation; yea a doctrine, very plausibly comporting with, and indulging,
that carnal slothfulness and indisposition unto spiritual and heavenly things,
which are so generally found in men. This is apparent from that passage in the
Parable, Matthew. 25. ver. 24, 25, etc. where the Servant, that was so hardly
persuaded of his Master, as that he was an hard man, reaping where he sowed
not, etc. is charged with being both sloathful and wicked, v. 26. Therefore
that opinion, which denies a sufficiency of power to be given by God unto men,
whereby to sanctify, regenerate themselves, etc. is very dangerous, and an
open Enemy to all Godliness, especially in persons, who are at present ungodly;
although it be true likewise, that the evil influence and tendency of it in
this kind, may be (and in some is) over-balanced with other principles of a
better and more pious inspiration.

Quest. 18.

But how can the truth of such an opinion, for which you have pleaded by the
seven Arguments last recited, consist with the truth of all those places of
Scripture, which attribute the Sanctification, Regeneration, Conversion of men,
and every saving work wrought in them, unto God, and his Spirit, or grace?
Places of this import are these (with many other like unto them), And the Lord
thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, that thou may
love the Lord thy God, etc. Deuteronomy. 30.6. -- that ye may know that I the Lord do
sanctify you. Exodus 31.13. And I will give them one heart, and one way, that
they may fear me for ever, etc. Jer. 32.39. -- But I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me, ver. 40. Which are born not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, not of the will of man, but of God. Joh.
1.13. Of his own will begat he us with the Word of Truth, Jam. 1.18.

Answ.

These, with all other Texts and passages of like import, are well and clearly
consistent with that Doctrine, which asserteth a sufficiency of power
vouchsafed by God unto men, whereby to sanctify, regenerate, and deny
themselves, to mortify the deeds of the body, and generally to act and do
every such thing, which God has declared to be of absolute necessity for their
Salvation. The fair consistency between this Doctrine, and the Texts of
Scripture mentioned (with their fellows) may be well understood by these, and
such like considerations.

1. It is one thing to be able, or to have a sufficient power for the
performance or doing of a thing: an other, to exercise, or make use of, this
power, for the actual performance thereof. Christ had a sufficiency of power to
save himself from death, Matthew. 26.53. Joh. 10.17, 18. but he made no use of
this power for such a purpose. Men may be enabled by God to make themselves new
hearts, and new spirits, etc. and yet not be made willing by him, no nor of,
nor by themselves, nor by any other creature, to do it. Power to do that which
is good, without a will to employ it accordingly, is a just ground, and the
only just ground, of condemnation and punishment.

2. Though it be supposed that men have a sufficiency of power to make
themselves new hearts, and further, that their hearts are made new; yet it does
not necessarily follow from hence, either that these new hearts are made by
themselves, by the improvement of that power, or that they are not made by God.
For God can do all things, which he has enabled the creature to do: yea, and
is many times pleased to do such things himself, which the creature, enabled by
him to do them, neglects notwithstanding, and does them not.

3. It is not unusual in other Writers, nor in ordinary discourse, nor in the
Scriptures themselves elsewhere, to ascribe an achievement, or exploit, as
well, nay rather, to him that shall command, encourage, order the method and
means for, the performance and accomplishment of it, as to him that shall act
it with his hand. In this respect every saving work that is found in men, may
be (in sufficient propriety of speech) ascribed unto God, because he commands
it, gives encouragement unto men to endeavor it, prescribes methods and means
for the performance of it, although it be supposed that men themselves are the
workers of it, and this out of those abilities which they have received from
him, by the use of such and such means vouchsafed likewise unto them, to
perform it.

4. It is not improper, nor any uncouth Dialect, to ascribe that, which is
actually done and performed by another, unto him that shall furnish and
accommodate him with all the strength, power and means, by which be does
accomplish it: yea, that which is performed and done in this case, is
principally to be attributed unto him; and secondarily only, and in a meaner
respect, unto the other.

5. (And lastly,) When the production of one and the same effect depends upon
the joynt-operations, or contributions, of different causes, the effect may, in
good propriety of speaking, be ascribed sometimes to the one of these causes,
and sometimes to the other. The Apostle Paul ascribes the Spiritual birth, or
begetting, of believers, unto himself, or his Ministry; For in Christ Jesus I
have begotten you through the Gospel, (1 Cor. 4.15.) which yet the Apostle
James (as we heard) ascribes unto God: Of his own will he begat us with the
Word of Truth, Jam. 1.18. The reason why this effect, is, and reasonably and
truly may be, ascribed as well unto Paul, as unto God, is, Because Paul was
(...) a joynt-worker (as himself speaks) with God in it. Many instances of this
kind of speaking, are found in the Scriptures. Therefore it is no argument, or
proof, at all, that because the works of Sanctification, Regeneration, etc. are
so frequently in the Scripture attributed unto God, therefore they are not
attributable unto men themselves also; or that men have not a sufficiency of
power from him to do all those things, by, and upon the doing whereof, they
shall certainly attain them, and find them wrought in them.

Quest. 19.

You have declared briefly the general and common nature of these four great
Ornaments, or important Qualifications in a Christian Profession,
Sanctification, Regeneration, Mortification, and Self-denial; you have likewise
more largely showed, and proved, that God has endued men with sufficient
abilities, in conjunction with such a concurrence of his own, which he is
graciously pleased to afford unto all men, to possess themselves of them, and
to adorn their hearts and lives with them; Can you now further declare the
particular and distinct natures, or properties, of every of them (respectively)?

Answ.

I shall endeavor by the assistance of God, to do this also, being not without
hope, but that he has in some measure enabled me hereunto.

Quest. 20.

What then is that Sanctification, which (according to the Scriptures) always
accompanies a true Faith, and the state of Justification, into which men are
(as has been formerly said) translated by it?

Answ.

Sanctification, in that notion and sense of the Word, which (as I conceive)
your question intends, imports such an impression, work, or disposition, in
the heart or soul of a man, by which he is (as it were) consecrated and set
apart for God, and for his service, in works and words, in thoughts and
purposes, of righteousness and holiness; being separated and taken off, both
in will and deed, from the common, sinful, and profane practices and doings of
the flesh, and of the world about him. Or else (which comes much to the same),
It is a serious and affectionate alienation of the Soul from whatsoever is
sinfully base, impure, or unclean, springing from an high approbation, love and
liking of things that are spiritually clean, that is, which are comely, and
honorable to them that shall do and delight in them, whether they be God,
Angels, or Men.

Quest 21.

Why does God require Sanctification of Men, as a qualification, or condition,
without which he will not save them?

Answ.

Because he finds it repugnant to his Wisdom, and to his interest of Glory, to
take any Creature, which has actually sinned, into that near communion and
fellowship with himself in his Glory and Blessedness, which the state of
Salvation imports; unless it shall first have quitted it self with an
excellent and worthy behavior and demeanor of it self. Now there is no
carriage better becoming a creature, which has received life, and breath, and
all things of present enjoyment, from God, and yet further expects from him
far greater things then these, then to estrange and separate it self from all
things of a sinful and unclean nature, as being contrary to his will and
pleasure; and to devote and appropriate himself to serve and please him in all
things that are clean and pure, as well thoughts, as words, and deeds.

Quest. 22.

How, or by what means, may a man, with the ordinary assistance and blessing of
God upon his endeavors, raise that great and happy work of Sanctification in
his soul?

Answ.

By a diligent and frequent urging, pressing, and importuning his Soul from
time to time, with such Arguments and Motives, which are proper to persuade to
a setting apart, all the faculties and powers both of Soul and Body, from all
polluted and unclean doings, for the serving and pleasing of God in ways that
are pure and undefiled; together with frequent and fervent applications of
himself by Prayer unto God to assist and prosper him in his way.

Quest. 23.

What are the Considerations, or Motives, (or some of the principal of them)
that are most effectual and proper to prevail with a man to sanctify himself
(in such a sense, as you have declared.)

Answ.

The principal of them are seven.

Quest. 24.

What is the first of them?

Answ.

God himself is Holy, yea most transcendently Holy ( Esa. 6.3.) that is,
alienated and estranged in his mind and will, to a greater distance and degree,
then is imaginable by a finit understanding, from whatsoever is sinful, impure
or unclean. This is a consideration or argument that has much in it to press
the Soul unto Sanctification, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Nor is there any walking with
God [friendlily, or peaceably] unless we agree with him in his disposition and
principle of Holiness Amos. 3.3.

Quest. 25.

What is another of these Motives?

Answ.

There is no entrance into the new Jerusalem, no Salvation of Soul to be
expected from God, but only for, and by, those that have made themselves
capable of these most high and sacred privileges by a work of sanctification
in their souls, Rev. 21.27. and 22.14, 15. Heb. 12.14. (with many others.)

Quest. 26.

What is your third Motive unto Sanctification?

Answ.

That God, in that voice whereby he speaks unto men in the Gospel, calls
them unto holiness of heart, life, and conversation, (1 Thessalonians. 4.7.) Now every
call of God unto men, especially in the glorious Gospel of his dear Son,
whatsoever the tenor or import of it shall be, ought in Reason to be judged of
that high concernment unto men as that the obedient harkening unto it must
needs, on the one hand, greatly bless them, and the neglect, on the other
hand, bring wrath and judgment upon them.

Quest. 27.

What is your fourth Motive.

Answ.

That as God, in the Gospel, inviteth and calls men unto Holiness, so he
inwardly prompts them unto it, stirrs up desires in them after it, and works
inclinations toward it; yea and is always ready to aid and assist, to bless
and prosper them in their real and faithful endeavors for the attainment of
it, without whose aid and blessing in this kind, the best endeavors and
engagements of men would be in vain: in which respect he is said to sanctify
them. ( Joh. 17.17. Ephesians. 5.26. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.) as he is said to build the house
when he blesses and prospers the labors of those that build it. Psalm.
127.1. Now whatsoever God promises, or declares himself ready to assist, and
cooperate with men in, and for the obtaining of, may well be presumed to be a
matter of most desirable consequence unto them, and such, which they should
most willingly travail in the use of means to procure. This Motive is used in a
like case, by the Apostle, Phil. 2.12, 13.

Quest. 28.

What is your fifth Motive to quicken men to the study of Sanctification.

Answ.

Holiness is the fairest Lineament of the Image of God in men, and makes them
like unto him ( Ephesians. 4.24.) and so ennobleth, and advances the nature of man
to the highest pitch of real honor and dignity, of which it is capable in
this world. And in this respect the Holy Ghost often commends it under the
notion and name, of Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. Ephesians. 5.27. 1 Pet. 2.9. Psalm. 16.3. and
elsewhere.

Quest. 29.

What is your sixth Motive of the same tendencie with the former?

Answ.

As Holiness makes men like unto God in his Nature (in which respect, Holy men
are said to be made partakers of the divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1.4.) So it
advances them to a considerable degree of likeness unto him in his condition;
I mean, in respect of the enjoyment of himself, and of all he possesses
(Heaven and Earth with all the Hosts of them), upon terms of the richest and
highest contentment and security that may be. He that is Holy, may converse
with himself, as with an Angel of God, with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory;
may be secure, or assured, that God is with him; and so need not care, or fear,
who they are that are against them, Romans 8.31.

Quest. 30.

What is your seventh and last Motive to persuade unto Sanctification?

Answ.

A person that is Holy, (to speak with reverence) gives the right hand of
fellowship unto Jesus Christ, and falls in with him in managing and carrying on
that great and blessed design of his, the saving of the world. For they that
are Holy, shine as lights in the World ( Phil. 2.15.) whereby they both show
the ways of Life and Peace unto men going astray and wandering in the dark and
slippery paths of Death; and withal by their example, give steady and certain
information unto them, that these ways are passable by flesh and blood, and
may be walked in by men with great joy and contentment of Soul. Now what can be
more taking with the Spirit and Soul of a man, then to move in the same sphere
with Jesus Christ, and to have his heart and hand lift up unto the same
enterprise and undertaking with him.

Quest. 31.

You have showed the nature of Sanctification, and some principal Motives to
inflame the hearts of men With desires unto it. Can yon proceed, and do the
like in the great work of Regeneration? And first can you briefly declare the
Nature or substance of it, or how it affects, or alters the Soul?

Answ.

Regeneration (I conceive) is such an impression, or work, upon the heart or
soul of a Man, by which having been prevented, and corrupted, with pride,
ambition, covetousness, malice, envy, inordinate self-seeking, unbelief,
profaneness, etc. partly through the aptness of flesh and blood (especially
whilst it is yet in the heat and strength of it, and has not been antidoted
with sound wisdom, and much consideration against them) to engender and breed
such evil affections in, and of it self; partly through the evil examples and
customs of the world round about it; is, by the power of the word of God and
the effectual consideration of the great concernments therein held forth unto
him, restored (in some good measure and degree) to that innocence, humility,
and simplicity of heart, or to that freedom from those, and the like
unnatural, unworthy, and sinful dispositions, wherewith he was at first born
into to the world. That Regeneration is some such Restoration, or return, as
this, might be argued and proved from these words of Christ to his Disciples;
(as likewise, from other Scriptures); verily I say unto you, except ye be
converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. Mat. 18.3.

Quest. 32.

How, or by what means may a man come to be regenerate, or to return, and be
brought back to his native innocence, humility, and simplicity, having been
vitiated and corrupted with wicked and sinful dispositions of a contrary nature
and import?

Answ.

The means in general, was briefly mentioned in the description of Regeneration
now given; viz. The power of the word of God, and the effectual consideration
of the high and great concernments held forth thereunto men, (still supposing
the blessing of God upon the means used by men, as Soveraignly necessary for
the production of effect desired.)

Quest. 33.

But what are the means in particular, or some of the chief of them?

Answ.

The means of Regeneration in particular are chiefly six.

Quest. 34.

What is one of these means?

Answ.

To fill the judgment, and conscience, with convictions, both from the
Scriptures, and from principles and grounds in reason, that without making us a
new heart, and a new Spirit, that is, without a work of Regeneration, there is
no entering for us into the Kingdom of God, no escaping the vengeance of
eternal fire.

Quest. 35.

What is a second means contributing toward the great work of Regeneration?

Answ.

To constrain the heart and conscience from time to time, to lie quiet and
still, for some space of time, under the dint and force of such convictions,
before they remove, or dispose of themselves, to any other object, that so they
may feel the just and full weight and importance of them to persuade men to the
great duty of Regeneration, or making them new hearts, and new Spirits.

Quest. 36.

What are the Scriptures or some of the chief of them, from which the judgments
and consciences of men may be filled with such convictions as you speak of,
viz. that without Regeneration there is no Salvation to be expected from God?

Answ.

The Texts of Scripture of this import, are many: yea there is no truth
relating to a Christian profession, either more frequently, or more plainly
avouched in the Scriptures, then this, or the substance and clear import of it.
That of our Savior is alone sufficient to raise the conviction we speak of in
the judgments and souls of Men. Except a man be born, again he cannot see [that
is, enjoy] the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. To which these may be added (with
many others) and considered at leisure Ezekiel. 18.31, 32, Mat. 18.3. Ioh. 3.5.
Iam. 1.18. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Act. 3.19.

Quest. 37.

What grounds in reason are there to convince the Conscience of man, that
without a work of Regeneration upon him, he cannot be saved?

Answ.

Amongst many others, there are these two, very pregnant and near at hand.

First, God is a God of judgment ( Mal. 2.17. Esa. 1.27.) and therefore must
needs discern and put a difference between those, who in obedience to his
command, make themselves new hearts, and new Spirits, and those who turn their
backs upon his charge in this kind, and hold on their course in the
stubbornness and impenitencie of their old corrupt and wicked hearts unto the
end. Therefore Salvation being a reward judged meet by him to be bestowed upon
the former, he cannot judge it meet likewise to be conferred upon the latter.

Secondly, God is a God of Truth also, and this as well in his threatenings,
and execution of them, as in his promises and performance of them. (See 1 King.
14.11. Esa 1.20. Ier. 4.28. with many the like.) Therefore having threatened
men with exclusion from his Kingdom, and with the vengeance of Eternal fire,
unless they shall be regenerate, there is no place left for any question, or
doubt, whether persons living and dying unregenerate shall be saved, or no.

Quest. 38.

What is a third particular means for the promoting and effecting the work of
Regeneration?

Answ.

Clearly and distinctly to understand and know, what a new heart means, or
what change, or alteration, is made in the heart or soul by a work of
Regeneration. For unless this shall be in some good measure known, a man
cannot tell what to do, nor how to go to work, to perform the will and command
of God in making himself a new heart.

Quest. 39.

What is that new heart the making whereof seems to be the work of
Regeneration?

Answ.

Although the work of Regeneration necessarily requires the making of a new
heart; yet the heart that is made new, may have, yea and ought to have, more
put into it, then the work of Regeneration, strictly taken, necessarily
requires. For the work of Regeneration thus understood, and as it was lately
described, requires only a return in the heart, or soul to those worthy
qualifications of innocence, humility, simplicity, etc. with which a man was
first born into the world, and from which he degenerated and declined by a
customary and frequent harkening unto, and obeying the suggestions of Satan,
the motions and insinuations of his own flesh, and by comporting with the
manners and examples of the world about him: Whereas, his heart being thus
far renewed, or made new, by the precise work of Regeneration, he ought yet
further to renew, enrich, and adorn it with knowledge, faith, holiness, fear of
God, etc. So that the change, or alteration, made in a man by a work of
Regeneration, is from an injurious, proud, ambitious, malicious, envious,
crafty and mischievous disposition, unto a righteous, humble, modest, loving,
candid, harmless, and plain-hearted frame, and temper of Soul.

Quest. 40.

What is a fourth means whereby Regeneration may be wrought in Men?

Answ.

The exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospel, being known,
believed, frequently and fervently meditated and wrought upon by the Soul.
Whereby (says the Apostle Peter) are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises, that, by these [viz. known, believed and considered by us,]
we should be made Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Great hopes and
expectations are a natural and proper means to raise the hearts of men, and to
make a great alteration and change in their principles and dispositions. And if
the condition or nature of the great things hoped for, be spiritual and
heavenly, and to be enjoyed with, or in the presence of God, the alteration
made in men by the hope of them, must in reason be conceived to be from what is
more vile, to that which is more excellent. and (indeed) from that which is
carnal and earthly, to that which is spiritual and heavenly, and which
sympathizeth with the nature of God himself.

Quest. 41.

What is your fifth means availeable to the same end?

Answ.

To inform a man's self thoroughly, and duly to consider, that if he shall
prevail with his heart to abandon, and divest it self of all its sensual and
sinful dispositions and desires, and so to pass over into the state of
Regeneration, those new dispositions and desires, which shall take place in it
instead of the old, will soon be as connatural and pleasing to it (or rather,
much more) as these; yea the actions, practices, and ways which are suitable
unto them, and unto which they will lead him, will yield as much, or more, even
at present, satisfaction and contentment unto him, as his former courses and
doings ever did.

Quest. 42.

What is your sixth (and last) means proper to cause the work of Regeneration
to prosper in a man's hand?

Answ.

Frequent, and fervent Prayer unto God to bless and prosper all the other
means that shall be used by him, to the obtaining and accomplishing the desired
end, it being one of the most appropriate privileges of God to bring means and
ends together, and to grant unto men to eat of the labor of their hands.

Quest. 43.

You have given an account of the nature of Regeneration, and of some means for
the raising it in the Soul. Will you now proceed, and declare likewise the
nature of Mortification, since this also is imposed by God upon men, on like
terms of absolute necessity for their Salvation?

Answ.

Mortification is such a work, or impression upon the heart or soul, by which
all those dispositions, and inclinations unto sin, which in the generality of
men, are active and lively in tempting and drawing them into sinful actions,
and ways, are so broken, and the vigor and power of them so infeebled and
quashed; that a person mortified to any considerable degree, finds himself (as
it were) unable to commit sins, for want of will, list or propension hereunto;
according to that of the Apostle PAVL. We CAN DO nothing against the truth,
but for the truth. 2 Cor. 13.8. Consider and compare herewith Genesis 39 9. Mat.
7.18. Romans 6.2. and 7.18. Act. 4.20. 1 Ioh. 3.9. (with some others).

Quest. 44.

What are the best means to raise, and to advance the work of Mortification in
the Soul?

Answ.

To believe with all the might of the soul, and to consider accordingly from
time to time that Jesus Christ endured that painful, bitter, ignominious and
accursed death of the Cross, for this great and weighty end (amongst others)
namely to persuade and prevail with men to conform themselves to a likeness of
those his sufferings, in crucifying the old man, and destroying out of them the
body of sin, that they might not serve or obey it any more in the lusts
thereof. Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Gal. 2.20. 1 Pet. 4.1.

Quest. 45.

What is another means to help forward the work of Mortification?

Answ.

To have recourse unto the Spirit of God, within us, seriously and humbly
desiring him, that because we, through the weakness and great indisposition of
the flesh, to such a work as Mortification, are exceeding backward and averse
to be brought unto it, or to do any thing in it to purpose, and besides by
reason of the spiritual darkness in our minds and understandings, are much to
seek how to go about the work, or what to do in it; He will please secretly
first to quicken and stir us up unto it, and then supply and furnish us with
such Arguments and Considerations, which are proper and effectual through God,
to accomplish it. But if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
Body, ye shall live. Romans 8.13. Very great things might be done by the Childten
of men, by the ducture, help, and assistance of the Spirit of God within them,
did they engage and employ him accordingly, or as they might, and ought to do.

Quest. 46.

What is a third means to promote the same work?

Answ.

To fill a man's judgment and conscience with strong convictions that there is no
Salvation of Soul to be obtained from God without a preceding work of
Mortification upon it. A strong and clear conviction hereof kept upon the
judgment and conscience, so that they may be made to bear and feel the just
weight and importance of it, will soon break the heart of the powers of
darkness in men, and so astonish and confound all sensual affections, and
sinful dispositions in them, that they will have little list to stir, or
move, or act, their former parts any more.

Quest. 47.

Have you yet a fourth means to propose upon the same account?

Answ.

I conceive that this consideration also will be very serviceable in the work;
namely, That though all sensual and sinful propensions and dispositions in men
were utterly abolished, and destroyed out of them, they would not find, nor
feel, nor have the least cause to complain of any want of them, however they
should be deprived of the pleasures which they took in gratifying them, whilst
they were in being. As though men having an itching distemper in their flesh,
take a pleasure in scratching, yet would they find no inconvenience in the
wholenesse or cleanness of their skin, although the distemper being removed
the pleasure of scratching would be lost. All that which is to be mortified in
men, is but superfluity, and may be spared, without the least detriment of any
pleasure, satisfaction, or contentment that are in the least degree worthy of
men, or needful for any person.

Quest. 48.

May there not yet be found a fifth means to help forward the work of
Mortification?

Answ.

Yes (doubtless) a frequent, close and fervent meditation of our short
continuance in the world, together with the utter uncertainty of this
continuance, as that it may be much shorter, then we are aware of, or do
imagine; must needs much abate the heat and strength of all sensual and sinful
inclinations. Moses considering, that if he should have pursued and forgive
after, the enjoyment of the pleasures of sin, he could have enjoyed them but
for a season [that is, an inconsiderable space of time] wrought his heart, even
to this choice, rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, (which yet
as to flesh and blood is far less eligible, or desirable, then only to
abstain from fleshly lusts, or to forbear superfluous contentments and
delights) then such enjoyments upon such terms; I mean, the pleasures of sin,
which he knew he could enjoy but for a season, Heb. 11.25. The serious thought
of the sound of the feet of Death at our doors cannot (lightly) but be as a Rod
of iron in our hand, to break and dash in pieces all worldly, sensual, and
sinful motions and dispositions, in the hearts and souls of men; yea though
they be very stubborn, and as loath to yield, or give place, as Satan was to
quit his place in Heaven, when he was thrown down from thence by the
irresistible arm of God. When the approaches of Death are apprehended, it is
but a kind of natural Christianity for them to purify [or sanctifie]
themselves ( Job. 41.25.) and consequently, to be as dead before hand, to all
worldly or fleshly defilements.

Quest. 49.

Can you not bethink your self of some other means, besides those already
mentioned, to cause so good, and great a work, as that of Mortification, to
prosper in the hand of him, that is willing to set about it?

Answ.

Considering that lusts, and sinful motions, are but (as it were) the
complaints of men, of the straightness of their conditions otherwise, and of
their dis-satisfation herewith, without them, even as stealing, deceiving, and
lying for advantage-sake are (constructively) the complaints of men that they
are very poor and know not well how to do, or subsist in the world, without
such practices; therefore I judge it much conducing toward the cutting them
off from the Soul, for men to acquaint themselves distincly and thoroughly, with
the unsearchable riches of the grace and bounty of God in the Gospel, and to be
much in the contemplation of the unspeakable happiness and blessedness of all
those that love God; and to feed daily upon, and nourish their Souls with a
settled hope and expectation of part and fellowship in that great Glory, that
shall be revealed in the Sons of God; at the appearing of Jesus Christ, not
deducting any thing from the full value, or worth, of such an interest and
felicity, nor thinking it in any degree the less desirable, or contentfull,
because it is not of a present enjoyment, but must be waited for, for a season,
and until the appointed time comes. The very hope and expectation, of such an
unmeasurable Happiness; coming toward a man, being lively and pregnant, and
not encumbred with any considerable fears or doubtings, will fill the soul
with joy unspeakable and full of glory, and be a portion of rich and high
contentment unto it: And consequently, will reduce it to such a state, and
frame, that it will not think that it stands in need of any additions, that can
be made unto it by any sinful lust, or way of unworthiness, and so will
abstain from them without any trouble; as generous Spirits, being well apaied
with their great revenues and estates in the world whereof they are lawfully
possessed, as they have no need, so neither have they any temptation upon them,
or inclination in them, to steal; which persons, pinched with poverty, and not
able to bear the smart or pain thereof always have.

Quest. 50.

Have you not yet one means more to offer upon so great and happy a service
unto the World, as to further men in the way and work of Mortification?

Answ.

Inasmuch, as for the most part, and in most men, sinful lusts, and inordinate
dispositions and desires, especially when they have been long habituated in the
Soul, and so are become next to natural, are very stubborn and not easily
subdued, or expelled from thence, and so are (as it were) of kin to that kind
of evil Spirit, of which our Savior affirms in the Gospel thus. This kind
can by no other means come forth, but by Prayer, and Fasting, Mat. 17.21
Compared with Mark. 9.29. therefore I judge that the same kind of application, (
prayer seconded and strengthened by fasting) made unto God, must needs be very
proper and effectual also to dispossess the hearts and souls of men of those
hateful and unclean Spirits, pride, covetousness, ambition, envy, malice,
wrath drunkenness, adultery, fornication, with whatsoever else ought, by the
Law of Mortification to die. When the Apostle says, but I beat down [or keep
under] my body, and bring it into Subjection, lest etc. (1 Cor. 9.27.) it is
the most probable sense of some, that Prayer and Fasting were some of the
principle weapons used by him in this warfare against his body. It being the
prerogative of God to bring means, and ends together [ Psalm. 127.1. 1 Cor. 3.6.
2 Cor. 10.4. with many others] and he never failing to do it, when his
interposure in this kind is by prayer sought for by his Creature [ Mat. 7.7, 8.
2 Chronicles. 15. ver. 4 compared with ver. 7.] though otherwise he sometimes
resolves to withold the blessing of his concurrence in this kind [ Levit.
26.16. Deuteronomy. 11.17. etc 28.38. Ezekiel. 36, 37.] Earnest Prayer made unto him that
the means used by us for the mortifying of the deeds of the body with the lusts
thereof, may by him find their enterprise, and accomplish their work, must
needs prosper accordingly. How much more when the force and prevailing efficacy
of it, shall be doubled by fasting; which it self also is an exercise not
improper to abate the rankness and importunity of the sinful cravings of the
body, which it is still presenting unto and obtrudeing upon the Soul.

Quest. 51.

You have declared your sense concerning the respective natures (with some
other particulars about them, both jointly and severally) of those three great
points of Christian Religion, Sanctification, Regeneration, and Mortification:
will you now show in like manner, what you judge and hold concerning
self-denial: which was the fourth (and last) particular mentioned with the
three former? And first what you concieve concerning the nature of it?

Answ.

Self-denial is such a grace, or work, in the heart, or soul whereby the
person, in whom it is found, is effectually inclined to neglect, relinquish, or
part with his own lawful interest or right, whether in matters of profit, or
pleasure, or in any the concernments, or contentments, of the outer man, or
relating to this present world, when either the glory of God, or the interest
of the Gospel, or of any truth thereof, or the spiritual welfare or safety of
men, require such a deportment of him, and are like to suffer without it. Such
a Christian principle as this in men is, (as I suppose) called Self-denial,
because he that acts according to the nature or guidance of it, does by such
an Action (as it were) deny that there is any such person in being, as himself,
or (which is, in effect the same) that there is any such, to be regarded, or
taken care of, by him in matters of this world, in such and such cases. He that
acts self-denyingly, behaveth himself in such an actio^ as a man free among
the dead (in David's expression Psa. 88.5.) and not as a member of the society
of this world.

Quest. 52.

Is it not then a very difficult and hard work be raised in the Soul?

Answ.

The Lord Christ, you know, has plainly told us, that strait is the Gate, and
narrow is the way, which leads unto Life, and few there be that find it. Mat.
7, 14. And (indeed) if the work in the difficulty of it, were to be estimated
by the wisdom, and strength of men only, it will be found as difficult, as our
Savior determines it to be, that a rich man should enter into the Kingdom of
God. With men (says he, that is, in respect of humane wisdom and strength
only) this is impossible: but with God all things are possible ( Mat. 19.26.)
meaning, that God, by the excellency of his wisdom, and might of his spirit,
is able, and when desired and sought unto, willing, to enable men both to do,
and to suffer all things whatsoever, that are necessary for their Salvation,
though they seem to exceed the capacity of flesh and blood never so far. See
and compare Phil. 4.13. 1 Ioh. 4.4. So that there is no reason why any man
should be discouraged or troubled at the difficulty of the work, seeing that
God is so near at hand to direct and assist us in it, and to bless us in the
use of such means for the raising and effecting it in the Soul, as he has
graciously furnished us with for such a purpose.

Quest. 53.

What are the means, which God holds forth unto us in the Scriptures, as
efficacious (in the regular and due use of them) to enrich and bless the Soul
with the grace of Self-denial?

Answ.

The chief of these means, as far as my memory at present serves me to
recollect them, are Twelve.

Quest. 54.

What is the first of the twelve?

Answ.

To consider, that the want of this grace in the Soul, renders men incapable of
entrance into the Kingdom of God, as well as the more scandalous and gross
sins of adultery, fornication, drunkenness, covetuousness, extortion, idolatry,
etc. Jesus then said to his Disciples, If any man will follow me [that is
desires, or intends, to come, whither I am going, meaning, to enjoy an estate
of eternal blessedness and glory] Let him deny himself, and take up his cross
[ daily, says Luke] and follow me; [meaning, that it was in vain for any man
to expect part or fellowship with him in the glory and happiness of the world
to come, unless he followed, or imitated, him in his example, and practice, of
self-denial, in this world.] Mat. 16.24. This Item and unchangeable Decree of
God concerning the eternal Salvation of men, partly for the certainty and
indispensableness of it, partly for the vast consequence and concernment of it
unto men, our Savior inculcates over and over, either in expresnesse of words,
or in sense and import, and the Holy Ghost was careful to make his records
answerable, directing three of his Evangelists to give knowledge unto the world
of the re-iterated words, and sayings of Christ, to that effect or purpose. See
and compare Mat. 10.37, 38, 39. Mat. 16. 24, 25. Mar. 8.34, 35. Luke 9.23, 24.
and 14.26, 27.33. The force, and rich contribution of this means toward it is
end, see mentioned in the answer to the 37 and 46 question of this Chapter.

Quest. 55.

What may be another means to work the heart of a man to a self-denying frame?

Answ.

Seriously, and joyfully to consider, that as a self-seeking or self-confessing
frame of Spirit (as we even now heard) brings upon men inevitably without
repentance, the vengeance of eternal fire, so on the other hand that the
self-denying Spirit, lately described, being retained, and persevered in, is
always accompanied with Salvation. If any man (says Christ, as we lately
cited the words) will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross and follow me [clearly meaning and implying, that all those that would
be willing to fellow him in his blessed example of self-denial and taking up
his Cross, should certainly arrive at the like blessed estate with him in joy
and glory] Mat. 16.24. Peruse at leisure these places more abundantly
evidencing the same truth, Mar. 8.34, 35. Mat. 10.39. and 16.25. Luke 9.23, 24
Mar. 10.29.30.

Quest. 56.

What is your third means to promote the same work?

Answ.

To consider, that when we shall deny our selves in any of our dearest
enjoyments in the world, or expose them unto loss, showing our selves ready
and content to part with them for Christ, or for the Gospel's sake, if God
sees it expedient for us that we should notwithstanding retain the possession
of them and enjoy them still, we shall be never the farther off from them, by
laying them down at Christ's feet in such a case. Notwithstanding Abraham
offering up his only Son Isaac upon the service of the will and command of
God; yet he enjoyed the comfort, and contentment of his company all the days
of his life. In like manner, those three Servants of God, Shadrach, Meshack,
and Abednego, denying themselves in all they had, or could ever hope to have,
in this world, even in their lives themselves, to avouch the honor of their
God against those, that trampled it under their feet, kept the full possession
of their lives notwithstanding; nor did the least hair of any of their heads
fall to the ground by that high act of love and faithfulness unto their God.
Dan. 3. The like instance we have hi Daniel, Dan. 6. So Priscilla and Aquilla
are said to have laid down their necks for the saving of Paul's life ( Romans
16.4.) and yet they lost not their own by it. The Church-histories afford
examples of this kind in great numbers.

Quest. 57.

What is a fourth means whereby the heart of a Man may be wrought to a
self-denying frame?

Answ.

To consider, that in what diserable enjoymennt soever we shall at any time
deny our selves, if God shall please (and often times he is pleased, as was
lately showed) to continue the possession of it unto us (notwithstanding the
devoting and consecrating of it unto God) is like much to altar the property of
it for the better, and to double and treble the comfort, benefit, and
contentment of it unto us afterward. As men raised from the dead, were
supposed of old to have a greater excellency of worth and power then those that
had only lived, and not passed under that change, Mat. 14.1, 2. In like manner
those earthly comforts and good things, which have been as dead unto us by
being offered up by us in sacrifice upon the service of God, or any the
concernments of his Glory, if they be again made alive unto us, by being
delivered back into our possession and enjoyment by God, are like to be so
sanctified by having been for time, and upon such terms in his hand and
possesion, that they shall ever after be unto us as a barren land made
fruitful, and yield a sevenfold proportion of sweetness, contentment, and
delight above their former rate. Thus the lives of those three Servants of God
(of whom we lately spoke) wherein they had denied themselves, and resigned them
up into the hand of God, being restored and re-injoyed by them, were attended
with more honor, riches, and power, then ever before. Dan. 3.30,. And there is
little question to be made, but that Isaac, after his Father had received him
(as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 11.19) in a figure from the dead, was a Son of
more, and greater pleasures unto him, then at any time before his being laid
upon the Altar.

Quest 58.

Your fifth means contributing toward the same end, what may it be?

Answ.

A like consideration, that if God shall please to receive at our hand, and make
use of, that good thing of ours, wherein we shall deny our selves for his sake,
if it be of that kind of good things, the loss or want whereof may be
compensated with other good things enjoyable in this world, as credit, estate,
love and respect from, and enjoyment of, relations and friends, interest in
great men, or the like, this compensation shall certainly be made unto us, in
such a case. Doubtless the words of Christ ( Mar. 10, 29, 30) import, and
promise, as much as this. And Jesus answered and said, verily I say unto you,
There is no man that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or Father, or
Mother, or Wife, or Children, or lands, for my sake, and the Gospels, but he
shall receive an hundredfold now in that time, houses, and brethren, and
sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions and in the
world to come, eternal life; meaning, that any person, that shall suffer the
deprivation, or loss of these, for Christ sake, shall, amongst the Saints, and
friends of Christ, up and down the world, find both persons and things of like
comfort, dearnesse, and accommodation unto him, with those which he has
forsaken for his sake.

Quest. 59.

What is your sixth means to help forward the work of Self-denial?

Answ.

To lay, and keep, the conscience and soul close to this meditation, that how
precious, dear, or valuable soever the outward injoiment (whether one, or
more,) shall be unto us, which we are at any time called to deny our selves in,
and to relinquish for Christ's sake, we shall never come to the like
improvement of it in any other way, for our real benefit and advantage, though
we should wait for an opportunity in this kind for an hundred years together.
How ever a cup of cold water may be disposed of otherwise, by him that has it
to give, it will be but as spilt upon the ground, and produce nothing to him,
in comparison of what he may make of it, by giving it freely unto one of
Christ's little ones, in the name of a Disciple. Verily I say unto you (says
Christ) he shall in no wise lose his reward [meaning, according to the constant
import of such a kind of expression in the Scripture, he shall most certainly
be most bountifully and magnificently rewarded] Mat. 10 42. If a cup of cold
water only parted with for Christ s sake shall turn to so blessed an account
unto him, who shall at any time deny himself in it; doubtless a man's estate,
liberty, reputation, relations, and life especially, if he shall deny himself in
any, more, or all of these, will, in their return, amount to an unvaluable
Treasure.

Quest. 60.

What is the means you have to offer in the seventh place, to help in the work
of Self-denial?

Answ.

Duly to consider, that if we shall deny our selves in any of the good things
we possess, and enjoy in the world, whatever it shall be, the consecration of
this as a first fruits, unto God, will sanctify unto us the whole lump
remaining, that is, will obtain such a blessing from God upon all we possess
besides, that both the possession of it will be the better secured unto us, and
the use and enjoyment of it more incline and dispose us to the service of God.
(For both these, I suppose, are intended, when any outward good thing is said
to be sanctified unto men.) But give Alms (says Christ to the Pharisees Luke
11.41.) Of such things as you have [or, according to what you have, at present,
and are able to give] and behold, all things are clean unto you; meaning, (as I
conceive) that a consecrating or devoting a reasonable proportion of their
substance unto God, as he requires, would free their whole estates from such
encumbrances, unto which the possessions and enjoyments of most men are
obnoxious through the displeasure of God against them for neglecting him in his
just prerogative in that kind.

Quest. 61.

What is your eighth means conducing to the same end?

Answ.

To engage the heart and soul much to consider, that whatsoever it shall be,
wherein God shall at any time call us to deny our selves, in case we should
withold it from him, and not be willing to part with it upon his account and
for his sake, it may soon after be taken from us in some other way (unthought
of, and unexpected by us) against our wills; in which case we are no ways like
to receive either thanks, acknowledgment, or any other reward for it: but to
sustain a dead, absolute, and utter loss of it. Whereas had we been willing to
accommodate the interest of God with it, upon his call, we should have been
sure to have made a friend (as we use to say) with it, yea the best and
greatest Friend, tha ^is to be found in Heaven, or in Earth: yea and in a short
time have received an hundred, I might say, a thousand for one in the return of
it.

Quest. 62.

What is your ninth means?

Answ.

To ponder, weigh, and consider, whether that comfort, or enjoyment, wherein we
shall refuse to deny our selves, when called by God hereunto, whatsoever it
shall be, credit, estate, liberty, relation, one, or more (of what kind soever)
yea, or life it self, whether (I say) in case our foolish, unthankful, and
unbelieving hearts shall not serve us to part with it freely at such a time, it
be not like to wither in our hand afterward, as bieng blasted with the breath
of Gods displeasure, and become as a fruitful land made barren for the
wickedness of those that dwell in it, so that instead of the former sweet
pleasure and contentment we reaped from it, from thenceforth it shall yield us
little but sorrow and grief of heart, and bitterness of Soul.

Quest 63.

What means do you propose (in the tenth place) to assist weak flesh and blood
in the great and difficult work of Self-denial?

Answ.

To take knowledge, and consider that as we our selves are not our own having
been bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.) but his, who has bought us; so
neither is any thing we possess, or enjoy, our own, but by a kind of a faint
and under-title, and with reference unto men: but God is (unquestionably) the
true and rightful Proprietour, and owner of whatsoever we call ours, in the
good things of this world. And this David acknowledged over and over, both in
his own name, and in the name of the people, when they offered so liberally
toward the building of the Temple. All things come of thee, and of thine own
we have given thee. And again: All this store -- comes of thine hand, and is
ALL THINE OWN. 1 Chro. 29.14, 16. See Hos. 2.9. Hag. 2.9. (with some others.)
Now it is a most just and equitable precept of God, withold not good from the
owner thereof [so the original, and our former translation: our latter has, to
the same effect, from them to whom it is due] when it is in the power of thine
hand to do it, Pro. 3.27. But to detain, and withold that, which of right
belongs unto another, not only when he requires it, but when he has special
occasion likewise for it, it being in our hand and power, as well to give it
unto him, as to withold it from him, is an high misdemeanour, and
provocation, in the sight of God and men. This is the case of him that shall
not deny himself in any thing whatsoever, which he calls his; when God
requires it at his hand. For though all that any person under Heaven enjoys,
be by sovereign Right, and by a title un-disputable, His (I mean, Gods); yet he
never requires the smallest thing possessed by any man, but when he has need
of it, as Christ had of the Ass to ride on into Jerusalem: upon the account of
which need only, he sent his Disciples to fetch him, and the man-owner was
willing to let him go, Mat. 21.23. compared with Mar. 11.2, 3, 6

Quest. 64.

What is the means you intend for the eleventh place?

Answ.

Seriously to consider, that if God shall at any time please to receive any
thing at our hand of that which is ours, for his own accommodation and service,
it is of as lively, pregnant, and securing an import, as a sign from Heaven
would be, that he greatly loves and respects us, and intends favor and
frinendship unto us at more then an ordinary rate. As the Wife of Manoah
reasoned the case with her Husband, when he was afraid of his Life, because of
the Vision they had seen. If the Lord would kill us, he would not have received
a burnt-offering, and a meat offering at our hands etc. Judge. 13.23. And the
Scriptures sometimes expresses the happy condition of men, in respect of the
terms wherein they stand with God, by his acceptance of their Sacrifices and
Services. Genesis 4.4, 5. Genesis 8.20 21. Psalm. 51.19. Levit. 1.4. Mal. 3.4. (with
others).

Quest. 65.

What is the last means whereby you conceive that the work of Self-denial may
be raised in the Souls of men?

Answ.

To recommend the preceding considerations with fervent and frequent Prayer
unto God for his blessing on them, when you shall take them, or any of them, to
serve you in the said great and blessed work. For they in the best employment,
and improvement of them by men, are but like the planting of Paul, and the
watering of Apollos, which had signified little to those, upon whom they were
bestowed, had not God interposed with them to give the increase. See the
Answers to the 27 and 4^ Questions of this Chapter. If you shall plant the
foregoing considerations in your understanding, judgment, and memory, and then
seasonably water them with Meditation and Prayer, you shall most certainly
find, and that within a short time, the work of Self-denial beginning to bud
and put forth in your Soul.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Prayer: and somewhat in particular, but very briefly,
concerning the Lords Prayer.
Quest. 1.

HOw comes that exercise, or act, of Devotion in men toward God, which we call
Prayer to find a place in Christian Religion, or in the profession, and
practice hereof?

Answ.

Prayer unto God, indefinitely considered, and in the general, is no act, or
exercise appropriate unto Christian Religion, but is practiced by many, amongst
whom Christ, or the Gospel, were never so much as named; only at the motion and
instance of their consciences, no otherwise instructed, or enlightened, then by
hearkening unto the voice or dictates of those Principles and seeds of divine
knowledge, which God by nature has planted in them. Only there is a peculiar
kind of Prayer, or way and manner of praying unto God, which is proper to this
Religion, and which he has revealed unto the professors hereof, as a
deportment, or behavior, most excellently becoming them, and consequently, as
most grateful and acceptable unto himself: And this (indeed) is the general
notion, or consideration, under which all duties whatsoever are by him required
of Men.

Quest. 2.

What is that Prayer, or kind of praying unto God, which is only taught in the
Doctrine of Christian Religion, and practiced amongst the professors hereof?

Answ.

To pray unto him in the name of Jesus Christ with Faith of being heard, and
accepted through him, in whatsoever we shall thus ask in Prayer, according to
the will of God.

Quest. 3.

What is it to pray in the Name of Jesus Christ?

Answ.

It is to persuade the heart in praying, or to believe, that what we ask of
God, according to his will, we shall as certainly for Christ's sake [that is, by
virtue of that glorious interest, which Christ by means partly of his near
relation, and partly of his infinite worth and dignity, has in God, and we
through him] obtain, as if Christ himself should in person make the same Prayer
for us.

Quest. 4.

Why do you add these words, according to the will of God? Is it not enough to
pray in the name of Christ, and in Faith? Or, what do you mean by these words?

Answ.

When the Scripture says thus, And this is the confidence that we have in him
[or toward him, that is, God, by means of Jesus Christ] that if we ask any
thing according to his will, he hears us (1 John 5.14.) that provisional
clause, If we ask any thing according to his will, seems to include these two
things; first that we ask such things only, which are meet and convenient for
us, and so adjudged, and declared, in one kind or other, by God himself. In
that absolute model, or prescript, concerning prayer (given by Christ), we are,
for matters of this life, if not strictly confined, yet graciously taught and
directed, only to pray for, our daily bread [in opposition to a praying for
riches, honors, pleasures, or any the great things of the world]. Thus Agur
long before, prayed unto God to feed him only with food convenient for him.
Prove. 30.8. Therefore it being not according to the will of God, that we should
pray for the great things of the World [at least, for our selves] if we make
any such Prayer as this unto him, he is at liberty whether he will hear us, or
no, notwithstanding any promise of audience made by him. Secondly, The said
words of caution, or proviso, according to his will, seem to import this also;
that we must be orderly and regular in our ends which we propound unto our
selves in asking any the good things of this life of God; as that we ask them
not to gratify our lusts with them but to maintain our selves in an honest,
comfortable, and cheerful posture, and condition, for the service of God, and
of men (for his sake.).

Quest. 5.

Are there more kinds of Prayer (I mean, of Prayer that is regular, and
accepted with God) then one; or but one only?

Answ.

The word Prayer, taken in a large sense (as frequently it is) may comprehend
those 4 particulars (mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.1.) as so many
subordinate and distinct species under it, (...), supplications, prayers,
intercessions, giving of thanks. But here the word Prayers, is to be taken in a
strict sense (which may be showed presently). Some make Thanksgiving, to be a
part of Prayer: but this seems not so proper, considering the Apostle makes a
difference between them, and mentions them as two distinct services, or
applications of the Soul unto God, Phil. 4.6. Col. 4.2. So that understanding
the word Prayer, in a large sense, it may be said, without mistake, that there
are several kinds of Prayer: but the proper and strict sense of the word, there
is only one.

Quest. 6.

How do these 4 kinds of prayer ( as you lately said they may be called,
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, giving of Thanks) differ the one from
the other?

Answ.

First, Supplications, are requests made unto God for our own deliverance or
preservation from evil; whether in respect of our sins by which we have
deserved evil; or of the infirmity of our present condition by reason whereof
we are (howsoever) exposed unto evil. Prayers (in the strict sense of the
word) are requests made unto God for the obtaining of the good things, whether
spiritual, or temporal, of which we stand in need. These two would (ordinarily
at least) be joined together in our petitionary applications unto God. Act.
1.14. Phil. 4.6. Intercessions are Requests made unto God for others, whether
it be for their deliverance from evil, or for the procuring of some positive
good things, one or more for them. Romans 8.26.34. Heb. 7.25. 1 Timothy 4, 5. The
verb, from which the word is derived, sometimes signifies to pray, not for,
but against others. Act. 25.24. Romans 11.2. Lastly, giving of Thanks, is a
cheerful, submissive, and engaging Acknowledgment, made and tendered unto God,
for any good that has been done by him, whether immediately by himself, or
mediately by instruments: either unto our selv s or unto others. This kind of
Prayer ought still to be joined with the former, Phil. 4, 6. Col. 4.2.

Quest. 7.

Whether is it lawful to pray to Angels, or to Saints, or unto any other,
whether person, or thing, but God only?

Answ.

The Scripture allows no Prayer to be made, either to Angel, or to Saint, but
unto God only. It is here plainly affirmed, that God hears Prayer, ( Psa.
65.2.) And there are instances and proofs without number, scattered up and down
the Scriptures evincing this to be true: but there is not the least overture,
or whisper, that either Angel or Saint, whilst remaining in Heaven, hear any
Prayer made unto them on the earth. If they did, why should not all flesh come
unto them, as the Scripture affirms it shall or will come unto God upon the
account of so-strongly-attracting a property. O thou that hear Prayer, unto
thee shall all flesh come: Psa. 65.12. And elsewhere, David says, That every
one that is Godly shall make his Prayer unto him. Psa. 12.6. So that there are
none but ungodly ones left to pray unto Saints or Angels. Nor did Christ, when,
upon request, he taught his Disciples, and in them, all men, to pray, send them
either to Saint, or to Angel, but unto God only: After this manner therefore
pray ye. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Mat. 6. Luke 11.

Quest. 8.

Whether is it the will of God, that persons, as yet unregenerate and
unbelieving, and whilst such should pray unto him?

Answ.

Yes, (doubtless), for being willing that they should Repent, 2 Pet. 3.9. Mat.
3.2. and Believe. Mar. 1.15. and make themselves new hearts and new spirits
(and so become regenerate) Ezekiel. 18.31. why should he be thought unwilling that
they should pray unto him for his gracious assistance whereby to be enabled to
perform these great works? especially considering that he has encouraged even
such persons, to pray unto him for the gift of his Spirit, with a promise, and
this most emphatically proposed, and with greatest advantage to procure belief,
that, upon their Prayer, he shall be given unto them? If ye then be evil, know
how to give good gifts to your Children, how much more shall your heavenly
Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Luke 11.13. See also Joh.
4.10.

Quest. 9.

But how then does the Scripture say, that without Faith it is unpossible to
please God, Heb. 11.6. And in another, place: For, whatsoever is not of Faith
is Sin. Romans 14.23. Can a person, by a Prayer which is a sin, or wherein he
pleases not God, obtain so inestimable a benefit and blessing of him, as the
gift of his Holy Spirit?

Answ.

The meaning of the latter saying is only this; that whatsoever a man does,
being unperswaded, or unsatisfied, in his conscience of the lawfulness of it,
he sins in doing it, although that which he does in such a case, be, in it
self never so lawful and good. And accordingly, if he that asks the Holy
Spirit of God, should doubt in his conscience, whether it were lawful for him
to ask this Spirit of him, he should (indeed) sin, and not please God in asking
it, nor yet (doubtless) obtain it by asking. For the former place, where it is
said, that without Faith it is impossible to please God, it speaks not of a
Gospel Faith, by which a person is savingly justified; but of such a Faith, for
belief concerning God, which may be acquired by the light of nature and has
been found in many of no higher an inspiration; as namely a belief of the Being
of God, and of his goodness toward those, who are studious and careful to
please him, and approve themselves unto him, as it is explained in the latter
part of the same verse: For he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and
that he is a rewarder of those, who diligently seek him; meaning, that without
a belief of these two things, no man can, or will, compose and settle his heart
to live in obedience unto God, or to depend upon him. But both these
persuasions concerning God, may (as has been said) be found in persons, who as
yet do not believe unto Salvation, though by means of them, they be in a ready
way hereunto.

Quest. 10.

But is it not as unpleasing unto God, that a wicked man should take his Name
into his mouth (which he must do, if he pray unto him) as that he should take
his Covenant, or Statutes, into his mouth? Or is it not evident, from Psalm.
50.16. That he is not willing that a wicked man should do this; the words being
these; But unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare my
statures, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth?

Answ.

The Scripture, neither in this place, nor in any other, by a wicked man
means a simple, or mere Unbeliever, or a person chargeable with no other
crime, but only that he is not in a state of Grace, or of Salvation; but such a
person only who has some way or other debauched his Conscience, as either with
profaneness, neglect, or contempt of God, Idolatry, Pride, gross Hypocrisy,
Covetousness, Oppression, Deceit, Cruelty, customary Swearing, or Lying,
Perjury, Malice, Uncleanness, Drunkenness or the like; but for the most part
the Scripture, by a wicked person, understands such who have been openly
Scandalous, and branded with common Infamy for some vicious practice or other,
in their Conversation, and remains still impenitent and unreformed. And the
truth is, that it is not the will of God, or pleasing to him, that such as
these, whilst such, should either take his name into their mouths in Prayer?
or his Covenant in discourse, in Preaching. But if there be so much as a first
fruits of any inward relentings in conscience, for the evil of their ways, or
any secret desires of amendment, this puts them into a capacity of praying
unto God, at least in private, for his help to perfect the work of their
Repentance, and this with acceptance, (at least, to a degree) whereas outward
Reformation, and this practiced for some time, is required in such men, to make
them regularly, and with acceptance capable of taking Gods Covenant into their
mouth, and declaring his Statutes.

Quest. 11.

But can any Prayer be made unto God with acceptance, which is not presented
unto him in the Name of Jesus Christ, and with Faith in this Name?

Answ.

If he that prays unto God, has that worthy and honorable apprehension or
opinion of him, that he is a rewarder of those, who diligently seek him,
although he has no explicit, or express knowledge of Christ, or by name, and
consequently has no such Faith in his name, which necessarily requires such a
knowledge of him; yet by means of that implicit knowledge of Christ, which is
virtually, and (as it were) consequentially included in that Faith, or belief
of his, concerning God, [namely, that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him,] his Prayer may be accepted by him. The Apostles themselves as it
seems by those words of Christ himself unto them, You believe in God believe
also in me (Joh. 14.1) did not for a long time, believe explicitly in Christ,
(as neither did the Saints, more generally at least, under the old Testament)
yet their Prayers (doubtless) all this while were accepted with God. Yea when
Christ drew up that absolute Model, or Prescript, for the Regulation of
Prayer, extant Mat. 6.9, 10. etc. and Luke 11.2, 3 etc he did not so much as
mention his own name in it, nor direct, or prescribe any thing about praying in
his Name, or out of Faith in his Name, in any formal, literal, or explicit
manner, but only inclusively, argumentatively, or in a consequential way, as
viz when he directs, or prescribes unto those, who desire to pray, that they
call God Father: Our Father, which art, etc. that relation in God unto men,
winch is imported in this word Father, supposing and including in it that
Restantation of Mankind unto the grace and favor of God, which has been
procured and effected by Christ in his death, whether this be particularly
known by him that prays, or no.

Quest. 12.

But does not this opinion, or Doctrine, that a Prayer made unto God, may find
acceptance with him, although it be not tendered or presented unto him in the
name of Christ, make void, or (at least) less considerable all those promises,
directions, and encouragements (so frequent in the Scriptures) by which men are
invited, and taught by God himself to present their Prayers and Requests unto
him in the name of his Son Jesus Christ?

Answ.

No whit more then this opinion, or Doctrine, that Salvation was attaineable
under the Old Testament, by means of the shadows, and obscure Representations
of Christ in the Levitical Law, does either abrogate or make void the Gospel,
or render it less considerable. For as the glory of the Gospel does not stand
in this, that there was no Salvation in the world before that entered into it,
but in this, that life and immortality were brought to light by it, the
contrivance of that Salvation in all particulars clearly discovered, which
before were little known, or understood; the means of obtaining it, which
before were scant and sparing, most graciously and bountifully enlarged etc. In
like manner, neither does the worth and excellency of those directions, and
promises, whereby God would bring men to pray unto him, explicitly and
directly in the name of his Son, and with the like Faith in him, lie in this,
that no other Prayer but this, shall find any degree of Acceptance with him;
But in these Two things rither. First, that by them men are more vigorously put
upon it to seek after an explicit and distinct knowledge of Christ, that so
their Faith in him may be answerable, which must needs add to the comfort and
joy of it exceedingly: Secondly, that they are very proper and effectual to
awaken and stir up the Faith which men have in Christ, when they are about to
pray, which must needs cause them to pray with the greater fervency, and so
render their prayer proportionably the more availant, or prevalent with God.

Quest. 13.

What is meant by praying, and making supplication always in the Spirit, Ephesians.
6.18.

Answ.

To pray, and make supplication always, in [or with] the Spirit, is to be
careful: that whenever, or as oft-soever as we pray unto God, either for the
obtaining of things that are go^d, or for preservation from things that are
evil, we engage our Spirits [that is, our hear^s and souls] effectually in the
work that we ^e not superficial, overly, or remiss, in so important a
business, making it rather a labor of the Tongue, or lip, then of the mind,
and spirit, and Soul. The lip and tongue may sometimes be excused from having
any thing to do in our applications by Prayer unto God, and the work be wholly
laid upon the Spirit, heart, and soul; and the prayer made by these alone, be
accepted with him. But as the Scripture says Psalm. 147.10. That he takes no
pleasure in the legs of a man [meaning for any natural endowment, as of
comeliness of shape, activity or the like, or unless their use and motion be
guided according to his will]; so neither does he take pleasure in any man's
tongue, or lips for any thing uttered in Prayer by them, though never so
eloquently, with never so pertinent, pleasing or piercing expressions, unless
they be acted herein by the Spirit [that is by the power and strength of the
heart, and soul] of him that prays.

Quest. 14.

Whether is it lawful to pray by a Book, or to read all that we Pray?

Answ.

Inasmuch as Prayer is only a representation, or tender of the motions and
desires of the heart and soul unto God, if we can raise and be accordingly
careful to raise, such inward motions and desires, as are expressed in the
words which we read, supposing these to be regular, and such as are meet to be
found in us, and that all along as we read, we be alike mindful to hold forth
or tender these motions and desires unto God. I see no sufficient ground to
condemn praying by a Book, as simply, or in all sorts of men unlawful; when the
Master of a Family upon whom it lies as a Christian-duty to pray with those of
his house from time to time, is not guifted with competent utterance. Judge it
more convenient for him when he prays with his Family, rather to make use of
a book, then to undertake the duty without it. But as we are justly offended
with those, who being healthful and sound in their limbs, legs, and feet, are
well able to go and walk without crutches; and yet as if they were lame, will
ordinarily use them, as the worst and laziest sort of beggars are wont to do;
So when men that are enabled by God of themselves, and without the help of a
book, to utter and express, competently (at least) the inward conceptions,
motions, and desires of their Souls, if notwithstanding they shall dissemble
and (in effect) deny the ability, and gift which God has given them in that
behalf, by making use of a book, or writing always when they pray, They are in
Peter's condemnation when Paul reproved him for dissembling, Gal. 2.11. etc.
When a person desires to pray privately, in the presence and hearing of God
only, although his gift of utterance be never so mean, yet I suppose it more
convenient for him to make use of it, then of a book, at such a time; partly
because God needs not the significancy of words (nor, indeed any words at
all) to come to the knowledge of our desires; partly because gifts by an
humble and conscientious use of them, and the blessing of God thereon, are often
times improved, and the imperfection of them (to a good degree) healed; partly
also, because the heart is at so much the more liberty to conceive desires, or
petitions, of the best accommodation to a man's present condition, and
occasions, whatsoever they be.

Quest. 15.

Supposing a set Form of Prayer (as it is called) to be, simply and in it self.
Lawful, whether is the constant use of it amongsft people, by him who is their
mouth in Prayer, more expedient or promising more edification, or comfort unto
them, then such prayers, which are from time to time conceived, and uttered, by
the gift of prayer, at the same time?

Answ.

A Prayer of a fresh and present conception, when it is uttered, being
conceived by the Spirit, or by a gift of Prayer, has some things in it, which
render it more likely to edify and comfort those, that are partakers of it,
then one and the same Prayer still repeated.

First, A prayer that is new, is more like to awaken and engage attention in
those that are to join in it. Customary things are but as matters of course,
which are commonly passed over with little, or no observation. Whereas things
that are new, are of kin to things that are strange, after which even they that
are but drowsily disposed, will force themselves to hearken. God himself makes
account that if men should be but able to say, even of his great works, when he
brings them forth, Behold, we knew them before, that they would despise, or
(at least) less regard them. Esa. 48.7.

Secondly, A prayer newly conceived by the help of the Spirit of God, comes
warm from the heart, and so is more like to convey warmth to the hearts of
those that hear it, then a Prayer that is brought out of the memory where it
has lain for a long time dead; Besides, the womb of the memory, and much more
of a book is but a cold place, in comparison of that of the heart or soul.

If it be said, That a prayer which is brought out of the treasury of the
memory may, when it is uttered come from the heart also, and this with as much
spiritual warmth, or heat, as if it had been newly conceived here; I answer,

The heart cannot in reason, be so much raised, or engaged with borrowing of,
or from the memory, or with delivering out, what is borrowed from hence, as
with travailing in birth with new conceptions, and in bringing forth these with
apt expressions, which must suddenly be found and taken up.

Thirdly, A prayer conceived by a spiritual gift (and such is the gift of
Prayer) is more proper for a Church or Church-Assembly, and like to do better
service here, then a prayer composed or framed by a natural gift, one or more,
as good parts or abilities of learning, rhetorique, etc. And I take this for
granted, that no person, that finds, or knows himself to be endued by God with
a gift of prayer (and he that is thus endued by him cannot likely be long
ignorant of it) will decline the use, or exercise of this gift, and choose
rather to imply his natural gift instead of it.

Fourthly, Praying from time to time, with variety of matter, with new and
different petitions, and expressions, does set forth and commend, upon terms of
far greater advantage, the unsearchable riches of the manifold wisdom,
knowledge and bounty of the Spirit of God, then the constant use of one, and
the same Prayer: and consequently, must needs be more like to awaken men to
discern and acknowledge the gracious presence of God with them, or among them,
in their holy assemblies, and likewise to glorify him for vouchsafing so much
of himself, or of his goodness unto men; as it is said; They marvelled, and
glorified God, which had given such power unto men, Mat. 9,8. And the Apostle
Paul expostulates thus with the Church of Corinth, Know ye not your own selves
[though I should not affirm it or remind you of it] how that Jesus Christ is in
you [or rather among you in your Church-community; meaning, by a notable
presence of his power, and of his grace and love toward you] except ye be
Reprobates [or rather, very injudicious and undiscerning; meaning that those
Apostolical gifts and abilities which God had given him for their sakes, and of
which they had had large Testimony and proof amongst them, did evidentiy
demonstrate the presence of Christ in the midst of them] 2 Cor. 13.5.

Fifthly, (and lastly) when men pray by a gift of Prayer, the Holy Ghost is at
full liberty, both to act their Hearts and Spirits in prayer, as he pleases,
and to prompt them with such Holy motions, and streins of petition, as he
judges most congruous and commodious for the respective occasions, of those
that are present; and withal, to act their tongues and lips in praying, and
to give them utterance, as he pleases: Whereas he that always confineth
himself to a set form of words in praying, confineth also the Spirit of God
either to give him always one and the same matter of Prayer, or a like set
form of motions, and desires to present in prayer unto God; or otherwise to
permit him to utter words in prayer, which in their significations, have no
agreement with the inward impressions upon his heart. Besides, he that prays
upon such terms, does not so much speak as the Spirit gives him utterance, but
rather as he gives utterance unto the Spirit, or at the best, unto himself.

Quest. 16.

But have not many, either pretended unto, or presumed upon, a gift of Prayer
from God, been a shame and dishonor unto the holy Ordinance of Prayer uttering
before God, and his people, things that have been uncomely, offending against
the Laws and Rules of this sacred exercise by tautologies that is, by
unseasonable, importune, and needless repetitions of the same things] by
broken in-coherent, and distracted sentences, by an immethodical confusion, and
preposterousnesse in ordering petitions, by presenting petitions contrary to
the revealed will of God, and the like? Were it not better then, to prevent so
great inconveniences as these, that set forms of Prayer should be constantly
used, at least in public, and where many are present, and that extemporary
praying should in such cases, be restrained, or refrained?

Answ.

When many pretending to the knowledge of the truth, and presuming themselves
to be orthodox (as few Ministers, yea or Teachers of one kind or other, but
do) shall notwithstanding teach errors, and unsound Doctrines publicly,
doubtless it is not expedient nor lawful, for the preventing of this
inconvenience (though it be far greater, and of much more dangerous
consequence, then any such defect, or miscarriage, ^n praying, as those
mentioned) to confine all teachers to the reading of homilies, or to the
reading or getting by heart, all they deliver in teaching (although this latter
be no means to prevent the inconvenience we speak of, because men are like to
be as erroneous in penning, as in preaching). It is no way of God, nor
justifiable in reason, either to counsel, or constrain any man to bury that
talent of preaching, which God has given him in the earth; and to serve God,
and his Church, only with reading what other men have written (though with
approbation) to prevent the evil, and danger of being heterodox in his
doctrine, in case he should make use of his own proper gift for the raising,
handling, and ordering of it. There are better and more Christian remedies
against both the inconveniences mentioned, both that incident unto praying, and
that incident unto preaching likewise, by a personal, private, and appropriate
gift, better (I say) then those that have been argued against: the truth is,
that these (as the common saying is), are Remedies worse then the Diseases.

Quest. 17.

Are there any degrees in Gods acceptance of Prayers; so that (for example)
though one prayer find favor in his sight) and be well accepted with him, yet
another may please him more, and obtain more Grace, and higher Acceptance with
him?

Answ.

We commonly estimate and measure Gods acceptance of Prayers, by his granting
the things desired of him herein (though I do not conceive this rule to be
universally true: or that the Apostle Paul his Prayer, that the messenger of
Satan, sent to buffet him, might be caused to depart from him, was not
accepted with God, because it was not granted, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. Or that it was
less accepted then many others, that were granred): But as far as this rule
carries truth in it, it is plain that there are degrees in Gods acceptance of
Prayer, and that such a Prayer, which may prevail with him to the obtaining of
lesser, and more common mercies, or favors, yet will not prevail to the
obtaining of greater or more signal vouchsafements, although these also may be
obtained by another Prayer, which is of choi^er and higher acceptance with him.

Quest. 18.

How can you make this to appear?

Answ.

When the Apostle James says, that the fervent [or effectual fervent, as our
last translation renders the word] Prayer of the Righteous avails MVCH, (
Jam. 5.16.) he clearly supposes, that the Prayer of such a person (a righteous
man) though it were not fervent in the same degree, yet might to a lower, or
less degree prevail with God also. And if the Righteousness of him that
prays contributeth toward the acceptance, and prevailingnesse of the prayer
with God (which is plainly enough likewise imported in the said Saying) it is
not to be doubted, but that when two righteous men, yet the one in
Righteousness excelling or exceeding the other (which very possibly may be,
yea and commonly is the case between two righteous persons) shall pray
together, yea and this with equal fervency (and faith too); the prayer of the
one, namely his that excels in Righteousness, shall have the pre-eminence
in acceptance with God. So when another Apostle writes thus to the Hebrews.
Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to
live honestly. But I beseech you the rather [or, somewhat the more earnestly,
as the former translation reads it] to do this, that I may be restored to you
the sooner Heb. 13.18, 19. He seems to imply, that they might procure from
God his liberty and return unto them the sooner, if they did quit themselves
accordingly in their prayers for him; as it is observed by the Holy Ghost,
that, instanr and earnest prayer was made by the Church for Peter when he was
so suddenly and miraculously delivered out of Prison, and restored unto them,
Act. 12.5.

Quest. 19.

How or by what means, may a person come to interesse himself in the great
privilege, or blessing, of Praying ferventlie?

Answ.

These considerations laid, and kept close, and warm to the heart and
conscience, will stand him in much stead, and do him good service, that way.

First, That when he prays, he beats not the air, but speaks in the ears
of the living God, whose property, yea and glory it is, to hear Prayers (
Psalm. 65.2.) Yea and can no more lay aside this property, then deny himself.

Secondly, That when he offers up prayers and supplications with strong cries
and tears, (as Christ is said to have done in the aaies of his flesh, Heb. 5.)
he forcibly strikes or smites upon the tender bowels and compassions of God,
and causes these to move and work within him.

Thirdly, That when he shall, once, and again, have reaped the fruit of his
Prayers, and been supplied, according to the desire of his Soul, out of the
Treasures of the goodness, bounty, and power of God, his heart will be filled
to the brim with gladness and joy hereupon; according to that of our Savior
to his disciples; -- Ask and ye shall receive, that your Joy may be full. J^.
16.24.

Fourthly, That if he shall at any time pray loosely, coldly, drowsily, or as
if he cared not much whether he prayed or no, he will expose himself to the
eminent danger of losing his Prayer: which may very possibly turn to a matter
of sad consequence unto him, and prove either an occasion of his declining in
Faith or love toward God; or of a greater indifferency and remisness to pray
afterward.

Fifthly, That it concerns him, both as much as his comfort and peace in this
world, and especially as much as the Salvation of his soul in the World to
come, do amount unto, that his prayer finds acceptance with God: which it is
not like to do, if it be perfunctory, and slight, and has not the strength of
the heart and soul in it.

Sixthly, (and lastly). That a man's heart, or spirit can never upon no occasion
or exigence whatsoever, be called up, and made to give out its lust and
strength, to a greater advantage, benefit, or blessing unto him, then when he
is to engage in the great duty and heavenly exercise of Prayer. If the heart be
seriously pressed, urged, and importuned with the weight and consequence of
these, and the like considerations, when a man is upon drawing near unto God in
Prayer, it cannot (lightly) but attend him in the action with the best and
uttermost improvement and enlargement of it self, whereof it is well capable.

Quest. 20.

What Faith, or what kind of Faith is it, which is required of a Person in
praying, to render his Prayer accepted with God? Is it only a justifying Faith;
Or is it a Faith or belief, that God hears, or regards our Prayer? Or is it
a Faith, or Belief, that God will grant, or give unto us, that which we desire
of him in our Prayer? Or is it some other kind of Faith differing from all
these?

Answ.

To believe steadfastly that God both hears, and regards our Prayer, and
that he wants, neither love or goodness of will, nor yet any sufficiency of
power, to grant us, or do for us, what we ask (only supposing that our Prayer
be, for the matter of it according to his will, and presented with some
fervency or earnestness of desire) is (I suppose) that kind of Faith, which
commende^ our Prayer with acceptance in the sight of God.

Quest. 21.

But if such a Faith as this avails (in conjunction with the terms or
conditions now mentioned) to the acceptance of our Prayer with God, may not he
that prays be filled with assurance, and this ordinarily, that he shall
receive from God the very self-same thing, in specie, or in the letter (as we
use to say) which he prays for, whatever it be, as whether it concerns his
temporal comfort in this world, or his eternal well-being in that which is to
come? For it seems no hard matter for him that has any competent knowledge
of God, to believe steadfastly, both that he hears, and regards the Prayers
of all good men, and likewise that he wants neither goodness of will,
toward them, nor power, to grant them their desire. Or may both these be in
God, and yet such men be denied the good thing they ask in Prayer of him?

Answ.

Most certain it is, that God neither wants goodness of will, or largeness
of heart, toward those that love him, nor yet any sufficiency of power to
grant them whatsoever they desire of him. Nevertheless it may stand with his
good will, not always to grant unto them in particular what they desire; no
though they desire nothing but according to his will (in the sense formerly
declared. In the Answer to the fourth Question in this Chapter.
And yet in this case, the Prayer made upon such terms unto him, may be of
good acceptance with him, though it does not prevail with him for the thing
particularly desired. This is manifest from that denial which the prayer of
Paul himself received from God, although it is not to be doubted, but that it
was both a Prayer according to the will of God, and preferred with great zeal
and fervency of Spirir, yea and thrice (at least) reinforced, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8,
9. A like instance for the purpose in hand, we have, if the place be well
considered, Luke 10.5, 6, with Mat. 10, 12, 13. But from the instance (now
mentioned) of the denial returned by God unto Paul's Prayer, it is further
evident, that no person can be groundedly confident, that all his Prayers,
though framed and presented, according to the will of God, shall prosper to the
obtaining of every particular desired in them: No, nor yet that any one of his
Prayers for temporal good things, though so framed and presented, shall thus
prosper or prevail.

Quest. 22.

But is not this a great discouragement unto prayer, at least for temporal
things, that he that prays, can have no full assurance of obtaining what he
desires?

Answ.

Though Saul should have had no assurance of finding his Fathers asses, when he
went and travalled up and down to seek them, yet if he had been assured, that
in case he should not find the asses, yet in seeking these, he should find a
Kingdom, his want of the former assurance, considering the latter, would have
been no discouragement unto him from taking pains to seek them. In like manner
the assurance which the servants of God have or may have, that when they pray
for temporal good things, if they receive not in kind what they ask, they
shall receive it in full value, (if not with an overplus) leaves no place, nor
pretense for their discouragment from praying for temporal things. And though
they can have no absolute assurance that, praying for outward good things, they
shall have a return made by God according to the letter of their Prayer; Yet
have they grounds of hope for their prevailing even in this kind, more rich and
promising, then the hopes of men generally are built upon, when their
expectations of compassing great things in the world are raised to the highest.
God does not ordinarily turn his back upon the very letter of the prayers of
his Saints, which are made unto him (all the Laws of such prayers duly
observed) for temporal good things.

Quest. 23.

What may be the reason, why God at any time denies that temporal good thing,
which is sought at his hand by Prayer, when both the person that prays
pleases him, and the prayer likewise pleases him, his whole will and pleasure
concerning this duty being carefully and conscientiously observed in the
managing of it, at least as far as the understanding of a Man is able to
discern, and judge?

Answ.

God may have some purpose, or design, of great consequence, at present
unrevealed, and unknown to him that prays (so that he cannot be bound to take
notice of it) which he cannot effect or bring to pass according to his mind,
and as his Wisdom has prescribed the method, and manner of the effecting it,
but under such circumstances, or upon such terms which are inconsistent with
his gratifying of him who prays (in the case in hand) according to the letter
of his Prayer. God sometimes steppeth aside out of the road of his ordinary and
standing providence, to accommodate the world, or some members of it, with
somewhat of great concernment unto them, wherein he could not, at least
according to his mind, gratify them, keeping his wonted course in his
providential administrations. It was (and is) the Law, or Rule, of his ordinary
providence, to help and deliver righteous men out of the hand of the wicked,
and to save them, because they trust in him, as David expressly affirms, Psalm.
37, 39, 40. And elsewhere, to the same purpose very often. See ver. 24, 25. 38,
33. Of the same Psalm. See again Psalm. 55.22. and 145.18, 19, 20. Yet being to
put in execution his great and happy Design of Saving a lost world, and not
knowing how to please himself in doing it, but by making a breach upon the said
Law, he dispensed with it accordingly, and delivered up the most righteous
Person that ever was, into the hands of wicked men. In like manner though the
granting of righteous men the very letter of their Prayer, and this in matters
of this life, as well as in things appertaining to Salvation, be the way,
wherein his providence moves and acts ordinarily (always supposing their
Prayer in this kind to be regular) yet he may sometimes have such a design,
either for the signal advantage of him that prays, or for some great benefit
of the world about him, in one kind or other, which his wisdom dictates unto
him, cannot be so commodiously effected, for his glory, unless the letter of
his Prayer be denied unto him, and somewhat given him in exchange for it.

Quest. 24.

But does not the Scripture require a particular Faith in him that prays,
that he shall receive, even in kind, the good things which he seeks of God in
Prayer (whether it be of the good things of this Life, or of that which is to
come) not promising any return of a man's Prayer from Heamen without such a
Faith? Else how are these, with other like places to be understood, And all
things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, believing, ye shall receive: Mat. 21,
22. (compared with ver. 20.) Therefore I say unto you, what things soever ye
desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them,
Mar. 11.24. But let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering: for he that wavererh,
is etc. For let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord,
Jam. 1.6, 7? Add to these Joh. 15.7. Jam. 5.15, 16. 1 John 5.15.

Answ.

First, Certain it is, that particular good things have been granted by God
unto the prayers of good men, where there was no great confidence, much less
any full or grounded assurance of Faith, that they should obtain them. Those
Christians that prayed for Peter's deliverance out of Prison ( Act. 12.) had (it
seems) no fullness of assurance that they should prevail. For when the Maid
brought them tidings that Peter was at the door, they told her, she was mad to
say such a thing: and when they could not abate her confidence, yet could they
not believe that it was Peter himself; the belief of this, though they had
been, and still were in Prayer for his deliverance, was notwithstanding farther
from them, then the belief of a most uncertain tradition concerning Angels, as
namely that they should not only appear in the shapes and likenesses of such
men to whom they are supposed to be assigned by God for gardians, but that they
should also counterfeit their tone and voice in speaking: Then said they (says
the Text), It is his Ange. Verse 15. And when they saw that it was he indeed,
it is said, They were astonished ver. 16. By these passages it fully appears,
that they had no fullness of assurance of obtaining Peter's enlargement, at
least not so soon as they did obtain it, when they prayed for it. In like
manner the prayer of the Leper in the Gospel, being conceived in these words
(as all the three former Evangelists record it) Lord, if thou will, thou can
make me clean, plainly imports, that neither had he any height of confidence
that he should obtain his cleansing by it; his Prayer, as much declaring his
doubtfulnesse of the will of Christ as his confidence of his power, to heal
him, Mat. 8.2. Another like instance we have in him that prayed thus for his
Child, being possessed with an unclean Spirit? If thou can do any thing, help
us, and have compassion on us. And being put upon it, and provoked by Christ,
to believe, yet did he advance no further then only to such a Faith, which was
encumbered with doubtings and unbelief. Yet notwithstanding his Prayer for his
Child prospered to the obtaining of that great cure, or deliverance which was
sought for by it, Mar. 9.22, 23, 24. Therefore

Secondly, by that wavering, or tossing to and fro in Prayer, which has no
promise, but a threatening rather of being sent empty away, seems to be meant,
not every degree of doubting, whether he that prays, shall receive according
to the letter of his Prayer or no, but an instability of mind, a rising, and
falling, a coming and going, an ebbing and flowing, in his belief concerning
God's hearing and accepting him in his Prayer, or concerning his Power of doing
for him according to his Petition. Such a fluctuation and unsettlednesse as
this, in a man's opinion, judgment, or faith, about the great Attributes of God,
his truth and faithfulness, his omnisciency, omnipotency etc. is very uncomely
and unsavory in him, that professes himself a Servant and Worshipper of him.

Thirdly (and lastly) that believing in Prayer. ( Mat. 21, 22. and Mar. 11.24.
compared with Mat. 17.20. and Luke 17.6.) unto which the removing of Mountains,
with other miraculous Achievements, is promised, and this (it seems) according
to the letter of the Prayer of such a believing, is not that kind of Faith, or
believing, which is required in the whole community of Saints to commend their
prayers with acceptance unto God, but that which was required particularly of
those, who had the gift of miracles, for the succesful exercise of this gift.
Of this kind of Faith the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 13.2. implying in the
context, that it may be in persons void of the heavenly affection of Love,
which is the right hand of that Faith, that is found in all the Saints, and
inseparable from it?

Quest. 25.

Although, when a man prays for a temporal good thing, he can have no
absolute assurance of obtaining it, be his prayer, in all points never so much
according to the will of God; yet when he prays upon these terms, for any
spiritual good thing, may he not, yea ought he not, to be filled with assurance
that now the very letter of his Prayer shall prosper?

Answ.

He may, and ought to be fully assured, that praying as he ought, and
continuing thus to pray from time to time, for any spiritual good thing (in
reference to himself) which is simply necessary for his own Salvation, that he
shall receive from God a return in specie, of his Prayer; because there is
nothing in valor in value, that can be given him in exchange. But if he be a
Petitioner, either of spiritual good things for others, or of things conducing
only toward his own Salvation, but not essentially requisite hereunto,
although he may have grounds of Hope abundantly sufficient to engage him to
pray, that even the particularity of his Prayer being regular, shall be given
him, yet are there none that I know of, sufficient to build an absolute
assurance in this kind upon.

Quest. 26.

Whether is it regular, or meet, to pray conditionally, or to desire such, or
such a thing of God under this provisional clause, (or the like) If it be thy
will?

Answ.

The end of the Saints application unto God by Prayer, being to prevail with
him to do, and consequently to be willing to do such things, which they had no
sufficient ground to expect that he would do for them, or (consequently) that
he would have been willing to do for them (for he does nothing but by the
motion of his will) unless they had sought them by Prayer at his hand; any
such clause inserted in their Prayer as this. If it be thy Will, seems to
imply one of these two things (both of them inconvenient) either, First, That
unless God were willing, before their Prayer, and consequently without their
Prayer, or whether they prayed unto him, or no, to give them that, for which
they pray, they were content to go without it, and willing that God should turn
himself away from their Prayer; Or, Secondly, That they were very diffident, or
much in doubt, whether he would be prevailed with by their Prayer to be willing
to do for them, what they desire therein. Whereas that frame of heart, which
becomes men in Prayer, requires some degree (at least) of an humble confidence
that God, upon and by means of their Prayer (made unto him according to his
will) will become willing to grant them their desire, yea though it be in
temporal things (in which he seems to take the greatest liberty to change the
Prayers of his Saints) unless there be such a bar in the way (as was
formerly mentioned) namely, Gods being in travail with some great design of
Good, which cannot be commodiously effected, in case he should grant unto such,
or such, of his Servants, the letter of their Prayer. Now the best way to
express the submission of our wills, to the will of God, in such cases, is in
that form used by our Savior upon the same account: If it be possible. O my
Father, if it be possible [meaning, if thou have any other way, as pleasing
unto thee, whereby to gloryfie thy self in the Salvation of the world as by my
Death] let this Cup pass from me. Nevertheless [as if he should say, though
my desire of self-preservation, especially from so horrid a death, as that
which I apprehend I am shortly to suffer, be exceeding strong, and as great, as
great may be] Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will [that is, as
another Evangelist has it, not my will but thine be done] Mat. 26.39. Luke
22.42. When our minds, or wills, are strongly set upon any thing, which is of
more then ordinary consequence unto us then is it most seasonable, and
needful, when we pray for it, to pray with this condition, or proviso, If it
be possible; meaning hereby (as has been hinted) if the granting unto us what
we desire herein, be well-consisting with all thy counsels and purposes
otherwise (it being unpossible and (indeed) unreasonable, that any of Gods
purposes, or decrees, being all so wise, and holy, and good, should give place
to the gratification of any Creature whatsoever.) And in such a case, to have
the submission of our wills unto the will of God in that kind prepared, and (as
it were) ready drawn up to be exhibited and tendered unto him.

If it be said; But Christ in one place prays thus: Father, if thou be
willing, remove this Cup from me, Luke 22.42. Therefore ie seems no ways
inconvenient, to ask any thing of God in Prayer under this condition
(expressed) If it be thy will?

I Answer; The words in the original, translated, If thou be willing remove,
(...) Id est, utinam velles auserre: nam ita, Ei accipi, etiam cum Indicativo
conjunctum, jam bis notavimus. Hug. Grotad locum.
etc. should rather be rendered thus; O that thou would remove this Cup,
etc. And thus they do not import any doubting of his Fathers will to remove
itf, but only an humble yet ardent desire, that it might be his will to remove
it: which desire notwithstanding he immediately prostrates at the feet of his
Fathers will; which he believed was sufficiently propense to have granted him
his desire in the removal of the said Cup, were it not set and fixed upon some
exceeding great and glorious design, repugnant to it, or inconsistent with it:
in which case, he makes a request contrary to the said desire, viz. that this
his desire should not be fulfilled, but the will of his Father opposite to it.

Quest. 27.

How often is it necessary, or requisite, that we should pray?

Answ.

The Scripture's exhortation, or advice unto men is, to pray continually: yea,
and to watch thereunto. And he spoke a parable unto them to this end, that men
ought always to Pray, and not to Faint, Luke 18.1. Watch ye therefore, and
pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man Luke 21.36. Continue in
Prayer, and watch in the same with Thanksgiving, Col. 4.2. Pray without ceasing
[or continually] 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Praying always with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, etc.
Ephesians. 6.18. Be ye therefore sober, and watch unto Prayer, I Pet. 4.7. (besides
many other places.)

Quest. 28.

What does the Scripture mean, by praying continually, praying always, or
without ceasing?

Answ.

To pray always, or without ceasing, does not signify to do nothing else all
the day long or all the night long, but pray. Such a sense of the phrase is
very preposterous and importune: neither was our Saviors exhortation, nor the
Apostle Paul's exhortation to pray without ceasing ever practiced by
themselves, or by either of them in such a sense. Therefore to pray
continually, or without ceasing, may well be conceived to require, or imply
these three things.

First, That men pray frequently, in respect of their ordinary and constant
occasions of praying.

Secondly, That they mend their ordinary measure, and pray more frequently,
upon special and extraordinary occasions.

Thirdly, (and lastly) that they give not over, no nor intermit (if it be
possible, and no greater duty interposeth) either their course of frequent
Prayer, until their ordinary and standing occasions of praying, shall cease,
which at the soonest will not be until the latest and last of their breath; nor
their course, or engagement in a greater frequency of prayer, until their
special and extraordinary occasions of Praying shall cease, which cannot be,
until God has either answered the joy of their heart in granting them their
desires about them, or else shall have given them a peremptory denial of their
Prayers concerning them, by some providence, or permission, whereby they become
incapable of being gratified in them.

Quest. 29.

What are the constant and standing occasions, which all men, without
exception, have to pray frequently?

Answ.

These are too many to be particularly numbered, or rehearsed only in general,
they are reducible under these two heads: They are either such, which concern
our own well-being, and peace, whether in matters relating to this present
world, or to that which is to come: or else such, which relate in like manner
to the well-being of other men; for whose safety and peace we stand bound by
the Royal Law of Love, to pray, as well as for our own, though not with that
variety, or particularity of petitioning, wherewith we stand obliged in duty to
seek our own.

Quest. 30.

What are some of the chief, or more considerable occasions, relating to this
present life, which constantly call upon men to pray, or call upon God
frequently?

Answ.

To be fed from day to day with food convenient, to be clothed and harbored
accordingly, to be preserved from all those dangers, miseries, and sad
disasters, unto which men clothed with weak flesh and blood, are liable every
moment, and which fall heavy (sometimes) upon one or other of them; to be kept,
or delivered out of the hand of the oppressor, and destroyer: to have our names
and reputations guarded against malicious, bitter, and false tongues: to be
continued and mainrained in a good and healthful condition, and habitude of
body, and in case of sickness, weakness, or pain, to be rescued and restored
thereunto: to prosper, and be succesful in our counsels, labors, and honest
undertakings: to be comforted and well apaid in our families, and relations
here, as in our consorts, children, servants, as well in their towardliness,
comeliness of behavior, etc. as in the preservation of their lives, limbs,
healths, etc. and then in our other relations also abroad: yea and in the peace
and good condition of our neighbors round about us, yea and of the land and
nation of our abode. These (with many others) are continual and constant
occasions engaging men to frequency of Prayer if they desire either to taste, as
little as may be of the sorrows and troubles of the world, or to see as much of
the good of it, as is like to be enjoyed by men.

Quest. 31.

What are the standing occasions (or some of the principal of them) relating to
the world to come, which are engaging upon men to pray frequently?

Answ.

If they be yet unconverted, and unbelieving, they stand in need of the Spirit
of illumination, by the help whereof the eyes of their minds and understandings
may be opened, to see clearly an effectual door of Salvation and eternal
happiness, set open unto them in Jesus Christ through Faith in him, and all
other doors imaginable, as leading or looking that way, shut up and made fast
against them with bars of Iron: And in case this Spirit shall be obtained, so
that now they are converted, and brought home unto God by believing, they still
stand in need of the daily and constant supplies of the same Spirit, that they
may be led into the way of all truth, that they may grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, that they may persevere, and hold the beginning of
their confidence steadfast unto the end, and not by apostacy, or backsliding
ose the things which they wrought, whilst they were faithful, that they may be
strengthened in the innerman to all suffering for Righteousness sake, with
joyfulnesse; that they may deny themselves, and take up their cross daily, and
so follow Christ, that they may be increased in their Faith to the forgiving of
all men all their trefspasses against them (whatsoever) that they may mortify
the deeds of the body and crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts;
that they be enlarged and raised in their love and respects unto Christ, beyond
and above all the love, and respects they bear unto Fathers, Mothers, Sons,
Daughters, Brothers, Sisters, Houses, Lands, yea or their lives themselves;
that they may be brought to a resolvednesse of will to watch and pray
continually, that so they may be counted worthy to stand before the son of man
in his great Day; that they may be made both able, and willing, to quit
themselves from time to time both in doings and sufferings, so that they may be
mere to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in Light, etc. These are
some of the great and most important occasions, relating to the world to come,
that strongly bind all men to the Christian behavior of praying frequently, if
they make any Treasure of their Souls, or put any difference between an
equality with the Holy Angels in joy, blessedness and glory, and fellowship
with the Devils in everlasting shame, torments, and misery.

Quest. 32.

You teach, and say, that the standing occasions, relating as well to this
present world, as to that which is to come, are greatly pressing upon men to
pray Frequently: But what do you count Frequent Praying? Or how often must a man
pray that it may be truly said of him, that he Prays FREQUENTLY?

Answ.

I do not remember that the Scripture any where determines the case, how often a
man must of necessity pray, that he may be truly said to pray frequently or
without ceasing. And where God has left it free to the consciences of men, to
judge of, and satisfy themselves about, any circumstance of a duty, I judge it
nor convenient, or safe, to prescribe, or impose any thing positively, or
peremptorily in the case. Yet he that has (As the Apostle speaks) obtained
mercy of the Lord to be faithful, may give his advice, and sense, in such
cases. By the way, I suppose it neither reasonable, nor safe, to estimate
frequency in praying by that, which may properly enough be counted frequency,
or oftnesse, in some other things: as the word many, applied to some things,
imports a far greater number, then when it is applied to some other things:
The Devil is said often times [or frequently] to have violently caught [or
seized on] the poor man ( Luke 8.29.) over whom he had power: but he that shall
not torment the Devil by praying oftener then (in all likelihood) the Devil
tormented this man by seizing him, cannot (I conceive) be said to pray often,
or frequently. So the Apostle, speaking of himself, says, that he was in
Prisons more frequent, in deaths often: Yet he that is not more frequent, and
oftener, in prayer then this Apostle was, either in the Prisons, or in the
deaths, he speaks of, ought not to please himself with a conceit that he
prays often. I conceive then by the best observations I can make f om the
Scriptures in reference to the matter in hand, as also by an equitable
consideration of the thing it self, that praying frequently, requires (at
least) praying daily, or every day; Except it be under some such providential
dispensation, which bereaves a man of the capacity, or possibility so to pray;
as in case of such distempers, by the rage and violence whereof the
intellectual faculties of the Soul are disabled from their natural and proper
functions, or the like: [in which ca^ses, the sadness and extremity of their
conditions do themselves intercede with God for them]. The Holy Ghost knowing
so long before, how the grace of God in the days of the Messiah, would operate
in the souls and consciences of those, that were willing to receive it,
foretold by the Prophet David that when he should come into the world, he
should daily be praised [that is, either that himself should be daily
worshipped, and prayed unto, by his Saints; or, that he should be magnified in
the prayers of his Saints, which should be DAILY offered unto God the Father in
his name] Psalm. 72.15. This latter seems rather to be the meaning, from the
former clause; Prayer also shall be made for him continually; that is, the
Saints shall desire of God in Prayer, and this very frequently and with great
importunity, that the Heathen may be given unto him for his inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for his Possession (Psalm. 2.8) and that all
the Nations and Kingdoms of the Earth may serve him, Dan. 7.14.27. Psalm.
72.11. This being the substance and effect of that petition, Thy Kingdom come.
Yet praying daily, in the low sense of the phrase, [that is, praying once every
day] was not, it seems, judged praying frequently, by the Saints of old. For
they (as is probable) following the light, which God himself gave concerning
his mind and pleasure about the toties quoties of his ordinary and standing
worship, in his appointment of the daily Sacrifice under the Law, which (as we
know) was to be offered twice, morning and evening, every day, ( Exodus 29.39,
40.) the Saints (I say) of old, as well in the times of the Gospel, as of the
Law, did impose upon themselves a semblable Law of offering unto God the
spiritual sacrifice of Prayer twice (at least) every day; though they took
Liberty to exceed this proportion, when occasion was. Nehemiah prayed before
God daily, day and night [that is, morning and evening] for the people of
Israel, Neh. 1.6. Even as Paul also prayed exceedingly night and day, That he
might see the faces of the Thessalonians, 1 These. 3.10. So David: It is a good
thing to praise the Lord -- to declare his loving kindness in the morning, and
his Faithfulness every night. Psalm. 92.1, 2. Yet elsewhere he resolves to
exceed this scantling, declaring that he would pray, and cry aloud, not
evening, and morning only, but at noon day also. Psalm. 55.17. But this
(possibly) might be upon special occasions, (whi h likewise might be Daniels
case in the captivity Dan. 6.10.) yet some, writing upon the passage affirm it
to have been a custom amongst the Jews, to pray (ordinarily) thrice a day, and
at the times mentioned here by David: which opinion has great probability from
the Scripture, as might be argued more at large; yea it seems, from records of
an ancient date, that these three hours of the day were observed likewise by
Christians in their Prayers, in the primitive times.

Quest. 33.

But is it not Christianly commendable, or well pleasing unto God, that a man
should bind himself unto him by vow, or solemn promise, to observe certain
hours in the day, or night, or both, wherein to humble himself before God in
Prayer, so as not to make a breach at any time upon such his engagement,
unless (happily) upon some very great and indispensable occasion?

Answ.

What men take up, and impose upon themselves in or about the worship of God
upon the account of their own wisdoms, or wills, is no worship of acceptance
with him, who frequently gives this account, and this only of his rejection of
such, and such services of men, that he commanded them not, Jer. 7.31. Judge.
2.19, Deuteronomy. 17.3. Jer. 19.5. and 32.35. See also Esa. 1.12, 13. and 66.4. Hos.
9.15. (with others) And there is this great evil commonly attending services
and devotions of men's own contrivement, that they secretly intise and draw away
the hearts and souls of men from the worship enjoined by God, unto themselves,
and incroach upon the respects and esteem due unto his Precepts. The Traditions
of men though they be only collateral, and not contradictious, unto the
Commandments of God, yet are they apt upon such an account to make them of
little or no effect. Notwithstanding where God has left any circumstance
concerning his worship undetermined, so that what he has commanded in this
kind, cannot be performed without the doing of somewhat, which he has not
commanded (which is the case in most, if not all his precepts concerning
worship) here a man may (nay of necessity he must, in one kind or other)
determine himself. But if in this Case he shall determine himself once for all,
and engage himself to act uniformly, or after the same manner, perpetually: he
had need be very circumspect and cautious, least by such an engagement, he
spreads a snare in his own way; and this, as in other respects so mainly in
this, that what he does upon his own election, he puts not to the account of
worship, nor equalize it in esteem with what he does according to the express
Commandment of God. As for example (in the business in hand) God injoineth
men to pray continually or without ceasing. But he has not injoined them to
pray so many times determinately, as three, four, five, or six times in every
24 or every 48 howrs, or the like. Yet he that shall Christianly, and
conscientiously obey the said Commandment of God, must determine himself to
one or other of these numbers, or some other, within the said spaces, either
occasionally, and with liberty to change both the number and season also of his
times, when, and as he pleases, or else unchangeably, as by imposing some
Religious tie upon himself to pray, so often, (as suppose 3, 4, 5, or 6 times)
every 24 hours, and at such and such seasons, or hours, whether of the day or
night, after such a manner as canonical hours (so called) are observed amongst
the Papists. Now then this is that which I say; that he that shall (in the case
in hand*) determine himself in the latter way mentioned, had need look
narrowly and very attentively, both before him, and round about him, lest he
entangle himself to his great prejudice otherwise; but especially lest that
which is of his own, and from himself, in his course of praying, be not of
higher esteem with him, then that which is of God, and that the tale or number
of his prayers, together with his select hours, be not more minded then his
prayers themselves, or then the making and presenting of them with that Faith
fervency, and devotion of soul, which are required by God.

Quest. 34.

Whether is it necessary, that he who is convinced in Conscience that he ought
to Pray frequently, should when he prays, retire himself into some place of
privacie, and there pour out his Soul in articulate words before God? or may
he not perform this duty, with a good conscience, and with acceptance in the
sight of God, only by being frequent in Ejaculations, ever and anon sending up
into Heaven, and presenting unto God some short Petitions, and Requests
conceived within him, either as he walks up and down, or rides in a Journey
or lies on his bed, or the like, without any verbal expression, or sound of
words?

Answ.

It is not (I suppose) doubted by any man, but that frequency of Ejaculations,
and the darting up the heart and soul into Heaven in spiritual motions and
desires at any time, or in any place, without any pronunciation of words, is a
practice or exercise well becoming Saints, and of good acceptance with God.
Yea, I rather question whether there be any true Saint, who does not more, or
less, use it. Nevertheless I do not conceive that when either Christ, or any
of his Apostles, exhort and charge men to Pray continually, and to watch
hereunto, they are to be understood of such a kind of Praying; but of that
rather, wherein a man, withdrawing into some private place, sets himself in
the presence of God; and so humbly, and with reverence due to so great a
Majesty, discourses in Prayer with him, the important affairs of his Soul;
striving and wrestling with him withal earnestness and importunity, to obtain
from him all such supplies and vouchsafements of Grace, and Mercy, which he
judges needful, either for his own comfort and peace, or for theirs, whose
conditions he judges it his duty to recommend together with his own unto God.
For such a kind of praying as this, is that which Christ enjoyneth: But when
thou prayest enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to
thy Father which is in secret -- But when ye pray, use not vain Repetitions, as
the Heathen do: for they think they shall be heard for their much speaking,
etc. Mat. 6.6, 7. Therefore that kind of Prayer, which Christ requires of men
in the ordinary course of their praying, is to be managed by speech or by an
oral prolation of words, and to be performed with as much privacie, or
retirement of a man's self, as well may be. For words are very requisite and
useful, even in private Prayer, as well for the quickening and keeping up a man's
intention, and for the preventing of drowsinesse and distractions in praying,
as for the exercise and improvement of his gift of utterance.

Quest. 35.

In case a man prays daily, or suppose twice a day in communion with others,
as with the Family of which he is a member, or the like, whether is it
necessary, that besides his praying upon this account, he should pray privately
also?

Answ.

Although I do not conceive that there is a like necessity of praying
privately, incumbent upon him, who prays constantly in fellowship with
others, which there is upon him, that either wants or scrupleth the use of
such an opportunity; Yet I am much afraid that the work of Christianity, as of
Repentance, Faith, Love, Mortification, Self-denial, etc. Will not greatly
prosper, or much advance in his Soul, that shall not sometimes at least,
commune in prayer with his God privately, and apart from all creatures. Because
there are in most persons some such corruptions, or stonds in their
Sanctification, which are not like to be met, or thoroughly dealt with, in, or
by, the prayers of others: no nor yet mere to be so particularized, or lamented
over, by the persons themselves with such breakings of heart, and remorse of
soul, in the presence of others (in case any of them should be the mouth of
those unto God, amongst whom they pray) as may be very requisite for their
removal, and healing, yea and may be transacted fully, freely, and without the
least regret in the presence of God, when he, and the Soul, are together alone.

Quest. 36.

You have showed us what it is to pray continually: but we are further
admonished, or commanded, to watch also, and to watch unto prayer. What do you
judge this watching, or watching unto prayer to be?

Answ.

That watching, which is so often, and so strictly charged upon Christians by
Christ, and his two great Apostles, Paul, and Peter, does not stand so much, if
at all, in refraining from the natural rest, or repose of the body, by sleep,
but in keeping the mind, heart, and soul habitually, and vigorously intent upon
the great concernments of their eternal salvation, and how they may be found in
peace of Christ at his coming, and be counted worthy to stand before him, when
all the world besides (a remnant only excepted) shall not be able to abide, or
bear his presence. To watch in Prayer, Col. 4.2. or, unto Prayer, 1 Pet. 4.7.
is to be with all serioufsnesse and earnestness of mind and soul, apaid in our
prayings, as if we were in these exercises, making an attempt and assault upon
Heaven, or striving to lay hold on life and immortality, wrestling against
Principalities, against powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesses [or, wicked spirits] in Heavenly places
[that is, which have great advantage over us, as they that fight from the
higher ground] that we may break their bonds, and cast away their cords from us
for ever. Or else to watch unto prayer, may import an attentiveness of mind to
espy opportunities for praying, where they are not otherwise so easy, or
obvious to be discerned; or else to contrive or make such opportunities by a
dexterous methodizing, and contracting our worldly business into so narrow a
compass, that there may be spaces of time to spare, whereof to make
opportunities for prayer.

Quest. 37.

What position of the body is best becoming prayer? Or is there any one posture
(determinately) so necessary in the performance of this duty, that all others
are unlawful?

Answ.

In the Scriptures we find that both the Lord Christ himself, and his Saints
likewise, did very frequently use the gesture of kneeling, when they prayed,
Luke 22.41. 2 Chronicles. 6.13. Psalm. 95.6. Dan. 6.10. Act. 7.60. Act. 9.40. Act.
20.36. Act. 21.5. And this (doubtless) is a very proper and comely behavior
of the body, when we pray unto God. Yet Christ himself did not use it
constantly, for the Evangelist Mark records, that he fell down on the ground
and prayed, etc. Mar. 14.35. as Joshua likewise, and the Elders of Israel with
him, had done long before, Josh. 7.6. And though there be no other bodily
gesture, but only the lifting up of his eyes to Heaven mentioned by the
Evangelist John to have been used by him in the uttering of that most heavenly
prayer, John. 17. Yet it is the probable conjecture of a good expositour, that
he neither kneeled, nor lay prostrate upon the ground, when he pronounced it,
but that as he was walking with his disciples, he made a stand, and so without
any other change of the position of his body offered up this prayer unto God.
When hanging upon the cross, he prayed for those that crucified him Luke
23.34. he was in a differing posture from all the rest. And notwithstanding the
texts pointed to for the gesture of kneeling in prayer, yet it is the more
general sense (as far as I have observed) of learned men, that standing was
the more ordinary posture of the Jews, when they prayed, unless it were in
times of great Mourning, when they prayed either kneeling, or prostrate on the
ground. Yea the Scripture it self speaks as well, and with as much
approbation, of standing as of kneeling in Prayer: which proves, as well the
one, as the other, to be lawful But when ye shall stand, and pray, forgive, if
ye have any thing against any man, etc. Mar. 11.25. The Publican also justified
by our Savior before the Pharisie, prayed standing, when he smote his breast,
and said. God be merciful unto me a Sinner, Luk 18.13. The Children of Israel
stood and confessed their Sins, etc. and the Levites stood and prayed, etc. and
called upon the people to stand up and praise the Lord, etc. Nehem. 9.2.4, 5.
See also Jer. 15.1. and 18, 19. Job. 30.20. Where we read, But Abraham stood
yet before the Lord (Genesis 18.22.) the Chaldee reads, Abraham prayed, etc.
Hezekiah prayed lying on his Bed, and with his face to the wall Esai. 38.2. In
the primitive times, the Christians used both postures in their prayings, as
well standing as kneeling: only their grounds for appropriating the one to one
time of the year, and the other, to another, and so the one kneeling, to their
penitentiaries (for a certain season) and allowing the other, standing to the
rest, seem to have had, more of the sand, then of the rock in them. Though I do
not any where read of the posture of sitting used in Prayer, yet by the rule of
proportion from Hezekiahs praying (and this with acceptance in the sight of
God) lying upon his bed, being through sickness, not well capable (at present)
of any other posture, I suppose it may be argued and safely concluded that men
and women, if either through some weakness, or want of present accommodation
otherwise, they cannot without inconvenience, offer their sacrifice of Prayer
either kneeling, or standing, they may do it sitting without sustaining any
damage in their acceptance with God, only if they bow the knee of the heart and
soul unto him.

Quest. 38.

The Scripture sometimes mentions the lifting up of the eyes, and sometimes
the spreading, or lifting up the hands to Heaven, or toward Heaven, by those
that prayed. What may be the reason of these gestures? Or whether do you judge
it? either necessary, or convenient, that either one or both of them, should be
in these days used by them that pray?

Answ.

I do not remember that any one person: besides David, and Christ, is recorded
in Scripture to have lift up his eyes to Heaven, when he called upon God;
although it is not improbable but that many others of the Saints did likewise
use the same gesture when they prayed. Nor is it (I presume) at all
questionable, but that it may very lawfully, if not commendably, at least by
some persons, be used now. For the lifting up of the eyes to Heaven when a man
is about to pray, is a natural and proper action, or means to awaken the
remembrance of the glorious and incomprehensible Majesty of God in his Soul and
to create awful and reverential impressions in him, of the transcendent
holiness of him, with whom he has then to do; Heaven being the habitation of
his holiness, and of his Glory, Esa. 63.15. Besides some conceive it to be a
gesture, or behavior, proper to express or signify a man's Faith, and holy
boldness, and confidence in God, when he prays. This apprehension seems
very probable (if not somewhat more) from those words of Christ, wherein he
describes the demeanor of the poor Publican, as of a person weak in Faith,
and much dejected under the sense of his own unworthiness, when he was about
to pray, viz. That he would not so much as lift up his eyes unto Heaven, Luke
18.13. So Ezra being in great astonishment and trembling for the high
misdemeanour of his people, begun his Prayer thus; O my God, I am ashamed, and
blush to lift up my face to thee, etc. Ezra. 9.6. Yet these passages show and
prove, that the lifting up the eyes to Heaven, when we pray, is not so
necessary, but that we may be accepted in our prayer without it. There is
somewhat the like consideration of the spreading, or lifting up of the hands
toward Heaven, in Prayer. Only this seems to have been more frequently used in
this holy action, then the other of lifting up the eyes. Notwithstanding though
it be recorded as the deportment of several of the Saints in some of their
prayers, as of Moses, David, Solomon, Ezra, etc. Yet it is not necessary to
believe, that either all the servants of God, when they prayed, used it, or
that these persons themselves used it at all times, when they prayed: nor
consequently, that it is so essential to the regularity of Prayer, but that
this service may be performed with good acceptance in the sight of God, without
it. It seems to be significative (as the other likewise was, as was lately
hinted) of the Faith of those that prayed; For the lifting up their hands
toward Heaven, was in token of their confidence that God would give them what
they asked, and that they prepared themselves accordingly to receive it by
lifting up rheir hands toward him of whom they ask it.

Quest. 39.

In case a man finds himself much indisposed, drowsy and listlesse when he is
about to pray, or to join with others in praying, whether is it convenient, or
best for him to force himself upon the work, such his indisposition
notwithstanding, or else to a wait a better habitude of mind and body for the
work, and then to engage more freely and effectually in it?

Answ.

An indisposition, or listlessnesse to pray, when a man has an opportunity
otherwise for the performance of the duty, is (for the most part at least) but
a temptation: and consequently, is to be resisted, and the work to be set upon
in the presence of it, with so much the more courage and Resolution. And as the
frequent experience of the Saints in other cases, have taught us, that the Soul
prospers most, and enjoys it self in God upon the best terms, upon a Victory
obtained over some Temptation; in like manner, it has been often found, that
those, who have entered upon Prayer under much untowardnesse, and
gain-sayingnesse of their flesh, yea and of their minds and Spirits also, have
in the progress of their work been more enlarged and raised in their Spirits,
then at other times, and been taken up seven degrees nearer unto the third
Heaven, then at such times, when at the beginning of the exercise, they found a
fresh and lively edge upon their hearts to pray, and made account (it may be)
to have been greeted by life and immortality, before they had done.
Notwithstanding, if after some competent proceeding in the work, we find our
indisposition not abating, but rather growing and prevailing upon us, this
being an argument that it was no temptation, but somewhat more really out of
order in the course of nature with us, I conceive it more convenient to give
place unto it at the present, and to contract the remainder of our devotions,
into as short a compass as well we may, waiting the good pleasure of God for
our healing and restoring, with full purpose and resolution, then to quit our
selves with redoubled zeal and diligence in the work.

Quest. 40.

Does the Scripture any where afford us any Rule, or Direction, by which we may
be guided unto the due method, or manner, and to the due matter likewise of
Praying, that so we may know how to ask, and when we ask things of God
according to his will?

Answ.

The body of the Scripture it self, in respect of what it teaches and
directs (in several parts and passages of it) with relation to both
particulars, may be termed such a Rule os you inquire after, or rather to
contain in it such a Rule. But the Lord Christ, the better tb accommodate all
that should desire to pray unto God with acceptance, and to encourage them in
their way, has contracted into a few words, the sum and substance of what is
dispersed up and down the Scriptures upon those accounts, in that brief model
which we call, the LORDS PRAYER.

Quest. 41.

Whether was it his intent that this Prayer, should be, either constantly or
frequently, used in the nature of a Prayer, without any variation of the words,
or that it should be as a brief model, pattern, or platform, by which they who
pray might be steered and guided in their way, unto such particulars, which are
necessary for them to know?

Answ.

That it was intended by him as a directory or platform, by which men might be
taught how to pray, is not (I suppose) questioned by any. And in this notion of
it, Christ (I conceive) in prescribing it, directly answered the intent of his
Disciples in their request (made unto him by one of their company) the tenor
whereof was, that he would teach them to pray, Luke 11.1 Their meaning
(doubtless) was not, to desire him to bind them strictly to a certain form of
words in their praying, but to teach them to pray, that is, how to pray [ viz.
with acceptance in the sight of God]. And himself, being now ready to dictate
this prayer unto them, Mat. 6.9. delivers his mind concerning it to the same
purpose; After THIS MANNER therefore (says he) pray ye: Our Father, etc.
meaning, that their prayers which they should from time to time present unto
God, should both for matter and manner, be ordered and framed, as that brief
model, or compendium of prayer, which he would now propose to them, should
direct them. And that the Apostles themselves understood, and received it from
him in this notion, and not as a set prayer, to be either constantly, or
frequently used, appears by their practice upon Scripture record. For whereas
we here often read of their praying, and several of their Prayers are recorded,
yet do we no where find that ever they made use of the said prayer in the
nature, or instead of a Prayer; but constantly in the nature of a directory, or
rule, how to pray, all their prayers being conceived and framed by the light
and guidance of it, in such sort, and so far, as it was intended to give
light, and regulation in this kind. (For there was something added, at least by
way of explication, by Christ afterward, concerning the manner of praying,
Joh. 16.24.26.) Notwithstanding I know no sufficient ground to judge the use of
it, as a prayer, universally unlawful: and he that shall thus judge, will put
to rebuke the whole generation (in a manner) both of righteous, and learned
men, as well in latter, as in more ancient times. For these generally conceived
that it was very lawful to be used as a Prayer, and did (for the most part)
sometimes thus use it.

Quest. 42.

What may be the reason, why Christ, delivers his prescript, or platform of
Prayer, in the plural number, Our Father, etc. Give us, etc. Forgive us, etc.
rather then in the singular?

Answ.

The reason very possibly may be, to intimate his desire that his Disciples and
followers should love to pray in consort and conjunction, and take all
opportunities to assemble and meet together about this heavenly exercise. The
Apostles seem thus to have understood the mind of Christ in the point we speak
of. For of these it is said; These all continued with one accord in Prayer and
supplication, with the women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, and with his
Brethren, Act. 1.14 And if it had been delivered in the singular number, it
might with as much reason have been demanded, why it was not delivered in the
plural. For as it is now ungrammatical and improper, for him that prays
privately, unless he change the number, so would it have been in the other
case, for those that should pray in company.

Quest. 43.

But how can it be looked upon as a perfect, or complete pattern or platform of
Prayer, when as there is nothing in it to direct, or teach men, in what name to
pray, which is a matter of as material and weighty a consideration about
Prayer, as any other thing that is most needful to be observed in it, and is
supplied by Christ himself afterward, Joh. 16 24.26?

Answ.

It may be called a perfect rule, or platform, of Prayer, because it did very
sufficiently and completely instruct men how to pray with acceptance, at the
time when it was delivered, and until God judged it meet that a further and
clearer discovery should be made, in what name, and upon whose account and
interest, he would be prayed unto by men. For (as was formerly hinted, In the
answer to the 11th question in this chapter) he that in prayer calls God his
Father, prays implicitly, and consequentially, in the name of Christ, as the
believing Jews of old, and until this discovery was made, and published in the
world, did. The Apostles themselves did not pray in the name of Christ,
explicitly, or distinctly, until after his Resurrection or at the soonest, a
very little while before his death. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my Name:
And, At that day ye shall ask in my name. Joh. 16.24.26.

Quest. 44.

How may this Prayer be conveniently divided, and the parts of it distinguished?

Answ.

The whole is called a Prayer, because the greater part of it is such,
containing several petitions. But besides that which is strictly and properly a
prayer, there is first a preface in the beginning. Secondly, a doxologie, (some
term it a thanksgiv ng) immediately before the conclusion. And thirdly, the
conclusion it self.

Quest. 45.

What occasion, or need, was there of a Preface before the Prayer?

Answ.

So to qualify and affect the heart, that it may be meet, or more meet to
pray. Besides a preface is a commodious introduction unto prayer.

Quest. 46.

Supposing this to be the preface, Our Father, which art in Heaven; how does it
affect the heart to make it meet to pray?

Answ.

The heart is then in a meet frame to pray when it is filled on the one hand
with the remembrance, or apprehesion of the good will of God toward a man, and
on the other hand, with a like apprehension, of his transcendent Majesty and
Glory. The former strengthens Faith, and gives boldness; the latter allayeth
this boldness with Reverence and fear, and teaches a man, under that freedom
whereunto he is admitted by God, to know and observe his due distance,
notwithstanding. Now being directed, and encouraged by Christ (in this preface)
to call God, Our Father, we are, or may be, and ought to be, hereby filled with
the remembrance of his natural affection and good will toward us; but being
withal reminded that he is, in Heaven, this is proper to strike out hearts
with awful apprehensions of his great Glory and Majesty.

Quest. 47.

How many, and what are the Petition (...) ^tained in this Prayer, unto which
all that variety of blessings and good things which we can reasonably, and
according to the will of God, ask in Prayer of him, may, and ought to be
reduced? and unto which, whatsoever can (regularly) be reduced, may according
to his Will be asked of him?

Answ.

The number of them is generally taken to be six; (though I find some that
judge it more commodious to make them seven, dividing the sixth, and last,
(according to the ordinary account) into two.) The first, Hallowed be thy Name.
The second, Thy Kingdom come. The third, Thy Will be done on Earth, as it is
in Heaven. The fourth, Give us this day our daily bread. The fifth, And forgive
us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. The sixth (and
the last) And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from all Evil.

Quest. 48.

What is the meaning, of the first of these Petitions? and what are the
particular things, or some of the chief of them, by which an estimate may be
made of the rest, which are comprehended and desired therein?

Answ.

When we pray unto God that his NAME may be Hallowed [that is, sanctified, as
the word signifieth]; we pray, that he will so interpose by his Grace, and by
the sending forth of his Spirit into the world, and by his Providence, that men
may know him with such a knowledge, which answers the truth and (as much as
may be) the adequate excellency of his being, as that he is infinite in all
perfections, as in goodness, mercy, holiness, righteousness, truth, wisdom,
knowledge, power, etc. And that in all these he does not only excel the best
and greatest of Creatures, Angels, and Men, to a degree no not in the highest
degree that is imaginable, but that his nature, or being, though most singly
and simply one, yet eminently contains in it the whole respective bodies, or
elements of them all. For the name of God is then truly, and properly Hallowed,
or Sanctified, when in the minds, consciences, and souls of men, he is placed
upon a high Throne alone by himself, and set apart in his due distance in
respect of his most transcendent excellency and glory, from all Creatures
whatsoever, whether in actual being, or in possibility of being, and withal is
honored loved, feared, served, and obeyed, answerably (in some measure at
least) hereunto. As on the contrary, his Name is said to be polluted, when any
thing is conceived, or done by men, as if he had something in common with some
Creature, and were not, ih his nature and being, of an excellency in all
perfections whatsoever, appropriate only to himself.

Quest. 49.

When Christ teaches us to pray unto God, that his Name may be hallowed, does
he intend that we should pray for any thing commodious or beneficial for our
selves, or for that, which only concerns the glorifying of God? Or had he an
eye both to the one, and to the other, in prescribing unto us this Petition?

Answ.

It is not reasonable to conceive that Christ puts men upon praying in one
kind or other, or upon any service whatsoever, for any benefit, or advantage
that may possibly accrue unto God by it, in one kind, or other. For he is of
himself, and from himself, as blessed as blessedness it self can make him,
full to the brim, as of Goodness, so of Happiness, and all satisfaction, and
contentment imaginable, yea and above, and beyond all imagination. Nor can any
accession, or addition be made unto his glory by any service from the Creature,
though performed with the highest hand of wisdom, zeal, and faithfulness: as
neither can he suffer the least diminution in his blessedness or glory, by the
greatest wickedness that can be practiced against him. The Scripture is
express and full of his truth. My goodness (says David unto God) extends
not unto thee, Psalm. 16.2. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise
may be profitable to himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art
Righteous? Or is it gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect? Job. 22.2,
3. Again, If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? Or if thy Transgressions
be multiplied, what do thou unto him? If thou he righteous, what give thou
him? Or what receives he of thine hand? Thy wickedness may hurt a man, etc.
Job. 35.6, 7, 8. Neither is he worshipped with men's hands, as if he needs any
thing, etc. Act. 17.25. Therefore when Christ teaches us to pray unto God that
his Name may be Hallowed, he rather intends the benefit of those that pray,
then his to whom the Prayer is made. Besides, it seems somewhat improper for
men to desire God to deal well by himself, or to do himself right, or the like;
unless it were upon an apprehension, that by doing himself right, he shall in
one kind or other, benefit, and accommodate them. Such requests are not wont to
be made by us unto any sort of men, but unto such only, whom we look upon as
incogitant, and neglective of their own concernments. Notwithstanding the
petition in hand, may commodiously enough be taken in some such sense as this,
viz. as expressing our desires unto God that his Name may be Sanctified, or
himself glorified like unto himself in the world, out of an unfeigned Love, and
pure respects unto his infinite goodness, without minding, at present, either
any benefit like to redound thereby unto our selves, or that he himself is
capable of any benefit by having his Name thus Hallowed, or sanctified by Men.

Quest. 50.

But what benefit is like to accrue unto those who pray unto God that his Name
may be Hallowed, by having this their Petition granted unto them? Or how are
m^n profited by the Hallowing of his Name? Or is the meaning of the Petition
only this, to desire that God's name may be hallowed by us, who pray, not
intending, or including, any others in it?

Answ.

The Petition seems to intend, that we pray for the Hallowing of God's Name, as
well by, and amongst others, as by our selves, (though principally by our
selves). Otherwise we shall not express by it any true love or affection unto
God, nor any sincere desire to have his Name hallowed, but a desire only of our
own benefit by our hallowing it. For if we desire the hallowing of God's Name,
simply or out of any naturalnesse of Love to him, or any otherwise, then with
respect unto our selves, or our own profit, we must desire and pray, that it
may be hallowed, far and near, by and amongst all the Nations of the Earth,
as well as by our selves. The benefit that will redound unto us by having out
Petition granted us in this sense of it (over and besides what we shall be
advantaged by our own personal hallowing the name of God) must needs be
exceeding great, as namely the reducement of the world to a more desirable
state and condition unto the inhabitants of it, by chasing away those pests of
the peace and comforts of men on the earth, covetousnese, oppression, fraud,
envy, malice, cruelty, unmercifulness, contention, drunkenness, uncleanness,
with, the rest of the troublesome retinue of ignorance and propainesse). For
where the Name of God is Hallowed, there is no place for these abominations.
Besides th generation of the righteous will be propagated, our friends
spiritual allies, and heavcenly confederates will be increased our enemies
will be at peace with us, and they who formerly destroyed us, will be zealously
addicted to build us up.

Quest. 51.

What is the meaning of the second Petition? And what are some of the principal
things desired therein?

Answ.

By the Kingdom of God here, is meant, in a more special and particular
manner, that happy state and condition, which the world shall be translated
into, when the Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and
of his Christ, (Rev. 11.15. Compared with Chap. 12.10). For now God shall Reign
gloriously in his Saints and Holy people his, and their Enemies, being
universally subdued and put under their feet. Righteousness and true holiness
shall lift up their heads on high without any check, or control or fear of
either, from the powers, or greatness of the world; for these will be nursing
Fathers, and Sovereign benefactors unto them. But in a more general sense, by
the Kingdom of God may well be meant, all those providential dispensations of
his, which according to his counsel, and those principles of equity, which
rule in all his dealings with the world, are proper to promote and make way for
the coming of that Kingdom into the world; and likewise all such, which may in
the, interim, be as a taste, or first fruits of that Kingdom unto the world, as
the numerous increase of Righteous and Holy men, the giving them credit and
countenance from Heaven by blessing and prospering them, and making their Faces
to shine by causing the fear of them to fall upon the men of this world, and
for the effecting and bringing to pass of these things, the pouring out of his
Spirit in ministerial gifts and endowments upon men, and the giving them hearts
to serve him in this great work, the keeping out, of unlearned, unfaithful,
unholy men from this employment, the advancement of godly wise, and worthy men
unto places of power and authority (with the like). These are the principal
things comprehended in this second Petition, Thy Kingdom come, and to be
minded by us when we present it unto God.

Quest. 52.

What is the meaning of the third Petition? and what the things we should
chiefly mind in preferring it unto God?

Answ.

When Christ teacheh us to pray thus unto God, Thy will be done on Earth as it
is in Heaven; his meaning is, that we should desire of him, that he will
vouchsafe such a measure of Grace, and of his good Spirit unto all men and unto
our selves especially; whereby we may on all hands, and in every place, be
inclined and made willing to follow the example of his Holy Angels, in our
readiness, zeal, diligence, faithfulness, constancy, and perseverance, to do
all his will and pleasure made known unto us in his exhortations, precepts, and
commandments, or by any other means whatever: and consequently, that he will
persuade and strive with us effectually, to deny our selves, and to sacrifice
our own wills and desires upon the obedience and service of his, to waive and
let fall all our own ends and designs, when they are not clearly consistent
with his, to be willing to take up our cross daily, and to follow Christ, as
well in the way of his afflictions and sufferings, as of his innocence and
holiness.

Quest. 53.

What is the meaning of the fourth Petition? and what do we more particularly
desire of God in this?

Answ.

We desire of God all things meet and needful for our being, and well being in
this present life: and consequently, that he will in cline our hearts to
exercise and employ our selves in some honest and lawful calling, making us
diligent, industrious, and faithful in it, and then bless our labors and
endeavors with success, keeping us by his good providence, out of the hand of
extortioners, oppressors and deceitful men, from casualties, and losses by
thieves, Pirates, fire, wars, tempests and the like; that he will so interpose
by his Word and Sprit in our hearts and conciences, that we may keep our selves
free from all superfluous, impertinent, and needless cares, from all
distracting, turmoiling, and wasting of our thoughts, from lingering and
hankering after the delicate and great things of the world, as riches, honors,
pleasures, great places, etc. inasmuch as the letting out of the heart in
desires after these things, is contrary to our well-being and regular enjoyment
of our selves in this world.

Quest. 54.

But is it proper, or necessary, for rich men, who have goods (and in these,
bread) laid up for many years, to use this Petition, or to pray unto God, Give
us this day our daily Bread?

Answ.

The story and case of Job (not to mention others of like Argument) shows
that there lies an equal necessity upon rich men to pray unto God for the
preservation and safe-guarding of their great estates, yea even to such a
proportion of them, which amounts only to their Daily bread, with that which
lies upon poor and mean men, to pray for a supply of things necessary, or for
their Daily bread. Besides, if they take their Daily bread without asking it of
God by Prayer, it cannot prove better then un-hallowed or polluted bread unto
them, strengthening and disposing them to evil ways and works. Nor can they
expect the best part of Gods blessing upon it, as viz. that it should quicken,
nourish, and strengthen their heart to the love and service of God. For every
Creature of God (says the Apostle) is sanctified by the word of God, and
Prayer, 1 Timothy 4, 5. He does not say, it is made lawful by Prayer, but it is
sanctified; that is, is made nourishing to the Soul in the spiritual life
thereof, as it is of course, or in the nature of it, unto the body in the life
natural.

Quest. 55.

Whether is it not lawful to pray unto God for Riches, or for a plentiful
estate, as well as for our Daily bread?

Answ.

I do not find that Christ any where disliked, or rejected men for being Rich:
Nay, it is said that he loved a young man, that had great possessions, Mar.
10.21, 22. and honored Zacheus, who also was rich, with inviting himself to
his house. Yet I find that sometimes he pittieth this Generation of men, as
being in a most sad and dangerous condition and not in any possibility of
Salvation, but only by some great and more then ordinary interposure of God.
Mat. 19.23, 24.26 Mar. 10.23, 25, 26, 27. Elsewhere I find him, by his Apostle,
dealing very roundly with them, prescribing unto them several receipts (very
uncouth and unpleasing unto the generality of them) as, not be high minded, not
to trust in uncertain Riches, but in God, to do good, to be rich in good works,
to be ready to distribute, willing to communicate, etc. and all these things as
necessary to be done by them, that they may lay hold on eternal Life (which
otherwise is it seems, like to pass or slip, by them, unminded, and
unregarded,) 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. By another Apostle I find him taking notice
of the ways and actings of such men, as very wicked, and abominable in the
sight of God, and which unrepented of, and unforsaken, threaten the vengeance
of eternal fire. Do not ri h men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment
Seats? Do they not blaspheme that worthy Name, by which ye are called? Jam.
2.6, 7. Go to now ye rich men, weep, and howl for your miseries -- Behold the
hire of the Laborers which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept
back by fraud, cries, and the cries of them which have Reaped, are entered
onto the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Ye have lived in pleasure on the Earth
and been wanton: ye have etc. Jam. 5.1.4, 5. Now to pray unto God to bring us
into such a state and condition, in which it is next to an impossibility for
any man to be saved, yea and which is apt to render men utterly incapable of
Salvation, but only by doing such things, which are commonly very grievous and
tormenting unto such men to do; And lastly, which has this sad property in it
also, to make the lives and doings of those that come into it (more generally)
vile and hateful before God; to pray (I say) that God would be the Author of
such a condition as this unto us, is (in effect) to pray, that he would lead us
into temptation, whereas Christ, in the very next Petition but one (as we heard
and shortly God willing shall hear further) teaches us to pray the contrary,
viz. that he would not lead us into Temptation; Besides if it be unlawful, when
Riches do increase, to set a man's heart upon them, (as David, in that respect,
forbids men to do, Psalm. 62.10.) Surely it is not expedient (at least) to
set a man's heart upon the increasing them, or to strive with God in Prayer for
them. He was as well a wise man, as a Godly, that prayed against them. Give me
neither Poverty nor Riches. Prove. 30.8. Notwithstanding, it is not (I conceive)
the mind of Christ in the Petition in hand, to impose it upon men as a duty, to
limit themselves strictly to pray for things of present necessity only, for
then they should be bound to pray, not so much for the blessing of God upon
their honest labors, as for the confinement, or scanter measure of this
blessing. For otherwise (as the wiseman informs us) the blessing of God
makes Rich, Prove. 10.22. and the hand of the diligent (he says) does the
same, ver. 4. Yea and men ought to be provident and to have an eye to the
future, and in summer to lay up for winter, and in health and strength, to
remember sickness, and weakness: yea if God has given us Children, to
remember them also, and, if he shall please so far to bless us, and give
opportunity, to lay up in a convenient measure for them. The Scriptures are
express and clear for these things. See at your leisure Prove. 6.6. and 14.24.
and 15.6. and 20.4 13. and 27.23, 24 etc. and 28.19. and 13.22. 2 Cor. 12.14.
(with many others) So that when Christ teaches us to pray, Give us this Day
our Daily bread, his meaning and intent seems to be, to take men off from
minding or looking after superfluities, or the great things of the world, and
not to be importunate with God for them, but to leave him to his own Liberty
and Pleasure whether he will bestow, or cast in unto us, such things as these
or no; and to be earnest with him only for things of present necessity and
convenience Besides, the Prayer in hand, being drawn up and formed by Christ
for the use and direction of all Christians without exception, it was not
reasonable, or meet, that any thing should be found in it, that should
occasion, or lead, men to pray for Riches, or any the great things of the
world, but only for things necessary and convenient: because such things as
these, are commodious and beneficial, unto all (without exception) whereas
neither the heads, nor the hearts of many are able to carry a full cup without
spilling; nor to weild great riches, honors, or height of prosperity, without
imminent danger of being ruined and undone by them for ever.

Quest. 56.

What is the meaning of the fifth Petition? and what are some of the chief
particulars comprehended in it, and which we are directed by it to ask in
Prayer of God?

Answ.

This Petition leads us to the acknowledgment of our selves to be sinners
against God; and that whilst our sins remain unpardoned, we are in a sad
condition, and obnoxious to the breaking out of his displeasure in one judgment
or other (if not in more) upon us (for in this respect our sins are here called
our debts, or trespasses, which unless they be forgiven, will be, we know not
how suddenly, required at our hand.) And therefore we are further taught and
admonished in this Petition, to pray as constantly for the forgiveness of them
as we do for our Daily bread. For to ask it in Prayer of God, is a special
means to obtain it, according to what we read, Mat. 18.32. I forgave thee all
that debt BECAUSE thou desiredst me. But we are withal admonished, and
directed, to seek it of God upon such terms, which if we do nor really and
truly perform, we pray, not for the pardon or forgiveness of them, but for the
retainment of them, and for the vengeance due unto them to be inflicted on us.
For they that pray thus unto God; Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us, if they do not forgive them, pray, that themselves
may be no otherwise forgiven; that is not at all. So that the great and signal
favor, and blessing, which this Petition leads us to ask explicitly and
directly of God, is the forgiveness of our sins; and consequentially, a
gracious exemption from all those evils, judgments, and miseries, which our
sins have deserved, together with a free and full enjoyment of all those
blessings and good things, which the infinite goodness, and bounty of God
inclines him to bestow upon such of his Creatures, who by their love loyalty,
and obedience unto him, have found favor in his sight. The Petition yet
further being so modelled, as we have heard it is, for the obtaining of the
great blessing of the forgiveness of our sins upon our asking it, remindeth us
to ask likewise a merciful, loving, and free spirit toward our enemies, and
those that have been injurious unto us, in what kind or degree soever. For
unless we freely, and from the heart, forgive unto these all the injuries,
wrongs, and unkindnesses (damages in some cases only excepted) which they have
done unto us, we are not admitted more then the Devils to the favor of
petitioning God for the forgiveness of our own sins, with any hope of having
such our Petition granted us. By the way, it is worthy our observation, how
beneficial enemies, and those that deal unkindly and injuriously by us, are, or
may be unto us, unless we be far greater enemies to our selves, then they.
They afford us the happy opportunity of doing that, the performance whereof
gives us a steady, and full assurance of being accepted with God in our Prayer
for the forgiveness of our sins, and without the performance of which, we are
excluded from all hope of prevailing in so great a concernment, Mat. 6.14, 15.
and 18.35.

Quest. 57.

But have they that believe in Christ, any need to pray for the forgiveness of
their sins? Are not their sins, by virtue of their Relation unto, and union
with Christ, pardoned (as it were) of course, as, and as often as, they are
committed?

Answ.

Christ, by his death, according to the counsel and will of God, purchased
actual pardons of sin, or pardons of sin to be actually, and without any more
ado, or requirement of any other terms, or conditions, conferred upon all
those that should truly, and with all their heart believe on him. But evident
it is from the Scriptures, that he has subjected the enjoyment of these
pardons, as well in respect of the continuance of them, as of the extent of the
benefit of them, even whilst they are continued, under certain Proviso's, or
terms of Limitation, as his wisdom and righteousness, for the orderly and
equitable Government of the world, and more particularly of his own house,
directed him to do, being at full liberty to order the great affair we now
speak of, as himself should please. As for example; we find the continuance of
the enjoyment of such a pardon, clearly suspended upon his Christian behavior,
who is at present possessed of it, toward those that have wronged, or dealt
unkindly by him, in his free and hearty forgiving them, Mat. 18.27. compared
with ver. 28.30.32, 33, 34, 35. Mat. 6.14, 15. Mar. 11.25, 26. So likewise upon
his perseverance in Faith, Love, and Obedience unto the end, Mat. 24.13. Luke
8.15. Romans 2.7. Mat. 10.33. Heb. 3.14 and 6.11, 12. and 10.38, 39. (besides
other places very many). Again, These pardons, in respect of their present
benefit, either in freeing men from inward fears of Gods displeasure, or from
outward sufferings, or punishmenrs due unto sin, are suspended upon the
regularnesse of their obedience, their holy and humble walking with God, their
exercising themselves to have always a conscience void of offense toward God,
and toward Men, etc. The truth hereof, in both particulars, most exemplarily
and at large, appears in David's story, who by reason of his breach of Loyalty
unto God in those extravagant practices and misdemeanors, wherein Satan was
above him, was both inwardly afflicted in Soul, and this very sorely, and also
pursued from time to time, by and with many outward judgments and sore
afflictions from God, as if he had been in the number of those who never
believed, nor had ever been blessed with the pardon of their sins. See (at
leisure) upon this account. Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33. 1 Cor. 11.30, 31, 32. Heb.
12.28, 29. 1 Pet. 1.17. (with many others) Therefore even they, who believe in
Christ, and upon their believing, were invested with the pardon of their sins,
inasmuch as they sin daily, notwithstanding, yea they know not how often ( for
who can understand his errors. Psalm. 19.12.) are greatly concerned to ask the
pardon of their sins of God from day to day. For otherwise, God is at liberty,
or rather (indeed) under a necessity (in respect of his honor) to make them
their sorrow either inward, or outward, or both. And since Christ has now made
it, or declared it, to be a part of the worship of God that we daily, or from
time to time ask of him the forgiveness of our sins, they who do not exercise
themselves in asking it, herein and to a degree, become profane, forsaking or
neglecting the worship of God, and consequently to a like degree, expose
themselves to the danger of apostasy, and so to have the pardon of their sins
cancelled and reversed, never to be obtained by them more.

Quest. 58.

What is the meaning of the sixth and last Petition? and what are some of the
most considerable things which we are directed in it, or by it, to ask in
Prayer of God?

Answ.

This Petition consists of two members, or parts: which (as was lately
hinted) occasioned some to divide it into two Petitions, and so to make the
number of the Petitions, seven. Concerning the former part of it; The last
preceding Petition respects our sins past, and already committed, and taught
us to ask the forgiveness of them. This Petition respects sins to come, or
which we are in danger of committing afterward, and directs us to take the
best course that is, to avoid the danger, and keep our selves free: which is,
by praying unto God that he will not lead us, or, rather (as the word (...)
signifies) bring us, into Temptation, but deliver us from evil; that is, that
he will not in his providence, afford unto Satan, or any other Tempter, any
Opportunity, or Power, to tempt us unto evil, but with a gracious intention to
stand by us himself, and keep us upright under the temptation, and deliver us
from falling into that sin, unto which we shall be tempted. God tries many,
yea there is scarce any of his Saints, but he tries in one kind or other: but
(as the Apostle James informs us) he tempts no man, Jam. 1.13.
Notwithstanding he may be said to lead, or to bring men into Temptation, when
having stood between them, and temptation formerly (as sometimes he stood in
the cloudy and siery pillar, between the Israelites, and the Egyptians, not
suffering them to come the one at the other) he now withdraws himself, (as he
did from Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 32.31.) and so exposes, and (as it were) delivers
them up into the hand of the temptation, of what kind soever it be; hereby
acting and doing, as if he had (in a strict and proper sense) led, or brought,
them into temptation. When two things, though differing in their natures, are
yet alike in their effects, or in the ordinary events or consequences of
either, the Scripture often expresses the one in terms more appropriate unto the
other. Similia similium occupant nomina. Hug. Grot. in Act. 13.33. Solent
similia nomen inter se permutare. Idem. in Ephesians. 1* ^.
Now Christ, immediately subjoyning this Petition for preservation from sinning
unto that wherein he directed us to ask the forgiveness of our sins, plainly
admonishes us, that when we have obtained the great Grace and Mercy of the
pardon of our sins from God, it lies as a great duty upon us to be every way
solicitous and careful, that as far as is possible, we sin no more. When in
the latter clause of the Petition, we pray that God would deliver us from
evil, by Evil, we may understand both the evil of sin, and consequently the
evil of suffering, or of sorrow, this being the natural product, or fruit, of
the other. Some of the chief particulars, which we are in this Petition,
reminded to seek of God by Prayer, are, that he will create in us an Holy
anxiety and tenderness over the purity and cleanness of our hearts, and
ways, a deep detestation and abhorrency of sin, and of all pollution by it;
because without these, we cannot pray with that fervency and effectualnesse of
Prayer, which becomes us, that he will not lead us into temptation, etc. So
again, that whilst we are free and kept by him from temptation, he will not
suffer a Spirit of remissness, carelessness or security, to grow upon us, lest
he should be hereby provoked to lead us into temptation, and not deliver us
from the evil, unto which we are tempted. And so on the contrary, that whilst
we do enjoy a serenity and quietness of Spirit, and remain unmolested of
temptations, we may have grace in our hearts to serve him with reverence and
fear, and with that faithfulness, zeal, and alacrity of soul, that his hand
may be hereby strengthened to grannt us our Petition, of not being led by him
into temptation, etc. So also that he will enlighten our judgments and
consciences from day to day, to see and apprehend more clearly and convincingly
the horrid nature of sin, the most lamentable and deplorable weakness of our
natures to stand it out against temptations, if left unto our selves; and
consequently, that there lies a necessity upon us, presiing us as with a
weight of a great mountains, were we sensible of it, to be importunate with
God, not to lead. us into Temptation.

Quest. 59.

What is the meaning of the Doxology, or thanksgiving (as some call it)
subjoyned unto the former Petitions, and expressed in these words; For thine is
the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever? And how does it relate unto
the said Petitions?

Answ.

The Particle, the, annexed unto all the three, THE Kingdom, THE Power, THE
Glory? is most Emphatical in reference to them all. For it implies that there
is but one Kingdom, worthy the name of a Kingdom; and so but one Power, that
deserves the name of Power; and but one Glory, that is much considerable in the
nature of glory. And Christ directs us to ascribe them all unto God, and to
look up unto him, as really, and rightfully, possessed of them all. By the
Kingdom, he means the whole universe, or great body of the Creation,
consisting of Heaven and Earth with all the Hosts of them, and all that
incomprehensible variety of created beings from the highest to the lowest, that
is found in them. This great body of the Creation, unto God stands in the
nature, and relation, of a Kingdom, because he exercises a just Sovereignty,
and super-eminent Authority over it, and every member and part of it. Some take
the Kingdom here in a more restrained sense, namely for that select and choice
party of the Creation, which consists of Elect Angels, and Holy men, over
whom God reigns by his Grace, Word, and Spirit, etc. This Kingdom is
(indeed) included in the other; but if this were here meant apart from the rest
of the Creation, over which God exercises a Kingly Sovereignty, as well as
over it, he must be said to have two Kingdoms, and not (emphatically) One.

By THE Power, is meant that strength, or might, which is appropriate unto God,
and which we commonly call omnipotency, that is, all-mightinesse. This Power
may well be called, THE Power, because, whether we respect either activity, or
resistance, all the power that is vested in the whole Creation, and in all the
respective parts or members of it, as in Angels, Devils, Men, Hosts, or Armies
of men, stones, rocks, hills, mountains sun, moon, stars, elements, fire,
water, the greatest breaches or inundations of waters, waves of the Sea,
whirlwinds, storms, tempests, earth quakes, lions, unicorns, elephants, horses,
Leviathans, or what other Creature there may be for strength in any degree
considerable, were (I say) all the strength and might, that are found dispersed
in all these, and all other Creatures united and incorporated in one subject,
capable of them all, yet would not the power that should be raised from this
great and universal conjunction, being compared with the power of God, hold the
proportion of the leightest dust in the balance, being weighed against the
greatest mountain under Heaven, yea or the whole great Globe or body of the
Earth, Yea as the Prophet David informs us, The strength of the Hills, is his
also. Psalm. 95.4. So is the strength of Angels, Devils, Men, and of all the
Creatures mentioned, and all others, his likewise; that is, at his disposal and
command, either to suspend or restrain, or else to employ, and exercise, as,
and about what he pleases.

By THE Glory (here also acknowledged as belonging to God) is meant that
Majestic State, or condition so highly honored, reverenced, feared, admired,
adored by all Creatures, whereof God is possessed, and wherein he enjoys
himself in all fullness of peace, and joy, and blessedness for evermore. All
the glory of Solomon, with all that which has been, or is at this day called
Glory, in the Courts, States, Palaces, of all the Princes, Kings, Monarchs,
Potentates of the Earth, could they be supposed to be molten together, and run
into one Mass, of which a Colosse or Mountain of Glory should be framed and
made; yet even such a body of Glory as this would be compared with the Glory of
God, would not hold the like proportion, which the snuff of a Candle does to
the illustrious body of the Sun, when he rises and shines in his might.

Quest. 60.

But how does the mention here, or acknowledgment, of these high things as
belonging unto God, relate unto the Petitions going before; which it seems they
do, by this causall particle, For: For thine is the Kingdom, etc. What may be
the dependence of the one upon the other?

Answ.

As before we began to Petition, we were directed (as we have heard) so to
conceive of God (and to exprese our conceptions accordingly) as might encourage
us to pray, and yet with reverence; So having finished our work of Prayer, we
are directed to represent such things unto God, relating to himself, which in a
reasonable construction, must needs incline him, and this very effectually, to
grant us what we have desired of him: and consequently this representation, or
doxology must needs be an excellent means to revive and strengthen our Faith
concerning a favorable audience, and acceptance with God in our Prayer. For
our Savior well knowing that Faith is the principal Verb in the sentence of
Prayer, judged it necessary to be well guarded both in the Front, and Rere; and
has made provision accordingly, by awakening and raising up such apprehensions
in us of things relating unto God, both in the beginning, and end of his model
of Prayer, which being well and understandingly digested, must needs be as
marrow and fatness to the Soul of our Faith. We spoke formerly of what is
found upon this account, in the beginning of the Prayer, in the first words,
Our Father. Now in the close, representing it unto God as a thing well known to
us, and believed by us, that His is THE Kingdom, THE Power, and THE Glory, and
all these for ever; we humbly signify, and declare unto him, that we have
reason and ground in abundance to believe, that he will give us what we have
asked (and are accordingly resolved to depend upon him for) namely, because he
is infinitely and eternally blessed, full to the brim of all his capacities,
of, and with himself: and consequently, cannot but be most propense, and ready,
yea, zealously rejoycingly, triumphantly addicted to do good unto his poor
Creatures, when they stand in need of him especially when they look up unto him
by Faith, and humbly seek his face by Prayer. Even a Creature richly apaied
with the sense of much contentment in his condition? or with the apprehension
of some great felicity come upon him, becomes hereby large-hearted, and
open-handed, to show any kindness or mercy to those that stand in need, and
come in his way. The Scripture gives many instances ot the truth of this
Principle, or Observation. See at leisure and consider diligently these Texts
(unto which you may add many others of like import) 2 Samuel 19.22.29, 30. 1 Chronicles. 12.40. Ephesians. 4.8.10, 11, etc. Gal. 4.15. As on the contrary frequent
experience teaches us that the more discontented, and less satisfied men, or
other Creatures, are with their conditions, they are the more indisposed to
gratify others in any thing, and (for the most part) male-contented persons,
are of malefique, and malignant dispositions, taking more pleasure in the
troubles, and sorrows, then in the comforts, or prosperity of other men. The
Devil, who looks upon himself as the most miserable, and accursed, of all the
Creatures of God, is the first born of all that imagine and practice mischief
against others, and by the cruelty of his malicious endeavors and attempts to
draw his fellow creatures into the same wretched condition with himself, has
purchased unto himself the names of Abaddon, and Apollyon, ( Revel. 9, 11.) the
former being an Hebrew, the latter a Greek, or Gentile, word or name, to
signify that the Bow of his devouring malice stands bent both against Jews and
Gentiles, that is, the whole world; even as the Son God on the other hand, by
designing and endeavoring the Salvation, both of Jews and Gentiles (that is of
the whole world) has obtained the name of Jesus and of Christ; the former,
being an Hebrew, the latter, a Greek or Gentile appellation. Therefore God, who
must needs be infinitely apaied with joy, delight, and contentment in the
highest, in his condition, knowing himself to be possessed of such a Kingdom,
such a Power, such a Glory, as were lately described, and these fully secured
unto him to the days of Eternity, must of necessity likewise be conceived to
be mercifully, graciously, and bountifully inclined, and this in full
proportion to the knowledge and sense he has of his own blessedness, to
condescend to the Prayers and Supplications of his poor creatures, when ever
they shall call upon him.

Quest. 61.

What is the meaning of the word Amen, in the conclusion of this Prayer? Or
what reason may there be why Christ should direct us to the use of this Word,
in the close of our Prayers?

Answ.

Amen, being interpreted, signifies Truth, Verity, or Faithfulness. Thus Esa.
65.16 The God Amen, (in the original) is twice rendered, the God of Truth, and
(in the former Translation) the True God. So Revel. 3.14. Christ is called, The
Amen: which is expounded, the Faithful and true witness. In discourse with men
it imports a serious and weighty asseveration of the truth of what is said next
unto that which is made by oath: yea it appears from some Jewish records, that
according to the common form of Judiciary Swearing amongst this people, he that
took an oath, administered unto him by the judge, expressed his willingness so
to do, by uttering the word Amen. Yet this proves not that the Lord Christ
swear, as often as he used the word Amen (translated, verily) in the Gospel,
(which it seems, is the conceit of some.) For whereas he used this word, Mat.
24.47. Amen, I say unto you, etc. The Evangelist Luke recording the same
Sentence, expounds his Amen, by the word (...) of a truth, or verily, Luke
12.44 And elsewhere he expounds it by the word (...) that is, yea, or verily.
Luke 12.51. Compared with Mat. 23.36 And sometimes both the Hebrew, Amen, and
the Greek (...) yea, are joined together, as words mutually explaining the one
the other. Revel. 1.7. 2 Cor. 1.20. When the word Amen, is subjoined in the end
of a Prayer, thanksgiving, curse, ortany affirmation, it expresses an
approbation by him that utters it, of what is contained in them (respectvely)
together with his desire, that things should be accordingly. And in this
construction of it, it imports as much as, So be it (or the like) and is so
englished twelve times together in so many verses of Deuteronomy. 27. in our former
translation in conformity to the Greek: and is in our last translation, so
rendered, Jer. 11.5. This signification or import of it, is attested by what we
read, Jer. 11.5. Then answered I, and said, Amen, O Lord. So also, Jer. 28.6.
Some conceive it to be a matter of duty, and required by God, that we use or
pronounce it, at the end of all the Prayers we make, whether in private, or
with others, if we approve them. And so in the end of all our doxologies and
thanksgivings. There may be a good reason assigned, why it may be convenient,
and thus far necessary to be used in such cases, as namely, because it may be
conceived to answer the use and intent of a Seal, by which deeds in writing are
wont to be completely ratified. For as a Seal put to a writing, after it has
been made, read, and perused is (constructively and in effect) an
acknowledgment and confession of the party, that he was not prevented or
surprised, in yielding to, or confirming any thing contained in the writing,
but that he has well weighed and considered all things, upon which confession
it is most equitable that such his deed, should obliege and bind him
effectually to the performance of the terms of it: In like manner, when a man
has poured out his Soul in several Petitions, and Requests unto God, by
concluding all all with the word Amen, he declares himself to have been
thorough-hearted in such his prayer, that he at no hand recalls any thing
petitioned for in it, but that upon good consideration he stands fast and firm
by all his suits and motions, and is ready to repeat and go over his prayer the
second time, in testimony of his ardent desire, to have it granted. For I
conceive the word Amen, to be (interpretatively) the praying over the prayer
made the second time, by him that uses it in the cloze thereof. There is much
alike consideration of the word, when used after doxologies, and thanksgivings.
For here it imports the full, and free, and redoubled consent, desire, and
contentment of the heart and soul, that God should be praised and magnified, as
he now has been, and that he should remain for ever possessed, and in the full
enjoyment of all those Regalia, those most transcendent and adorable Royalties,
which have now been been ascribed unto him. Whether in the Prayer in hand,
there being a Doxologie, as well as Petitions or a Prayer going before it, the
intent of Christ was, that it should relate unto the one, or unto the other
only, or unto both indifferently, may be some little Question. But since (as we
have heard) it is congruous and proper unto both; and comprehensive senses,
wherein nothing is forced, are generally to be preferred before those that are
narrower; I conceive it best to understand it with reference unto both; and to
import, that as we are affectuously, and ardently desirous that all the
preceding Petitions should be granted unto us; so are most joyfully, and with
the height of all contentment, apaied in heart and soul, that God is possessed
of such a Kingdom, such a Power, such a Glory, as we have now ascribed unto
him, and that he is secured in this his possession, and enjoyment for ever, and
ever.

Quest. 62.

You have opened unto us many things concerning grayer, and now lastly unfolded
the great precedent, or pattern of this heavenly exercise (though conceived,
and drawn up in few words, according to the wisdom of him, who had the spirit
of wisdom given him without measure, being the Architect and great master of
it) will you please to direct us only in this one point further, how we ought
to behave our selves after we have prayed, that we may lose as little of the
benefit and comfort of our Prayers as may be?

Answ.

There are five things to be done, and as many to be taken heed of and avoided,
when we have prayed, that we may not either in whole, or in part, lose the
fruit of our Praying.

Quest. 63.

What is the first thing to be done upon this account?

Answ.

To look after our Prayers, when we have sent them up into Heaven, and observe
diligently, for some space of time (if we receive not satisfaction sooner) how
they speed and prosper in the things, about which they were sent. David did
this, and resolved to do it. Psalm. 3, 4. Compared with 85.8. There are several
Christian commodities that accompany this practice.

First, It ingageth and exercises the mind about God, and particularly about
that lovely Character or property of His, by which he attracts and draws all
flesh unto him; I mean, his property of hearing Prayer. Psalm. 65.2. and 34.4,
5. (with many others).

Secondly, If we mind our Prayers our selves, it must needs strengthen the hand
of God to mind them also. He that neglects, or despises his Prayer when he
has put it into the hand of God, does (upon the matter) disclaim or disown it,
and withal seems to undervalue the gift and grace of God, by which it was
conceived, and presented to him: all which are much disobliging unto God.

Thirdly, If we shall narrowly observe what returns are made us from Heaven of
our prayers, we shall be the more able clearly to understand, what we receive
from God in answer to our Prayers, and what we receive of his favor and good
will otherwise. And if we shall once come clearly to find, that from time to
time we receive good things from him upon the account of our Prayers, this will
prove a matter of most rich consolation unto us. For as a good and gainful
Trade, is a better means of subsistence then the finding of a purse of Money
upon the way, or the receiving of a good Gratuity from a rich Friend, once, or
twice, or the like: So when a man comes to know that he may have of the good
things of Heaven (as it were) in a way of traffic, or commerce by Prayer, it
is a far greater cheering and raising to the Soul, then now and then to
receive a Love-Token from God, though of good value. See Joh. 16.24 (cited also
in the Answer to the 19th Question in this Chapter).

Fourthly, He that is intent upon the issue and success of his Prayers,
declares hereby that he honors the promises of God made unto Prayer, by
believing them, which is a thing well-pleasing unto God, and strengthens his
hand to the fulfilling of them, as far as he that thus acts, is concerned
in them, Jam. 1.6, 7. 1 Chronicles. 5.20.

Fifthly, (and lastly) that deportment of Soul we speak of, quickneth and
disposes the heart unto thankfulness, when God answers a man's prayer, and
thankfulness, being the best return which God expects from the Earth of
those commodities, which he sends thither from Heaven, must needs put life
into the Prayer-Trade driven between God and men, and keep the windows of
Heaven, being once open, from shutting any more.

Quest. 64.

What is a second thing to be done after we have prayed, that our Prayer may
turn to account and not miscarry?

Answ.

We must be careful to make good that ground of Righteousness, and pleasing
God, which we had gained (by the assistance of his Grace) and stood on, when we
made our prayer; yea, if it be possible, we should endeavor to advance, and
gain more of this ground daily: that so we do not weaken the interest of our
Prayer, whilst it yet remains in the hand of God, and before it be returned,
or make the return shorter, or less considerable when it comes, then otherwise
it would have been.

Quest. 65.

What is the third thing to be done, when we have prayed, that we may
accommodate and strengthen our prayers, whilst they are at work in Heaven for
us?

Answ.

To send more of their fellows after them: and if these also be made to wait
for their answer any considerable space of time, and our necessities of an
answer grow in the mean time very urgent, and sorely pressing upon us, to send
more after these also, and such, if it may be, which are more fervent and
importuning than they; and at no hand to desist, or give over praying, until a
clear and plain Answer, either in the Affirmative, or in the Negative comes.
Negative Answers, for the most part, are not long delayed: And when God intends
not to gratify our desires in Prayer, commonly he gives some signification, or
intimation at least, of his purpose in this kind, by one means or other, before
we have bestowed many Prayers on them. It is not, it seems, agreeable to the
goodness, or sweetness of his Nature, to be accessory, either to the growth, or
long continuance, of any such desires in his servants, which he has no intent
to fulfill. After a third request made by the Apostle Paul, that the messenger
of Satan sent, to buffet him, might be made to depart from him, he received an
express from God, by which he plainly understood, that it was not his pleasure
therein to hearken unto him, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. Affirmative Answers many times are
long in coming, and must be waited for, and sought by crying unto God night and
day for a large season, Luke 18.7. Yea, their coming (as is probable) may be
obstructed, and prevented by a cessation of Prayer, before we have a sufficient
ground to despair of their coming at all; which the longest delay of all is
not, whilst their coming will be beneficial unto us; as appears from the
Scripture last cited. Therefore we should arm our selves with David's
resolution, Psalm. 123.2. to cause our Eyes to wait [in Prayer] upon the Lord
our God, until that he have mercy upon us, how long soever the time may be, See
Luke 18, 1, etc. Luke 11.8, 9, etc.

Quest. 66.

What is a fourth thing requisite to be done by us, when we have made our
requests known unto God, that our hope of obtaining may be the more lively and
comforting?

Answ.

If what we have sought of him by Prayer, be such a thing, toward the bringing
to pass whereof we may, and ought, to contribute more then our Prayers; we must
remember, and be diligent, to second and assist our Prayers, in their way by
doing it. God does not love to be put upon the unbaring of his Arm, by his
creatures, when they have a covering in their hand to cast over it. Moses
commanded Joshua to choose out men, that were to go out and fight against
Amaleck, notwithstanding the lifting up of his hands in Prayer against them,
Exodus 17.9 When men have been as earnest with God in Prayer for the obtaining
of any thing, as they know how to be, it concerns them to be as diligent in the
use of all other means, which are proper to effect it, and within their reach
and power; as if they had not by Prayer interessed God at all, in, or about,
the effecting of it. They shall but build Castles in the Air, (as our common
Proverb is) who having need of an House to be built for them, shall neglect to
provide convenient materials, and to employ a workman made of flesh and blood,
about the building of it; thinking by importunity of Prayer, to get it built
without hands, by the invisible Architect of the World.

Quest. 67.

What is the fifth (and last) thing that becomes, and concerns, us to do,
when we havelodged our Prayer, and Supplications with God, that we may be
counted worthy to receive a gracious answer unto them in due time?

Answ.

To allow unto God, with all patience, and contentedness of mind, and with
cheerfulness of submission, His just liberty of choosing his time and season,
for giving answer unto our Prayers and to judge, that it is, or will be, every
whit as expedient and profitable (yea, more) for us, that such his answer
should be respited until His time, though this time of his be never so much
longer, or further off, then ours; as it it would be, in case he should, in the
giving of it, anticipate his own time, by applying himself unto ours, (which is
always that which is present). It is (indeed) welpleasing unto him to be
importuned with the Prayers and Cries of his Saints, night and day, and to have
no rest given him, until he gives them an answer from Heaven unto their
Prayers. But then this importunity must not proceed from a spirit of
impatience, discontentedness, or unbelief; or from a conceit that they receive
damage, or hurt, by being so long delayed in the return of their Prayers from
God: but either from a desire to strengthen the hand of God; to give them so
much the better measure in the return of their Prayer when it comes, or from an
apprehension of the greatness of the things, for which they pray: which very
possibly may be such, that God judges it not meet to give, or bestow them, but
upon long waiting, and many Applications made by fervency of Prayer unto him;
Or thirdly, (and lastly), from a desire of hastening their Answer from God as
much as may be, in a regular and equitable way; as namely, by praying as much,
and with as much zeal and ardency of soul, in a short time, as according to the
usual and accustomed rate of praying, even amongst the Saints themselves, men
are wont to pray and pray with, in a long time. For, as when Summer-seasons
prove extraordinarily hot, the Fruits of the Earth come to their maturity and
ripeness, and are fit to be gathered, before their wonted seasons in ordinary
years: In like manner, when men shall double and treble the spiritual heat and
fervency of their souls in holy addressments unto God, for the obtaining of
such good things, as they desire, above what is ordinarily, and at other times,
done, either by themselves, or others, they hereby become so much the sooner
sanctified, and are made the more early, yet regularly capable of receiving
those good things from the hand of God. Yea, and God shall walk by the same
rule of Righteousness and equity toward men, when he shall open speedily, to
those that knock vehemently, and witoute intermission; and when he makes them
stay longer, before he opens unto them, who do but knock now and then, and this
more faintly.

Quest. 68.

What are the things of which heed must be taken, and which are to be avoided,
when we have labored in Prayer with God, lest this labor should be in vain,
or less successful?

Answ.

As they are equal in number unto the particulars mentioned as necessary to be
observed and done, that our prayers may not be obstructed in their way, so are
they in their natures opposite unto them (respectively.)

Quest. 69.

What then is the first of them?

Answ.

That when we have prayed, we do not neglect, or make leight of our Prayers,
turning our backs upon them, as if they were only matters of course, and words
beating the air, or like unto the natural lives of men (as the Scripture
describes them) Vapors that appear for a little time, and then vanish away.
Jam. 4.14. He, who when he has once presented his supplications and prayers
unto God, takes his leave of them, as if he never expected to see, or hear of
them more, does not so much under-value, or neglect his own act, or that which
is from himself in his Prayer, as that which is from God in the ordinance it
self, and in all those great and precious promises which he has made unto the
due performance of it. It is one thing for a man to take shame, and humble
himself for all his own weaknesses, and the interposures of his flesh, in his
Prayer: this is meet and necessary to be done: but quite another thing, and of
a contrary import, to despise or not to regard or look after his Prayer it
self, as if his weakness in praying, must needs make the truth and
faithfulness of God in his promises made unto Prayer, though defective and
weak (for he could expect none other from men) of none effect. God, what by
teaching men how to pray, and what by inabling them by his Spirit to pray, and
what by granting such mighty powers unto these prayers as he has done, has
enabled them to c eat another, a new kind of Angel, or ministering Spirit,
which is as able to serve them, and do as great things for them, both in
Heaven, and in Earth, as those Ministering Spirits (properly so called) the
elect Angels of God themselves, are able to do. Yea that new kind of Angel we
speak of, Prayer, has a kind of Authority given unto it by God, over those
other Angels; and by the interest which it has, above the other, in him who is
the Lord of them both, is able many times to procure it self to be served by
them in very great and important affairs. Therefore Prayer, though it be in a
sense, the Creature of Man, yet being made of the love, goodness, bounty,
wisdom, and power of God, as the constituting principles of it, it is too
sacred and holy to be neglected, or lightly esteemed by man, when once he has
given life, and breath, and being unto it.

Quest. 70.

What is a second thing, by which our Prayers may suffer, if it be not avoided?

Answ.

To decline or grow worse after them, then we were at the time, when we made
them. As we degenerate and cool in our zeal and fervor of Spirit to the
Service of God, and ways of Righteousness, when we have recommended our
concernments or desires unto God, our prayers proportionably lose of their
interest and acceptance in Heaven, being now the prayers of persons less
considerable for Righteousness then they were, when they first arrived there.
And God is more distasted with good men for losing one inch of their holy
ground, then he is with wicked men for advancing two, in that ground of sin and
folly, which is their element. He expects that his presence should teach men
holiness, and that when they have been in near and close communion with him,
they should contract an heavenly luster and brightness upon their souls from
the glory of his Holiness. Therefore if having been so lately in his presence,
and beheld his face, they shall forget what manner of God he was, and shall
rather make loss then gain, of so great and blessed an opportunity, it must
needs argue a ve y unnatural and irrational strain of unworthiness, and
consequently be very displeasing unto God. Besides, he expects that having
put so much of their concernments into his hand, as their prayer and the
contents of it, whatever they be, do amount unto, this should bind them all to
their good behavior, and be as a fiery motive unto them to quit themselves at
the best rate they are able in pleasing him, lest otherwise they should
obstruct the return of their Prayers, or, at least, damage them in their return.

Quest. 71.

What is a third thing that must be taken heed of, lest our Prayers deposited
in the hand of God, be weakened or disabled by it?

Answ.

That in case we shall not receive an answer from God after the first, second,
or third time of asking, we be not at all discouraged, or faint, so as to
suffer our hands to hang down from praying any more, or say within our selves,
God will not be entreated by us, but has cast our Prayer out of his sight. For
in, those two Parables in the Gospel, the one, of him that came to his friend
at midnight to borrow loaves of bread, Luk 11.5 etc. the other, of the Widow
and unrighteous Judge Luke 18.1. etc. Christ plainly teaches, that though we
shall pray long, and often, and after many prayers receive no encouragement
from God, no testimony of any love, or respects that he bears unto us, yet by
our unwearied continuance, and obstinate perseverance in praying, we shall at
length prevail and overcome him. If the Priests, and men of war with Joshua,
had compassed the Gity of Jericho six days together, once every day, and had
here desisted, the walls of this City had stood as firm and strong as before:
yea, had they compassed it about (with the sound of their Trumpets of
Rams-horns) only six times more on the seventh day, all had signified nothing,
as to the bringing down the walls of Jericho: it was the compassing it about
the seventh time on this day, that did the wonderful execution, and made all
the former compassings significant.

There is the like consideration of Naamans washing himself seven times in
Jordan: His six former washings had contributed nothing toward his cure, had
they not been accompanied with the seventh: but this being added unto them, put
spirit and life into them all, and made them all serviceable unto his
cleansing. The young man that came to Christ, desirous to know of him wha he
should do to inherit Eternal Life, had (it seems) done many things of good
relation, and tendency, unto this end: but he was like to suffer loss of all
these, unless he did that One thing, which Christ told him was yet wanting,
whereas this being done would have made him perfect, Mar. 10.21. with Mat.
19.21. In like mnnner, when we have prayed long, and often, not seven times
only but seventy times seven, for the obtaining of some great and special
favor from God, and have not all this while, received the least overture of
any favorable answer like to be given us, yet once praying more may (possibly)
raise (as it were) all our former prayers from the dead, and it and they
rejoice together in an honorable conquest over the Almighty, and in dividing
the spoils of Heaven.

Quest. 72.

What is a fourth thing likly to make our Prayers fruitless, if we be not
careful to avoid it?

Answ.

The neglect of a conscientious and diligent use of such means which are
proper, and of divine appointment, for the bringing to pass of such things,
which we ask of God, when the nature of the things which we thus ask is such,
that other means besides Prayer, may, and ought to be used for the effecting of
them. As for example, when we pray for patience, faith, humility, self-denial,
or the like; there being such t^u^hs, such discoveries of God, his mind and
counsel, laid down in the Scriptures which are proper and effectual to work and
increase these (respectively) in the hearts and souls of men, they must be
diligently inquired and sought out, and our judgments and consciences,
seriously, and frequently pressed, urged, and importuned with them accordingly.
When Joshua (with the elders of Israel) had for some good space of time, in
great humility, falling on the Earth with his face, and putting dust on his
head, prayed unto God, that Israel might no more turn their backs upon their
Enemies, God takes him off from further praying, and puts him upon doing of
that which was proper, and requisite to be done by him, and by the people, that
his Petition might, in an orderly and regular way, be granted unto him. And the
Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up: Wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face?
Israel has sinned, etc. Up, sanctify the people, etc. Josh. 6.10, 11, 13. To
desire any thing of God in Prayer, and not to use the means created and
appointed by himself, for the bringing of it to pass, is, in effect to desire
him to pour contempt upon his own ordinance, and to tend in pieces the covering
which with great wisdom, he has made for his own arm.

Quest. 73.

What is the fifth (and the last) thing, which may damage our Prayers in the
hand of God, very much if care be not taken to keep our selves free from it?

Answ.

An impatience, or discontentednesse of mind, that God does not as well comport
with us in our time, as in the matter or substance of our prayer otherwise. He
is not (indeed) offended that we should hasten him all we can, with calling and
crying unto him night and day, with all the importunity of asking. But he is
offended that we should be offended, and make our selves agrieved, when he,
upon reasons of greatest weight, and highest importance for his own glory, and
the general benefit of the world; Yea and our own profit also, shall for a
time, delay the fulfilling of our desires. For he seldom, or never makes any
long tarrying, (as David speaks) with his Answers to the prayers of his People
but upon one, or more of, and commonly upon all the said Considerations. Now
for any man to be dissatisfied, or froward, because God Will not sacrifice such
high and sacred concernments upon the service of his petty interest, or less
considerate desire, is such an importune strain of dis-ingenuity, that it is no
marvel if the zeal of God toward his prayers be cooled, if not quenched by it.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments.
Quest. 1.

WHat occasion, or necessity, was there that such a Body, or Systeme of
Precepts, or Commandments as that which is called the Decalogue, should be
delivered, or issued out by God, either by word of mouth, or writing, unto the
World?

Answ.

Although it was not directly, or immediately delivered unto the world, but
unto a small part of it, namely to the Church of God consisting, at the time
when it was delivered, of the Jewish Nation only, yet it may properly enough be
said to have been delivered unto the world, because this Nation was entrusted
with it (as it was with the rest of the Oracles of God. Romans 3.2.) For the use
and benefit of the world; asvvell as for their own: in which respect this,
together with the rest of the said Oracles, are by the Apostle called, The
E;ements, or rudiments of the World. Coloss. 2.8.20.

The reasons and occasions, for which God was pleased to issue it forth in
words, and writing unto the world, may be conceived to be these.

First, That men might have a perfect Copy, and of Divine authority, always at
hand; by which to correct all those errors and falsifications, to supply all
those defacements and blottings out, to enlighten all those obscurities and
uncertainties of words and meaning, which in process of time, had crept into
the first writing of this Law in the hearts and consciences of men by God,
partly through the negligence and carelessnesse of men in keeping this divine
abstract of their Duty, fair and legible within them, partly (and more
especially) through a long accustomed boldness and daringness in sinning
against the express and clear dictates of it. This was designed and intended
by God in order to some further ends: of which some may be touched presently.

Secondly, God by making the rule, or law of man's obedience, so plain, and
public withal in the world, has taken a course to cause every man both to
know his own sins better then otherwise he was like to have done, and every man
likewise to take better notice of the abundance of sin and wickedness
practiced in the world round about him. Moreover (says the Apostle Romans 5.20)
the Law entered [or rather iterveened, (...), viz. between Adam with his sin,
and condemnation brought upon the world by it, and Christ with his
righteousness, and justification] that the offense might abound; that is, that
the sin of Adam might the better appear to have been abundant in evil. So
that God might very justly; yea equitably subject his whole posterity unto
death for it (for the Law pronouncing the Sinner cursed declares sin to be
another manner of thing far more horrid, and devouring, then otherwise men
were like to conceive of it) or rather, that the offense of that sin might
abound (for (...) is presently explained (...)) that is, that the guilt of sin
might become, and appear likewise, to be much greater, the authority of the Law
prohibiting it, being reinforced a fresh and that immediately, and with
stupendous miracles, by the great Lawgiver himself. Elsewhere the same
Apostle informs us, that by the Law is the knowledge of sin ( Romans 3.20.)
meaning, that very frequently, and in many cases, men come by means of the Law
written, to know those ways and actions to be sinful, which otherwise they
were like never to have known in that relation. See for this Romans 7.7. Yet
neither is this end of God in delivering his Law in writing, his ultimate end,
but subordinate, and subservient to some others. Therefore

Thirdly, The giving of the said Law in writing unto the world, by means of
that property and service of it last mentioned, commends the rich grace of
God in the gift of Jesus Christ, unto the minds and consciences of men. For the
more sin is discovered, and made known in the world, both in the multitude, and
heinousness of the perpetrations of ir, that Grace which takes it away, and
heals the great Evil brought upon men by it, must needs be discovered, and
acknowledged, to be the greater. This point of the counsel of God in sending
the Law into the world, i^ (I conceive) pointed at by the Apostle, in the place
lately cited (in part) Romans 5.20. Moreover the Law entered [or interveened]
that the offense wight abound; [that is, as we before expounded, might appear
to be exceeding great] but where sin abounded, grace did much more abound; as
if he should have said, the greater abundance of sin was discovered to be in
the world, the fuller discovery was (consequentially) made of that
super-aboundancie of the grace of God in Christ, by which that abounding sin
was attoned, pardoned, and done away. And this discovery was that, which God
aimed at in the other. For the further illustration and confirmation of this
Reason, see and consider (at leisure) Romans 3.19. Gal. 3.19.

Fourthly, As God by sending the Law into the world upon those terms, on which
it is come, intended the more perfect discovery of those sins, that were, and
would be committed in the World (as has been said) so iikewise he designed by
it a more effectual restraint of sinning amongst men. And this the Law written
is proper to effect, partly by inlightening the minds and consciences of men to
know their duties at every turn, which it does in the directive part of it:
partly also, and more especially, by threatening and terrifying them under the
commission, and guilt of sin, which it does by the penalty, and curse annexed
to it. This end of God in giving the Law we speak of, is plainly intimated by
the prohibitory, or negative form or tenor, of (well nigh) all the precepts of
it: and is asserted by the Apostle, Gal. 3.19. Wherefore then serves the Law?
It was added [namely unto the Gospel that had been preached before unto
Abraham, ver. 8.] Because of Transgressions, till the Seed should come, to whom
the promise was made, etc. meaning; that notwithstanding the Doctrine, and
substance, of the Gospel had been in the world from the days of Abraham (yea
and long before) yet by reason of the obscurity of it, and sparing discovery of
the grace vouchsafed in it, until Christ, it had little force or efficacy to
turn men from their ways of sin, and wickedness. In which respect, God being
merciful unto the world, and desirous to stop the current of sin amongst men,
by the best means he was able at present (for his wisdom suffered him not to
send his Christ into the world, until many generations after) he was pleased
to give out that fiery Law we speak of (as Moses terms it, Deuteronomy. 33.2.
Whether for the dread and terror, with which it was given, or for the
spirituality or searching property of it) unto the world, being [to make it the
more effectual for the end we speak of, and more awful to the consciences of
men; as the Apostle addeth] ordained [or rather ordered, that is managed,
transsacted; and, as it were, put into it is office, invested with its
Authority, and power] by Angels, [one pronouncing it in the name of God;
others, in great numbers attending and countenancing the action] and this, in
the hand of a Mediator; meaning that God admitting only, Moses (with Aaron his
Brother, who were but as one, in this service) instead of the rest of the
people to come near unto him, when the Law was given, and by him charged them
to keep at a great distance from him, plainly signified both that the people
had about this time, and before, greatly provoked him by sinning; and also that
the present dispensation (the giving of the Law) was not intended for a means
of their reconcilement unto him, without the interposure of a Mediator between
him and them. That the Law does sometimes occasion, and provoke unto sin, and
not restrain from it, is by accident, being contrary to the nature and intent
of the Law, and to the primary intent also of the Lawgiver.

Fifthly, (and lastly) the issuing forth of the Law unto the World, as in one
respect (which is accidental to it) it works, or causes, wrath (as the
Scripture speaks) that is, increase of wrath, or wrath in a greater measure;
So in another respect, more suitable to the nature of it well considered, and
according to the gracious intendment of him from whom it came, it is
serviceable and proper to lead men into such ways by which they may escape
wrath, and obtain the love and favor of God. For (as the Apostle Paul
informs us, Romans 7.12.) The Law is holy, and the Commandment [that is, every
precept of it, or the preceptive part of it] holy, and just, and good: and
consequently: cannot directly, or according to its native tendency, operate any
thing but good, unto men. Now the good intended by God unto Men in giving unto
them this Law in writing, was to assist the Law of nature, or so much of this
Law, as was yet remaining in them, in three particulars of great concernment
unto them, wherein the said Law of nature, as it was now (more generally)
wounded, and maimed, was defective and weak. As,

First, when it restrains men from doing evil (wherein as we lately showed
it is much more serviceable, then the Law of Nature in the remainders of it
within men) it preserves them from wrath, at least from so much of the wrath
of God, which would have been the wages of those sins, had they been committed,
from which they have now been restrained.

Secondly, As it teaches and charge men to do their duties, and things
pleasing unto God, it does that which is proper to interess them in the love
and favor of God. For the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, his
countenance does behold the Upright, Psalm. 11.7.

Thirdly, (and lastly) As it convinces them notwithstanding of sin, and so
causes them to despair of Justification in the sight of God, by their own
works, it imposes a necessity upon them, both to make diligent inquiry whether
there be not a means vouchsafed by God for their Justification
(notwithstanding) and likewise, in case they find that such a means there is,
that they embrace it with all readiness, not disputing the terms hereof,
whatever they be, further then only to know them. And thus we see the truth of
what some have affirmed; viz. that Gods ends in giving the Law, where
Evangelical.

Quest. 2.

What is that small part, or piece of Scripture which is frequently called the
Decalogue, (that is, the Ten words, (Deuteronomy. 10.4.) or a discourse or speech,
consisting of Ten words) commonly The Ten Commandments?

Answ.

It is a Breviate, or Abstract of the whole duty of man, made or drawn up by
God himself: Or, a brief collection of such general heads of duty, which
jointly contain in them whatsoever God does ordinarily, and without some
special manifestation of his will otherwise require of men, either to do, or to
forbear.

Quest. 3.

Whether does the Decalogue, as administered by Moses, concern Christians, so as
to bind their consciences to the observation of it?

Answ.

This Question is of that kind, the resolution whereof is nore troublesome,
then edifying, like unto such suits in Law, where the victory does not balance
the one half of the charge and trouble about the prosecution. For if it be
granted, First, That the Decalogue proceeds from God: and Secondly, is upon
this account, obliging upon the conscience of Christians, it is not material,
nor (indeed) proper, or worthy a man of competent understanding to ask, whether
it binds him as delivered by Moses? For neither did it bind the Jews, simply
as delivered unto them by Moses, no nor yet if we speak strictly, and properly,
as delivered unto them by Moses from God, but as proceeding, obligation-wise
upon them, from God; and would have been equally binding unto them, had it been
sent in like manner, or upon the same or the like terms of conviction that it
did come from God, by the hand or ministry of any other person whatsoever as
well as Moses.

Quest. 4.

But how can the Law we speak of (the Decalogue) be at all, or in any respect,
binding upon the consciences of true Christians, when as the Apostle
administreth this comfort, in express words unto them, that they are not under
the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.14. And elsewhere he says, that, the Law is
not made for [or, not given unto, as the former translation has it] A
Righteous man, but for the lawless, and disobedient, for the ungodly and
sinners, etc. 1 Timothy 1.9.

Answ.

True Christians, or Believers, are said not to be under the Law, because they
are not under the curse, or condemning power of the Law, or because they are
not at the mercy of the Law for their justification; not because they are not
bound in conscience to observe, and do the things required in the Law.
Otherwise they were not liable to offend, or to do any thing that is sinful,
which is expressly contrary to the current of the Scriptures; these from place
to place affirming, that believers themselves offend, and do things that are
sinful, and withal, that sin is a Transgression of the Law, Romans 7.25. Jam.
3.2. 1 John 1.8.10. Gal. 6.1. 1 John 2.1. with Chap. 3, 4. Besides, the
Apostles often press the Authority of the Law to persuade Believers to do
their duty, and to convince and reprove them for the neglect hereof. Romans
13.8.10. 1 Cor. 9.8. and 14.34. Gal. 5.14. Jam. 2.8.9, 10, 11.

When it is said, the Law is not made for a Righteous man, but etc. the meaning
is, The Law as it was delivered upon Mount Sina, accompanied with a Spirit of
Bondage, and with a grievous penalty, or curse (annexed) against those that
should transgress any jot or title of it, was not suited, or fitted by God, to
the state and condition of Righteous and Holy men, as such who thus far and
in this consideration (namely, as they are righteous) need no urging, or
terrifying with threatenings, to do the things required in the Law, being by an
inward principle strongly inclined hereunto; but unto the state and condition
of persons lawless and disobedient etc. that is, which live loosely, wickedly,
and profanely, as if they had no law at all within them, either to inform them
of what was meet and fitting for them to do, or to restrain them from doing
evil. In which respect they have need of such a Law without them, which on the
one hand, might be full of light to teach them their duty, and on the other
hand, full of dread and terror, to restrain them from doing things contrary
unto it. Some interpret the place thus, The Law is not made for the Righteous,
that is, not for the justification of the Righteous, or that righteous men
might merit either justification, or salvation, by the observation of it (in
which sense it seems to have been taught, and urged by the Jewish Doctors,
against whose Doctrine the Apostle cautioneth Timothy, ver. 6.7.) but for the
Lawless, etc. that is, for the conviction, and reformation of wicked and
ungodly persons, that they, through the dread of the vengeance, or curse,
denounced in it against their sinful ways persisted in, might become sensible
how great a necessity lies upon them to take sanctuary at the Gospel, and to
flee for refuge under the wing of Jesus Christ, by believing. But that the Law
we speak of, does, in the directive part of it, concern Righteous men and
Believers, even as such, and this in a very material consideration, is evident
from this saying of the Apostle, ver. 5. For the end of the Commandment [that
is, of the Law, as clearly appears by that which follows, and is generally so
expounded] is Charity [or Love] out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience,
and of Faith unfeigned. Though a thing may be prepared, made, or done, upon
such, or such a special or particular occasion (originally) yet the Agent being
full of Wisdom, and quick of discerning, may have his eye upon, and propose to
himself several other ends, or accommodations, in what he so makes, or does,
besides his answering or supplying that his particular occasion. Hell fire is
expressly said to have been prepared for the Devil and his Angels, [that is,
upon occasion of their Rebellion, and for their punishment] Mat. 25.41. Yet God
apprehending that it would conveniently serve for the punishment of wicked and
ungodly men also, and likewise that in the dread and terror of it, sounded
aloud in the ears of the souls and consciences of men, it would be a proper and
likely means to prevail with many to inquire with all diligence how to escape
it, and consequently to hearken unto, and to embrace the Gospel; He has
declared his purpose to make use of it accordingly for both these ends: and
these in this respect may be called the ends of hell fire, as well as the
punishment of the Devils, though secondary and (as it were) adventitious, in
comparison thereof. In like manner though it be supposed that the Law was given
upon occasion of those wicked persons, which abounded in the world, when it was
given, and which were likely to succeed in no smaller numbers, afterward, to
break the stoutnesse of their wicked hearts, and to put them upon thoughts how
to escape the vengeance of God due unto their sins, yet God knowing that it was
serviceable and proper also to engage holy and good men unto, and to direct
them in the exercise of thar heavenly affection of Christian love, was pleased
to ordain, and nominate this also, as an end intended by himself in it.

Quest. 5.

Whether is justifying Faith required in the Decalogue or Moral Law?

Answ.

There can be no other kind of Faith required, properly, and directly, in the
Moral Law then what was required of man immediately upon his Creation, and
during his state of innocence, because this Law (at least so far as it is
moral) has suffered no alteration, or change, since the first writing of it by
the singer of God, as the Author of nature, in the fleshy tables of the heart
of man. Now that kind of Faith, which since his fall, is required of him in his
justification, supposes him to be a sinner, and consequently sends him out
of himself unto another for his justification; yea unto the sufferings of
another, or unto another that has suffered for him. But such a Faith as this
could not be required of him to his State of Righteousness, or innocence,
because whilst this continued, he was no sinner, nor did he stand in any need
of seeking justification by another. Nor (indeed) during the time and state we
speak of, was there any Faith at all, of one kind or other, required of him
(properly) for his justification, but only for the continuance of his
justification. For he was in possession of a state of Justification, until he
cast himself out of this possession, by sinning voluntarily. And that Faith,
which in conjunction with other duties or works of the Law in their respective
seasons, was required of him for the continuance of his justification, was not
a Faith of like Character, or Notion, with that which now justifies: it was
not a Faith in God, that he would justify him freely through the Redemption
which is in Christ Jesus, nor an assent unto any promise made by God for the
justification of him upon the performance of such, or such terms: but such a
Faith, whereby he believed God to be every ways as great in holiness, in
truth, in goodness, and in all manner of perfection, as he had by the light of
nature, revealed himself unto him to be. From whence (by the way) it is
observable, that Man did not by his fall in Adam lose any ability, or power, to
believe in Christ unto justification; (For how could he lose that in Adam,
which neither Adam, before his fall, nor he in Adam ever received?) and
consequently, that this Faith is not now required of men upon the account of
any ability given unto them under the first covenant (of works) or received in
Adam, but upon the account of such ability or power which is given unto them by
the second Adam, under the second Covenant (of Grace).

Quest 6.

But if justifying Faith be not commanded in the Decalogue, or Moral Law, how
can this Law be said to be perfect, or a perfect Rule of all duties that we
owe, either to God or Men, or our selves? Or is it not a perfect rule in this
kind?

Answ.

The Decalogue is a perfect rule of all Moral duties, which are naturally such,
whether respecting God, our neighbor, or our selves: but there are some duties
which are termed positively Moral, which become such by institution, or special
command, which are not comprehended in the Decalogue; that is, which could not
by the light of reason, or force of conscience be discovered there, or made out
from thence, to be things required of us: nor would they have been duties, or
things required of us by God, had he not given particular charge, or commands
concerning them over and besides the Decalogue. But though they be not
required, or commanded in, or by the Decalogue, or Moral Law, yet they are, and
well may be termed Moral in a sense or in a particular respect as (namely)
positively or institutedly Moral; because being commanded by God, though not
in the Moral Law, yet are men bound to the performance of them by that
obligation unto God in things appertaining to him, which the Moral Law imposes
on them. Hence it is, that though to believe the Gospel be not enjoined by. God
in the Moral Law, yet being otherwise required, or enjoined, by him, he that
does not believe it, makes God a Liar (as John says 1 John 5.10.) which is a
transgression against the Moral Law, being contrary to that most honorable
and reverend esteem of the Truth and faithfulness of God, which the Moral Law
requires of all men in the first Commandment of it. As on the other hand,
John Baptist says of him that believes the Gospel, that he has set to his
Seal that God is true ( Joh. 3.33.) that is, has given a full testimony of the
truth and faithfulness, of God, which is a duty required of every man by the
Moral Law. Thus all the Levitical Ceremonies, during the time that God was
pleased they should continue, were positively Moral unto the Jews, to whom
they were prescribed by him: and if they had neglected, or omitted any of them
in their season, they had transgressed, not only the ceremonial Law; by which
they were particularly enjoined, but the Moral Law also, by which God
commands both them and all men, to worship him with that worship which
himself directs and prescribes unto them, There is the same consideration of
the Sacraments, and their Administration and use in the Gospel. Now justifying
Faith, or to believe in Jesus Christ, is a duty of that kind we now speak of,
(as was lately intimated) viz. positively Moral, and is not to be reckoned, or
found amongst the Duties that are naturally such, and are commanded in the
Decalogue or Moral Law: which though it be a perfect rule in its kind, and
fully sufficient for the ends for which it was given, yet is it not absolutely,
or in all respects perfect: for then there had been no need of any additional
precepts in the Gospel.

Quest. 7.

But if justifying Faith be not required in the Moral Law, whether is it at
all required of the Heathen, who seem to be under the command of this Law only,
and this only as it is written in their hearts and consciences, and not at all
under the command of the Gospel?

Answ.

God in the Gospel speaks immediately and directly unto those only, who live
under the ministry of it, or who have the letter of it, and withal are
capable of understanding it: and unto these, and concerning these he declares
plainly and clearly, upon what terms he is pleased to justify and to save
them; and again, upon what, he will do neither. Concerning others, as Children
before years of discretion, persons destitute of the ordinary light of nature
in their understandings (whether this has befallen them by some accident, as
of sickness, or other providence; or is occasioned by some defect in their
constitution, or corporeal Organs) and so likewise concerning Heathens, amongst
whom, or near unto whom, the Letter or Ministry of the Gospel never came, he
has discovered his mind and counsel touching their, both justification, and
salvation, somewhat more sparingly: Nor is it easy to evince from the
Scriptures so plainly and distinctly upon what terms he purposes to proceed
with these in the great concernments mentioned, but that some doubt may still
remain. And of all the three sorts of persons named, the case of the third and
last (the Heathen) seems to be most obscure. Notwithstandiug these seven
particulars relating to it, are (to me) unquestionable from the Scriptures.

First, That God really and truly desires their Salvation, at least simply
considered, or as men, or members of mankind. This is fully evident from these
places (with many others) 1 Timothy 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9. Tit. 2.11. Heb. 2.9.

Secondly, That as of him, unto whomsoever much is given, much will be required
( viz. to his Salvation) ( Luke 12.48.) so by the rule of equity, and
proportion, to whomsoever little or less is given, little or less will be
required of him. This agrees with that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there
be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not.

Thirdly, That there is no person of mankind, but has received a Talent, one,
or more by a diligent and conscientious use and improvement whereof, he shall
be accepted with his Lord and Master. Mat. 25.14, 15. etc. Luke 19.12, 13. etc.

Fourthly, That in every Nation, he that fears God, and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him, Act. 10.35.

Fifthly, That the forbearance, and long-sufferance, and goodness of God,
which leads men (that is, is apt and proper to lead men, yea and does
actually lead, or bring some men) unto Repentance [and consequently to bless
them with the great blessing of forgiveness of sins, or justification, Act.
3.19. Act. 5.31. Luke 24.47. 2 Pet. 3.9.] has always been, and is yet daily
exercised, toward and amongst the Heathen.

Sixthly, That though there be neither Salvation, nor Justification, in, or by
any other then Christ only, ( Act. 4.12.) Yet both the one, and the other, may
be obtained by him, without the knowledge of him, or belief in him, by name;
and that the generality of the godly Jews of old, were both justified and saved
by him upon these terms, neither knowing him, nor believing in him, by his
Name.

Seventhly, (and lastly) that though many Heathens have neither heard the
sound, nor seen the sight of the letter of the Gospel, yet there is none of
them but have frequently had the (...) or (as the Apostles word is in a like
case, Romans 2.15.) that is, the effect, or import of the Gospel, preached, or at
least, plainly intimated unto them otherways; according to that of the
Apostle, Act. 14.16, 17. Yea that patience and goodness of his, which he
exercises liberally toward them from day to day, and by which he leads them
unto Repentance (as we lately heard) is, constructively preaching, or a
providential preaching of the Gospel, or an holding forth of terms of
reconciliation unto them. The result from these particulars is, that the
Heathen are in some respect under the charge and command of the Gospel (being
all commanded to Repent, Act. 17.30.) and not altogether, or only, under the
rigorous and exacting power of the Moral Law: and consequently that such a
Faith is required of them, which God will impute unto them for Righteousness,
as he imputes the Faith of those, who live under the Orall Ministry of the
Gospel unto them, although it be not so well formed, so articulate and distinct
as this. I might here add, that it is the more general, and declared opinion
of the best Protestant writers, even theirs who are more hardened in their
judgments against the Heathen then some others, as well as of the ancient
Fathers, that God has some that are his, and that shall be saved, in every
Nation under Heaven. This concession supposes, that God does not bind himself
with so much severity to the Orall Ministry, or visible letter of the Gospel,
but that he sometimes works in men such a Faith which will both justify and
save them, by preaching it unto them by the light of nature, the goodness and
bountifulness of his providence, and works of Creation.

Quest. 8.

Why does the Apostle call, the giving of the Law the ministration of Death,
and of Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.7.9. When as you lately showed from the
Scriptures, that Gods intentions therein were Evangelicall, and gracious, and
the same Apostle likewise said elsewhere (as you cited him) that the end of the
Commandment was love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and Faith
unfeigned?

Answ.

As the Temple, though one and the same building, yet aspected the Heavens
contrary ways, one end of it looking toward the West, the other toward the
East, one side toward the South, the other toward the North: so many actions
and dispensations of God, in respect of the contrary tempers and behaviors of
men, who are concerned in them are proper to produce, not only differing, but
even opposite effects; which in that respect, are both of them said to be
intended by God (in his said dispensations) though not with intentions of the
same order. God's intentions in sending Christ into the world, were Evangelical
and gracious, in the highest, Christ himself declaring them accordingly: For
God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved: Joh. 3.17. Yet in another place he says, For
judgment am I come into this world, etc. Joh. 9.39, And Simeon concerning him,
whilst he was yet a child: Behold this Child is set for the fall, and rising
again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against, Luke
2.34. Gods sending Christ into the world, was a proper dispensation and means
to save those that should believe on him, and it was no less proper to render
those inexcusable and worthy death that should reject him. Therefore the
Salvation of some, and the judgment or condemnation of others are both asserted
as the intentions of God in that great dispensation of sending him: but the
former, the Salvation of men, as his primary, or antecedent intention: the
latter the Condemnation of men, as his secondary, or subsequent. In like
manner, the giving of that Law, being a dispensation, and means, proper both to
awaken the consciences of men that are yet in their sins, to consider that they
are under the curse of God, and so to provoke them to inquire after a way of
deliverance, and when they have found it, to walk carefully and conscientiously
in the prescripts of it; and likewise to feal up and fully ratify the
condemnation of those, that shall despise the Gospel, or neglect to make
diligent search how to escape the curse, so peremptorily denounced in the Law
against them ^ in respect of the former, Gods intentions in it may truly be
said to be Evangelical, and the end of it to be love out of a pure heart, etc.
in respect of the latter, it may as truly and properly be called, the
ministration of condemnation, and of death.

Quest. 9.

How does it appear that the Decalogue, or Moral Law, is binding unto any
other persons, or people, but unto those of the Jewish Nation only, considering
that the Preface, or Introduction to it, relates peculiarly unto them, and
seems to contain if not the only, yet the principal ground of that obedience,
or subjection, which is due from men unto it: God spoke all these words saying,
I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of
the House of Bondage? Exodus 20.12.

Answ.

That the Decalogue, or Law we speak of, binds to the observance of it (at
least as far as it is Moral) the consciences of all those that are under the
band, or engagement of the Gospel (who, as was lately, though briefly proved,
are no fewer then the universe of mankind), is evident from hence, viz. because
it is in the several parts or precepts of it, incorporated (as it were) with
the Gospel and made one substance or body of Doctrine with it. Yea,
Gospel-exhortations and the duties herein enjoined, are sometimes pressed upon
the consciences of Believers by the authority of the Law, as requiring the same
things of them, 1 Cor. 9.8.9. Mat. 7.12. Mat. 22.37, 38. 1 John 3, 4. Jam.
2.10, 11. And the Lord Christ himself expressly says, That he came not to
destroy the Law, or the Prophets [the Authorized Expounders of it] nay he
adds: I am not come to destroy them, but to fulfill them: And soon after:
Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven [that is,
shall have no place there, as the next verse expounds it] but whosoever shall
do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven
[that is, shall be highly honored in this Kingdom] Mat. 5.17.19. Therefore

Concerning the Preface prefixed before ths Decalogue, although in the litteral
and typical sense and signification of the words, it relates particularly unto
the Jews, they being the only people, whom God had brought out of the Land of
Egypt, out etc. Yet in the mystical and spiritual import of them, which is
sufficiently declared and asserted in the Gospel, and which is the far more
eminent consideration of them, the said Preface contains matter of an equal
engagement unto obedience lying upon all other Nations in common with the Jews.
For deliverance from under the power and tyranny of Sin, Satan, Death, Hell,
etc. which is typically held forth in the great and famous deliverance of the
Israelites from under the Tyrannical power of Pharaoh, and out of the iron
furnace of Egypt, respects all Nations under Heaven, as well as it does or
ever did the Jews, according to the promise made by God unto Abraham long
before, Genesis 12.3. and not long after confirmed and renewed, Genesis 18.18. and
chap. 22.18.

Quest. 10.

But what may be the reason why God should seek to engage the Jews to own him
for their God and to yield obedience unto his Laws, by mentioning the act of
his Grace and Power toward them in bringing them out of the Land of Egypt,
etc. rather then by insisting upon his far greater obliging grace and favor
unto them, in delivering them from sin, and from the curse due unto it, and a
thousand bitter and most grievous things following it?

Answ.

The wisdom of God judged it meet to reserve the clear and open-faced
discovery of the Gospel, and of the great work of Redemption, for his Son Jesus
Christ, when he should come into the world (2 Timothy 1.10. Hebr. 1.1. with Ephesians.
3.5.) So that though the Gospel was preached unto, and amongst the Jews at, and
before, the time of the giving of the Law ( Gal. 3.8. Heb. 4.2.6.) yet was it
preached unto them with much reservednesse of the luster, beauty, and
brightness of it: God sent it unto them in such an habit, as Rebecca was in,
when she met Isaac, covering her self with a vail, Genesis 24.65. This (probably)
is the reason why God was pleased to make use rather of the shadow then of the
substance, of their great deliverance by Christ, to insure, if it might be,
their free and willing obedience unto his Law: and this the rather, because the
shadow we speak of (their deliverance from Egypt) was a most sacred token, or
pledge from Heaven newly sent and received by them of his great respects, and
favor unto them. And inasmuch as this people were to be patterns and
ensamples, and to lead the way of obedience unto the Law of God, to the rest of
the world, it may be judged worthy the goodness of God toward them, to
animate and enliven their obedience unto it by reminding them of such an
high-favour and privilege, which was appropriately theirs; withal knowing
their temper of being extraordinarily taken with propriety in their privileges
and favors from God.

Quest. 11.

Whether is the Decalogue, or Moral Law (more generally so called) Moral
throughout (I mean, naturally Moral) in every thing that is contained, or
expressed in it? Or, may it not be termed Moral, because it is more generally,
though it be not universally, or in every point, such.

Answ.

I suppose the question does not mind any other of the Ten words, or
Commandments of this Law, or any thing mentioned, or contained in them, but
only the Fourth, and in this, more especially the Day, the seventh day, here
commanded to be sanctified, or kept holy. That the observation, or keeping holy
of this day, according to the tenor and rule of the Commandment, (as viz. by
refraining our selves, and by restaining others that are under us, from
ordinary labor, etc.) neither ever was, nor at this day is known by the light
of nature to be a duty required by God of men, is most probable and next to
that which is unquestionable: For,

First, The ground, upon which God builds his Commandment for the observation
of this day viz. his resting on this day from his six-days work about the
Creation, is not known, nor knowable, by the light of nature. The Scripture
expressly says, that By Faith [that is, by divine Revelation, and the credit we
give here unto] we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God.
Heb. 11.3. If the framing of the worlds by the word of God be not known by the
light of nature, much less is the time that he took to finish it, or on what
day he rested from this work, known unto men by this light.

Secondly, There is express mention made ( Genesis 2, 3.) of the special
interposure of God by way of Institution, to make the observation of this day
to become a duty unto men. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it,
because etc. There is no such course taken with any other of the duties
enjoined in all the rest of the commandments, to bind the practice of them
upon the consciences of men: Therefore the observation of the day pointed unto
in this fourth commandment, is a duty of a different nature and consideration
from those required in the other commandments; they being all naturally
Moral, this only such by institution, or particular command.

Thirdly, If the observation of the seventh day we speak of, were naturally
Moral, as the duties of the other Commandments, and so of perpetual
obligation, as they are, the primitive Christians (generally) and all the
Churches of Christ throughout all succeeding ages, until now, must be
censured, and condemned, as living, and dying, and this (as is most likely)
without Repentance, in a sinful practice against the light of nature: which is
an hard sentence, and hardly Christian, for an inconsiderable party of men to
pass upon the great Congregation of the firstborn in all their Generations. For
it is sufficiently known that these did not walk in the observation of that
day, but of another instead of it.

Fourthly, It is hardly to be thought, or supposed, and yet much harder to be
proved, that there was ever any thing written by God in the fleshy tables of
men's hearts which was legible by the light of nature; but that it has been, by
one or other, at one time or other, actually read by this light. The Apostle
supposes that the Gentiles, which have not the Law do, or may do, by nature
the things contained in the Law [meaning, the things in the Law, which are
naturally Moral] hereby showing the work, or effect, of the Law, written in
their hearts, etc. Romans 2.14, 15. But never (I believe) was there any thing
done by the light of nature, no not amongst those in whom this light shined in
her greatest, brightness, by which it may appear that they were led by the
guidance of this light, to the observation of the seventh day, which the fourth
Commandment injoyneth. It is not unlike but that some of the ancient
Philosophers, and Poets, amongst the Heathen, being inquisitive after the
learning, manners, and practices of Foreign Nations, (as many of them were)
did by hearsay, amongst many others Jewish Notions, Doctrines, and Customs,
(express mention whereof is found in several of their writings) come to
understand what they (the Jews) held, and practiced about the seventh, or
Sabbath Day also, and did accordingly insert some particulars of their
knowledge in this kind, in their writings, as Hesiod, Homer, Callimachus, and
others. But nothing can be so much as probably concluded from hence, that
therefore they knew anything by the light of nature, concerning the holiness,
which God by special institution (as we heard) has put upon that seventh day,
of which the fourth Commandment speaks: much more probable it is that they
might have some glimmerings of an apprehension, that such a proportion of time,
as one day in seven, was reasonable and fitting for intermission of bodily
labors, that they might be at liberty to attend upon religious affairs. But
unless we shall suppose, that (which I suppose was never supposed, or affirmed
by any) it may be known by the light of nature how long God was in creating the
world, and that he was six days precisely, neither more nor less, employed
therein, it is not imaginable that by this light it should be discovered unto
any man, that the day specified in the 4th. Commandment, should be sanctified
by God for Religions ends and purposes, rather, or before, any other.

Fifthly, If it be to be found written in the book of Nature, that the day
defined in the fourth Commandment, ought, according to the will of God, to be
religiously observed above other days, then whatsoever, said, or done, is of a
direct tendency to take away this honor from it, and to cast it upon another
day, must needs be sinful. This proposisition is of unquestionable truth:
because the contents of the book of nature are nothing but the unchangeable
righteousness of God. But several things have been both said and done,
without sin, of a direct tendency to alter the religious property of that day,
and to give it to another: Therefore the religious observation of this day is
not naturally Moral. The truth of the latter proposition is demonstrable from
the Scriptures, where several things are found of a direct tendency to invite
and persuade men to substitute another day, in the place of that, for their
Religious Affairs.

Not to insist upon those places and passages in the Old Testament, in which
many of the learned Fathers apprehended, that there was a plain Overture given,
even in those days, that there should be a change of the Judaical Sabbath, or
seventh day; into the eighth, by the Messiah; as, in the appointment of
Circumcision on the eighth day, so in the Title of the Psalms entitled, Pro
Octava, for the eighth, (as Psalm. 6. and 12.); in the number of the souls that
were saved in Noah's Ark, which was eight; again in that of Ezekiel. 43.27.
(which has more light in it then the rest) And when these days are expired,
it shall be that upon the eighth day, and SO FORWARD, the Priests shall make
your burnt offerings upon the Altar, and your peace offerings, and I will
accept you, says the Lord God. Some are confident that David prophesied of
this eighth day, as to be made Sacred by the Lord Christ: This is the day which
the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it. Psalm. 118.24. Some
likewise conceive that the same Prophet looked toward the Christian Assemblies
that should meet on the Lords day; in these words: Thy people shall be willing
in the day of thy power, in the Beauties of holiness, etc. Psalm. 110.3. And
lastly, some argue to the same point (and this with no slender probability)
those words of the Prophet Haggee (the Apostle himself much favoring their
design in this kind by his citation and application of the words, Heb. 12.26.)
Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the Heavens and the Earth,
etc. Hag. 2.6. I only mention these things, as judged, by men of great
sanctity, and deep insight into the Scriptures, sufficient overtures from God
given long since unto the Jews, of his purpose to give them another day in
exchange for their seventh-day Sabbath, in due time. And, that the blessing and
holiness of this day are transferred by God, and his Authority, unto another
day, even that which stands next to it; and from the times of the Apostles has
been known by the name of, The Lords day; the Gospel to an unbiassed judgment,
and attentive conscience, makes sufficiently manifest.

First, Our Savior takes notice of the custom and manner observed by men,
who make Weddings, or other great Feasts, that in case a person less honorable
be placed in the uppermost room, and a person more honorable then he comes,
the maker of the Feast desires the former to give place unto the latter, the
less honorable unto the more honorable, ( Luke 14.8, 9.) which is but reason,
and consonant to the light of nature: in like manner the Raising up of Jesus
Christ from the dead being a greater and more honorable Achievement, or act
of God, then the Creation of the World; it is but good reason to conceive that
God should cause the former to give place unto the latter, and to deliver up to
the day hereof, that honor of blessing and sanctification, which the day of
its remembrance had received from him. Nor is it meet to think, that God who
commands men to give honor to whom honor belongs ( Romans 13.7) should
himself give honor where less honor is due, and deny it where it is due in a
far greater measure or degree.

Secondly, If Gods rest, or refreshing, after, or upon, the finishing of the
work of Creation, was a ground, or motive unto him (as the express letter of
the Commandment affirms it to have been) of his Separating and sanctifying a
day for a memorial of it; we cannot reasonably judge, or with the salvage of
the unchangeablenesse of God, but that his pleasure, acquiescence, and rest, in
his raising of his only begotten Son from the dead, being of a more precious
and dear resentment unto him then the other, should be honored with a day of a
Solemn and Sacred remembrance as well as it. Yea and inasmuch as he did not
judge it meet, or agreeable to his Wisdom and goodness, to devote or
sanctify any greater proportion of time for rest, and religious occasions,
then one day in seven (or every seventh day ordinarily) lest men should be
straightned for time in their ordinary businesses, and employments: and
considering withal, that the day of his rest from the works of Creation, had
now lived in honor through many Generations, yea for some thousands of years,
his pleasure was, not to consecrate another or a new day, but to take off the
burden of this honor from the shoulder of that day, and to lay it upon the
day of his Sons Resurrection,

Thirdly, The Jews did nothing, no not in the least circumstance, of time, or
otherwise, about the crucifying of Christ, but what the hand and counsel of God
had determined before to be done [that is, to permit to be done] Act. 4.28. Now
then, if the Counsel and purpose of God had been to continue, or establish,
the Jewish Sabbath, under the Gospel, and to make that Christian, would he not
have so interposed by his providence about the time of Christ's death, that the
third day, the day of his riseing from the dead, should have been that day, I
mean the last, not the first day of the week? For had it been ordered thus,
there had been no place left for any scruple, or question about the alteration,
or continuance of the day. And I make little question, but that as it was
providentially ordered by God that he should remain in the hands of death, so
long as, and no longer then, now he did, that so the Scriptures might be
fulfilled in his rising again the third day (1 Cor. 15, 4.) So likewise the
time, or day, of his dying was by the same hand so disposed, that the third day
after the day of his rising again, might be the eighth day from the Creation
(that is, the first day of the week) that the Scriptures herein also might be
fulfilled, which (as we lately showed) did foretell, though somewhat darkly,
his rising again on this day.

Fourthly, From sundry passages of Scripture we learn, that it has been a
thing frequent with God, and practiced by him from the beginning, to consult
and provide for the remembrance and honor of his great, and most considerable
actions whether performed immediately by himself, and with the unbareing of his
own arm, or mediately by men, through his special interposure and strength,
partly by setting himself some Character of solemnity upon the time, or day of
their respective achievements, partly by teaching and prompting men by his
Spirit to do it. Peruse at leisure, and consider (upon this account) these
Scriptures, Gen, 2, 3. with Exodus 20.11. Exodus 12.42. Exodus 13.3, 4, 6.10.
Esther. 9.20.21, 22. Joh. 10.22. Now it is true, that for the remembrance with
honor of his other great works, he judged an Anniversary, that is, one yearly
solemnity, sufficient, for the reason (I suppose) lately mentioned (namely,
because he would not by too frequent avocations to religious services, make any
wider breach upon men's time for their secular employments then was needful),
Only for that most signal and glorious work of the Creation, he judged a weekly
solemnity but convenient and meet. Now then it is in no degree probable, that
God should bring forth the firstborn of his works, a work so
super-transcendently glorious and wonderful, as the raising of Christ from the
dead, and leave it unto the world without the special and appropriate solemnity
of a day for the remembrance of it; an honor which (as we have heard) he has
not judged meet to deny unto other of his works of a far inferior
consideration unto this. But certain it is, that there is no day, at least, no
weekly day (and an anniversary is much beneath it) characterized with any
blessing from God for the remembrance of this work of his, though it has the
pre-eminence amongst and above all its fellows, unless it be concluded, that
He, or men authorized by him in that behalf, have taken the Crown of Blessing,
which was first set upon the head of a former Sabbath and has herewith Honored
and Crowned the day of this great and blessed Work. And

Fifthly, (and lastly) that this has been done both by Christ himself, upon,
and after, his resurrection, and by his Apostles, who by their example have
more then invited, even conscientiously engaged, the whole Christian world
after them to the observation of this day, is sufficiently manifest by the
light of sundry passages in the Gospel.

First, The Lord Christ himself began to celebrate and solemnize the day we
speak of, on the individual day of his Resurrection, by an holy and Heavenly
conference with some of his Disciples upon the way; and by administering the
Sacrament afterward (as is exceeding probable, and was the sense of some of
the Fathers, and is argued and concluded by many Arguments by some (though
denied by others) from these words, Luke 24.30. And it came to pass as he sat
at meat with them, he took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them.)
And it is very considerable to the case in hand, that the Evangelist being to
relate those Sabbath-like works of Christ mentioned in the entrance of his
Relation, ver. 13. gives special notice of the day wherein they were wrought by
him. And behold, two of them went THE SAME DAY, etc. namely, that very first
day of the Week, on which Christ arose from the dead, as appears ver. 1. with
the context along to the 13th. ver. Now there can (I suppose) no reason of
moment be given why the Holy Ghost should give such particular knowledge of the
day, on which the two Disciples travailed to Emmaus, but only to signify that
Christ on this day began to sanctify the day of his Resurrection by his
example in religious exercises, and to lead the way to all that should believe
in him, to do likewise. Again

Secondly, The Evangelist John, gives notice of another appearance of Christ
unto his Apostles assembled together on the same day toward the evening, and
of sundry gracious applications of himself unto them, Joh. 20.19, 20. etc. who
likewise gives double notice (as it were) of the day wherein these things were
done. Then the same day at evening [that is, in the latter part of the day
natural, which the Jews, midday being past, were wont to call, Evening] being
the first day of the week, when the doors were shut, where the Disciples were
assembled, etc. ver. 19. Having sufficiently notified the day of this
appearance of Christ, in these words, Then the same day, why he should add,
being the first day of the week, hardly any other reason can be given, but only
to commend in special manner unto Christians the remembrance of this day, the
first day of the week; as having now somewhat more then ordinary put upon it. So

Thirdly, The same Evangelist, in the same Chapter, ver. 26. gives knowledge of
another appearance of Christ unto his Disciples assembled, when Thomas with
them, who was absent at the former. But withal, is careful to inform us that
this appearance also was made by Christ on the same day of the week with the
former, not mentioning any thing either spoken or done by him, in any of the
six days between. And after eight days he reckons inclusively, as Luke
9.28. Compared with Mat. 17.1 and Mark. 9.2.] again his Disciples were within
-- then came Jesus, the doors being shut, etc. Upon this passage a Learned
Writer observes, that, The Disciples, having once enjoyed the presence of
Christ on the day of his Resurrection, seem to have adjudged, consecrated, or
assigned? the same day to Religious assemblings ever after: Whereof he makes
proof by pointing to several Texts of Scripture Videntur Discipuli semel
resurrectionis die Domini experti praesentiam, eundem diem in posterum,
solennibus conventibus dicasse.
Of which we shall take some further notice presently. For

Fourthly, That it was indeed the practice of the Saints in the Apostles days
to solemnize the day we speak of, the first day of the week, with a religious
assembling of themselves for the worship of God, and other exercises of their
Christian profession, sufficiently appears to him that is not contentious, but
willing to obey the truth, from these two or three Scriptures (compared
together, and with those lately argued) Act. 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. Act. 2.1. In
the first of these Texts, we read, And upon the first day of the Week, when the
Disciples came together [meaning, after their usual and accustomed manner] to
break bread [that is, to administer and partake of the Lords Supper, as
Expositours generally and without scruple interpret] Paul preach unto them,
etc. In the second, the Apostle writes to the Corinthians thus, Upon the first
day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has
prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come. The notation of the
circumstance of time in both these passages, would be very impertinent, and
without all favor of edification, unless it be supposed that the intent and
purpose of the Holy Ghost herein, was, to commend the day specified, upon some
special account unto Christians: Which is not lightly imaginable what other it
should be, but to give them to understand, that this was the day weekly
observed by Christians: in these times to meet together (in their holy
Assemblies) as they had been directed and taught both by the example of Christ
himself (of which we spoke lately) and likewise by precept from the Apostles,
by whose Authority and direction all things, appertaining to Government, and
order, in and about the worship of God in Christian Churches, were established
and observed. Nor can there any good reason be given why the Holy Ghost, in
both the places mentioned, should not as well have recorded and directed, the
day of the month (together with the notation of the Month it self) as the day
of the week, had there not been somewhat more edifying and considerable in the
one, then in the other.

For the third (and last) of the three places, the contents of it are these:
And when the days of Pentecost were fully come, they were all with one accord
in one place [meaning, all the Apostles with the other Christians that
consorted with them, to the number of an hundred and twenty, Cap. 1.15.] And
suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a rushing mighty Wind -- And
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, etc. That the day, on which the
magnificence of Heaven rejoiced over the world to send the Holy Ghost down unto
it in that miraculous manner, which is recorded in the former part of this
Chapter, was the first day of the week, though it be not in so many words
affirmed by the Holy Ghost, yet may it be, with evidence enough, concluded from
the computation of the days of Pentecost, which are here said to have been
fully come [or fulfilled]; as likewise from the convention of the Apostles,
with the rest of the Christians near adjoining, in the same place, on this day.
There are learned and grave Authors, both ancient and modern, who are thus
minded, and seem to make the proof of the point of no difficulty at all. It
gives large credit, and countenance to the Opinion, That the Apostle John
records that it was the Lords day also, on which he was in the Spirit [that
is, with the Spirit, as the praeposition (...), is translated, Mar. 1.23.
meaning that the Holy Ghost came on this day upon him, and surrounded him with
light and glory] presenting him with those mysterious and prophetical Visions,
recorded in the book of the Revelation, Chap. 1.10. Now (as we argued lately
upon a like occasion), it had been beneath the wisdom of so great an Apostle,
to make such a treasure of the circumstance of time, or of the day of the week,
when the Spirit came in that extraordinary manner upon him, as to make so
particular a record of it, had he not known it to have been a matter of weight
and moment to commend it hereby unto Christians, or a day intended by God to be
observed by them, and on which he purposed to make richer discoveries of
himself, unto those that should now attend on him (as it seems John in special
manner did) than on other days. Much more might be argued (and has been
argued by others) to prove the day of the Jewish Sabbath exauthorized and
discharged by God, upon the Resurrection of Christ. And that the day hereof was
substituted by his will and appointment, made known unto his Son Jesus Christ;
and by him, unto the Apostles; and by them, unto the Churches, in it is stead;
some express themselves in the point thus, As Christ ordained the Supper in
stead of the Pascal Lamb; so has he appointed the first day of the week in
place of the last.

Quest. 12.

But how can the Fourth Commandment be termed, Moral, or be numbered amongst
the Commandments, that are such, if the day therein required to be kept holy,
be of another nature; and such, to the observation whereof men are not
perpetually obliged, but only for a time?

Answ.

The services, or things enjoined in the Commandment, being Moral, and such
which are indispensably, and for ever, binding; though applied by the
Commandment unto a day, which is in it self alterable upon occasion; yet may
the Commandment, in respect thereof, be truly and properly enough called,
Moral; yea, though the said day be actually, and de facto, altered. The command
of God requiring of men a cessation from bodily labors, and worldly
employments, one day in seven, or every seventh day, that they may be at
liberty, both in body, and mind, to attend upon the worship of God, and great
concernments of their souls, is naturally moral, and expressive of that
righteousness of God, which is unchangeable; or of one particular strain, or
ray of it. Nor is the day nominated and appointed by the Commandment, properly
ceremonial, or of like consideration with other days of Feastival Solemnities
appointed by the Levitical Law; because it is not properly, or upon such terms
abrogated, as they are, as viz. without any other to succeed them in their
respective services, but is only exchanged, by him, that was, and still is, the
Lord of it; having another day of a friendly and rich sympathy with it, a day
of rest and refreshing unto God, as it also was; only more worthy and
honorable, given unto it to succeed in it is stead. Besides, neither is the day
we speak of, wholly, or in respect of every thing found in it, exchanged: it
has somewhat of a Moral consideration; in respect of which it may be said
still to retain its authority and binding Power, and to exercise them in its
Successor: For it is not merely, or simply a day, or a space of time
containing either 12 or 24 hours, but a SEVENTH day, or such a space of time,
which never begins, or returns, until six times as much as it self, has
passed by and gone before, and then continues but its own proportion, or
period: and so gives place again, and waits, until six days more of equal
duration (respectively) with it self, be fulfilled, and then returns of
course. Now such a Seventh day as this, is an equitable, or reasonable
proportion of time, and may accordingly be estimated by the light of Nature;
For men (ordinarily), yea and laboring beasts also, to rest from their labor
and toil; and for men, upon this opportunity, to exercise themselves in duties
of Religion, in acquainting themselves with God, and with the manner of his
true worship and service; that knowing these things and practicing accordingly,
they may be found meet to be saved, and made eternally happy by him: That this
proportion of time, a seventh day, is most competent for the occasions and ends
now mentioned, is not a mystery or secret above the reach of nature, has been
already hinted; and might be sufficiently proved by many sayings yet extant in
the writings of such men, who have been the sons of no higher an inspiration;
but that this has been done, to all reasonable satisfaction, by many other. So
that there is ground large enough, on which to judge and conclude the Fourth
Commandment to be Moral, although the day therein specified, be exchanged for
another.

Quest. 13.

But when God has, in plain and express words, enjoined the solemn observation
of a particular day, is it meet or safe, for men, to Substitute, or Obse ve
another day instead thereof, without a Warrant, or Command from God, in like
plainness, and expressness of words, so to do?

Answ.

We have a Warrant, and Command from God, in equal plainness and expressness
of words, to hearken unto, and to obey his Son Jesus Christ, in all things that
he should teach, or say unto us ( Matthew. 17 5. Luke 9.35. compared with Acts
3.22, 23.). And Christ has taught and said unto us, as plainly, that they
which hear his Apostles, hear him; as on the other hand, he that despises
them, despises him ( Luke 10.16.) yea, and God himself that sent him. Again,
the Apostles plainly require of us to follow them, even as they follow Christ,
1 Cor. 4.16. and 10.1. 2 These. 3.17. Now it has been lately showed and proved,
First, that Christ himself observed the first day of the week (the day of his
Resurrection). Secondly, that his Apostles likewise observed it; and the
Churches by order, and direction from them. See the Answer to the Eleventh
Question of this Chapter.

Besides, God pouring out of his Spirit upon all flesh, more plentifully under
the Gospel, then He judged meet to do under the Law; and vouchsafing much more
large, and clear discoveries of himself, which are proper means to make men
Spiritual, I mean, able, quick, and ready to apprehend, conceive, and discern
his mind and will, though but overtur'd and intimated unto them, expects
accordingly more ingenuity from them; and that things agreeable unto his Will
and Pleasure, should of themselves, still be so near at hand unto them, that
they shall not need any Grammatical demonstrations, or enforcements from the
Letter to convince them; but that they should take the impression of such
things, even from Promises that are but of a Collateral, and somewhat remote
Affinity with them. It is a true and worthy saying of Musculus to this point.
Animus vere pius, voluntatique Dei obsequens, non solum ea praestat, quae
express per verbum Dei voluntatem Dei manifestant, sed etaim quaecunque ex
verbo Dei colliguatur (Musc. in Mat. 7.21.) Quemadmodum boni servi est non
solum verbis heri sui expressis, sed and nutibus illius obsequi.
A Mind truly pious, and obsequious to the Will of God, will not only perform,
and do those things which are manifest by the express Word of God, to be the
Will of God; but even those things also, which may upon any reasonable terms
be gathered from the Word of God: As it is the property of a good servant, not
only to obey the express words of his Master, but even such signs of his Will,
which he either makes by the cast of his eye, or moving of his head. And, long
before him, Bernard writing to persons Religiously devoted (according to the
manner of those times) tells them, Non est vestrum circa communia languere
praecepta; neque solum attendere quid praecipiat Deus, sed quid velit: Bernard.
Ad fratres de monte, etc.
That it was not for them to languish away in the practice of ordinary or
common Duties: nor only to attend, or mind, what God commands, [meaning,
directly, and in plainness of words] but what he wills, [that is, whatsoever
may be made out from the Scriptures to be pleasing to him]. Yea, the Apostle
John himself clearly distinguishes between keeping the Commandments of God,
[that is, the express and broad-faced Commandments of God] and doing the things
that are pleasing in his sight. 1 John 3.22. So that those significations, or
intimations, of the Will of God, for the change of the last day of the week
into the first, which have been mentioned, were they by many degrees less
Argumentative that way, then we have found them to be, were yet sufficient to
overruled the Judgments and Consciences of persons Spiritually minded, and
obsequiously devoted to the service of God, into a submission unto his Will in
that case.

Quest. 14.

How is the Decalogue to be divided? Or, is there any ground in Scripture for
the Common distribution of the ten words thereof, into two Tables?

Answ.

That these Ten Words were written by God himself, in two Tables of stone, and
this twice over, or at two several times (the two first written, having been
broken by Moses in his zealous indignation against the Idolatry of the people,
Exodus 32.19.) is evident from the Scriptures, Exodus 24.12. Exodus 32.15, 16.
Deuteronomy. 5.22. and 10.1, 2. Only here is nothing affirmed, either concerning the
number, or the particulars of the words written in the one Table, or the other.
It is most like that they were written in the Tables, in that order, wherein
they are from place to place rehearsed: Yea, from the two distinct Natures, and
Relations of the Commandments, some of them more particularly, and immediately
respecting, the deportment of men toward God; others, their deportment toward
one another, and every man's toward himself, (which distinction is taken notice
of, and approved by Christ himself in the Gospel, Mat. 22.37, 39. Mark 12.29,
30, 31.): It is next to unquestionable, that those of the first sort, more
directly respecting God, were written by themselves in one, the former of the
Tables; and the rest, in the other. The assignment of the four first, unto the
first Table, and the six remaining, unto the latter (which is the division
commonly received amongst us) has nothing in it (as far as I can judge) that
needs offend, or scruple any man. For though the fourth Commandment seems to be
of a mixed nature, and requires of Masters of Families, that they permit that
indulgence, or respite from bodily labor, unto their servants, and those under
their power, which God has judged meet to be allowed unto them, as well as
their own attendance upon the worship of God; yet, in as much as that rest from
labor, is imposed by God upon a Spiritual account, and for Religious ends, the
Commandment (I take it) may, without error, pass in the retinue of those, that
stand in special relation unto God, and so be adjudged to the First Table. The
Papists to accommodate (as it seems) their Doctrine and Practice of
Image Worship, Of the First and Second Commandment (as we account, and
distinguish) make but one: and because they know themselves engaged to find,
and acknowledge the number of Ten, therefore to heal their absurdity of
Addition, they apply a greater of Multiplication; importunely rending, and
making two of the Tenth. So that they have but three Commandments to dispose of
to the First Table.

Quest. 15.

Why does the Apostle Paul affirm the Law to be Spiritual? saying, For we know
the Law is Spiritual, Romans 7.14.

Answ.

Because, as Spirits are little of substance or bulk of Matter, but of
incredible activity, force, and power, extending their operative vigor unto
very many effects, which ordinary causes cannot reach, or produce: so the Law
of God being a very brief Systeme of Doctrine, and consisting of few words, is
of a very fiery, active, and penetrating nature (it is called, a fiery Law,
Deuteronomy. 33.2.) intermedling continually, and having to do with all the world: and
this not only in respect of all they do, or forbear to do, outwardly; but in
respect likewise of all that stirs or moves, though never so softly, or
secretly, within them; with their thoughts, purposes, intentions, desires,
hopes, fears; yea, with their habits, dispositions, inclinations, propensions,
even whilst they are asleep and move not; yea, it has to do with all these,
whether they be regular and good, or whether inordinate and sinful), and this
upon very authoritative and high Terms, commanding and approving the former, as
excellent and worthy; judging and condemning the latter, as deserving no lesser
or leighter punishment, then Death. In respect of this so vast a
comprehensiveness of the Law, David addresseth himself unto God in this
Meditation. I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad [or large, as the former translation read it] Psalm. 119.96.
Meaning, that he was able tp estimate and compute the sum total of all that
excellency and worth of wisdom and goodness, and other perfections, which he
had at any time met with in the greatest, highest, and most worthy actings of
men: but in the Commandment or Law of God, he descried such a vastness of
wisdom, righteousness, and goodness; what in the frame, matter, and substance
of it; what in the design and projection of it; that he was put past his
Arithmetique, and was not able to give either unto himself, or others, a just
or full account of them. The Jewish Doctors have such a saying as this amongst
them; The Holy Blessed God, left nothing in the world, wherein he gave not some
Commandment to Israel. And whereas Moses himself records that the two Tables
of Stone, in which the Law was written by God, were written on both their
sides, even on the one side, and on the other, ( Exodus 32.15.) some conceive
that hereby it was signified, that the Law pierces quite through and through a
man; and takes hold, not only of the outward behavior of men, as well in
words, as in deeds, but of the most inward, close, and least perceptible
motions and stirrings of the heart or mind within them. Yea (doubtless) that
which the Apostle speaks concerning the Word of God, ( Heb. 4.12.) is meant
chiefly, if not only, of the Law of God, in conjunction with those explications
and interpretations of it, which, upon occasion, have been given by the holy
Ghost, and are found scattered here and there in the Scriptures, both of the
Old and New Testament. For the Word of God (says he) is quick, and powerful,
and sharper then any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing a-sunder of
the soul and spirit; and of the joints, and marrow; and is a discerner [(...),
an exquisite, or accurate, discerner] of the thoughts and intents of the heart.
Now, the intents of the heart, are (in Solomon's Metaphor) the most inward, or
nethermost parts of the belly, Prove. 20.27. the deepest waters in the hearts
and souls of men, beyond, or beneath which, there is nothing bred or conceived
in them: The Law of God then, piercing, and passing through, and searching all
along that vast tract and region of the Soul, where there are things
innumerable, of smaller and greater consequence, appertaining to the cognizance
and judicature of It, having an authoritative and righteous saying to every
thing (without exception) that is found here, even to the most secret and
retired intentions of the soul, yea and commanding, and calling for, such
things which are yet wanting in this numberless retinue, may well be called,
Spiritual.

Quest. 16.

But how must the Decalogue, or Law be interpreted and understood, that such a
spiritualness, as you have described, may be asserted unto, and found in, It;
in as much as the mere letter of it seems not to promise, or to imply, any
such thing: the thousandth part of things commanded, or forbidden, not being
here mentioned, or expressed?

Answ.

The just sense of the Law, and meaning God in it, is to be gathered and
inferred from the writings both of the Old and New Testament; where the holy
Ghost has in several places, and upon several occasions, declared sometimes
one part, or precept of it, and sometimes another: by the diligent observing,
and comparing of which together, certain general Directions and Rules, may be
framed (as several have been by learned men, studious and expert in the
Scriptures); by the light and guidance of which it may be so interpreted and
understood, and this with truth, that the spirituallity of it (in the sense
declared) will sufficiently appear, and be acknowledged. The Jewish Doctors,
out of the curiosity of their observations, have (as they affirm) found in the
books of Moses the two affirmative Commandments in the Law (the fourth and the
fifth, for all the rest are negative) multiplied in their explication, into
248. (according to the number of joints in a man's body) which they call
commanding precepts, and the eight negative Command, into 365 negative commands
(according to the number of the days in a year) which they term precepts
forbidding. Both numbers added together make 613. which (it seems) is the just
number of the Letters, in the Ten Commandments. The observations, if true, or
near unto truth, are not altogether useless.

Quest. 17.

What are the Rules or Directions you speak of, which are of such use for the
better and more perfect understanding of the Law, and of the several precepts
of it?

Answ.

The principal and most useful, are 20. in number, the first of them may be
this. The proper End of every Commandment, is to lead and govern the sense and
interpretation of that Commandment. So that, as, on the one hand whatsoever
directly contributeth toward this end (being not repugnant to the end of
another, as great, or greater then it) is to be looked upon, as commanded
therein; so on the other hand, whatsoever is contrary to this end, and of a
direct tendency to hinder it, is to be reckoned amongst the things forbidden in
this Commandment. Now the end (I mean the appropriate end) of every
Commandment (respectively) is not hard to be found out; A little consideration
will discover it unto us.

Quest. 18.

What is a Second Rule?

Answ.

Every affirmative precept, includes his negative, as, on the other hand,
every negative, his affirmative. This rule is but rational, and the reason of
it near at hand. For if God commands such, or such a thing to be done, it is
plain that he forbids the doing of that which is contrary to it. Again, when
he restrains or forbids any thing, it is as plain that his will and
meaning is, to have that done which is opposite to it. If he commands
Children to honor their Parents, or inferiors, their superiors, he does by
the virtue and import of this Command, forbid them to neglect, despise, or
dishonor them. So when he forbids men to murder, he does hereby enjoin them
to be careful for the preservation of the lives of men, and to use all due
means, when occasion requires, for the maintaining, and safe guarding of them:
This Rule gives light to the sense and mind of God in all the Commandments.

Quest. 19.

What is the Third Rule?

Answ.

Where one sin or vice is expressly forbidden, all things homogeneal hereunto,
that is, of like nature, kind, or consequence, are forbidden likewise. It being
requisite in the tenor and frame of all Laws, (and observed accordingly in
all, as well humane, as divine) that they be as concise, and compendious in
words, as well may be, their sense and interpretation had need be directed by
some such rule as that now mentioned: because otherwise their restrictive
authority will not reach unto the one half of things intended to be restrained
by them. But to give a little light to the meaning of the rule by an instance
or two. Where Murder is expressly forbidden (as in the 7th. Commandment) all
assaulting of men by force, all intended affrighting them, all wounding or
maiming their bodies, the doing of any thing without just Cause, that is like
to cause grief, or sadness of heart, unto any, the withholding the wages, or
hires of poor laboring men, the detaining of their pledge, if they have
occasion to use it for their Livelihood, the refusing to pay moneys, when they
are due, unto such persons, who live and subsist, they with their Families, by
the employment of their moneys in any Trade, or course of life: all these with
many others, being related in affinity unto Murder, and having a direct
tendency to the wasting and destroying of the lives of men, are prohibited by
God under the title, or name of Murder. In like manner, in the prohibition of
stealing are intended and included, all such actions, which directly tend to
the impairing, or ruining a man's outward estate (yea, and inward also) as the
setting of his house on fire, the putting of Cattle into his Cornfieldsd, the
setting, or leaving open gates, or breaking his fence, by means whereof Cattle
are like to endamage him, all deceit in dealings, circumventing or
overreaching in bargains, etc. These with many others of like consideration,
being of the same consequence with stealings to the diminishing of a man's
estate, are restrained in the same Commandment with it.

Quest. 20.

What is a Fourth Rule?

Answ.

Where any duty is commanded (as there is, one or more in every Commandment,
as appears by the second Rule, lately given) there the u e of all regular and
lawful means which are necessary, or proper, for the qualifying, preparing, or
enabling men for the practice and performance of this duty, is commanded
likewise. The reason of this Rule also is not far off. For men being generally
indisposed unto virtuous actions, and such which are their duty to do, he that
enjoyneth them such actions, must be conceived to injoin them (as it were) of
course, the use of such means, which are proper and likely to remove that
indisposition, and in the stead thereof, to introduce, or raise an inclination,
or willingness in the Soul, unto these actions, or duties. Yea the neglect of
the use of means, that are proper to prepare and sanctify men for the
performance of a duty, is in reason, a greater sin, and for the most part more
burdening the conscience, yea and more provoking in the sight of God, then the
nonperformance of the duty it self. The meaning of this Rule is obvious and
plain enough, and needs no further explication.

Quest. 21.

What is your Fifth Rule?

Answ.

Where any thing vicious, or sinful, is forbidden, there all things directly
tending toward the perpetration of the sin, are forbidden also, yea though
this perpetration does not always follow upon them. As for Example: Where
stealing is forbidden, Idleness, Slothfulness, Prodigality, Pride of Life,
Affectaion of costlinesse in a man's House-furniture, Table, Apparel, etc. above
his standing-Revenues, acquaintance, and familiarity with persons addicted to
these evil practices (with many the like) are forbidden also: because though
all that be Idle, Prodigal, etc. do not actually steal, yet these evil
demeanours, Idleness, Prodigality, etc. have an express tendency to bring men
to poverty, and want of things needful: in which condition they are under a
sore Temptation to put forth their hand unto this Wickedness. Pro. 30.9. and
6.30. The reason of this Rule also is easy to be conceived. For men being of
themselves (more generally) prone, more then enough, unto that which is evil,
he that commands them to refrain from it notwithstanding, does vertually, and
by evident consequence, command them to refrain all such occasions, ways and
doings, which are like to awaken, strengthen, and actuate such evil
propensions in them.

Quest. 22.

What is the Sixth Rule?

Answ.

Where any one virtuous act, or duty, or worthy course of Life is commanded,
under this, and together with it, all other actions, and practices, of affinity
with it, and of a like consequence, and concernment, are commanded likewise.
Where Parents, Fathers and Mothers, are commanded to be honored by us, we are
here commanded even for their sakes, to behave our selves soberly, discreetly,
and commendably in the sight of all men, keeping our selves free from scandal,
from all just reproach and reproof from men: and so to be observant of their
counsels, obedient unto their commands, ready to vindicate and maintain their
reputations, as far as with a good conscience we may, upon all occasions,
willing to relieve them, and stand by them with our substance, in case they be
in want, and God has given unto us wherewith to do it, etc. The reason of this
Rule is of the same consideration for the Affirmative, with that of the third
Rule in the Negative.

Quest. 23.

What is the Seventh Rule?

Answ.

Where any sin is prohibited, all signs or appearances of this sin; as all
gestures, actions, and words naturally or customarily proceeding from it, are
prohibited also, 1 These. 5.^2. Thus where Pride is forbidden, Walking with
stretched out necks, minsing with the feet, Esa. 3.16. Strange and costly
Apparel, 1 Pet. 3.3. 1 Timothy 2.9. Zeph. 1.8. Haughty eyes, or looks, Prove.
6.17. and 30.13. Contention, or contesting, Prove. 13.10. Threatening, or
disdainful speaking, Prove. 14.3. (with sundry the like) are forbidden likewise.
The reason of this Rule, is; All fruits, signs, or appearances of any sinful
disposition in men, are against the honor of God in his Government of the
World, being apt to offend, or grieve, persons that are good on the one hand,
and to provoke and encourage those that are evil unto the like misdemeanors on
the other hand. In this respect, God judges it meet to restrain them; and
this, to convenience his Law with all the brevity that well may be, in the same
Commandment with the capital and known sin, from whence they proceed.

Quest. 24.

What is the Eighth Rule?

Answ.

Where any holy or worthy disposition or habit, is required, here all the
genuine and proper fruits, actings, or expressions of this disposition, are
enjoined with it. Thus where the love of God, and so, where the love of men,
are commanded; with the former, our maintaining of the Truth of God, upon all
occasions (as we are able), our showing forth of his excellencies and
perfections, our depending upon him for relief and deliverance in streights and
exigencies, our honoring him with our substance, in being liberal and
openhanded toward the poor and needy, toward the promoting of every good
work, whereby he may be glorified (with many the like) are commanded: with the
latter, our forgiving men their trespasses against us, covering their
infirmities, (as far as with a good Conscience we can) bearing with their
weaknesses, judging well of them, (when we have no sufficient ground to judge
otherwise) lending unto them what they want, giving unto them, if they be poor;
counselling them when they are in doubt; admonishing them (seasonably, and
tenderly, yet effectually) when they sin (with many other things of like
import.) The reason of this Rule is; because, as a fruit-bearing-tree is
desired for the fruits sake, which it naturally bears; so are virtuous habits
and dispositions required in men by God, that they may perform and do those
things, which such Principles are proper to produce.

Quest. 25.

What is your Ninth Rule?

Answ.

Where a sin is forbidden, all accessorinesse to the perpetration of this sin,
by whomsoever it be committed, intended, or designed, is forbidden likewise
unto every man. Thus, where Stealing is forbidden, all strengthening of the
hand of such a man, to the practice of this sin, whom we know, or justly
suspect, to be addicted unto it; as by pleading the excusablenesse, or by
extenuating the demerit and crime of this sin in his hearing; the furnishing
him with weapons, instruments, or engines, for the practice of it; the
accommodating him with means of secrecy, or safety, when and whilst he is
about it, (with many the like) is forbidden likewise. The reason of this Rule,
is; because the real intent of the Lawgiver being to prevent, and hinder, the
commission of the sins prohibited by him, it cannot reasonably be conceived,
but that together with the prohibition of the sins themselves, he should
prohibit likewise all compliance with the practisers of these sins, and
whatsoever might encourage them, or strengthen their hand to the perpetration
of them at any time.

Quest. 26.

What is a Tenth Rule?

Answ.

Where any duty or virtuous action, or course of life is commanded, the use of
all good means to promote and further the practice, not only in our selves, but
in others also, as we have opportunity, is therein, and therewith, commanded
also. Thus where the Honoring of Parents, whether naturally and properly such,
or such by analogy and similitude, as Magistrates, Teachers, Guardians,
Tutors, Masters, etc. is commanded; we are commanded also to promote the
Interest of the said Command, by exhorting and persuading (as occasion is
offered, and when it shall be seasonable) all persons, both young, and old, to
the practice of it; by countenancing, commending, and showing respects unto
those that are conscientious in the practice of it; and again, by admonishing,
reproving, discountenancing, those that are dispisers, and transgressors of
it. There is the same consideration of all other duties in their respective
commands. The reason of this Rule proceeds upon the same account with the
reason of the former. God, the Lawgiver, intending subjection by men, unto all
his Laws, and the diligent practice of every good work, or duty, commanded by
him, must in reason be conceived to require of men, that they promote and
further this subjection, as well in others, as in themselves, by all good ways
and means upon all occasions?

Quest. 27.

What is the Eleventh Rule?

Answ.

Where the duty of an Inferior toward his Superior in one particular kind of
relation, is required, the like duty (for the nature and kind of it) is
required of all Inferiors toward all such their Superiors, who stand related
unto them in any such relation, which holds proportion unto, and is of, alike
consideration with that other. Thus the relation of those that are under the
Government, inspection, and care, of the Civil Magistrate, Spiritual Pastor,
Guardian, Tutour, Master, etc. wherein they stand related unto these their
respective Superiors, is of like nature and consideration (at least in some
respects) with the relation of Children to their natural Parents, Father and
Mother; and consequently, where God requires of Children toward their
Parents, that which he judges meet they should exhibit by way of duty unto
them, there does he require the same of those toward the other Superiors
mentioned (with the like) who stand in the relation of Inferiors unto them.
The reason of this Rule, is; because, the same duty, or duties, cannot but well
become all such Relations, which resemble one the other, and are of a like
nature and consideration, at least as far as the resemblance between them does
extend; God likewise judging it meet to provide for the compendiousness of his
Law, as much as with convenience might be, and so not to multiply
Commandments, where one, with a little interposure of Reason and Conscience to
interpret, would serve as well as many.

Quest. 28.

What is a Twelfth Rule?

Answ.

Where the duty, or duties, of Inferiors toward their Superiors, are charged
upon them, the reciprocal duties of Superiors toward their Inferiors are
implicitly charged upon them also. Thus, where the duty of the Wife toward her
Husband is imposed upon her, the duty of the Husband toward the Wife is
consequentially, and interpretatively, charged upon him likewise. So, where the
duties of Subjects, of Children, of Servants, of the particular members of a
Christian Congregation, etc. which they owe unto their respective Superiors,
(all comprehended under the word honor) are charged by God upon them; the
corresponding duties, which these Superiors respectively owe unto them again,
are required by the same authority, and upon like encouragements, and
penalties, at their hand. The reason of this Rule, is; because, as that saying
of Christ, in the Gospel, is founded upon plain equity, Unto whomsoever much is
given, of him much will be required, (Luke 12.48.) So, when Superiors hear
that the tribute of Honor, Subjection, Reverence, Obedience, Service, etc.
from their Inferiors, is awarded unto them by God; their Consciences cannot
(lightly) but tell them aloud, that God, whose ways are equal, (Ezekiel. 18.25,
29.) demands of them, in, and by, the same award, on the behalf of their
Inferiors, all such reciprocations of duties, which are proper for them to
afford unto them, as countenance, protection, nurture, education, maintenance,
encouragements unto well-doing, and for well-doing, etc. as the respective
natures and qualities of their places, and relations of Superiority, require of
them, and give them means and opportunities with all, to perform and exhibit
unto them.

Quest. 29.

What is the Thirteenth Rule?

Answ.

Where the duties of Inferiors toward their superiors, and again, of
superiors toward their inferiors, are enjoined; the duties of equals toward
equals are included, and enjoined also. The reason of this Rule, is, because
the duties of equals toward equals, may, by the light, and impartial debates
of Reason and Conscience intervening, be estimated by the nature of the
reciprocal duties which mutually intercede between inferiors and superiors.
And God (as has been formerly hinted) is not wont to multiply Precepts, when
any one of those few, which he has given, is sufficient to show Conscience her
work by the help and improvement of her own light. Now the duties between
equals, the duties between superiors and inferiors being well known, may be
estimated, or computed, thus. My equal, being in relation unto me, next, or
near unto him that is my superior on the one hand, and on the other, next, or
near likewise unto him that is my inferior; it is reasonable and meet that I
allow and give unto him, somewhat a certain proportion, though less, of that
honor which I owe to my superiors, and also a like proportion of that
protection, care, moderation, and other duties, which I owe to my inferiors.

Quest. 30.

What is the Fourteenth Rule?

Answ.

Where any duty, one or more, which I owe unto another man, as a man, or unto
my Neighbor, is enjoined me, here I am charged with the performance of the
same, or like duties toward my self; only with such exceptions,
interpretations, or provisoes, which the Scriptures themselves, that are the
best Expounders of the Law, as well as the common light of Reason, inform me,
ought to be made in the case. Thus, where I am commanded not to wrong my
Neighbor, either in his repute, estate, relations, limbs, or life, and the
like; I stand charged not to injure, or prejudice my self in any of these. So
where I am commanded to love my Neighbor, to be helpful unto him in his need,
to counsel and advise him the best I can, as well in his spiritual as temporal
affairs, to bear his burdens, to cover his infirmities, to uphold his
reputation as far as with truth, and a good Conscience, I am able, etc. all
these (with several others of like nature) I stand bound by the same
Commandment to perform unto my self. Only, as the saying is; There is no
general Rule without its exceptions; So in the case of the Rule before us,
there are some things of which I am a debtor unto my Neighbor by virtue of the
Commandment of God; of which I am not hereby made a debtor unto my self. It is
my duty upon occasion, to give as large a testimony unto my Neighbor, and to
speak as much good of him, as with truth and knowledge I can: but it is not
proper for me to do the like by my self. So if my Neighbor be overtaken with a
fault, I stand bound in duty to restore [that is, to endeavor to restore] him,
in the spirit of meekness, (Gal. 6.1.): but I am not bound to show the like
tenderness to my self, in the like case. Some other particulars there may be,
(though I presume they are not many) which the Commandments of God, that
oblige me to my Neighbor, do not impose upon me to perform, at least in the
letter of them, or otherwise then in a way of proportion, or equipollency,
unto my self. And these variations, which are but interpretations of the said
Commandments (respectively) are prescribed and taught (as was even now hinted)
in the Scriptures. But the reason of the Rule may be this: All those things,
which God judges meet to be performed and done by every man unto other, being
in their natures beneficial and good unto all those, to whom they ought to be,
and are, performed, by whomsoever they are performed, and consequently being
such unto every man, though performed unto him by himself; therefore to salve
the brevity intended in his Law, he enjoins every man's duty to himself, in the
same Commandment with his duty to other men.

Quest. 31.

What is the Fifteenth Rule?

Answ.

When two Commandments meet in opposition the one unto the other, so that they
cannot both be obeyed, the greater ought to have the homage of obedience
performed unto it, the binding force of the lesser ceasing in such a case, so
that if the greater be performed, there is no transgression of the less. Our
Savior gives testimony to the truth and usefulness of this Rule, in two or
three Instances. First, where the Levitical Law, allowing the eating of the
Shewbread unto the Priests only, meeting with the Moral Law, which enjoyneth
the use of means for the preservation of life, upon such terms, that obedience
could not be yielded unto both, gave place unto the latter, and was disobeyed
without sin in him that did transgress it; who (questionless) had sinned, if,
as the case at present stood with him, and his company, he had not disobeyed
it, Mat. 12.3, 4. The Moral Law, being the greater, in the juncture of the
competition, superseded the authority of the Ceremonial, as being the less.
Again, where the Law injoyning a strict Rest, or cessation from work, on the
Sabbath day, as being a law of inferior consequence, did not oblige the
Priests against that Law, by which they stood charged to worship God, by
slaying, and offering sacrifices in the Temple, even on that day, this being a
Law of more considerable and rich import, then the other, Mat. 12.5. Another
instance like unto this we find, Joh. 7.22. The reason of this Rule is nothing
but what the common light of reason suggesteth, viz. That in all Competitions
between two things of unequal worth and goodness, where both cannot be chosen,
or embraced, the more worthy, and weighty in goodness, ought to have the
pre-eminence. By the light of this Rule, evident it is, that the Commandments
of the first Table, which respect the glory and interest of God, are to be
preferred in obedience before those of the second, which concern the interest
of the Creature, when both cannot be obeyed. As, when we cannot but either
betray, or deny some truth of God which he has made known to us, and so sin
against a great duty of the first Table, or else disobey the Magistrate,
Father, Mother, etc. and so expose our selves to the loss of our greatest
comforts in the things of this world, yea it may be of life it self, which are
all contrary to the sense of the greatest duties of the second Table (in
ordinary cases) in this case we must obey the charge of the first Table, and
stand by the truth of God with our testimony, and disobey superiors,
whatsoever be the consequence of it. It is true, and the instances lately
mentioned do confirm it, that the greater duties of the second Table, are, by
Gods gracious permission and allowance, to take place of the letter duties of
the first Table, when there happens a competition between them. But the
duties of the same degree in both Tables being compared, those of the first,
being the more important, ought to have the pre-eminence, in Competitions.

Quest. 32.

What is the Sixteenth Rule?

Answ.

Affirmative Commands are always binding, but not binding to be always
practicing, or actually doing, what they command; but only at times convenient,
and upon regular and due occasions. They are (indeed) binding always, to
maintain the habits of those virtuous and worthy actions, which they enjoin, or
an inward disposition or readiness of mind to be doing the things required in
them, upon all occasions. Thus when, and where, I am commanded to call upon
God, to meditate of his works, to reverence his Word, etc. I am not commanded
to be always employed in the actual exercise of these, or any of these duties,
but only to be always prepared and ready for the performance of them
(respectively) upon all opportunities: and when opportunity serves, to perform
them actually. There is the same consideration of all affirmative Precepts in
matters appertaining to the second Table. The Reason of this Rule, is, because
it is meet that every virtuous and worthy action' as well one as another,
should have time and place to be practiced, and wrought, the honor of God on
the one hand, and the convenience of the world on the other hand, requiring it.
But evident it is, that this could not be (I mean, orderly, and without sin) if
any Commandment which binds to the practice of any one of them, should bind
them to the continual practice of it; inasmuch as a man employed in one action,
during such his employment, is incapable of any other.

Quest. 33.

What is the Seventeenth Rule?

Answ.

Negative Precepts are not only always binding, but also binding to the actual
forbearance of what they prohibit, always, at all times, and in all cases
whatsoever; (excepting only such, wherein (happily) God himself, who has power
over his own Laws, shall grant a relaxation from any of them, unto any man.)
Thus the Commandment by which I stand charged not to hate God, not to despise
him, not to make him a liar, (by not believing him) not to murder, not to
commit adultery, etc. imposes a charge upon me to refrain from all these
misdemeanors at all times, and never to be found in any of them. The reason of
this Rule is, because every evil or sinful action is always, and in every
case whatsoever, repugnant to the glory of God, and contrary to the true and
real interest of men. Therefore such Commandments of God, by which these are
prohibited, admit of no cessation, or interval in their obliging authority
under any circumstance, or circumstances whatsoever.

Quest. 34.

What is the Eighteenth Rule?

Answ.

Where any external duty, whether respecting God, or Man, is required, the
inward disposition of the heart and soul, from whence such outward actions,
when they are regularly and duly performed, do proceed, is required also.
Thus, where the outward Worship and service of God are commanded, a devout,
humble, and pious frame of heart is commanded also. So where I am commanded to
feed the hungry, to relieve the oppressed, to pray for mine enem es, etc. I am
commanded withal to be inwardly loving, merciful, tenderhearted, etc. The
reason of this rule is: because God being a Spirit, delights in special
manner in the beauty and loveliness of the spirits and Souls of men; as also
to see fruits that are outwardly good, growing upon their own proper trees; and
not upon those that are counterfeit. And being desirous to make his Law
spiritual, and not bulky, or great of body, judged it meet to include his mind
and will concerning all things becoming the inner man, in those precepts,
wherein he requires such actions, and deportments which are proper to be
performed by the outer man.

Quest. 35.

What is the Nineteenth Rule?

Answ.

Where the external act of any sin is restrained, there all inclinations,
inward motions, workings, and stirrings of heart toward the committing of that
sin, are prohibited and restrained likewise. Thus where Murder is forbidden,
wrath, hatred, envy, malice desire of revenge, with whatsoever moves in the
heart or soul toward the perpetration of that horrid action, are forbidden
with it. So where the act of Adultery (under which, according to a former rule,
all acts of bodily uncleanness are comprehended) is forbidden, all lustful and
wanton thoughts, all secret motions and desires leaning toward that sinful
act, are made sinful also. The reason of this Rule may readily be conceived by
that of the Rule next preceding.

Quest. 36.

What is the Twentieth and last Rule?

Answ.

One, and the same sin, may in different respects, be prohibited in several
Commandments. Thus a man's coveting his Neighbors Servant, absolutely
considered, and without any further tendency, is a sin against the Tenth
Commandment. But as it prepares and disposes him to inveigle or intise away
this Servant from him, it is a sin against the Eighth Commandment. As it is an
act of disobedience unto God, it is a sin against the First Commandment. Many
instances in this kind might be given. The reason of this Rule is, the
exceeding sinfulness of sin, (in the Apostles expression, Romans 7.13.) on the
one hand, together with the large extent, and comprehensivenesse of the Law of
God, on the other. For the nature of sin is, in one respect, like that of a
solid or compacted body, which we use to say, is plenum sui, full of it self.
Sin (we know) is of kin to the Devil: and if it could speak it might answer to
him, that should ask it its name as truly as the Devil did, Mar. 5.9. My name
is Legion, for we are many. Every sin has many sins twisted in it, and these
of various and different relations, or aspects, looking awry upon the
Commandments of God which oppose them in their way. For the Law of God, by
means of the spirituallity of it (lately opened) meets with sin at every
turn, nor can so much as an eye, or look hereof, escape it.

Quest. 37.

But why does the Apostle James say, that whosoever shall keep the whole Law,
[meaning in all other points] and yet offend in one he is guilty of all? Jam.
2.10. Does he mean that every act of sin, includes an act of disobedience to
every of the Ten Commandments, as well as unto that, against which it is more
particularly committed?

Answ.

Not so: But his meaning is, that the Law being one and the same entire Rule of
life and behavior, and proceeding from one and the same Lawgiver, and every
breach of it made, by the express tenor of it, liable to the same penalty, or
curse, unto which the trangression of all the precepts of it are liable, he
that shall violate or trangresse any one of these precepts, is guilty of the
breach of them all, either because he breaks that Law, which contains them
all, and is (indeed) nothing else, but them all; or else, because, he firmeth
against that Authority, or that Lawgiver, by which, and by whom, they have
been all made given, and established, by reason whereof the neglect, or breach
of any one of them, is the disparagement of all the rest, and implies a
disposition to break them all, when occasion serves, as the saying is in the
Civil Law, He that injureth one, threatens many. Or because he that breaks any
one of them, hereby declaring that he fears not the displeasure of the
Lawgiver tempts and emboldeneth others to fall foul upon all the rest: which
has a direct tendency in it, to dissolve or greatly weaken, the Authority or
binding-force of the whole Law, and of all the injunctions of it. According to
that of David, where speaking of wicked men, and aggravating their wicked
practices, (in his address unto God) he complains of them, that they had made
void his Law. ( Psalm. 119.126.) much in such a sense as Christ also charge
the Scribes and Pharisees to have made the Commandment of God of none effect,
by their traditions, Mat. 15.6 with Mark. 7.11, 12. Or (lastly), because he
that breaks any one of them, incurreth the same penalty (at least for kind,
if not for degree, as namely the same Curse) which is due unto the breach of
them all. See Gal. 3.10. Ezekiel. 18.10, 11, 12. compared with the 13.

Quest. 38.

What is the sum of the first Commandment, or of the mind, and will, of God in
it?

Answ.

That every person of mankind, should deliberately, and with judgment, choose,
own, and honor him, as, and for, their God, and none other with him, or
without him.

Quest. 39.

But may, or ought, every man, and woman, without exception, choose, and own,
the true God, as, and for their God? may wicked, and unbelieving persons, do
this?

Answ.

Although wicked, and unbelieving persons cannot choose, or own God, as, or for,
their God, whilst they continue, and purpose none other, but to continue in
their wickedness and unbelief, (for God will not be the God of such persons,
in the desirable sense of the relation, and in which he is said to be the God
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, etc. whilst they remain such) yet may they,
through the Grace of God, and the due use of other means, vouchsafed unto them
on that behalf, repent of both, and forsake them, and so become actually
capable, (as Potentially they were before) of choosing, and owning God, for
their God. For God most graciously offers himself, to become the God of the
vilest, and most unworthiest of men, upon their Repentance. So that the
Commandment takes hold of all persons of mankind, without exception, that
either are in a state of Repentance, or capable of passing into this estate;
only with the difference now intimated. As concerning those, whom the guilt of
the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, has sealed up to eternal
destruction, so that they are absolutely, and for ever, cut off from the love
and favor of God, and who are to be looked upon, as being, in this respect, in
the same condition with the Devils; it is most probable that neither this, nor
any other of the Commandments of God looks after them, (any whit more then
the promises of reward made unto the keeping of them) but only the Curse
denounced against the breach of them.

Quest. 40.

What is it for a man, deliberately, and with judgment, to choose, own, and
honor God, (the true God) as, and for, his God?

Answ.

It is, upon a diligent inquiry after, and serious consideration had upon,
those grounds and reasons, which demonstrate the comeliness and meetness on
the on hand, and the unspeakable beneficialnesse on the other hand, that a man
should choose, and own, and honor, the true God, for his God, and none besides,
or with him, firmly to resolve, and conclude, that he will do accordingly, and
withal really to do it.

Quest. 41.

Wherein consists the comelinese, or meetnesse, that the creature, Man,
should choose, own, and honor, the true God, for his God; and none other, with,
or besides, him? or, how may the comeliness of these his actings be estimated?

Answ.

The comeliness of these actings, by such a creature, as Man is, may be
conceived, or estimated, thus, or in these two particulars. First, that a
creature endued with the excellent faculties, of reason, understanding, etc.
should not only, or simply, give honor, to whom honor belongs; but that
kind, and degree of honor, which of right appertains unto every one. This
the light of nature shows to be comely and meet. Secondly, that such a
creature, by ways, and means, that are honorable, should consult it is own
honur, safety, and well-being, and not through folly, expose it self to shame,
and misery; this also is comely for it, in every eye. Now both these are
evidently found in this creature's choosing, owning, and honoring, the true
God, for his God, and no other besides. For first, it is an honor
appropriately due unto this God, to be singled out from amongst all others,
that are called Gods in the world, yea, and from amongst all other Beings
whatsoever, by that creature of his we speak of, and to be owned, and honored
by it, for the God thereof: and it is an horrid and blasphemous indignity, or
affront, put upon Him, either not to be owned, and honored, by this his
creature, as it is God; or that any other, whether a God (so called) or
whatsoever is, or can be named otherwise, should be taken into fellowship with
him in this relation, and honor. Again secondly, this creature, by choosing,
owning, and honoring the true God for his God, provideth; and this in a way of
the most super-transcendent security; for his honor, and highest degree of
well-being. Happy is that people, whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 144.15. see also
Jer. 17.7, 8. (with many others) whereas either by neglecting, or refusing, to
take and honor him for his God, or by choosing any other in this relation, in
his stead, or by joining any other with him, he shall most certainly consult
his own shame, ruin, and confusion, Jer. 17.5, 6.13. Psalm. 73.27.

Quest. 42.

What may be the import of this phrase, before me, or, as some translate,
before my face?

Answ.

The expression may import, or hold forth, a great argument, or motive, to
persuade to the observance of the Commandment, in one main point of it; as
namely, that if any man shall have any other God, one, or more, but, or
besides, himself, though he may think to carry it secretly enough, yet the
abomination will be acted before his face, and as it were in his presence, and
whilst he looks on. See Psalm. 44.20.21. Now as the eye and presence of the
husband, is a potent obligation upon the wife, whilst she is under them, to
refrain all unchaste behavior with other men; and she must be impudent above
women, that will play the adulteress before the face of her husband: so is it
a consideration very forceable, and awful, to keep men from going a whoring (as
the Scripture speaks) after any strange God, that they cannot commit this
wickedness, but before the face of that God, who only is their lawful
husband, and whose name is, Jealous.

Quest. 43.

What may be conceived to be the reason, why God should in all the ten
Commandments, address himself unto those, from whom he requires obedience
unto 'them, in the second person singular, Thou; Thou shall have none other
Gods, etc. Thou shall not make to thy self, etc. And so, in all the rest, (for
it is plainly implied, though not expressed, in the fifth, which might, be read
thus: Honor THOU thy Father, etc.

Answ.

The reason may be, either, because the Commandments were immediately, and
directly given unto the Jews, (and consequentially only unto the rest of the
world) whose national and collective body is very frequently notioned in the
Scriptures, as a Person; as when it is called Israel, Jacob, a Son, etc. Or
else, because God (the Lawgiver) desires to possess every particular person
of mankind, to whom the Law is given, with this apprehension, That in every
precept thereof, he speaks unto him in particular, and with as much desire,
and expectation, to be obeyed therein by him, as if he had not minded, or
intended to charge any other herewith, but him only.

Quest. 44.

What are the more particular, and special duties required in this
Commandment, or some of the principal of them?

Answ.

Diligently and conscientiously to seek after the knowledge of God, and to
acquaint our selves with his Attributes and Perfections, as goodness, mercy,
wisdom, truth, justice, power, etc. (as he has discovered, and revealed them
in his Word, and in his Works, as well of Providence, as Creation) as likewise
with his counsels, and purposes concerning his intended proceedings, either in
ways of goodness and bounty, or of wrath and severity, with men, as far as he
has judged meet to afford us opportunity and means to attain the knowledge of
them. And further, to be ever and anon provoking, and stirring up our selves by
the most effectual considerations, and arguments we can think of, or come to
know, to believe, love, fear, reverence, obey, hope in, delight in, rejoice in,
depend upon, pray unto, be thankful unto, plead for, suffer for him, (I mean
God); yea, and to do all these things with that seriousness of mind, with that
high contest of heart, and soul, that there may be a true, and real
acknowledgement of the Divine Supremacy, and Greatness, in our doing of them;
and that we would not lay out our selves at any such rate of acting, upon the
account of any creature, or creatures whatsoever, And again to sympathize with
him in all his affections (for such the Scripture ascribes unto him) as to
love, as he loves (whether persons or things); and so to hate, as he hates;
to desire, as he desires; to rejoice as he rejoices; to grieve, as he
grieveth, etc. God, in commanding his creature, man, to choose, and take him for
his God, requires these things of him (with some others of like
consideration.) And he that takes no care to incline, or work his heart unto
them, especially if he knows them to be required of him, lives in
disobedience to this Commandment.

Quest. 45.

What are the sins forbidden in this Commandment, or some of the chief of
them, that so we may the better judge of the rest also?

Answ.

The great Sin here forbidden is the neglecting or refusing to choose and take
God, the true God, for our God. Together with this Sin, all such dispositions,
motions and actings of the heart and soul, are prohibited likewise, which
either are absolutely and utterly inconsistent with the great duty of the
Commandment (The having the true God for our God,) or else, which ill become
those, who have the true God for their God, and which being outwardly acted,
give suspicion (at least) that they have not indeed chosen, or do unfeignedly
own, this true God for their God. Of the former kind are these, gross
ignorance of the Nature, Properties, (or Attributes) and Counsels of God; such
erroneous and horrid persuasions of him, which represent him unto the mind, as
if he were (indeed) no God, Atheism, Polytheism (or a belief of a plurality of
Gods) profaneness, despair, a total want of faith in him, of love fear and
reverence of him, a disposition prevailing to an habitual and customary neglect
of known Duties, or to the like commission of known sins; hatred of holy and
good men, as such, or because such; a revengefull spirit against those that
have injured us, or whom we count our enemies, (with some others of like
consideration with these). Of the latter sort are these (with the like), a
disposition to neglect, or be careless in, the use of means, by which the
knowledge, or more perfect knowledge, of God is to be obtained, (as the Reading
and Meditating of the Scriptures, attending upon the Ministry of the Gospel, a
serious contemplating the works of Creation, a diligent observance of the
appearing of God in the course of his Providence, and government of the World,
fervent praying unto him for the spirit of illumination, religious conferences,
consorting our selves with the Saints, a diligent comparing of the movings and
workings of our own hearts, as likewise of the ways and actings of other men,
both good, and bad, with the Scriptures, etc.) So also an inclination to
idolatrous, or superstitious Observations, or to plead for them, praying unto
dead Saints, or expecting help from them, coldness in our affections to the
Saints that are living, and those that are born of God, heat in our affections
toward either the men, or the things, of the world; pride, or height of spirit
in prosperity; fainting, or hanging down of hands, impatiency, or distrust, in
adversity, a boldness or daringnesse of spirit frequently to omit known
duties, to walk in ways, the lawfulness of which is justly questionable, or
in the customary practice of any known sin, though it be never so little, or so
esteemed by men, etc.

Quest. 46.

May there any reason be conceived, why this Commandment should have the
pre-eminence, in order of place before the rest, and be made the first?

Answ.

There is this plain reason hereof; viz. Because obedience unto this
Commandment (the having, or cordial owning the true God, for our God) is the
natural and proper root of obedience unto all the rest, and (indeed) of all
true Religion.

Quest. 47.

What is the sum of the Second Commandment?

Answ.

That God will be worshipped with no other Externals, Forms, or Ceremonies, but
those only of his own prescription and appointment, and that with these, he
will be worshipped; and withal, that, in this respect, he will have men to
forbear every thing, that is like to tempt or entise them to the high
misdemeanour of False-Worship, [that is, of worshipping him in any other way,
or by any other means, then those commanded, or directed by himself] For under
the Ceremony or gesture of bowing to, or toward a graven Image, which is one
of the grossest, and most notorious streins of idolatrous and false Worship,
are prohibited (according to the sense of the third Rule, laid down for the
right understanding of the Decalogue, in the several Precepts thereof) all
other kinds and streins of false Worship whatsoever. And upon a like account,
under the making unto our selves any graven Image, or the likeness of any
thing, etc. [for religious ends] is forbidden the voluntary putting our selves
upon any temptation unto such Worship.

Quest. 48.

Why does God so strictly, and with such variety and particularity of
expression, by such great obligations, and engagements, beyond what is found in
any other of the Commandments, prohibit all will worship, or false-worship,
[that is, all methods, ways, gestures, habits, means of excitement unto
devotion, in one kind, or other, which are of Humane device, or contrivance,
and made use of by men in their worshipping of him?]

Answ.

The chief Reasons hereof may be these two,

First, because men are exceedingly apt, even impotently inclined, to take such
pleasure in, and so to dote upon, their own Inventions, in, and about the
worship of God, whereby their hearts are withdrawn and taken off, from that
reverence and esteem, which they owe unto the true worship of God, prescribed
by himself, and from that delight, which they must take herein, if they desire
that God should delight in them, or do any great things for them. Even as the
sensual contentment and pleasure, which the Adulteress takes in the imbracings
of him that commits folly with her, alienateth her affection from her lawful
husband, unto whom it ought to be constant and entire. The resemblance is very
natural, and (as we use to say of Pictures accurately taken) to the life: in
which respect the Scripture so much delights to set forth the nature of
Idolatrous, and false Worship by it. And besides, it seems to intimate, that
God takes a most high and sacred contentment in being truly and purely
worshipped, and in those who thus worship him; even as the affectionate husband
receives mavelous great solace and satisfaction in the Conjugal imbracings
of a wife that is chaste and loyal (see and compare, and diligently consider,
Cant. 1.16. Hos. 2.19, 20.) It is fully comporting with this notion, that in
this very Commandment (as often elsewhere) he declares and styles himself, a
Jealous God. Now then, as where the tide is wont to run, and bear up with
greater violence and force, than is usual in other places, the banks that are
made to defend the country and fields adjoining, from inundations, and
breakings in of waters, had need, both to be raised higher, and to be more
strongly fortified, then ordinary; so it is but reasonable, that the sinful
propensions in the hearts and souls of men, which are known unto God to be more
eruptive, and likely to break forth upon occasion, then others; and when they
do break forth, to be of a more pernicious consequence to the greatest
Interest, both of Creator and Creature also; should be restrained by Laws and
Commandments contrived and formed, both in words and matter (as it were) on
purpose for so great a service, both unto God, and Man, as the preventing of
the breakings out of such corruptions must needs be. This is one Reason.

Secondly, God foreseeing that in after-ages there would from time to time,
such a generation of men rise up in the world, yea and in his Church it self,
who would, not only give up themselves to be acted and led by a spirit of
spiritual whoredoms and fornications, and pollute themselves over head and
ears, with idolatrous, superstitious, self-devised, and men-devised Worships,
in several kinds; but also, with all rigor, as by imprisonments, confiscation
of Goods, excommunications, oppressions, and vexations in all kinds, yea and
sometimes by banishment, yea and by threatening, and inflicting death it self
upon them that would not submit, would attempt the Loyalty of the Sons and
Daughters of God amongst them, and compel them to drink of the same cup of
abominations with them: God (I say) foreseeing this, partly to qualify and
allay, if it might be, the sacrilegious rage of such oppressors; but chiefly
(I conceive) effectually to antidote the souls and consciences of his children
against the deadly poison of yielding unto, or complying with, such defilements
in his Worship, being under such sore temptations to commit this folly, and
hereby to cause a breach between their God and their souls, was graciously
pleased to fortify his Commandment against foraign and false worships, at an
higher rate, then he had done any of his Commandments besides. Other reasons
might be given: but these two, at present, may suffice.

Quest. 49.

What are the sins more particularly forbidden in this Commandment, or some of
the chief of them?

Answ.

All neglect, all volountary omission of the external worship of God at times
convenient, and when we are called to it, as omission of Prayer (public, and
private) of hearing the Word Preached, of attending upon the ordinances of the
Lords Supper and Baptism (if duly and purely administered); of Fasting, of
Giving of Thanks, of Singing of Psalms. Again, the making, or having, Images,
or Representations, to help or further us in our Devotions, worshipping of God
in, or before, an Image, or with posturing our faces (with observation and upon
a religious account) toward any part of the Heavens, East, West, etc. Praying
unto him by the mediation of Saints, adulterating or corrupting, any the
Ordinances of Divine Institution, with any Cerimonious devices of our own,
communicating in any of them being thus adulterated (especially without
declaring openly, and beforehand, our dislike of what we know to be spurious
and corrupt in their administrations) the introducing into the Church any other
Ordinances but these, the exercising of our selves in such man-devised
observations, which are commonly known to be taken up and practiced by men in a
way of Religion, and with a conceit of commending themselves highly unto God by
them, as going on Pilgrimage, disciplining their flesh with whipping, with
wearing rough and harsh garments, with a strict observance of such and such
hours, as well by night as by day (which they call, Canonical) for the duty of
Prayer, with forcing themselves to say over so many Pater Nosters, and so many
Ave-Maries, from time to time, and, through fear of falling short, or being out
in their tale, to keep and adjust the account by letting fall of Beads, with
fasting at such times chosen by themselves, and at no other, with perpetual
abstinence from flesh, from handling or touching money, from propriety in any
worldly estate or goods; and generally all such practices and ways, of humane
injunction, or recommendation only, wherein we discover our selves, or give
suspicion, thar we place any confidence, or hope of acceptance with God. In
like manner, all such actings, or expressions of our selves, whereby it appears
that we are afraid of Gods displeasure, either for the omitting, or not doing,
of what he no ways requires of us; or else for the doing of that, which is our
duty to do. To fear Divine displeasure upon either of these accounts, is, in
propriety, and strictness of notion, that which we call Superstition; although
use and custom have extended the signification of the word to other things
also, of a differing nature from these. Yet again: In this Commandment are
likewise prohibited all such actings, and disposings of our selves, whereby we
expose our selves to the danger of being drawn aside to the love and liking,
and hereupon to the practice of Idolatrous and false worship, making false
worshippers of God our intimate and bosom friends, frequenting the Assemblies,
the gaudy Temples, the services, or devotions, of Idolaters; carelessness or
perfunctoriness in performing the true worship of God (for this also disposes,
and exposes, men to the danger of declining to false worship.)

Quest. 50

What are the Duties more particularly required in this Commandment? or some
of the principal of them? (For, according to the second Rule, every negative
Commandment includes his affirmative opposite to it.)

Answ.

The general Duty here required is, that at times convenient, and as often as any
providence, or opportunity inviteth us, we worship the true God purely,
according to his will; that is, in such a way only, in, and by such outward
means, and with such rites, as himself has taught, and prescribed in his Word.
Under this General, these more particular duties are enjoined; diligent and
constant attendance upon the Ministry of the Gospel, (where no reasonable
impediment hinders); so upon the administration of the Sacraments, and all
other Ordinances of God, regularly managed, and dispensed, in the Church, and
public Christian assemblies, as prayer, discipline, fastings, thanksgivings,
etc. Again, (according to the Doctrine of the tenth Rule given) the diligent
use of all good means, to prepare, and fit us, for the due worship of God, is
here commanded also; as the reading of the Scriptures with care and conscience,
meditation, praying in private, religious conferences, minding and honoring
those, that are most exemplary in worshipping God; a provident ordering, and
contriving of worldly occasions, that no pretense about these may be a snare
unto us, to cause us to lose any of the golden opportunities of worshipping
God, etc.

Quest. 51.

How, or in what sense, does God threaten, that he will visit the iniquity of
the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third, and fourth Generation, of them
that hate him?

Answ.

First, God does not threaten to visit the sins of the Fathers upon the
Children, etc. but only when he finds them in the Children, as well as he did
in the Fathers. This he plainly declares in those words, of them that hate me:
which are restrictive, and interpretative, of the preceding threatening; and
imply, that unless the Children, in their respective Generations shall hate
him, [that is, the cause being put for the effect, (a frequent dialect in
Scriptures) shall sin against him, as their Fathers did] he intends not the
Threatening against them. See for this Ezekiel. 18.14. etc. Secondly, the reason
why God does not say, that he will visit the Childrens own sins upon them, but
the sins of their Fathers; nor again, that he will visit the sins of the
Fathers upon themselves, but upon their Children; the reason hereof (I say) may
be, because God judges it meet, many times not to punish in this world, [with
any exemplary punishment, or judgment, which kind of punishment he means by
the word visit] the first Transgressors in a Family, or race, but rather
patiently to await the trial and proof of their Posterity, (to the third and
fourth generation;) and accordingly as these shall be found, either to repent
of, and turn from their Fathers sinfulness, unto God, or to go on, and
continue in the same, or like course of provocation; so either to show them
mercy, and bless them, their Fathers sins notwithstanding; or else to fall
heavy upon them, with some signal judgment, or other; as filling up the
measure of their Fathers sins, (which it seems, was but half full before; and
so not as yet, according to the estimate of divine ^enity, and patience, ready
for judgment); and redoubling their provocations. So that God, when he
threatens to visit the sins of the Fathers, upon wicked Children, not their own
sins, or wickedness, signifies, or implies, that, had these Children been
the first of their race, that had been wicked, and not been the Children of
wicked Parents; although their wickedness had been the same, or as great as
now it is, they should, or might have escaped the visitation here threatened
(for I suppose that God by this tnreatning, I will visit the sins of the
Fathers, etc. does not imply, that he will never, or in no case, visit [with
temporal judgements] the sins of the Fathers, upon themselves, as well as upon
their Children, (being wicked also); the current of the Scriptures will ill
bear such a sense as this: but only declares, that when and though he does
suffer wicked Parents to go unpunished, yet their Children, if they follow them
in their wickedness, shall be sure to hear from him in wrath and judgment, and
that because they are the Children of such Parents, as well as because they are
wicked themselves). Hence it is, that when God threatens the Jews with any
severity of judgment for their wickedness, we so frequently meet with the
mention of the Fathers iniquity (though now dead) as well as the Childrens who
are the persons threatened in this, or the like form of words, you and your
Fathers, Jer. 44.21. So Ezekiel, was charged to remind the people, that they,
and their Fathers, had transgressed [or rebelled] against him, when he was sent
by God to denounce judgments against them, Ezekiel. 3,2. And so holy men very
frequently in their confessions, knowing it to be their duty to justify God in
his judgments whether already inflicted, or only denounced in the clearest and
fullest manner they could, upon this account confess and acknowledge, as well
the sins of their Fathers as their own. For our sins (says Daniel) and for the
iniquities of our FATHERS, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to
all that are about us, Dan. 9.16. See further, and compare Lam. 5.7. Jer.
14.20. Jer. 3.25. Neh. 1.6. Neh. 9.2.16.34. Psalm. 78.57.58. The Godly King
Josiah in his confessorie Message to the Prophetess Huldah, mentions the sin
of their Fathers only, as the cause, or means of kindling the wrath of God
against him, and his people, 2 King. 22.13. 2 Chro. 34.21. Yea and God himself
in pleading the equity of his proceeding in judgment against men, is wont to
allege and insist upon the iniquities of the Fathers as well as of the
Children, threatened, or punished by him, Then shall thou say unto them, Because
your FATHERS have forsaken me, etc. Jer. 16.11, 12. Your iniquities and the
iniquities of your FATHERS together, etc. Esa. 65.7. Sec also Levit. 26.39, 40.

Quest. 52.

May there any reason be conceived, why God should ordinarily, or (at least)
very frequently, visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children (in such a
sense, and upon such terms, as you have now declared) rather then upon
themselves?

Answ.

There may more reasons then one be well apprehended of this dispensation of
God. But I shall insist only upon one, which I conceive to be one of the most
considerable. This is, that when he does use severity in judging and punishing
his Creature, it may appear that his Creature is not simply or barely obnoxious
unto punishment, that is, not only so far sinful or delinquent to such a
degree, that he may justly punish him, but that he is (in the Apostles
expression, Romans 92.2.) (...) that is, fully, or perfectly and every ways
prepared, or fitted and (as it were) accomplished for destruction; and so for
that punishment, whatever it be, that shall be inflicted on him. Neither does
God judge it sufficient for the glory of his Righteousness, or Justice, in his
penal Administrations, that he may be justified in them [as viz. by some
exquisite or profound Argument, or Plea, made on his behalf] but that he may be
clear when he judges; that is, that the equity and reasonableness of his
judgments may appear out of hand, and by their own light, and as the Sun
appears unto the World, Psalm. 51.4. Compared with Romans 3,4. The Scripture in
several places, and in several veins of notion, presents God under this
Character viz. as listlesse and indisposed, and (as it were) without heart to
punish [in any degree of severity] until the wickedness of men be grown to
some considerable maturity, and height. As

First, Where he compares the degree, or proportion of sin, wherher in a
person, or people, before which he usually forbeareth to destroy, or inflict
any severe punishment upon them, unto a measure, which must be full, before he
can lift up his hand against them in such away. Thus the reason which he gives
unto Abraham his Friend, why he would not presently settle him, or his
posterity in the possession of the Land of Canaan, was, because the sin of the
Amorites (who were the present inhabitants of this Land, with some other
Nations) was not yet FVLL, Genesis 15.16. See also Mat. 23.32. Ezekiel. 7.23. Dan.
8.23. Nah. 3.1, 2, 3. etc.

Secondly, Where he signifies, or implies, that he must find men unexcusable
in the way of their sinning, before he enters into any district judgment with
them, See Romans 1.20. and 2, 1, 2. etc. Now many gracious vouchsafements from
God unto sinful men, are requisite to render them inexcusable, amongst which
the riches of his (...) that is, of his goodness, forbearance, and
long-suffering ( Romans 3, 4) seem to be chief, according to that, Romans 9.22.
What if God, willing to show his wrath and to make his power known, endured
with much long-suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted for Destruction? That is,
either until they be fitted, or, to be sitted, (or as the word, (...) properly
signifies, completely fitted) for destruction. These two things are here
plainly employed.

First, That without much long-suffering by God, sinners are not completely
fitted for destruction, at least not for such a destruction, wherein God may
make his wrath and power known.

Secondly, That God is not willing [that is, free or inclined] to make his
wrath and power known in the destruction of sinners, until they be fully and
completely prepared for destruction, [that is, until they have sinned with
such an high hand, or upon such terms, that nothing can, with reason, or
color of equity, be pleaded, why they should not be destroyed.]

Thirdly? (and lastly) That Character of disposition of God we speak of, is
held forth, where he designs the stopping of men's mouths in order to the
making of them subject to his judgment. That every mouth may be stopped, and
[so] all the World become (...), subject in judgment unto God, [or subject to
the judgment of God] as if men were not liable or subject to the judgment of
God [meaning, with that full, and through subjection, wherein he must find
them, before he proceeds in judgment against them] until their consciences
shall silence their tongues from all pleading for them, Romans 3.19. This is of
some affinity with the former, See Mat. 22.12, 13. So then this may well be a
reason, why God many times deferreth the visitation, or severe punishment of
the sins of Fathers, until he finds the Children, to the third and fourth
Generation, walking in the same or like way of iniquity with them. The patience
of God showed unto wicked Parents, renders their Children, if they prove
wicked also, much more obnoxious unto the judgment of God.

Quest. 53.

What may be the reason, why God extends his Threatening of visiting the sins
of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation only,
and no further?

Answ.

Because the knowledge of the wickedness of Fathers, or Forefathers, may
steadily, distinctly, and with certainty of report, arrive at their posterity
in the third or fourth descent, by means whereof, if they do not consider; and
take warning, they become inexcusable: whereas afterward, as in the fifth and
sixth Descent, and all succeeding, the memorial of the wickedness of their
Forefathers begins to be as an old story, the ground and original, and
consequently the truth, whereof, are uncertain, and so the story it self not so
apt to affect, or make any lively impressions upon the minds of men. Besides,
God limiting and confining himself in his pu, nishing of sin, unto the third
and fourth Generation, but enlarging himself in showing mercy to those that
keep his Commandments, unto thousands, plainly declares, how much more
propense he is to reward the righteous then to punish sinners.

Quest. 54.

Why does God, in this Commandment, rather then in any of the rest, threaten
to visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children?

Answ.

Because Children and posterity, are not in so much danger of being wicked, or
of provoking God upon their Fathers account, or by imitating and following
them, in any other way of wickedness, as in the way of Idolatry, and
superstitious worship of God: especially if the Fathers have had peace, and
prospered in the world, in the way of this sin, and the Children been partakers
with them in these things. A lightsome Instance hereof we have in the contest
of the people with the Prophet, Jer. 44.17. But we will certainly do whatsoever
thing goes forth out of our own mouth to burn incense unto the Queen of
Heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our
Fathers, our Kings and our Princes, in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets
of Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no
Evil. But since, etc. And that Children (generally) are more apt to inherit
(and commonly do inherit) the superstitious and idolatrous principles, and
practices of their Fathers and forefathers, rather then any other of their
sins, (not relating unto these); as well the Scriptures, as our own observation
of the course of the world in this behalf, may sufficiently inform us: Has any
nation (says God himself) changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods? Jer. 2.11.
See 2 Kin. 17.28, 29. and 30, 34. and ver. 41. Thus: So these Nations feared
the Lord, and served their Graven Images, both their Children and their
Childrens Children: as did their Fathers, so did they to this day. For brevity
sake, I omit many other places, pregnant with confirmation of the point in
hand; as Ezekiel. 20, 24, 30. Amos. 2.4.2 King. 15.9. 1 King. 15.26, etc.

Quest. 55.

Why should Children be more prone to imitate and follow their Parents in ways
of Superstitions and Idolatry, then of other sins?

Answ.

One reason hereof may be, because though these be very horrid, and
highly-provoking sins, yet have they an appearance and show of Wisdom, (
Coloss. 2.3.) and devout affections toward God, which no other sin has. We
know, how plausibly and confidently, the Doctors of the Romish persuasion plead
the cause of their Superstitions, and Idolatrous worship. Another (in
conjunction with this) may be, that Children, for the most part, are naturally
inclined to think honorably and reverently of their Parents, especially in
things appertaining unto God, and to Salvation: and in this respect have a
natural averseness to disparage their Religion, by rejecting, and exchanging it
for another; and by such a practice or means, as this to seem, jealous or
doubtful (at least) lest they dyed under the displeasure of God, and so are
cursed eternally. And because there is ordinarily, such a strong inclination in
Children to own, and cleave unto, that manner and way of worshipping God,
wherein their Fathers and Forefathers went before them, hence (I conceive) it
is that God, in the Scriptures, makes it an aggravation of the sin of such
Children, whose Fathers were true Worshippers of the true God, when they turn
aside into ways of Idolatry and Superstition, that they worship gods, whom
neither they nor their FATHERS have known. Jer. 19.4. Deuteronomy. 13.6. and 32.17.
and so likewise that he styles Idolatrous persons, and Nations, the Parents or
the Fathers and Mothers, of those who imitate them in their worship and
Religion: Thus says the Lord unto Jerusalem, Thy birth, and thy Nativity is of
the Land of Canaan, thy FATHER was an Amorite, and thy MOTHER an Hittite
[meaning that the Inhabitants of Jerusalem complied with these Nations in their
Religion, such as it was, as readily, as if they had been their natural
Parents] Ezekiel 16.3. Thirdly, out of that Hope, and persvvasion, which are very
incident to Children and posterity, That it is well with the souls of their
Parents, and Forefathers, in the state of death, they are inclinable, yea and
desirous, (though at some peradventure) to be with them, when they dye, and to
fare as they fare. And conceiving that the same Religion and way of worshipping
and serving God, is a likely means to bring them into the same condition with
them after death, hence they resolve to profess and practice none other.
Fourthly, (and lastly) that which is as considerable, as any of the former,
Persons given up to Idolatrous and superstitious Worships are more generally if
not universally, given up likewise unto some other kind, one or more, of sin
and wickedness besides. We need not appeal to the Authority of
Scripture-record for the confirmation of this (though here be plenty of it to
be found), that part of the Christian world, which have made conscience of
worshipping the true God purely, and without the pollutions of flesh-devised
worship, for several hundreds of years last past, have given a loud testimony
unto the truth hereof in one particular, the crying sin of Cruelty wiith the
blood and heavy oppressions of many of them; and besides, have all along known
enough, and at this day know, of the vicious and wicked practices of those, who
have turned aside unto their own-Idolatrous and superstitious inventions in the
worship of God. Now persons, superstitiously addicted, being conscious to
themselves of many foul sins, which they know to be displeasing unto God, when
through the patience of God they escape punishment for them, and live on
peaceably and prosperously in the world, they are apt and wont to ascribe no
less then a kind of mediatorie and attoneing virtue unto their superstitious
observances, imputing their prosperity and freedom from punishment under the
commission of so many sins, unto these; as if God had as high an esteem of
them, as themselves. This also might be evinced as a truth unquestionable from
the Scriptures (I mean, that will-worshippers and persons devoted to Apocryphal
rites and ordinances in the service of God, are high in confidence, that for
their sakes, they come off with God upon the better terms for there sins) but
that it would occasion more prolixity then is needful. Yea, it is extremely
probable (and a tough branch it is of the tree of my persuasions) that such an
imagination, being, by Satan's subtle motion, taken into the society, and made
one of the thoughts and apprehensions of men, makes the Christian world so
impotently, yea furiously, devoted to superstitious devices of all kinds, as it
is known to be at this day. No marvel then if the children of Idolatrous and
Superstitious Parents, being seasoned in their youth with such a principle as
this, be even precipitately disposed and inclined to walk after their manner in
worshipping and serving God, Who would not desire to be of such a Religion, by
means of the profession and practice whereof he may gratify his flesh with
what pleasures of sin he pleases, without danger of being judged by God for it?

Quest. 56.

Why does God in this Commandment, rather then in any other, insist upon his
Jealousy, declaring himself to be a Jealous God, to deterr men from the breach
of it? For, I the Lord thy God, am a Jealous God, visiting, etc.

Answ.

The reason may be, because his worship is the mariage-bed, wherein, he
claiming himself to be the only lawful husband (in the notion of a spiritual or
mystical marriage) of his creature, desires to solace himself with this his
Creature-Wife, offering himself likewise to be enjoyed by her with like
satisfaction and contentment. And (doubtless) when God is chastely, and purely,
and affectionately worshipped by his Creature, the greeting between them is
mutually pleasing and delightful in a very high degree: the richest
contentment which the most passionate and indeared yoke-fellows in this world
can take in the mutual enjoyments each of other, is but a shadow, a cold and
heartlesse kind of resemblance of it. Now then God, being conscious unto
himself of the ardent love, the dear and tender affections which he bears
unto his Creature (in respect of this marriage* relation) and of his most
bountiful and royalll intentions toward It, as his wife, when he shall for a
while have made trial of her love and loyalty, and withal that he has
acquainted her with, and several ways made known unto her, all this, He cannot
but be very impatient, and full of indignation, that his beloved Wife should,
under such great engagements as these, pollute the mariage-bed, and play the
Adulteress in his worship, by corrupting her self with strange Ordinances
(that never came out of his heart or soul) therein; yea, or should but wantonly
dally with frivolous and impertinent Rites or Ceremonies, though she should
retain and practice somewhat of his true worship with them. (For jealousy in
an Husband (we know) is not only provoked with the gross and complete act of
Adultery in his wife, when it comes to his knowledge; but also with all leight
and loose behavior, whether in words, looks, or gestures, which may reasonably
occasion any suspicion that way) And the more the heart and soul of a man is
drawn out unto the wife of his bosom, in love and dearnesse of affection, and
the more kindly he has expressed himself unto her from time to time, with so
much the greater rage is his jealousy like to break out against her, if he
shall at any time come to understand that she has been disloyal unto him:
which yet, because of his present affections unto her, and out of a desire that
himself may always enjoy the pleasure and contentment, and she the benefit and
solace of them, he endeavors, by the best means he knows, to prevent. And
(questionless) God, in this Commandment concerning his worship, remindeth his
Creature (man) of his nature of Jealousy. not so much with an intent to gain
the more equitable plea, in case his creature shall at any time provoke him to
express himself in the great severity of it (this, at most, is but his second
arie intention in the case) as to prevent and cut off all occasion from himself
of ever exercising it to his creatures prejudice; yet this not so much by
terrifying the creature with the sound, or mention of it, as by dissuading, or
taking it off, in a rational way, from whatsoever is likely to provoke, or
engage, him to such an exercise. For as he that does good [and is resolved to
continue so to do] has no cause to fear the Power, though he bears the
sword, and this not in vain (Romans 13.3, 4.) but has reason, or cause in
abundance, to refrain from evil, and to do still that which is good, because
of this sword: in like manner men have the greatest and weightiest reason in
the world, because of the Jealousy of God, to keep themselves chaste and pure
in his Worship; but whilst they do this, and with their whole heart are
purposed and resolved to do none other, they have no reason at all to be
terrified with it. But (certainly) the nature of Jealousy, duly considered,
as Solomon describes it [ For jealousy is the rage of a man, therefore he
will not spare in the day of vengeance: He will not regard my ransom, neither
will he rest content, though thou give many gifts, Prove 6.34, 35.] and the
jealousy of God estimated by this description, with it is reasonable allowance
for the dreadfulness of the power of God 's wrath above the rage of man, it
will be found the most irrational thing under Heaven, and at a most desperate
defiance with all principles of common prudence, for a man to stain the honor
of the mariage-bed of his Creator (I mean, his Worship) by imbaseing it wirh
any thing of a meaner original, then Divine. That the worship of God prescribed
by himself, is notioned in the Scriptures as the mariage-bed, into which he
invites his Creature, with an intent to communicate himself in secret as an
Husband unto it, might be demonstrated from all those places (which are
exceeding many) wherein the pollutions of his worship with humane Inventions,
are set forth by the Metaphors of Adultery, Whoredom, Fornication, etc. as
likewise from some others besides these. But I judge it not so necessary, the
argument, or inference, being near enough at hand to be descried by a little
consideration: and besides, somewhat has been already spoken to such a purpose
in the Answer to the 48. Question of this Chapter. Those words of the Spouse,
or Church, to Christ (there pointed to) Also our bed is green (Cant. 1.16.) are
meant (according to Mr. Brightman, who is the best Expositor of this Mystical
piece of Scripture, that I have yet seen) of the Temple purged, and the
Ordinances of Divine Worship restored to their native purity, by the Religious
King Josiah, in the 18. year of his Reign, whereof we read, 2 King. 23. and
Chr. 3.4.

Quest. 57.

Why should the bringing in, or using, of any foraign Ceremony, or Rite of
Humane invention and contrivance, be looked upon by God, as adulterating and
corrupting his worship, and hereupon provoke his Jealousy, especially when the
worship prescribed by himself, is performed, and exhibited unto him also?

Answ.

Because it is the sovereign privilege, and prerogative of God, as well to
nominate, appoint, and enjoin his own worship, as to be worshipped with it.
This is clear, both in the Scriptures, and in Reason. And they have built the
high place of Topheth -- to burn their sons and daughters in the fire, WHICH I
COMMANDED THEM NOT, neither came it into my heart, (Jer. 7.31.) The
wickedness of their Act, who devised this new kind of worship, or devotion,
is not here estimated, either by the unnaturalness or barbarous Cruelty of it,
nor yet by their intendment of it unto the honor of the Idol Moloch, but only
by this, that God commanded it not: which plainly implies, that it is an
usurpation, upon, or of, his Prerogative: when men set up any worship, or any
piece or appurtenance of worship, without his Command, and that for want of the
impresse of Divine institution upon it, it is highly provoking in the sight of
God, how specious or pretensible soever it may be otherwise, or with men. See
further upon this account, Jer. 19.5. Jer. 32.35. Isa. 66.4. Deuteronomy. 17.3. From
these words, ( Deuteronomy. 27.5.) And there shall thou build an Altar unto the Lord
thy God, an Altar of stones: thou shall not lift up any Iron tool upon them; it
is of ready observation.

1. That men have itching desires to be beautifying and adorning the worship of
God with their additional and artificial devices, judging it too simple, plain,
and homely, unless they shall put decency and comeliness upon it.

2. That God notwithstanding does not any whit more allow men to put to, then
to take from, that which he has ordered and directed in this kind; according
to that strict charge delivered once and again unto men, in the Law: Ye shall
not ADD unto the word which I, command you, neither shall you diminish ought
from it: that you may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God, which I
command you: (Deuteronomy. 4.2. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Josh. 1.7. Prove. 30.6.) In this last
place the words are: Add thou not unto his word, lest he reprove thee, and thou
be found a liar, [in that thou promised'st unto thy self, approbation and
favor from God, as doing him worthy service in completing his Word with thy
Supplements, when as thou meetest with nothing from him but displeasure, in a
penal reproof, for such thy presumption. In Scripture, that which deceives,
or disappointeth a man, whether it be a person, or thing, is frequently termed,
a Lie: and he that deceives himself with vain hopes or expectations, which are
a kind of promises made unto a man's self, may be termed a Liar; as well as he
that promises unto another, and disappointeth him. Deuteronomy. 33.29. Psalm. 66.3.
according to the Hebrew. So likewise Psalm. 18.45. See this noted in there
margent of the larger Bibles of the last Translation]. You may, unto the former
texts, add Rev. 22.18. and apply it to the matter in hand, Eccles. 3.14. Now,
to add unto the worship of God, is the same thing in substance (if it be not a
degree above it in impiety, and presumption) with making additions unto his
Word: As it is a greater crime in a woman to admit of dalliance with another
man, then to report her husbands sayings with some addition of words of her own.

From hence it appears, how insufficient and weak a plea it is to justify
the plowing with an Ox and an Ass together in the field of Gods Worship (I
mean, the making up of a service, or worship of God, of divine and humane
prefcriptions, blended and intermixed the one with the other) that such rites
and ceremonies, which are decent, may be allowed in the worship of God, not
being prohibited by him, although they call men their Fathers. For from what
has been now argued from the Scriptures, it is fully evident, that as God by
saying Thou shall not Commit Adultery, has restained men from the carnal
knowledge of all the women in the world, every man's lawful Wife only excepted;
although he has named none of them, and though many of them be very fair, and
comely: so has he excluded from part and fellowship in his worship, all
ceremonies whatsoever of foraign invention, without naming them, how decent or
comely soever any of them may seem in the eyes of men. For otherwise, to call
any ceremony in the worship of God decent, being of a Creature extraction, is
that grand absurdity, which Logicians call, Cotradictio in adjuncto, as if a
man should talk of cold fire, or dry water. The most tattered patch, ripped off
a beggars coat, and stitched upon a new cloak of the most Orient Scarlet and
richest trimming otherwise in the most visible place of it, would every whit as
well become this rich Garment, as the most plausible and best conditioned
ceremony that ever was born of flesh and blood in the worship of God. There is
no man more desirous of uniformity in the worship and service of God in his
Church, yea of such an uniformity which I conceive to be most, yea (rather)
only fecible, than I. For I presume there is no person, that owneth the name of
a Christian, but is willing and free to subscribe, and practice, that worship
in all points, which he knows or believes, to be prescribed by God himself.
They are the grand enemies to the Uniformity we speak of, who obtrude upon the
Consciences, either of weak and tender, or of strong and understanding
Christians, such ceremonies, and formalities in the worship and service of God,
which being heterogeneal and apocryphal, are so conditioned, that they are not
in reason like to yield any better fruit, then those foolish and unlearned
questions, as, the Apostle calls them, which (he says) engender strifes, 2 Timothy 2.23.

And as God in the Scriptures from place to place, claims it as his
appropriate prerogative, to order and prescribe his own worship, not allowing
any Creature, part or fellowship with him herein; so does reason it self invest
him with it accordingly. For to make it any ways meet, or (indeed) tolerable,
for a creature to have the least of his fingers in amending, improving, or
advancing the worship of God appointed by himself by any additional supplement
thereunto of his own devising, this horrid supposition must be made, and
subscribed, viz. that God either knows nor what is good and meet for himself,
or that he is neglective of his own good, and had rather be provided for, in
the concernments of his Glory, by the good will and wisdom of men, then by his
own.

So then, it being the prerogative of God, claimed, and appropriated unto him,
by himself, and adjudged unto him by the clear light of Reason it self, to be
the sole founder and disposer of his own worship, how can he look upon any
thing of Creature-contrivance practiced herein, as a member, or part of it, but
with an eye of provoked jealousy, and as a blasphemous pollution of his
worship, equivalent (indeed) to the setting up and worshipping another God, or
Gods with him? For it being acknowledged a branch of divine sovereignty, to
appoint divine worship, he that in the performance of this Worship shall allow,
or practice, any thing, as somewhat, or as a part of it, which is devised by a
Creature, does by this practice, or allowance, entitle such a creature to
Divine Honor, and makes it equal with God. Therefore in all will worship
there is Idolatry committed, yea and such Idolatry, which, though it may be
thought too hard a censure, to call palpable, or gross, yet will the practice
of it (and how much more, the first excogitation of it? and how much more then
this, all forcible compulsion unto it?) render men, (endued with reason and
understanding (as it were) on purpose to enable them to judge righteous
judgment, and this, where appearance tempts them to judge otherwise)
extremely obnoxious to the severe jealousy and judgment of God.

Quest. 58.

What is the sum of the Third Commandment?

Answ.

That we conscientiously refrain all such behavior, and demeanor of our
selves, in thought, word, and deed, whereby any contempt, neglect, or
disesteem, is likely to accrue, either from our selves, or others, unto any the
holy and honorable things of God: and that on the contrary in all the said
ways and respects, we so carry our selves in, and about, and toward these
things, that we may, as far as is possible, cause a reverence and awe of
them, in the consciences and souls, both of others and our own.

Quest. 59.

What are the particular duties required in this Commandment, or some of the
chief of them?

Answ.

To meditate, and speak of, upon all occasions, with reverence and due
circumspectness, the names and titles of God, his nature, attributes, word,
ordinances, servants, works, both of Creation, and of providence (mercies and
judgments): In like manner to hear his word preached, to call upon his name
(both in public, and in private) to exercise our selves in all other
ordinances, and parts of his worship, with desire, zeal, care, diligence,
frequency, faith, joy, humility, etc. So to make confession of our sins, with
brokennesse of heart, and contritenesse of spirit and with unfeigned purposes
of future amendment. So also to swear by the name of God (whenever we are
called, or have a just occasion to swear at all) in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness ( Jer. 4.2.) To use the comforts of this present life, meat,
drink, apparel, house, sleep, recreation, etc. with thankfulness, and
moderation, with frequent and earnest prayer unto God, that they may be all
sanctified unto us [that is, that we may be quickened, encouraged, and disposed
with all cheerfulness and freedom of heart to serve him, by means of our
enjoyment and use of them.]

Quest. 60.

What are the sins forbidden in this Commandment?

Answ.

Some of the chief of them are these: blaspheming the name of God, swearing by
it customarily, vainly, rashly, falsely, maliciously: swearing in like manner by
Creatures, as by bread, drink, life, light, faith, troth, etc. So likewise
banning, cursing, imprecating evil in the name of God, or otherwise, against
any creature (especially because we judge our selves or ours injured, or
neglected, by them) making use of the name of God, or any of his titles, in
charms, sorceries, or spells; seeking to the Devil, by witches, wizards,
conjurers, astrologers, for help or relief, in sickness, losses, or for the
knowledge of things future: despising, neglecting, careless or irreverent
using and repairing unto, without preparation, any the ordinances of God, as
reading of the Scriptures, hearing the word preached, prayer, sacraments,
fasting, etc. Neglecting to acquaint our selves with the titles, attributes and
providential dispensations of God, neglecting or omitting to make a due and
seasonable use of them, in administering admonitions, exhortations, reproofs,
counsels, comforts unto others, or our selves, living scandalously in a
profession of Christianity, etc.

Quest. 61.

What is it properly to take the name of God in vain?

Answ.

The word vain, and vanity, signifying in Scripture, both that which is false,
and that which is frivolous (that is, which, is of a slender, or no
consequence) indifferently, to take or to take up,) as the word more proper
signifies) the name of God in vain, imports some such act, by which a man
impaireth, (or, the degree tendency whereof is to impair) the honor and
reverence of one, or other of the names and titles of God, which whilst they
are contumeliously and unworthily handled by the tongues of some, they commonly
have, in the hearts and consciences of all: Or more particularly thus: To take
the name of God in vain, is to life it, either upon some trivial of impertenent
occasion, or for the confirmation of somewhat than is false.

Quest. 62.

What is the meaning of this Clause, The Lord will not hold him guiltless?

Answ.

The Lord will surely judge and punish him, as a person guilty of a great sin.
The expression is figurative: and the figure according to the notion whereof it
is framed is, when words properly taken signify little, but import, or intend
much. Rhetoricians give it the name of Meiwsis, or Liptote. It is very frequent
in the Scriptures. It shall not be accepted ( Levi. 19.7.) that is, it shall
highly provoke me (as the next verse makes plain): See the same Phrase in the
like sense, Levit. 7.18. So Mat. 10.42. Verily. I say unto you, he shall not
lose his reward, tnat is, he shall be exceedingly rewarded. And thou Bethlehem
art not the least, etc. Mat. 2.6. meaning, that this City should be of very
great note and fame amongst the chief Cities of Judah. Again, 1 Cor. 10.5. with
many of them God was not well pleased, meaning, that he was most grievously
displeased with them. Once more: Revel. 12.7, 8. -- and the Dragon fought, and
his Angels, and prevailed not; that is, were utterly vanquished, and
overthrown. Some learned men rather conceive of this form of speech, as proper
to the Hebrew tongue, and lay down this as a general rule; that Adverbs of
denying signify the contrary of that, to which they are applied. Both
conceptions give the same Emphasis and import that kind of Expression, or
phrase, whereof we now speak. So that the meaning of the words. -- will not
hold him guiltless, undoubtedly is, will most certainly and severely punish
him. But this threatening is to be understood, as (more generally) threatenings
in Scripture against other kinds of sins and sinners, are; namely so, that the
execution of them is not intended, when the offender takes Sanctuary at a true
and timely Repentance.

Quest. 63.

May there any reason be given, why this and the former Commandment only,
should be delivered with Threatenings against those, that should transgress or
disobey them? For there is no threatening found in any of the rest?

Answ.

Besides that general Threatening, wherewith the whole Law, and every
Commandment of it, is sanctioned, ratified, and confirmed, Cursed every one
that continues not in all things, which are written in the book of the Law to
do them, Gal. 3.10. (cited Gospelwise, that is, with more perspicuity of sense
and meaning, from Deuteronomy. 27.26.) there may this reason be conceived, why the two
Commandments mentioned, should be strengthened, and disobedience unto them
endeavored to be prevented, by particular threatnigs annexed unto them
(respectively) namely because the corrupting of the worship of God, and the
profanation of his name and holy things, are of a more pestilential and
destructive consequence to the observation of all the rest of the
Commandments, and so to the very life and soul of Religion, then the
transgression of any, yea of many of the others. This might be argued and
proved to any man satisfiable with reason. But because this engagement cannot
be well performed without more discourse, then will be contained within the
Limits of my intended brevity; and withal, the truth of it being of no
difficult apprehension, or belief, even without any discourse at all, upon
these considerations, I shall leave it (at present) to shift for it self
amongst the thoughts and judgments of men. And this further might be added unto
it, that notwithstanding the most pernicious consequence of the violation of
these Commandments (even now named) yet God foreseeing that there would in
future ages, from time to time, arise men of corrupt interest, and daring wits
and consciences, that would by captious and insnaring disputes, attempt to
elude his mind and intent in them, persuading and imboldening men to such
actings, wherein they should sin against them; and further, foreseeing that
these men would (for the most part) have the powers of this world on their
side, not only to countenance or strengthen them in their way, but to double
and treble the tempting force of their Arguments, and disputes, with the fear
of the material sword; God (I say) foreseeing that these things would be,
might in mercy to the precious souls of men, render the transgression of these
Commandments, so much the more formidable, and by special threatenings of his
displeasure against the breach of them, over-balance the temptations, both of
plausible and circumventing arguments, and likewise of the frowns and
threatenings of the greatness of this world.

Quest. 64.

What is the sum, or scope, of the Fourth Commmandement?

Answ.

That the day appointed by God for a religious rest (which we formerly showed
and proved to be the first day of the week, or the Lords day) now under the
Gospel: See the Answers to the 11, 12, and 13. Questions of this Chapter, be
wholly and entirely disposed of by us accordingly, both in reference to our
selves, and to those that are under our government and power, as well persons,
as laboring beasts (in case we have any of the one kind, or other, so related
to us) that is, according to the intent and mind of God in the Commandment,
which are discovered and made known to us in several passages of Scripture,
upon occasion.

Quest. 65.

Whether are Christians under the Gospel, obliged in duty to keep this day with
the same rigor or strictness of observance, wherewith the Jews observed their
Sabbath, or stood bound to observe it?

Answ.

The Jews in, and about, the observation of their Sabbath, stumbled at the same
stone, at which many Christians are apt to stumble in the course of their
obedience, or of their intended obedience, both unto this, and some other of
the Commandments of God. For they, out of a misguided conscience about the
mind of God in his Commandment of their Sabbath, in some rigid (yea and in
some very ridiculous) observances and practices over-acted his mind herein;
whereas out of the same principle, or a worse, they omitted other things of
more weight required of them by God in that his Command. But further to the
Question you last proposed, I answer, by distinguishing thus: If by rigor, and
strictness of observance, you mean, in general, a strict observance of, or
obedience unto, the mind and will of God in the Commandment, as now it is upon
a new account (as has been showed formerly) commended unto us by Christ, and
his Apostles; it ought (doubtless) to be observed by us with the same rigor and
strictness, with which the Jews stood bound to the observation of their
Sabbath. For Christ came not to grant dispensations unto men to neglect, or
omit, the least iota, or title, of the will of God concerning them, but rather,
on the contrary to enable, quicken, and engage them unto a richer, and more
complete conformity hereunto, then was expected from men before his coming, by
reason of their want of those large helps, assistances, and advantages, for
that purpose, which he brought with him into the world, ( Heb. 8, 7.8,9, 10).
Indeed being a Priest of a new Order, he came to make, and made an alteration,
or change, in, or of, the Law, (as the Apostle teaches us, Heb. 7.11, 12.) For
instead of a numerous retinue of troublesome and burdensome ceremonies, which
he has taken away from the Law, he has, by h s authority and command,
substituted an increase of the fruits of Love, and of mutual services, one unto
another. Gal. 5.13. Therefore,

Secondly, If by rigor, and strictness of observance, you mean, a strict
observance of the same things in particular, whether actions, or forbearances,
which the Jews stood bound to observe in their keeping of their Sabbath,
Christians are not bound to observe their Sabbath, or day of rest, with the
same rigor, or strictness. Yea it seems, that for some space of time (and
how long, is uncertain) before Christ had nailed unto his Cross the
handwriting of ordinances, that was against us ( Col. 2. 14.) God had remitted
somewhat of that strictness, which at first he required of the Jews about the
observation of their Sabbath. For at first it was said unto them, ye shall
kindel no fire throughout your habitations upon the Sabbath Day: and again,
whosoever does worf therein, shall be put to death, Exodus 35.2, 3. Yet before
the time specified, they, yea the strictest of them, the Pharisees, made
invitations and feasts on this day, which could not (lightly) be performed,
without both kindling fires and work done (by some, or other). And yet were
they herein blameless. For Christ himself accepted an invitation to one of
their Feasts, and was present at it with other guests, ( Luke 14.1.3.7.)
neither was the making of this feast, any work either of necessity, or of
mercy, or relating to the worship of God (as is evident) neither was his work,
who on the Sabbath day at the command of Christ, took up his bed, and carried
it ( Joh. 5.8, 9.) properly a work of any of these Characters. Their Sabbath
days journey, of the lawfulness whereof unto them, no man, I suppose, ever
made scruple, is somewhat of the same consideration. Of the enlargement of
their liberty as to these and the like particulars, in procedure of time after
a more strict imposition upon them at the first, a fair account might be given,
but that my design of brevity is against it. So that the Jews themselves in
aftertimes, did not observe their Sabbath, nor (as it seems) stood bound to
observe it, with like strictness, in respect of some particulars (and who
knows in respect of how many) unto which they were bound about the time of the
first delivery of the Law thereof unto them, and this by Gods own
interpretation of his Law. Nor is it an easy matter to make it out clearly
from the Scriptures with what either strictness, or liberty from things
burdensome and grievous, they stood at any time bound to observe it. It seems
they were not at any time bound to observe it upon any such terms of
strictness, but that they ought, and (doubtless) might well, call it a
delight, ( Isa. 58.13.) Yea God himself numbreth it amongst their feasts, and
with the same breath (as it were) threatens to cause their mirth, and their
Sabbaths to cease, Hos. 2.11. And some of the Jewish Doctors themselves; by the
day of their gladness ( Number. 10.10) understand their Sabbath (as Mr. Ainsworth
notes upon the place). The greatest outward strictness unto which the Jews
were tied in the keeping of their Sabbath (as far as can be gathered from the
Scriptures) consisted,

First, In abstaining from bodily labor, and servile work, from which
notwithstanding, they were not so strictly restrained neither, but that in
cases of necessity, (and the compass or measure of this necessity, who can
justly measure, or estimate). As likewise in cases of a religious import, they
might, yea in all cases of the former consideration, and in many of the latter,
were bound thus to labor and work.

Secondly, In forbearing to set any of their Children, servants, or cattle,
about any such labor or work, excepting only in the two cases mentioned.

Thirdly, In a serious preparing of themselves privately, or with their
families (if they were heads of any) for the more public and solemn worship
of God, in the Tabernacle, Temple, or some of their Synagogues.

Fourthly, In repairing duly on this day to one or other of these places, and
there to join with their Brethren that were present, in the public worship of
God.

Fifthly, In exhorting and persuading, if need were, those of their families to
accompany them hither, and to behave themselves reverently in the worship and
service there.

Sixthly, In meditating, pondering, and hiding in their heart, the word of God,
after they have heard it read, preached or expounded unto them.

Seventhly, In exercising mercy, as well toward their Beasts, as toward their
Brethren upon occasion.

Eighthly, (and lastly) in refraining all idle, vain, and impertinent
communication, all discoursing of worldly business and affairs, all
leightnesse and uncomlinesse in behavior, all indulging themselves, and giving
way to their hearts in their secret workings against the Sabbath, as detaining
them from their worldly occasions longer then they can willingly or well bear,
etc. That the Jews in the observation of their Sabbath, were obliged by God
unto these particulars, may I suppose be proved from the Scriptures: but I do
not remember any thing further, having the least show of rigor, or strictness
that was required of them upon this account. For to say, that this was further
required of them, that in the vening or close of their Sabbath, they were to
gather up by Repentance, what they had scattered in the day by forgetfulness,
or other infirmities of the flesh, and humbly to crave of God in Prayer the
forgiveness of the iniquity of their holy things, and to bless him with
thanksgiving for his holy ordinances, and the like, amounts to no more (upon
the matter) then to say, they were bound on that day to do that which they
stood bound to do every day besides, not to add, that to bless and praise God,
yea and to pray unto God for things needful, and comfortable, and especially
for forgiveness of sins, upon those terms of a gracious audience and
acceptance, on which the Jews might do both, are so far from deserving the
name of things strict, or rigid, that David who perfectly understood their
nature, and propriety of working, pronounces them pleasant and joyful. See
and compare Psalm. 135.3, with Psalm. 63.3, 4, 5. (and many other places in the
Psalms). Concerning the daily offering that was to be doubled upon their
Sabbath days ( Number. 28.9, 10) (this was indeed a little more trouble (and but
a little neither) to those that served at the Altar: but it did not render the
service of the day any whit more troublesome unto the generality of the people.
Now certain it is, that Christ, who came to call the servants of God unto a
far greater liberry in his worship and service, then was permitted unto them
under the Law of Moses, has not encumbered the observation of the Christian
Sabbath with any austerities of duty, or service either positive, or privative
(I mean, either in things to be done, or in things to be forborne) beyond what
was charged upon the Jews in the keeping, or for the sanctifying of their
Sabbath. If then their Sabbaths, notwithstanding any seeming severity, or rigor
of those injunctions, unto which they were tied to submit in the keeping of
them, were yet a delight, and days of gladness and mirth (as we herd) unto
those that loved and feared God amongst them: how much more should good
Christians under the Gospel, rejoice in keeping holy their Sabbaths, the
Ordinances and services whereof have more marrow and fatness, much more
heavenly sweetness in them, then theirs had, the external observation of them
in the mean time, being no whit more charged with any thing grievous, or
burdensome to the flesh, but rather much eased, and better accommodated unto
their comfort, if not otherwise, yet by the far richer, and more gracious
supplies of the Spirit; which also they may obtain to what measure they shall
desire, if they shall stir up themselves to ask them of God accordingly?

Quest. 66.

What then are the duties required of Christians in this Fourth Commandment,
or such of them, by which an estimate may best be made of the rest?

Answ.

First, in this Commandment, they are enjoined to remember in the six days
preceding that their Sabbath, or day of holy rest, is drawing near, and will be
with them in the course of it: and that they be accordingly diligent and
careful so to dispatch, contrive, and settle their worldly business within
the compass of these days, that if it be possible, no temptation from hence
may lie upon them to violate the rest of their holy day, when it comes. Next,
in the morning of this day, being come, to sanctify and prepare themselves for
the regular observing it, as well in respect of inward as outward requirements,
by a serious and effectual meditation of the high concernments (for their
well-being, both in this life and in that which is to come) of a conscientious
observance of this day, and also of the manifold dangers and great evils both
to soul and body that are justly to be feared upon the contempt or neglect of
it. Then, by prayer as time and opportunity will permit or otherwise by short
and fervent ejaculations, to put themselves into the best capacity they can,
for a fruitful attendance upon the ordinances of the public worship of God,
and to repair unto them accordingly in due time, and in the enjoyment of them
to behave themselves with an exemplary reverence, and fear: and if they have
Children (capable of instruction) or servants under them, to use all Christian
wisdom, with gentleness and gravity, to bring these unto the love and liking
of the same practices with them in the religious keeping of such days; and
withal to be render and careful that they do not make the worship and service
of God wearisome, or burdensome unto them (before they know what it means) by
any importune urging, pressing, or compelling them to religious duties beyond
their strength, and what they are well able to bear, or to perform; which may
soon be worse and more grievous unto them, then to be held to their ordinary
labors; and so without tasting any spiritual benefit intended by God by the
observation of this day, they shall be in effect deprived also of that corporal
benefit, of ease and refreshing, which was in special manner designed by him
unto such as these, in his appointment of such a day. Besides the duties
mentioned, we are further required in the Commandment, to exercise our selves
in works of mercy, as God ministers occasion, and affords means, as in
visiting the sick, in relieving the poor, in counselling those that are in
straights, in comforting the abject, and those that are afflicted in mind, etc.
So to perform works of necessity with heavenly minds, and in other cases both
to forbear our selves all bodily labor, and works of our particular callings,
as likewise to employ our Children, Servants, or others, about any business of
this world; to reject or suppress all secret thoughts and motions of a
worldly, or sinful import; to refrain all leight and uncomely behavior, all
recreations, which are either unlawful, or scandalous, all discoursings about
worldly affairs, etc. and generally whatsoever is repugnant to our edification
in faith and holiness, which is the great end of the Commandment.

Quest. 67.

What are the sins forbidden in this Commandment?

Answ.

Some of them are these. Not to remember in the six days before, that there is
such a day, as a day of an holy rest, unto Christians; or that this day is near
at hand; so to neglect our concernments in the affairs of this world in these
six days, that the day of rest, when it comes, will find us, by reason of
such a neglect, under a temptation, to profane it, when it is come, so to
despise, or under-value the conscientious observation of it, as either wholly
to neglect all preparing of our selves or others under us hereunto, or else to
be very slight and negligent in what we do in this kind: to absent our selves
upon any false or frivolous pretense, from, or to come late unto, the public
worship of God, and assemblies of his people, to be careless and loose in our
attention to what is delivered in the name of God unto us, or in hiding or
laying it up as a Treasure, in our hearts and minds, when we have heard it: to
indispose our selves, either by the quantity or quality of what we eat, or
drink on this day, to any of the duties of it: to give way to any drowsy, or
sleepy humor, or dispositon, whilst it is growing upon us in the time of
hearing; to employ our selves, or others, children, servants, or cattle; or to
set on foot, or to entertain discourse about any servile work, or worldly
business, for the present doing whereof there is no real necessity; to use
any recreation either unlawful, or offensive unto others; to think the day
overlong, or tedious; or to wish our selves at present liberty to follow
either our sensual pleasures, or worldly profits; not to be inwardly free, and
cheerfully apaid in these and all other, whether performances, or forbearances,
that are requisite in the due observation of the day; not to offer a sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving unto God in the evening of the day, as well for his
gift and appointment of such days, as for all the good we have received, by
means of his blessing upon us in the duties performed by us, in the keeping of
this day, together with a peace offering of humbling our selves before him for
our failings, and fallings short of fulfilling his will and pleasure concerning
us in the observation of the day, etc.

Quest. 68.

Whether are these words, Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work, to
be taken, as a command, or as a permission only?

Answ.

They are not to be taken, as either the one, or the other, if we mean,
absolutely and properly, but in a sense compounded (as it were) both of a
command, and a permission. For simply and absolutely to command labor
appertains not to the first table but to the second, and is enjoined in the
eighth Commandment here (according to the import of the second, fourth, and
fifth rules formerly laid down in this Chapter). Yet it is proper enough to the
first table to require labor or work, in a relative consideration, as namely
in order to the observation of the Commandments hereof (respectively). And in
this respect is labor, and working in the six days, required in this fourth
Commandment; viz. so far, as is necessary to put us into a condition of more
liberty, and freedom of mind, to attend upon the duties required, in a regular
observation of the day of rest here enjoined. Further then this, the words you
inquire about, are permissive only.

Quest. 69.

God then having commanded us to labor, and work, all the six days, in case
we find our selves in a defective capacity for the due sanctifying of the
seventh day, without laboring all the six, whether is it lawful for men,
suppose in any kind or degree of the most lawful Authority over us, to command
us off from laboring on any of the six days, be it to attend upon ever so
considerable a work otherwise, as prayer and fasting, or the like, especially
not knowing, whether they shall not hereby cast a snare upon us, in making us
less free in our minds to a regular and strict observance of the day of rest
appointed by God, then we were likely to have been, had we been permitted to
labor in our callings the full time granted unto us?

Answ.

If the occasion, upon which we are by any lawful authority, required to
desist from our ordinary labor on a week day, be justifiable and good, as the
^u^bling of our selves before God by prayer and fasting, with others, for the
turning away some heavy judgment of God either lying upon us, or threatening us,
or for the obtaining of his blessing upon any lawful and necessary undertaking
for public good, or the like, it is rather God himself then men, that takes
us off from our labor, in such cases. In that day (says the Prophet Esai) did
the Lord of Hosts call to weeping and to mourning, etc. Esa. 22.12. Now God
commanding us to labor the six days, etc. with no other intent, or for none
other end, then that being free from worldly cares and distractions, when the
day of his holy rest comes, we might be in the better frame and composure of
mind to yield obedience unto him, in the due observance of it, it may with
comfort, yea with confidence, be expected from him, that when in obedience unto
him otherwise, we shall forbear working on any of the six days, he will so
interpose with his good providence on our behalf, that we shall suffer no such
prejudice thereby in our worldly affairs, but shall be in as good (or rather in
a better) condition to observe the day of rest as without such a forbearance we
were like to have been. About the time when the Law of the former Sabbath was
given unto the Jews, there were many festival solemnities, within the Circuit
of the year, enjoined by God, and to be observed as well on any of the six
days, as on the seventh, as often as the days of the month, unto which they
were fixed in their institutions (respectively) happened to be any of these
days: and yet we hear of no complaint from any, that by being deprived of
their labor on one, or more, of the six days upon such an account, they were
disadvantaged, or discomposed in the least, for the sanctifying of the Sabbath.
We read likewise of fasts proclaimed by the Kings of Judah, one by Jehosaphat,
a good King, 2 Chr. 20.3. another by Jehoiakim, a wicked King, Jer. 36.6.9. we
read of a third, proclaimed by Ezra, a godly Ruler Ezra. 8.21.^3. Nor is it
like that any of these were kept on the Sabbath day. However, the Fast
prescribed unto the Jews in captivity, by Queen Ester, was required by her to
be kept three days together (the occasion being very urgent and weighty) Esth.
4.16. So that she judged it lawful, as the occasion might be, to take people
off from their weekly labor, at least for two days together, without fear of
putting them upon any temptation of violating the rest of the Sabbath. Indeed
for persons in authority to compel people to forsake their ordinary work on
any of those days on which God has either commanded or permitted them to
work, to attend either upon such ordinances of devotion, which being of humane
prescription, are not like to have the quickening presence of God in them, or
be it upon ordinances of divine institution, as preaching, fasting, giving of
thanks, etc. when the occasions or grounds, upon which they are forced from
their labors to attend them, are in presence only warrantable and just, but in
reality and truth have nothing in them to justify such a divorce between men,
and their lawful employments, being either frivolous, or wicked, as the ground
of Jezabels fast was, I King. 21.9, 10. and so of those hypocritical Jews, Esa.
58.4 In these cases (I say) and upon such grounds as these, to wrest men's
labor, of which they should eat, out of their hand, is no better in the sight
of God, then oppression, begotten either of ignorance, or impiety.

Quest. 70.

At what time, or hour of the 24, of which the natural day consists does the
Christian Sabbath begin?

Answ.

I do not know that this Question, or the matter of it was ever taken into
consideration in any of the reformed Churches abroad. Amongst us, some both
Ministers, and private Christians, have judged themselves bound in conscience
to make diligent inquiry after the precise truth in the case, that so they
might not, either through carelessness, or ignorance, either take from, or add
to, or alter any thing in the Commandment of God concerning the time of that
holy rest, which he has enjoined. These (as it seems) take it for granted,
that God both under the Law, required of the Jews, and under the Gospel
requires also of Christians, not only an entire and complete natural day,
consisting of 24 hours to be sanctified for a day of an holy rest, but
further, that the beginning of this day be computed from a precise fixed point
of time, belonging to the said 24 hours. The former of these suppositions
cannot well be admitted, either with reference unto the Jews, or Christian
Gentiles, at least if we take the word, sanctify, or keep holy, (in the
Commandment) in the sense wherein it is generally understood, in the opening
of the Command, [namely for exercising our selves in holy duties] and extend it
to the whole time of the 24 hours. For God (doubtless) does not require of
men to sanctify (in this sense) the said whole day (consisting of 24 hours)
which includes the night, as well as that, which we call the day, nor more then
about the one half of it, or rather such a proportion of it, as they usually
bestow in their ordinary labors on the other six days. This the express
words of the Commandment seem to imply: Six days shall thou labor etc. but
the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord, etc. as if he had said: the day of
thy rest, shall answer, or be the same, in duration with one of the six days
of thy labor: as the day of thine ordinary labor, so shall the day of thy
sacred rest be. For the latter supposition, that we stand bound by precept from
God to enter upon, and begin the duties of the sanctification of our Sabbath,
at a fixed and determinate point of time (as either, in the evening of the
foregoing day, when some hold the Christian Sabbath begins, as the Iew's
Sabbath did; or in the morning, or first peep of the (artificial) day
following, which is the more common opinion of professors amongst us; or, as
some others conceive, at the midnight between; judging the Sabbath then to
begin) the Supposition (I say) might take place in reference to the Jews,
inhabiting in their own land, and their Sabbath (at least with a very small,
and scarce-discernable variation) their countries being one and the same, and
this of small extent, in which respect, evenings, and mornings, began much
about the same point of time in the most, distant parts of it. But it cannot be
supposed that the Sabbath, or day of rest, the observation whereof is incumbent
upon Christians, should, in reference to them all, begin precisely at the same
point of time, in respect of the vast distances, east, west, north, and south,
between the several countries and places of their dwellings. For by reason
hereof, the beginning of the day (and so of the evening) unto those that
inhabit far Eastward, is by many hours sooner then unto them that live as
far remote unto the West. So then (with submission unto those that are able
to give a better account) the best way, and most agreeable to the intimation of
the words of the Commandment (as was lately noted) to compute the beginning
and the end, of the Christian Sabbath, is to estimate them by the time, when
laboring men, in the climate, or country, where we live, do ordinarily begin,
and end, their daily work or labor.

Quest. 71.

What is the surname of the fifth Commandment?

Answ.

That every person of mankind, capable of the knowledge of the Law, behave
himself toward all others, whether Superiors, inferiors, or equals,
according to the natural, proper, and due exigency of these relations, in their
several kinds and degrees, (respectively) unto them, and consequently, that
they be diligent and careful to inform themselves of what is due from them unto
men, by virtue of, and right of claim from, these relations, as also to
prepare, enable, and fit themselves for the performance of all things
accordingly.

Quest. 72.

What are the duties, or some of the chief of them, which inferiors owe unto
their superiors?

Answ.

Superiors are of different kinds, as either natural, civil, or
ecclesiastique. If then you ask concerning the duties, which are due in common
unto all these from their respective inferiors, they are these and the like.
To pray for them; to honor and reverence them. Not to neglect, or despise
them, for wants, or weaknesses incident unto men: but to cast a covering of
love over them: not to envy, or grudg them the pre-eminence, which God has
given them: but to stand up and plead their cause, as far as with truth, and
a good conscience they may, against those that shall disparage them, or speak
evil of them, etc. If you desire to know the duties, which are more
particularly due unto the several kinds of superiors mentioned, from their
Inferiors (respectively) it were better to propound distinct Questions
concerning them.

Quest. 73.

What are then the duties, which the superior, which you term Natural, may
justly, and his due, expect from his inferiors?

Answ.

Under the three general heads, or kinds of Superiors mentioned, there are
several distinct, and more particular species of superiors comprehended: and
according to the difference of those contained under every of the said heads,
some difference there may be in the duties due from their Inferiors, unto
them: which difference of duties, may be sufficiently apprehended, partly by
the light of nature, and partly by the written word of God. Of that kind of
superior, whom nature and the law thereof makes such (concerning which you now
require) natural Parents, Fathers and Mothers, by whom we received our lives
and being in the world, are the chief. Some of the principal duties, which
their Inferiors, their Children, owe unto them, are these, and the like (being
specialities of those general duties, which, as was even now declared belong
in common to all the kinds of superiors,) to be content with such provisions,
or allowances in outward things, as meat, drink, apparel, lodging, liberty for
recreation, company, placing out to trades, or callings, etc. as they (their
Parents) are either able, or judge meet, to make for them; to accept of
chastisement from them for their misdoings; not muttering, repining, or waxing
sullen, but giving them reverence, to be ready and cheerful to do what they
command them (in things that are lawful); not to grieve or discontent them by
any unduebehaviour, as by giving them froward or cross answers, by
stubbornness, idleness, wastfulnesse, keeping vain company, neglecting what
they entrust them with, or the like: so also, to ponder, and treasure up, their
wholesome counsels, and instructions, and to practice them, as occasion shall
be; to imitate their virtues, not to seem to take notice of their infirmities,
unless it be to cover them, not to despise them for their Age, Poverty, or
Sufferings, but to be so much the more respectful of them, and helpful unto
them, not to dispose of themselves in marriage without their consent, not to
disclose their secrets; not to hold familiarity with their known Adversaries,
etc.

Quest. 74.

Is there any other species, or under-kind, of that sort, or kind of Superior,
which you call, natural?

Answ.

He that is aged, is a kind of Superior, and such by nature, unto him, whose
years are but few (comparatively). The Superiority of the husband in respect of
the wife, is best referred to this kind also. He that excels in spiritual
gifts and abilities for edification, is a kind of superior likewise, in
respect of those, who are beneath him in such endowments. That of Masters in
respect of their servants, more properly belongs to the second, which we
called, politic.

Quest. 75.

What are the duties which younger persons owe unto those, that are ancient?

Answ.

To rise up before them, to give them precedence of place, and liberty to speak
first, or before them, to submit themselves unto them, etc. But these are to be
reputed duties belonging to the younger in reference to the aged, only in
ordinary cases, and when either both the one, and the other are private
persons, or at least when the younger is such. For otherwise, if the younger
be, either in respect of some political, or ecclesiastical office, superior to
him, that is ancient and a private man, (which is a case that frequently
occurrs) the order of nature in this Case, is to give place to the order, as
well of Civil, as of Ecclesiastical, or Church-constitution, and the duties
mentioned to enterchange givers and receivers.

Quest. 76.

What are the duties wherein the wife stands bound unto the Husband?

To submit her self, and to be subjet unto him, in every thing, as unto the
Lord. Ephesians. 5.22.24. to reverence and honor him, to be helpful and faithful
unto him, to delight in his presence, to please him in all things that are
honest, and comely, not to provoke, or grieve him, in any thing, as by froward
or cross answers, by sharp or loud speaking, by repeating matters of former
discontent, by sullenness, by sowrenesse or lowringnesse of countenance, by
aptness to take offense at his words, or actions, by neglecting his counsels
or desires, his kindred, or friends; by wastfulnesse of his estate, by
slothfulness, or carelessness in those household affairs, which appertain to
her inspection and care; by impatience or discontentednesse under such
troubles, or crosses, which are daily incident unto the best families, by an
unseemly fierceness or sharpness of carriage toward children, or servant, by
affecting over-costly or garish attire, by any leight, wanton, or suspicious
behavior; by frequenting places or company which he disliketh; by any
expressions of a profane or ungracious spirit, by not giving her best
assistance unto him, that God may be daily and duly worshipped in the family
(with other the like).

Quest. 77.

What is required of those that inferior in gifts, or abilities, for
edification, as in wisdom, knowledge, utterance, tongues, etc. by way of duty,
toward those whom God in such endowments, has made superior to them?

Answ.

They ought to honor and respect them, as persons raised up by God amongst
their Brethren, for their furtherance and help upon occasion; in the things
both of their present comfort, and eternal peace; so again, to give testimony
unto, and vindicate the good gifts of God in them, against those, that shall
any ways vilify or disparage them, to pray for them, that God will please to
increase their store, and make them more fruitful, and keep them humble under
the greatest increase that shall be given them; not to judge them, or take
offense at them, in case they take liberty in some things which their
consciences will not suffer them to take etc.

Quest. 78.

What are the duties, which inferiors are in this Commandment, charged with
toward those that are their superiors in a Politic, or civil
consideration, as Magistrates, or rulers in the civil state, and masters over
servants?

Answ.

The Laws of magistrates, being clearly consistent with the Laws of God,
(whether written in the Scriptures, or dictated by the light of Nature) ought
carefully and conscientiously to be observed by them. Such laws of theirs, unto
which they cannot, without sin, or a doubting conscience, yield a practical
obedience; they ought to subject themselves unto passively, that is, patiently
and with a meek spirit, accept of that punishment, which they impose upon the
non-observers of them. The persons of their Magistrates, yea though they be
none of the best, they ought to reverence and honor, as being set over them by
the providence of God, under him to rule and govern them for their good: and
so, to defend them with their estates, bodies, lives, when necessity requires;
to pay them tribute and custom willingly, to pray for them, and this more
particularly then for other men, to vindicate the justness of their authority,
their honor, and reputations, as far as with truth and a good conscience we
can (when occasion requires) and (however) not to reproach, revile or speak
evil of them, etc.

Quest. 79.

What is here required of servants as due from them unto their Masters?

Answ.

To count them worthy of all honor, to obey them in all things [that are
lawful] to please them well in all things, to show all good fidelity toward
them, to be subject unto them with all fear, not only if they be good and
gentle, but even though they be froward, not answering again, not pu^loining
from them Tit. 2, 9, 10. 1 Timothy 6.1. Coloss. 3.22. Ephesians. 6.5, 6. 1 Pet. 2.18.
(compared).

Quest. 80.

What are the duties, wherein we stand obliged toward our Superiors in a
spiritual or Church-consideration, as Pastors and Teachers, and such as are
over us in the Lord?

Answ.

To esteem them very highly in Love for their work sake, 1 These. 5.13. To obey
and submit our selves unto them, Heb. 13.17. To attend upon their ministry, to
receive their doctrine, being found upon trial agreeable to the Scriptures,
with gladness of heart, to give up our selves unto it; to imitate and follow
them in their Christian and exemplary walkings; to assert their innocence
against the revilings and slanderous tongues of men; to give a free and full
testimony, upon occasion, unto their Christian worth, and those good things of
God that are in them; to stand by them, countenance, and encourage them, under
the injurious dealings and practices of wicked men against them; to make them
partakers with us in all our temporal good things, Gal. 6.6. to pray earnestly
for them, not to grieve or offend them by a loose and unworthy conversation, or
by any unseemly action, etc.

Quest. 81.

You have declared the duties, which God in this fifth Commandment requires
of inferiors to perform unto their superiors of all the three orders or
kinds, Natural, Political, and Spiritual. Now inasmuch as you taught us
formerly, that where the duties of Inferiors toward their Superiors are
commanded, there the Superiors are likewise charged with reciprocal
deportments in the nature of duties, toward their Inferiors; Will you please
further to declare, what God here injoyneth Superiors (according to the
respective kinds of superiority mentioned) to perform unto their Inferiors?
Only by the way, giving us an account, if you be able, why God might please to
signify and express superiors of all kinds, by the names of natural
Parents, Father, and Mother; as also, why the Commandment plainly, and in
terms imposes upon children (and in them upon all other inferiors likewise)
their duties toward their Superiors, leaving these to understand, or take
notice of their charge, by way of consequence only, or from the admonitions, or
demands, of their consciences, being diligently informed by the Scriptures
concerning it? But first (I pray you) your answer to the former of these.

Answ.

Superiors in every kind may be commended by God unto us, by the names of
Fathers and Mothers, yea and be so styled by way of Irem unto themselves,
because these are sweet and pleasant names, and (very probably) intended by
God, both to signify what affections ought to be in all superiors toward
their inferiors, and what reciprocally should be in these toward them; as
that all superiors should be as loving, tender, and careful over those that
are under them, as Fathers and Mothers are over their children; and again, that
inferiors should be as ready, willing, and cheerful, to obey their superiors,
as children are their natural Parents.

Quest. 82.

Have you any thing for an answer to the latter of the two Questions lately
proposed?

Answ.

Inferiors, and more particularly Children (who are first intended in the
Commandment, and as significatours of all the rest) are not so apt, or
inclined, to enquire after their duty toward their superiors, nor yet
(ordinarily) so apprehensive or capable of it otherwise; no no^ yet so forward
or willing, to exhibit o^ perform it, being known, as superiors (in general)
and more especially natural Parents, Fathers and Mothers, are of their duties
toward them. It is a saying not more common, then true (some few exceptions
there may be, as to all, or most general rules, there are) that love
descends, but ascends not [the meaning is, that comparatively, or in a like
proportion, it seldom ascends.] One reason whereof may be, because the
interest of propriety, which the superior has in the inferior, is greater,
and more properly such, then that which the Inferior has in his Superiors:
Children are more the Parents, then Parents are the Childrens [that is, the
Parents have more to do with, and more right to employ, dispose, and make use
of, their Children, to their mind and contentment, which answers the notion of
propriety, then the Children have in respect of their Parents]. In like manner,
Subjects are more the Prince's-his, or his to whom they owe Subjection, then he
is their's. Now as it is natural for men to love their own, in what respect or
degree soever they be their own (whether they be things or persons) so it is
natural also for them to love those things or persons more, ( coeteris
paribus, as we use to say) which are more their own, and wherein their
propriety is larger, and more complete, then those in either kind, which are
less their own. So then Parents (and there is a like consideration of other
superiors, in reference to their inferiors respectively) being naturally more
inclined to act the parts of Parents toward their Children, and to do that
which becomes them in reference unto them, then Children are to perform their
duties toward their Parents; this may be somewhat of the reason why God in this
Commandment, so expressly charge Children with their duty toward their
Parents, and Parents implicitly only, and consequentially with theirs toward
their Children.

Quest. 83.

Now if you please, declare (with what brevity you can) the duties which God,
in this Commandment, requires of superiors in all the three kinds you
mentioned, toward their inferiors, respectively; beginning with the duties of
those, who are by nature such, and so proceeding unto the others. And first,
what are the duties of Parents, Fathers, and Mothers, toward their Children?

Answ.

To be affectionately inclined toward them and to manifest and manage such
their affections, by a conscientious and constant engagement of themselves in
the use of all good and likely means, both to make their condition good and
prosperous in this world, and happy and blessed also in that which is to come;
as, by a timely consecrating them unto the service of God by Baptism, by
frequent and fervent prayer unto God for them, by bringing them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, by a Christian, honest, and discreet
behavior of themselves before them, by keeping them under government, and in
subjection, with love, wisdom, and gravity, not provoking or discouraging
them, by training them up to some honest course of life, or calling, by
correcting them for their misdoings, seasonably and with moderation, not with
anger or fierceness, but with compassion; by allowing them convenient food,
raiment, and liberty; by a timely providing for them fitting consorts in
marriage (if need be); by reserving and laying up somewhat, if they be able, to
leave unto them, etc. It lies upon Mothers, by way of duty, to become nurses,
(if they be able) to their own Children, after the example of Sarah, who in her
old age performed that service unto her son Isaac making none other account (as
it seems) but that it was a duty (as it were) of course for her so to do, Genesis
21.7.

Quest. 84.

What does God require of those by way of duty toward the younger, whom the
privilege of age has made their Superiors (as has been said?)

Answ.

That they be ready to assist them with their counsel, when desired, or when
they see occasion otherwise, that they countenance and encourage them, in, and
unto, all well doing; that they admonish them, with wisdom, love, and
tenderness, when they do amiss: that they walk before them as ensamples of
sobriety, gravity, temperance, faith, love patience, etc. that they despise
them not because of their youth, or set light by them because of some
weaknesses incident to their years, etc.

Quest. 85.

What are the duties of Husbands toward their Wives?

Answ.

To love them dearly, as their own bodies, and as Christ loved his Church,
giving himself for it. Ephe. 5.25.28. To dwell with them according to knowledge
[that is, as the knowledge of the will of God concerning their behavior
toward them in all things, as it is made known in the Scriptures, directs
them and requires of them] not according to humor, passion, lightness of
Spirit or the like; to give honor unto them as unto the weaker vessels [that
is, as persons serviceable unto God, and used by him, as well as themselves;
although not made for such services, which require the like strength, either of
body, or of mind, with those for which men are made] to bear with their
infirmities, to take special notice of all their good services, their loialty,
their subjection, and all expressions of affection toward them, from time to
time, and to return the same, or better measure unto them, both in words and in
deeds, discreetly and in great love and tenderness to admonish them, to
instruct them in things appertaining unto God, and salvation, not to be bitter,
fierce, or sharp unto them at any time, but to delight in their presence, to
give them none occasion of jealousy, to provide for them things necessary
according to their state and calling, to allow them convenient maintenance, and
liberty, to stand by them in the exercise of that authority in the family, as
over children and servants, which belongs unto them; to protect them from
affronts and injuries, etc.

Quest. 86.

What is required of Superiors in gifts toward weaker Christians?

Answ.

That they bear their infirmities [that is, that they depise them not, nor
estrange themselves from them, because of them; this being to constrain them to
bear them themselves Romans 15.1.] that they use not their liberty to their
offense, nor to the enboldening of them to do that, which otherwise they
scruple, or know no sufficient ground on which to judge it lawful; that they be
of a condescending spirit unto them, willing and ready, upon all occasions, to
instruct and teach them as they are able to bear; not giving them strong meat
to eat, when they are able to digest milk only, etc.

Quest. 77.

What is required of the Politic superior, whether magistrate or master, in
reference unto those that are under them, and subject unto them (r spectively).

Answ.

First, God imposes this for a Law upon all magistrates, zealously to desire,
and accordingly to endeavor by a faithful and diligent exercise of the
authority and power committed unto them, the welfare and prosperity of the
people under them, as by procuring (as much as lies in them) wholesome,
necessary, and just laws, and such as these only, to be made for the government
of them, by seeing justice duly executed without partiality, or respect of
persons, by punishing those who being entrusted with the administration of
justice, either for reward, favor, ill will, or the like, abuse the trust
committed unto them, and pervert judgment; by taking an effectual course for
the suppressing of evil doers and all such, who contrary to the good Laws
under which they live, injure or molest any the members of their community; by
encouraging and protecting those that do well and are diligent and active, in
due order, to promote the honor, safety, and welfare of the public; by
procuring all former laws to be repealed, which by experience are found to be,
either un-necessary, or ensnaring, or burdensome unto the people, by an
honorable frugality and moderation in their expenses, that so they may have no
occasion, or temptation upon them to grind their people by hard impositions, or
levies of money, or by any other dishonorable and un-princely courses; by
taking such into their nearest acquaintance, and counsels, who are men of
wisdom, and vvorth, of approved integrity, and public Spirits; by being
vigilant and intent to get timely intelligence, and make discoveries of all
evil designs, or complottings of enemies, whether abroad, or at home, against
the peace and safety of the people under them, and by showing themselves wisely
vigorous, and active in preventing them; by leading their people, by the
authoritative and compulsorie light of their example, into all the commendable
ways of piety and virtue, as of the fear and love of God, of Justice, mercy,
patience, temperance, chastity, bounty, fortitude, and the like.

Concerning Masters, who have servants under them, it is commanded them by God
that they do, or give unto them that which is just and equal, [that is, that
they provide for them and allow them fitting meat, drink, lodging, wages, times
of refreshing, etc. that they take care of them when they are sick, that they
suffer not for want of good attendance, that they exhort and encourage them to
the service of God, instructing, admonishing, and reproving them upon occasion]
Colos. 4.1. That they forbear threatening them [all imperiousness, height, and
fierceness of speech toward them] Ephesians. 6.9. Not to rule over them cruelly, or
with rigor, Levit. 25.43. [that is, not to overburthen them with work, or
labor, (or as the Jews interpret, not to impose work upon them without
limitation, or without necessity, and meerrely for their wills sake, as when no
benefit is, or reasonably can be expected from the labor they impose) nor to
use severity in correcting them as either in correcting them at all, when there
is no just cause, or in exceeding the reasonableness of the cause when there
is any.

Quest. 88.

What are the duties which God requires of Ecclesiastical, or
Church-Superiours, (I mean) Pastors, and Teachers of particular Congregations,
in reference to the people under their several charges (respectively)?

Answ.

To love them (2 Cor. 2.4. and 11.11. and elsewhere) with tenderness and
dearnesse of affection, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8, and so as to be willing, yea glad to
part with their goods or temporal estates, yea and with their lives
themselves, for their sakes, 2 Cor. 12.15. 1 Thessalonians. 2.8. Joh. 10, 11. To pray
for them and this effectually, and continually and to give thanks for them
accordingly, Ephesians. 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.3, 4. Romans 1.7, 8, 9. 1 Thessalonians. 1, 2, 3. and
2.13. (compared) to take care of them, and watch for their souls, 1 Pet. 5.2.
Heb. 13.17. [that is, to be diligent in observing where they are spiritually
weak, and what their irregular motions are, and in considering how and by what
means and applications they may be preserved and kept sound in the faith, so as
to be presented blameless and without spot before Jesus Christ at his
appearing] when they are misled into any error endangering their salvation, to
travail with them in birth, until Christ be formed in them, Gal. 4.19. [that
is, to be as feelingly, as intensely desirous of their recovery unto, and
establishment in the truth as it is in Jesus as a woman in the pangs of an hard
labor is of being well und safely delivered] to be diligent in feeding them
with wholesome doctrine, and with the Words of Eternal life, and not to shun
[through fear, or favor of men] to declare unto them the whole counsel of God
concerning their Salvation, 1 Pet. 5.2. 2 Timothy 4.2. Act. 20.27, 28. Joh. 21.16,
17, 18. (compared) so also to administer unto them the ordinances of the
Gospel, in the purity of their institutions when, and as often as it shall be
judged convenient, Mat. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. To rule and govern
them according to the laws of the Gospel, given by Christ for this end and
purpose, as with diligence, Romans 12.8. so with gentleness, patience, and
meekness of Spirit, and not Lording it over the Heritage of God, 1 Timothy 3, 3,
2 Timothy 2.24. 1 Pet. 5.3. 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. Titus 1.7. and without partiality, and
prejudice [or, hastiness of judgment] 1 Timothy 5.21. To go before them in an
exemplary life and conversation, Tit. 2.7. 1 Pet. 5.3.

Quest. 89.

What may be the reason why a promise of temporal good things should be annexed
to this fifth Commandment, and not any promise at all unto any other
Commandment of the second Table?

Answ.

It is a right observation of the Jewish Doctors, that God is wont to ratify
and strengthen his affirmative commands with promises and his negative with
threatenings. The reason whereof may be, because there is nothing in equity, or
reason due unto the forbearance, or non-acting of sin, and wickedness, but
freedom from punishment: whereas positive rewards are proper to be conferred
upon virtuous and worthy actions and good services. Now all the rest of the
Commandments of the second table, being negative or prohibitory, they are all
sanctioned, or ratified together by that threatening which comprehends them
all, Cursed be he that continues not in all things, etc. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal.
3.10. This may be the reason why no promise is subjoyned unto any of them. But
why the promise, in this Commandment, should be of temporal good things,
rather then of spiritual, this may be one reason; because Children and younger
persons who are more directly, and in the first place minded in it, are more
apprehensive and capable of the good things of this life, then of that which is
to come. Yet this is to be added, that (according to the manner and method
wherein God trained up, and taught his Church in the infancy of it, which was
the state and condition of it when the Law was delivered upon Mount Sina, and
for many ages after) under the long and prosperous life on Earth here promised,
the life of blessedness and glory, which for ever and ever may be overtured,
and comprehended.

Quest. 90.

How does the Apostle affirm this fifth Commandment, to be the first
Commandment with promise (Ephesians. 6.2.) when as we find, as well a promise (as we
formerly touched) as a threatening, in the second Commandment; as namely that
God will show mercy unto thousands of them that love him, etc.

Answ.

This promise though it be inserted in the second Commandment (whereof some
account has been given) yet is it a general promise and relates as well to
the due observance of the rest of the Commandments, as of the second. Whereas
the Apostle's meaning in the words mentioned, clearly is, that the fifth
Commandent is the first, with an appropriate promise, and which is made in a
particular and special manner to the due keeping of that Commandment unto
which it is annexed. Neither does he term it, the first Commandment with
promise, as supposing that there is any more with promise also, after it; but
only that there was none such before it. The word first is used in other
writers in such a notion as this, as well as in the Scriptures; as viz.
exclusively only of any before, not inclusively of any to succeed, or come
after.

Quest. 91

May there be any reason conceived why the Commandment injoyning the honoring
of Parents, and other Superiors, should have place in the Decalogue before
those, which prohibit Murder and Adultery; it being commonly supposed that the
sins committed against the former Commandments, are greater then those against
the latter?

Answ.

The meaning of the common supposal you speak of, is not that all kinds, or
degrees of sins against the former Commandments, are greater then any sin that
can be committed against any latter Command; but only this, that the highest
degree of sinning against a former Command, is more sinful then the highest
degree of sinning against a latter. And I make little question but that there
may be greater sins committed by Children, against Parents, and so against
other Superiors, by those that are under them, if not by Parents also against
their Children and by Superiors against those that are subject unto them, then
the sins of murder or adultery [considered simply as such; and as
transgressions of those Commandments only, wherein they are expressly
forbidden, no circumstances of aggravation from the violation of some other
Commandment, one or more heightning the guilt, or demerit of them]. Yet there
may (I take it) be this reason further, why this fifth should be the frontier,
or leading Commandment of the second Table; viz. because a conscientious and
due observation of it, by children, and inferiors, in honoring their Parents
and Superiors, and by these in a due deportment of themselves according to
their places toward them, and by a regular deportment between equals mutually
(for the duties of these also are comprehended in this Commandment, as was
formerly noted) must needs prepare the way for a constant obedience unto all
the following commands, or for the preventing the transgression of them.

Quest. 92.

You have declared the duties of inferiors, and Superiors (in all kinds)
mutually: will you please to declare likewise (in a very few words) how equals
stand charged one toward another by God in this Commandment?

Answ.

Equals are to regard and own the dignity and worth each of other, to demean
themselves modestly, peaceably, and friendly one toward another; and in giving
honor, to go one before another, Romans 12.10.

Quest. 93.

What is the sum or scope of the sixth Commandment?

Answ.

That we seriously desire, and faithfully endeavor by all means lawful,
proper, and within our power, to preserve both our own lives and persons, and
the lives and persons of others: and that on the other hand, we be
conscientiously careful, neither to do, nor to suffer any thing to be done, as
far as we have means and opportunities to prevent it, that is like to
endanger either.

Quest. 94.

What are the duties more particularly required in this Commandment, or some
of them?

Answ.

The duties here required, are either such wherein we stand bound in reference
unto our selves, for our own preservations, or such wherein we stand obliged
unto others for theirs. In respect of our selves, we are here charged to
maintain and keep up the vigor and activenesse of our minds and spirits,
together with the strength and good habit of our bodies, that in both we may be
serviceable both unto God and Men: and in order unto these ends, to converse
with the grounds of Christian cheerfulness, and to resist all suggestions,
motions, and inclinations which tend to an unprofitable sadness and
lumpishness of soul; to be provident without distracting fears or cares; to
allow unto our selves convenient meat, drink, apparel, lodging, with seasonable
recreation, and physic; not to weary or waste our bodies which immoderate
labor, nor to soak them in excessivenesse of sleep; not to oppress or injure
them with inordinate eating or drinking; not to expose our selves unto
violence, or danger either from men, or in any other kind, but upon very
warrantable and weighty occasions, and when we have good reason to judge our
selves called by God hereunto; to prevent, or qualify the fierceness and
bitterness of men's Spirits against us, by giving them soft words, gentle
answers, and shevving them kindness (upon occasion) to avoid the company of
cholerique, quarrelsome, and angry men; to defend our selves with courage, and
with weapons; if we be assaulted, to use the benefit of the law, if this be
likely at any time to secure us in the possession of our lives, or of the
necessary means of them, and there be no other probable course to effect it; to
commend the safeguard of our lives unto God by Prayer, both by night and by
day, and more especially, when upon his account we shall expose them unto any
imminent peril, etc.

In reference unto others, God in this Commandment requires of us, that we be
seriously and unfeignedly desirous of their safety, welfare, and peace, and
that we endeavor our selves accordingly, upon all occasions, to promote and
maintain them; that we rejoice at the goodness of God toward them in their
preservation and health, that we be compassionate over them when they are
either sick, or in trouble, or in want, or in danger, etc. and that we be
cheerful and free in ministering unto them according to ability and opportunity;
that we exercise patience toward them in beating wrongs, and hard measure from
them, in forgiving the injuries they do us; in not despising them, or
withdrawing our selves, our love, or respects from them, because of some
weaknesses or wants in their words, or actions; that (salving a good
conscience) we avoid all occasions of offending, grieving, troubling, or
discontenting them, as by taking either their sayings, or their doings, in an
ill sense, when they are capable of a good, by refusing to hear, or to admit of
such a purgation or defense of themselves (especially if they be our
inferiors) being accused or suspected, which is in any degree reasonable, and
fair, by denying them any ordinary, or mean courtesy, when they desire it, by
speaking churlishly or unfriendlily to them, by showing any sign of a neglect
of them, by reproving them either unseasonably, or over-sharply; by not
yielding unto them in matters of less consequence, when they are confident
that their demands are just and right (with many the like). In case we be
molested with suits at Lave, not to omit any duty or service of love toward
those that are thus injurious and vex atious in this kind unto us; that we
stand by the poor and helpless when he is unjustly questioned for his life, or
otherwise wronged; and to deliver him, if we able. Briefly, that we be really
careful, that no man whatsoever receive any harm from us, or ours, in his
person by one means or other, but that we make conscience both by our selves,
and ours (as far as we are able to prevail with them) to render the lives of
all men not only safe, but comfortable also, as far as we have means and
opportunity; considering that a life which is uncomfortable is even in
Scripture notion and account, a kind of death; yea and may (very possibly) have
more evil in it then that which is commonly and properly called Death.
Therefore to do any thing willingly, and without a very just cause, which
directly tends to make the life of any man uncomfortable, or less desirable
unto him, is in Scripture sense (and if so, before God) to murder him: Yea not
to do that which is Christian and meet for the comfort of him that is in
distress, or misery, when we have means and opportunities to do it, is a
misdemeanour of little better interpretation.

Quest. 95.

What are the particular sins against this Commandment?

Answ.

These may (for the most part) be estimated by the particular duties enjoined
in it (which were now mentioned). As

First, in respect of our selves; to give way to impressions, or passions of
sorrow, grief, envy or discontent, to waste our Spirits with immoderate carking
and caring for, and about the things of this life; to entertain, or admit of,
though but for a short time, any thought, motion, or suggestion of acting any
thing which we know to be prejudicial to our health, or lives, to undertake any
desperate or hazardous adventure without necessty, or a lawful calling to it,
to be in the company of passionate, fierce, frantic, or furious persons, when
we may avoid it; needlessly to provoke the spirit of any man against us;
idleness, improvidence, expensive courses, and whatsoever tends to bring us
into want, streights, or exigences; to be wanting unto our selves, or
oversparing in things needful for the body, as in convenient meat, drink,
apparel, sleep, exercise, Physique, etc. and so to annoy or damnifie our bodies
with superfluity or excess in any of them; These (with some other particulars
of like consideration) are prohibited in this Commandment, in reference to our
selves. Again

Secondly, in respect of others, we shall be found transgressors by virtue of
this Commandment, if we either hate or envy them, yea or if we pity them
foolishly [that is, either to the danger, or hurt of those themselves whom we
pity, or to the endangering others] if we be causelessly or rashly offended, or
angry with them; if we be transported with any wrathful passion against them
(upon what occasion soever) if we be revengefully inclined, or implacable
toward them, if we shall upbraid them with any infirmity, whether natural or
casual, as with slownesse or bluntness in speaking, with stammering or
brokennesse in utterance, with defectiveness either in their understandings,
memories, etc. or in any of their senses, as seeing hearing, etc. with the want
or loss of any limb or member of their bodies, with baldness or any deformity,
with meanness of parentage, poverty, or disgrace formerly received by them,
either from men, or by any sentence of the Law inflicted on them; if we shall
reproach them with any of their miscarriages, or be vexatious or burdensome
unto them wih frequent barrettings or peltings at them with taunts, or
bitterness of tongue, with clamorous or loud speaking, with complaining of them
where ever we come as having done us wrong, or with any scornful or provoking
carriage of our selves toward them, as by breaking bitter jests upon them, by
shaking the head, or pointing with the finger at them; So again, if we shall
oppress any man with unrighteous or hard dealings, if we shall keep back the
wages of the labourer, or not restore the pledge to him that needs it for his
livelihood, if we shall hoord up corn in times of scarcity, or turn our ears
away from the cries of the poor, etc. Yea, if we do not give meat unto our
enemies when they are hungry, or drink when they are thirsty (for not to do
these, seems to savor of Revenge, Romans 12.19. compared with the 20.) If we
shall be found over-severe in punishing, or correcting, or neglect to prevent
greater miscarriages in any by not punishing, or correcting them seasonably for
lesser, if we shall quarrel with, strike or wound any person, or destroy the
life of any man, by poison, famine, assasination, persuading or commanding unto
dangerous adventures (as David is charged to have slain Vriah with the sword,
because he commanded him to be set in the front of the battle, 2 Samuel 11.15.
and 12.9. compared) or in any other way, except either by course of public
justice, or in a just war, or in our own, or friends defense, when there is no
possible, or at least no probable means otherwise for us to escape with our
lives.

Quest. 96

What is the sum of the Seventh Commandment?

Answ.

That we hate, and abstain from all uncleaness, both inward, and outward, as of
heart, speech, speech, gesture, or action, as likewise from all the causes
occasions of it, and from what may justly render us suspected of it: and that
we keep our selves pure and chaste, both in soul, and body.

Quest. 97.

What are the sins more particularly here forbidden?

Answ.

All speculative wantonness, or representations of fleshly daliance formed in
the mind and delighted in; using or hearkening unto (with contentment) amorous
and wanton songs, or any rotten or corrupt communication; an incontinent or
wanton eye, loving to wander and gaze upon objects, that are proper to feed, or
provoke lust; unchaste glances or intimations in any kind, lightness in
behavior; garishnesse or newsangleness in attire; wearing maimed apparel, and
which covers but by halves, belying our sex by refusing the habit which is
proper to it, and useing the contrary; to adorn, (or rather to deform) our
houses, or chambers with lascivious pictures; or to look upon them with
delight, when we come where they are; to pamper the body with delicious fare,
or with meats or drinks invented rather to nourish lust, then life, or to be
intemperate or given to excess, though in ordinary diet; to indulge our selves
in idleness, or in excess of sleeping, to seek the acquaintance or love the
company of lewd and infamous persons; to use inticeing, or unseemly gestures,
such as the Sons and Daughters of lust have appropriated to their society; to
use any needless exercise, which both experience, reason, and grave persons
have branded with the crime of being frequently accessory to unclean practices,
as familiar sporting and toying between men and women unrelated in marriage,
and so the dancing of such promiscuously, privacy, or retiredness with persons
of whom there is, or well may be, in such cases, any suspicion; to choose rather
to burn, or to quench the fire with stolen waters, then to marry; All
fornication, adultery, incest, with all unnatural lusts and pollutions; to
marry within the degrees of affinity prohibited by God, or with persons
formerly contracted, or married to some others who may be yet living, and have
not been many years absent; to dishonor the marriage bed either with an
unseasonable, or intemperate use of it, or with any other behavior not
becoming Christian gravity, or likely to offend the pure eyes of God, not to be
careful to prevent unclean practices in others, especially being related unto
us, by the interposure of such lawful means, which are in our power to make use
of in order thereunto, as not to pray often, and earnestly, unto God to keep our
wives and children unspotted of the flesh, not to provide timely for these,
suitable companions in marriage, if need be; and so not to live with the others
upon such terms of love and winningnesse of carriage, that they may have no
temptation upon them, but to abhor the thought of giving that unto any other
men, which is due only unto their own Husbands (respectively) etc. Not to cast
a snare upon others (nor upon our selves) whereby they may be tempted unto
uncleanness, as by speaking disparagingly, or undervaluingly, of the ordinance
of marriage, by pleading the lawfulness of Polygamie, or of Divorce in other
cases, then those allowed in the Scriptures. Or by inviting or inveighling them
into the company and acquaintance of persons of leight and loose behavior, etc.

Quest. 98.

What are the duties more particularly enjoined in this Commandment?

Answ.

These also (for the most part) may readily be understood by way of
contrariety, from the sins particularly forbidden (as you have now heard them
rehearsed). Or however, take a few of them by their names, by which you may
judge of their fellows. The duties then here commanded, besides the abstaining
from all perpetrations of actual uncleanness, may be reduced under three heads.
The first, conscientiously to use all the means, that are proper and likely to
create or raise in us a true love of a pure heart, and clean conversation. The
second, to use in like manner all means that are proper and likely to divert,
scatter, and quench all lustful motions, inclinations, and desires. The third
(and last) carefully to avoid all occasions and opportunities for unclean
practices. Of the first sort are these (with some others) diligently to
acquaint our selves from the Scriptures with all those grounds, from which the
great love of God unto, and the delight which he takes in, the purity and
cleanness of the hearts, and lives of men, may clearly be concluded; as the
conformity hereof unto himself, or his own nature, (which upon all occasions he
declares to be pure and holy) the frequent and weighty commands which he lays
upon men and women to keep themselves chaste, and pure, and unspotted of the
flesh, the promises that he makes unto those, that shall obey him in such his
commands, the great blessings that he has heaped upon those that have been
obedient unto him herein, the most effectual and pressing motives (with suitable
directions) by which he seeks to persuade men and women unto that wherein his
Soul so much delights in this kind; the effectualness of the means which he
has prescribed to render his command for purity and holiness, passable enough
unto flesh and blood, and no ways grievous, and more especially (among the
rest) the ordinance of marriage, etc. So again, seriously to consider with what
peace and comfort they (most commonly, and unless they forfeit these blessings
by some other great wickedness, or folly) both live and dye, who (in the
Apostles language) have possessed their vessels in sanctification and honor,
and not in the lusts of concupiscence, or uncleanness, in comparison of those
who have sold themselves to commit Adultery, Fornication, or any other
pollution of the flesh. Of the second sort are these (and such like) to lay our
Souls and Consciences close to those terrible and peremptory threatenings of
exclusion from the Kingdom of God, which the Holy Ghost in many places in
Scripture expressly denounces against all those that shall walk in the lusts of
uncleanness; to consider how virulent an antipathie all impurity in this kind,
has to that nature of God in which be commands us (in special manner) to be
like unto him (I mean, his holiness and purity) to remember how often his wrath
has been revealed from Heaven against men and women of unclean behavior; and
so, with what severity he charge persons of both sexes to abstain from
fornication, adultery, and all other fleshly impurities; to recount how proper
and effectual a course he has taken to render all unclean persons inexcusable,
viz. by contriving and allowing unto them his ordinance of marriage, a means
honorable, agreeable to their natures, and fully sufficient (at least where it
is not disabled by an high hand of wickedness to preserve them from all
defilements of the flesh. So also to consider, what a sad and miserable
condition, even in this world, very many have brought themselves unto, by
unclean practices, loseing their credits, exposing themselves to contempt and
scorn, wasting their estates, undoing their posterities (if they have any)
ruining their families, disgraceing their friends, wasting their strength,
filling their bodies with very grievous, noisome, painful, and shameful
diseases, so destroying their lives before their time, and dying one of the
worst kinds of self-murtherers, leaving behind them the stench and rottenness
of their bodies in their names and memories; in like manner to consider, how
many thousand times more grievous and terrible then all this it must needs be,
to die under the conscience and guilt of so much sin and wickedness; and
withal, that no man ever committed any act of uncleanness, but was arrested
with sadness and discontent immediately upon it. Under this head also are
comprehended these, and such like duties, to employ our selves in some honest
labor and course of life, and not to suffer either our minds, or our bodies,
to dispose themselves unto wantonness by idleness or sloth, to be temperate in
our diet, not affecting meat or drinks of high nourishment (when we are in
health) or invented to inflame or nourish lust: moderate in our sleep, sober in
our apparel, modest and grave in our behavior, favourie in our speech and
communication: or if by a conscientious observance of all these, we cannot
arrive at the blessing of a stable and perfect frame of continency, but that
we are still pursued with inclinations and motions another way, then to take
sanctuary at the ordinance of marriage and therein so to live and converse with
her, or him, whom God shall give into our bosom, that there may be a mutual
confidence of each in other, no occasion in one kind or other being given on
either side, of the least jealousy of unfaithfulness, or want of conjugall
affections, in either toward other. Under the third (and last) head, these
duties (happily with some others of like consideration) are comprised; To
withdraw from our familiar friends and acquaintances, as fast as conveniently
we may, when we understand that a spirit of uncleanness is entered into them,
and they refuse, after the first and second admonition, to repent and reform;
not to entertain others of like sinful character: to avoid privacie with such
persons, who may in probability, especially by means of the opportunity,
awaken the lust of concupiscence within us, which before was fast asleep; not
to be familiarly pleasant, or sportful, men with women, or women with men,
either in talk or in gesture, though before company, but only with their own
yoke-fellows: not to come within the doors of houses commonly suspected of
uncleanness, unless (happily) upon some urgent occasion, and then to hasten our
retreat all we can; not to look narrowly or long upon the comeliness, or beauty
of a person of another sex, (our own yoke fellow in marriage only excepted) not
to contemplate or feed upon the remembrance of them afterward, etc. Besides
these things, and such like in reference to our selves, the Commandment
charge us by all lawful and good means as much as in us lies, to prevent all
acts of impurity in others, and more especially in persons related unto us; as
in our Children by disposing them timely in marriage, if occasion be, and
opportunity serve; and in the mean time, conscientiously to endeavor, what by
prudent instructions, what by our own exemplary soberness and gravity, and
what by discreet government and nurture, to preserve them unspotted and
undefiled unto the day thereof. We are debtours likewise unto our Servants,
whilst they remain in our service, to endeavor by all the three means last
mentioned, to keep them chaste also, and free from pollutions in the flesh, etc.

Quest. 99.

What is the sum or substance of the Eighth Commandment?

Answ.

That we do not by any negligence, or unlawful practices, impair the outward
estate of other men, or our own; but on the contrary, that by all honest and
good means we seek to preserve, and further both.

Quest. 100.

What are the sins particularly forbidden in this Commandment?

Answ.

They are very many, yea though we extend the prohibition in it unto actual, or
external sins only (which probably may be according to the mind of God)
referring those of the heart, from whence these proceed, unto the Tenth and
last Commandment; which seems to have been particularly framed and given by
God for the restraint and punishment of such sins. But concerning the sins
which are more properly and directly the breaches of this Commandment, they
respect our misdoings, or miscarriages, either in reference to our selves or to
others. Those of the former relation are these (with their like). Trifling away
our time in idleness, or impertinencies, walking inordinately, wasting our
estates by prodigality, by lavish and needless expenses, as in meats, drinks,
clothes, buildings, house-furniture, sports, pleasures, gaming, giving or
lending without discretion, ill-advised suretiship, unnecessarie suits at Law,
venturing upon callings, or dealing in commodities, wherein we have neither
skill, nor experience. It is likewise a kind of stealing from our selves, and
ours (and so a sin against this Commandment to be miserably pinching and
sparing toward either in things needful for the body, when God has given us
plentiful, or competent estates, etc.

In reference unto others, we may be offenders against the Commandment before
us, several ways, as well by omissions, as commissions. In the former of
these ways, by refusing to lend unto them (in case they be reputed honest, and
able to repay) when they stand in need, and we well able to befriend them in
this kind; by neglecting, or refusing to pay what we owe, at the time appointed
when we have wherewith to do it; by not doing our best to preserve our
neighbors cattle, when we see them in danger of perishing; and so his corn in
the field, or any other his commodities, when we apprehend them likely to be
wasted, spoiled, or purloined; by not restoring either what we have found, when
we know the right owners hereof; or things committed to our trust and custody;
by not giving bread to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, clothes to the naked,
when we are sufficiently provided to do all this, and have opportunity, etc. In
the latter way of the two mentioned, we shall sin against the said
Commandment, by borrowing without necessity, only to enrich our selves; by
lending upon hard terms, and for unreasonable gain; by exacting our whole
debt, when our debtour is either not able to pay the whole, or not without
extreme inconvenience to him, and his; by denying what we have borrowed; by
detaining either that which has strayed, when the owner is known, or the hire
of the labourer, or the poor man's pledge being the means of his lively hood; by
injustice, fraud, falsehood, craft, making advantage of the poverty, want,
ignorance, or simplicity, of those with whom we deal in bargaining, buying,
selling, letting, hyring, dividing, accounting, exchanging, arbitrating,
joynt-trading, etc. by putting men to trouble, or needless expenses, to come
by their own, by equivocating, or concealing the truth to make things doubtful
and litigious, for our own advantage, and to the prejudice of others; by
putting off bad wares for good; by enhaunsing the reasonable price of
commodities, which we have engrossed into our own hands; by saying of what we
are to buy, it is naught, and of what we are to sell, it is good, whether there
be just cause to say the one, or the other, or no; by constraining those, who
fell for need, to take a price beneath the just value of their commodities, or
otherwise to leave them upon their hand; by abusing men's credulity, or
unskilfulnesse, by deceitful lights, false weights, balances, or measures by
selling or buying, either justice, or injustice, or other things that ought no
more to be bought or sold, then these, as Church Livings, license, or leave to
preach the Gospel, indulgences, or dispensations for sin, crucifixes, charms,
with all the appropriate implements of superstition and idolatry; by prolonging
of sui^^ by promoting, abetting, or defending bad causes; by being contentious,
and molesting persons with suits at Law, either for matters of small value, and
without having first made friendly and Christian applications unto those, whom
we thus molest, to try whether the differences between us might not have been
compounded in a more amicable, and less chargeable way, or with a virulency or
hatefulness of spirit, to increase their trouble or charge in the suit, more
then otherwise we needed, by removing landmarks, or ancient bounds; by making
spoil in our neighbors corn, grass, woods, fruit, etc. or by exposing them
unto spoil, by mis-using or disabling his fences, by leaving open gates, etc.
by robbing, or stealing, either by sea, or land, money, goods, cattle,
children, servants, etc. by professing, or practicing unlawful, unuseful, or
infamous arts, employments, or ways of getting money, as those of juglers,
jesters, fortune tellers, figure-casters, wizards, stage players, panders,
bearwards, rope-dancers, keepers of gaming-houses, with the whole retinue of
those that practice divinations in several forms of superstition, as by fire,
by water, by birds, by fishes, by arrows, by axes, by dreams, by the stars,
by the dead (or devils rather) by the hand, by the joints, by sieves, by meal,
by frankincense, etc. and (generally) all such devices and ways of living,
which are of no use, but abuse rather to the public, being good for nothing
but to pick the purses of poor and inconsiderate people, such of whom the
Proverb says, that, They and their money are soon parted.

Quest. 101.

What are the particular duties required in this Commandment?

Adsw.

It is not hard to judge of these, (or the greatest part of them) by the sins
prohibited therein, as they were even now named. Notwithstanding it may be for
the better information of the judgment, and awakning of the conscience, to
give instance in some of the chief of them, or su h, to the practice and
performance whereof, we are most frequently called. The duties then which God
has judged meet to charge us with in this Commandment, are these, (with others
confederate with them); To live in some honest and useful calling or
employment, to be frugal and discreet in our expenses, not to consume or waste,
by improvidence, or any unthrifty or vicious courses, that substance, wherewith
God has blessed us in our honest labors; nor yet, in the mean time, through
fear of want afterward, to steal from our bellies or backs, that which is both
by the Law of God and Nature their due, (I mean, things convenient and
comfortable to them) nor from the poor and needy, that which is necessary for
their present relief, (for this is theirs, and nothing but what is their due
from us, Prove. 3.27. and we are but righteous and just, when we are merciful.)
So again, to borrow, only to supply our present occasions, these being
necessary and warrantable; and no more, then what we know our selves able (at
present) to repay, and accordingly to repay willingly, and with thanks, what we
have borrowed, according to promise, if we are able: if we be not able, yet to
do what we are able, to content and please him, that showed us kindness in
lending; to lend with an eye to the ease and benefit of him that borrows, and
so not to use rigor in requiring it again, if we be able still to forbear it,
until he has reaped the just comfort of it: and, in case he falls into
poverty, and be not able to pay the whole without manifest danger of being
undone by it, to accept such part of the sum at present, as he is well able to
pay, and to forbear the rest, or wholly to forgive it, if his poverty be very
deep, and he not likely to come out of it, not to cast poor men into prison for
debt, nor any that are willing to make due payment of what they owe, or as far
as they are able; not to molest especially peaceable and good men with
informations or complaints against them, not to persecute them, nor to put them
to trouble, or charge for their conscience; not to circumvent, overreach, or
deceive any man in dealing, not to make advantage of the unskilfulnesse,
ignorance, forgetfulness, oversight, poverty, or necessity of any of those
with whom we have to do in one kind or other, but to deal justly, truly,
clearly; and faithfully by all; to restore with all fidelity things committed
to our trust, with goods unlawfully gotten, and things found, (when the right
owner is known to us); to prosecute with diligence, care, and faithfulness,
any honest cause or business, which we undertake for another, and to undertake
none but such; not to endanger our estates by surety-ship, not to undertake for
any person in a greater sum, then we are well able to pay; to use all Christian
moderation in seeking to come by our own, and not to put him to more trouble or
expense then needs, who puts us to contend with him for the recovery of it;
not to impair any man's estate by oppression, extortion, unreasonable exactions
for work or service done, by robbing, stealing, wasting, or endamaging any
thing that belongs to him; but, on the contrary, as we have opportunity, to
endeavor to better the condition of every man, as far as with reason, and a
good conscience we may, and to preserve from hurt or spoil what is theirs, as
if it were our own; not to inveigle, or entise weak and inconsiderate persons
unto vain and needless expenses, nor to flatter them in, or into an humor of
prodigality; not to profess, practice, plead for, or uphold any of those
impertinent and unprofitable (that I say not, unlawful) arts (or crafts rather)
as of telling fortunes, calculating nativities, casting figures, telling (or
rather, pretending to tell) where things lost are to be found, etc. which are a
kind of superstitious stratagem to fetch money out of the purses of poor,
simple and ignorant people; and of no other use or tendency, unless it be unto
matters of a far worse and dangerous import.

Quest. 102.

What is the sum of the Ninth Commandment?

Answ.

To charge us to refrain all things, words, gestures and actions, tending to
impair, lessen or wreck, either our own, or any other man's name and repute in
the world; and that by all means, as far as truth and a good conscience will
permit, we be careful to maintain and promote, both the one, and the other.

Quest. 103.

What are the more particular sins intended by God, to be restrained by this
Commandment?

Answ.

All neglect and omission of such things (upon occasion) which are proper and
likely, either to defend, promote, or procure, either our own or our
neighbor's (that is any other man's) good esteem or reputation in the world; is
when we are wrongfully accused, or lie under a scandalous, or evil fame, not to
beat testimony, as occasion and opportunity serve, unto our innocence, or not
to refrain all such actions and ways, (if with the salvage of a good
conscience we may) which are like to feed or strengthen the suspicion or evil
report, concerning us; so not to employ faithfully, and to the best of their
service, those good gifts and abilities which God has given us, when we have a
Call or opportunity to do it; so also to detrect or excuse our selves from
undertaking such good services, which we are well able to perform, upon a
pretense of insufficiency; a diminishing of that esteem or good opinion, which
others have, or gladly would have of us, by any indiscreet behavior, rash or
unadvised actings, offensive walkings; as if we be given, either on the one
hand, to boasting, or on the other, to self-dispraising, especially if it be
beneath the line of our known worth, or to minister occasion unto others to
praise us. In respect of our Neighbor, these, and the like, are made sins by
the commandment before us; light or groundless suspicions of evil in him,
putting hard or uncharitable constructions upon any of his words or actions,
reporting either of them to his disgrace, or contrary to his meaning or
intention; despising him for his infirmities, or making talk of them unto
others, reviving without any warrantable cause or ground, the remembrance of
his former miscarriages, refusing to stand by him in his cause, when we are
able to speak that upon knowledge, on his behalf, which may do him service;
especially giving in false evidence or information against him, setting on foot
untrue reports concerning him, encouraging those that carry about such reports
of him, by harkening unto them, intending his disgrace though by speaking the
truth; all jearing mocking, vilifying or deriding him, whether it be in words,
or by gestures of a disparaging import, as shaking or nodding the head,
stamping with the foot, pointing with the finger gaping with the mouth, winking
or staring with the eyes, etc. Again, importunely to admire a man, to flatter
him, or to speak unseasonable great words in his commendation, is like to turn
to his disparagement, ( Prove. 27.4.) and so are sins against this Commandment
also.

Quest. 104.

What are the Particulars required by way of duty in this Commandment?

Answ.

In respect of our selves; to understand as near as we can, our own line and
measure, so as not to be ignorant of, or deny any the good things which God
has given us, or wrought in us, but by the fruits of them brought forth in due
season, to give testimony unto them to seek a good name for our selves, by
judging and speaking well and honorably of others, as far as with a good
conscience we may, upon all occasions, and by forhearing to speak evil of any
man, by an innocent and unblameable carriage of our selves toward all men, by
seeking the glory of God in an holy and fruitful conversation. And so when God
shall have vouchsafed us the blessing of a good name in the world, to be chary
and tender of it, carefulby wisdom and integrity, to maintain and increase it,
and to refrain all things that are like to impair or quench the light of it.
Concerning our neighbor, we are charged to be really and cordially desirous of
his good esteem and repute, amongst men, even as of our own: and so to take all
occasions to vindicate and promote them with the best of our understandings; to
cast a covering of love over his infirmities, and not to blaze them abroad;
lovingly and seasonably to admonish him of such things, by which his name
either suffers, or is in danger or likely to suffer amongst men; Especially not
to be the Authors of any scandalous or false reports concerning him, or to
accuse, or to inform, or witness against him falsely; but to reprove those
that go about, whispering or insinuating matters of prejudice or disparagement
unto him; to appear and stand by him in his cause, when we know he is
wrongfully or maliciously questioned or accused; and to afford him the best
testimony for his defense, that with truth and a good conscience we can, and
have opportunity for it, etc.

Quest. 105.

What is the intent or sum of the Tenth and last Commandment?

Answ.

To prevent and suppress all inward propensions, inclinations, motions and
desires, either of wrongfully depriving any person of, or of wronging him in
any thing belonging to him, but to be well apaid with satisfaction and
contentment, with our present condition, though it be strait and mean,
cheerfully depending upon God for the enlargement of it in due time, either by
some more special providence, or by his blessing upon our lawful endeavors
that way.

Quest. 106

What are the sins against this Commandment?

Answ.

To conceive, harbor, or nourish any secret motion, wish, or desire, to
possess, use or enjoy any thing that is another man's, otherwise then upon
terms to his honest and full contentment, as when we buy his commodity at the
price which satisfies him for it, or borrow any thing of him with his leave
and consent, etc. To be ever and anon scanning and descanting upon our wants,
poring and musing upon what is hard or unpleasing to us, in our present
condition, but seldom or never to remember and consider what comforts and good
things we enjoy, either equal unto, or above many others, who are better and
greater then we; so, not to study the Christian Art of Contentment, not to be
diligent and conscientious to acquaint our souls with all the great Arguments
and Motives persuading hereunto, such as the love of God to us, his care over
us, his truth and faithfulness in that Promise, (as well as in all others)
That he will never leave us not forsake us, his wisdom in conjunction with his
goodness, in suiting and fitting our present outward condition, to the present
state and inward condition of our souls, his purpose to enlarge us, as we shall
become regularly capable hereof, yea, to exalt us in due time, or reward us
highly, if we shall quit our selves with humility and patience in our present
estate, his mercy to us in abating us so much of the demerit of our sin, in the
sorrow or sadness of our condition, as he does, and not making it by many
degrees more answerable in misery thereunto; the patience and submissiveness of
the Saints under his hand, in cases or conditions much more grievous and hard,
then our is (with some others.)

Quest. 107.

What are the Duties required in this Commandment?

Answ.

To raise desires in our hearts of the prosperity, welfare, and contentment of
other men, and to cherish and strengthen them being raised; and so to work our
minds to a cordial rejoicing in them, when they are enjoyed by them; to make
the first stirring or heaving of any desire within us, after that which is
another man's, hateful unto our soul, and immediately to check or suppress it,
and turn away from it; to endeavor such a resentment of the goodness and
bounty of God toward us in our present condition, as to judge that we want
nothing, which another person enjoys, to make it in any degree more
comfortable or meet for us; to convince our judgments and consciences, that,
had we that, which we inordinately wish or desire, as being another man's, it
would be much more like to turn to a curse, then a blessing unto us, and to
take from, rather then to add to, the comfort of our present enjoyments; to be
provident and diligent in the use of all good means, to make our condition so
desirable and contentful unto us, that we may have no temptation upon us, to
wish or desire any thing, which is another man's; or, if we be not able to make
an alteration to our minds, in our condition, then to alter the frame of our
hearts or minds, to a congruity with our condition, whatever it be, (for this
alteration may be made under any condition) because contentment is nothing else
but the result or proper effect of such a congruity. No badnesse of the outward
condition is able to cause discontent, ulesse the mind be of the conspiracy, by
refusing to comport with it, or to work it self into such a temper and frame,
wherein it will resent little or no difference between the best and the worst
of earthly conditions. For, as the Apostle Paul says, that That here is
neither male nor female, neither bond nor free, but that all are one in Christ
Jesus, and that Christ is all, Gal. 3.28. compared with Col. 3.11. [meaning
that all the privileges of this world, whether natural or civil, are drowned
in that abundant blessedness, which comes upon men by Christ believed on, even
as the highest hills and mountains in the Earth, were covered as well as the
mole-hils or valleys, by the prevailing waters of Noah's Flood, Genesis 7.19,
20.]. In like manner to a mind that is raised and lifted up by faith, to
converse much within the vail, and feeds heartily upon the hope and
expectation of the great things of the world to come; the difference between
riches and poverty, honor and dishonor, liberty and restraint, between a
smiling and a frowning condition in this present world, are contracted into a
very narrow compass, and make a person little sensible of contentment in the
one, or discontent in the other. What, or who hinders, but that every man may
cast in his lot, and take part with him, who knew how to be abased, and how to
abound, and was instructed both to be full, and to be hungry, ( Phil. 4.12.)
professing of himself, that he was as sorrowful, [his afflicted condition in
the world, making him so to appear] yet always rejoicing; as having nothing,
and yet possessing all things, 2 Cor 6.10. The more richly apaid any person,
man or woman, shall be in the inner man, the less delinquent will they be
found against this last Commandment. And let this suffice for answer to your
last question, and put a period to our present discourse.

ERRATA.
PAGE 1. l. 2. r. into. l. 6. r. a Catechism. p. 9. l. 15. sor a r. the p. 10
l. 14. after Christ, r. as God p. 13. l. 8. r. is to p. 14. l. 16. r.
destructive p. 28. l. 7. r. revelation p, 32. l. 2. r. Scripture p. 34. l. 17.
after otherwise, r. as well p. 39. l. 4. dele the latter, is p. 54 l. 12. (...)
P. 93. l. 29. r. have p. 94. l. 12, 13. r. salvation p. 95. l. 22. r. delights
p. 104. in the Title, r. How faith p. 113 l. Title, for veryfled, r. raised p.
142. l. 22. for men, r. them p. 161. l. 11. r. altar, l. 24 after for, r. a p.
176. l. 22. for be, r. being p. 179. l. 7. after discourse, r. or l. 2. r.
remain p. 184. l. 4. r. I judge p. 191. l. 10. r. granted p. 211. l. 30. r.
loss p. 238. l. 23. r. this p. 285. l. 11. for of, r. or. p. 288. l. 9. r. put
it, and invested it p. 363. l. 9. r. for the latter on, r. one p. 389. l. 13.
r. we have p. 403. l. 24. for degree, r. direct l. 29. for have r. loss p.
405. l. 2. r. of that p. 413. l. 13. r. evening p. 417. l. x. r. appointment p.
425. l. 11. r. country, p. 431. l. 29. for them, r. themselves.

Good Reader, concerning errors, whether of omission, or commission, about
points (which I confess, are not a few in both kinds, and much disturb the
sense in some places) thou art desired, where the sense fails thee by reason
of either, to enterpose with thy patienee and understanding, for a
rectification).

Of the Sacraments: Being The Second PART OF A DOOR OPENING Into Christian
Religion.

By the same Author.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold at the Greyhound in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A DOOR OPENING TO Christian Religion. The Second Part.
CHAP. 9. Of the Sacred Rites or Ordinances, called Sacraments, and in
particular, of Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.
Question. 1.

WHat is a Sacrament?

Answer.

A Sacrament in general (as Professors of Christianity, at least, the
Protestant, or sounder party of them, have appropriated the signification of
the word to themselves, and their Religion; for it is not found in the
Scriptures, nor any other word equivalent in sense, or signification, to it)
may be thus described. It is a Sacred Rite, Ordinance, or eternal Service
instituted, and prescribed by God, partly for the representation, partly for
the confirmation of some spiritual privilege, great benefit, or blessing which
he has promised in his word unto persons so qualified, as he requires in such
cases (I mean to make them capable, or meet to receive them.) This definition,
or description, includes as well the administration, and reception of that
which is commonly called the matter of a Sacrament, as this matter it self;
which notwithstanding is sometimes termed a Sacrament, without either of those;
as when we call Circumcision, and the Passover, Sacraments of the old
Testament; and so Baptism, and the Lords Supper, Sacraments of the New. But
taking the word Sacrament, as denoting a Sacramental Ordinance, or Institution
(which is the better, and more usual signification of the word amongst us) so
it imports as well (or indeed, rather) that which is to be done, with or
about, the matter of it, as this matter it self. Thus it is more proper to say
(if not more true also) that Christ appointed the celebration [that is, the
solemn, both Administration, and Receiving] of his Supper, then his Supper it
self, or the element of Bread and Wine, which are the materials of it. There is
the like consideration of the rest.

Quest. 2. If the word Sacrament be not found in the Scriptures, nor any that
answers it in sense, or signification, how comes it to be taken in by
Christians into the concernments of their profession, and be of that familiar,
and frequent use amongst them, as it is known to be? Or what is the nature or
proper signification of it, in that language (the Latin) from which it is
borrowed?

Answ. Although all things which in respect of their positive and particular
natures, are necessary, yea, or meet to be known, and believed by Christians
(in matters appertaining unto God) be sufficiently, and in words significant,
and proper enough, expressed in the Scriptures; yet the relations of some of
these things unto others of them, their mutual proportions, dependencies,
congruities, oppositions, etc. which are left to be observed and considered, by
the light of reason and understanding in men, and which there maybe good
occasion (sometimes) to mention, argue, and discourse, are not here delivered in
such particularity of words: So that for the expression and explication of
these, there may be a kind of necessity for Christian Writers, and Teachers,
to look out into the language that is used by other men, for words and phrases
that are most commodious and proper for such a purpose. Upon this account, such
terms as these, Trinity, Consubstantial, or Co-essential, Coeternal (with some
others) have been from amongst foreign speakers, brought in to the School, or
Doctrine of Christianity, for the better opening of the great mystery of the
Three in One, and One in Three, in the Divine Nature. In like manner, the
ancient and learned Teachers of the Christian Church, observing a certain
sympathy or agreement in nature, or in several main circumstances, between
several Ordinances, or external Services, enjoined by Divine Authority to be
observed by persons professing the true Religion, and finding frequent occasion
to speak, and treat of this their agreement, they adopted the word Sacrament,
(which before either was a stranger in matters of their profession, or however,
to any such signification, or service as that, unto which it was now called) to
declare and express it, as judging it (it seems) the most commodious and best
fitting term they could think of for such a purpose. The use of the word
amongst Christians is very ancient; only it was for a long time used by the
Fathers, in a more comprehensive signification, then only to signify that
peculiar and special kind of Ordinance, unto which the Protestant Religion
has now restrained it, by asserting two Sacraments only. And this more lax and
indistinct signification of it in the Writings of the Fathers, has proved a
snare unto the Papists, who cannot at this day be contented with fewer then
seven Sacraments, and these strictly and properly so called (for othewise, I
find some of our learned Protestants willing to give them content in allowing
them seven Sacraments, (yea, and more then seven, if it would satisfy them to
take them in the large signification of the word) being at first led into the
by-way of this error (now become a great pillar of their Cristianity, and those
anathematized by them into Hell, (that shall deny it) by their great Master
Peter Lombard, who put this branch to their nose about the year 1160. And the
troublesomness of the Papists with the ambiguity and abuse of the word,
occasioned some of our learned Reformers in Germany, as Zuinglis, Luther, and
Melancton, half to wish that it had never come, or been used, amongst them; who
notwithstanding for peace sake, and being unprovided of another word according
to their minds for their purpose, frequently used it.

To the latter part of your question, the Latin word Sacramentum, [englished,
a Sacrament] before it was Christianized, had three significations: 1. It
signified any sum of money deposited by him that would contend in Law, which
he was to lose, and forfeit to the public treasury, in case sentence went
against him. 2. It signified any transaction or business, about which an Oath
was used. 3. (And lastly) It most properly or frequently signified a military
Oath, by which Soldiers swore fidelity to their Emperor, or Commander in
chief, when they were taken into the Army. This last notion or signification of
the word, was (in all likelihood) that, which was chiefly minded by the ancient
Christians when they first used it in matters of their Religion (whereunto
likewise they might be the rather induced by the notation, or etymology of the
word, which imports holiness)

Question 3. May there any reason be given of the Counsel of God in adorning,
or setting forth Christian Religion, with such Rites and Ordinances, as these
we call Sacraments?

Answ. God being of all others the most rational and wise Agent, cannot be
thought to do any thing of mere will and pleasure, no nor yet without the most
choice, savory, and profound reasons, motives, or ends, of which any of his
dispensations, or actions, are any ways capable. It is the Apostles Doctrine,
that he works, [not any thing, simply and absolutely, according to his will,
but] all things according to the counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1.11. Only that is
to be minded, that the word counsel, when it is (as here) ascribed unto God,
does not imply any faculty, or act, of deliberating, debating, considering, or
the like (for these, though requisite and commendable in men, yet supposing
imperfection, as, viz. the want of knowing, at least for a time, what is best
to be done, are not attributeable unto God) but his infinite wisdom, considered
as dictating, or presenting, unto his will, all the resolves (with their
grounds and reasons) and these only, which are honorable, meet and worthy to be
passed, willed, or concluded by it; or if, after the manner of prudent and well
advised men, he had been long in consultation with himself about the forming,
molding and contriving of them, in regard of the most exquisite and profound
contrivements of them. So it need be no question, but that there are reasons,
why God should appoint a place for Sacramental ordinances in Christian Religion
and enjoin the observance of them in the exercise of it. Nor is it hard to
descry, and assign, one, or more of these reasons. For as the universe or great
body of the Creation, consists of things visible, and invisible; so are the
ways and dispensations of God (for the most part) founded upon grounds and
reasons, partly perceptible, and discoverable, partly hidden, and past finding
out. And this I judge to be the case about the reasons of Gods planting
Sacramental Rites in the Field of Christian Religion. Some of these reasons are
on this side the line of Humane perception (and it may be) others of them
beyond it.

Question. 4. What are, or what may be the reasons that are assignable by men,
of that disposition of God, whereof we now speak?

Answ. Besides the particular ends of each of the Sacraments (respectively,
about which it may be seasonable for you to enquire hereafter) there may be
five reasons given (in the general) of the Counsel of God in assigning part and
fellowship unto Sacramental Ordinances in Gospel Worship, or in the practice of
Christian Religion.

Question. 5. What is the first of these reasons?

Answ. To accommodate men in their spiritual and heavenly concernments, with
the use and exercise of their corporal senses, according to the state and
condition of their present infirmity, and as far as this requires help and
relief in such a kind, until that which is verfect comes, when (as the Apostle
informs us to our comfort) that which is imperfect shall be done away, 1 Cor.
13.10. The State of the Church, or Children of God, under the Gospel, is of a
middle nature, or consideration, between what it was under the Rudiments of
Moses his Law, and what it shall be hereafter, when they shall see no longer
dark^^ through a glass, but face to face (as the Apostle describes it, 1 Cor.
13.) the wisdom of God, judging it meet to follow the same, or the like methods
in ordering the superior world, which he observes in the inferior world, as in
many other particulars, so in this; I mean, in bringing the great mystical body
of his Son to its complete growth and perfection, gradually, as by his
disposition in the course of nature, the bodies or persons of men, attain unto
their maturity, by passing through, first, the state of childehood, then of
youth, in the way thereunto Now as in the infancies or childehood of the
Church, under the Levitical Law, all matters of Religion (in a manner) and
things appertaining unto God, were taught thereby, and exhibited unto their
outward senses in external Rites, and Sacramental Types and Figures, in great
numbers; whereas in the celestial state of it, in which it shall have outgrown
all imperfections and weakness both of its childehood, and youth, and be
advanced to its complete stature and perfection, there shall be no Sacramental
doings at all, no external Rites, Ceremonies, or dispensations whatsoever, but
only spiritual and immediate communications of mysterious light and knowledge
from God and from the Lamb. Rev. 21.22.) So under the Gospel state of it, which
(as was even now intimated) is its middle age, or youth, having somewhat both
of the weakness and imperfection of its childehood, and somewhat also of the
strength and perfection of its heavenly stature or condition, some few external
Rites, or Ordinances are proper and useful for it, in respect of what is yet
weak and defective in it, but a multitude, or any greater number of such
Ordinances, would be improper, and no ways necessary unto it, by reason of
those degrees of strength, and its manlike state, unto which it is advanced.

Quest. 6. Why, or how, are Sacrmental, or External Ordinances proper, or
beneficial, unto the Church, or unto believing Christians, in respect of their
weakness, or imperfection?

Answ. Where objects, or things to be believed, are in their nature very
spiritual, and much remote, not only from the outward senses, but even from the
common road or ordinary walks of the reasons and understandings of men, the eye
of faith, wherewith they are to be apprehended, being weak and dim, there is no
better, or more proper way or means in this case to relieve the defect of the
visive faculty of this eye, then to cloth these spiritual objects with as much
external sensibility, as well may be; especially if this clothing be
dexterously and wisely fitted unto the nature of them. Such a method, or device
us this draws the said objects much nearer unto the eye of Faith, and withal,
so so refracteth, accommodateth, and attempereth the spirituality of them unto
this eye, that notwithstanding the weakness of it, it is hereby enabled to
behold them more steadily and to contemplate and consider them with less
trouble, or burthensomness unto it, as the vail or covering which Moses put
upon his face, when it shone with that brightness, that both Aaron and the
people were afraid to come near him, so qualified, or reduced the disproportion
of the object to their weak senses, that by means thereof they were able to
draw near to it, and to commune with him familiarly, and without any offense or
trouble, Exodus 34.30 33. In like manner the glorious person of Jesus Christ,
together with those spiritual and glorious privileges, Union and Communion
with him, sanctification and forgiveness of sins (which are the sum, substance,
and effect, of the whole Gospel, vertually and implicitly containing or
including in them, all other particulars lying within the compass thereof) are,
in the Sacramental Ordinances of the Gospel, brought down as near, and as
dexterously accommodated unto all the outward senses, as their spiritual and
sublime natures would permit: by the opportun ty and means whereof, the
weakness of the eye of Faith must needs be much refreshed, strengthened,
enabled, and encouraged to converse more frequently and familiarly with them,
and to meditate of them with less distraction, and with more composedness and
fixedness of mind Besides, when the things that are to be believed are
exceeding great, and the performance or doing them, according to the ordinary
course of things, and common grounds in reason, hard to be believed it is some
ease and advantage to our Faith, wherewith they are to be believed, to see such
things done, which carry any lively resemblance or l keness unto them. He that
should promise to build us an house, strong, and of good materials, and every
ways convenient for our habitation, should, to a degree, quicken our faith to
believe him in such a promise, if he should at present make, and deliver unto
us, an exact pattern, or model, though made of paper, pasteboard, or of any
such light matter, of that substantial building, which according to promise, he
intends after a while to build for us, and to invest us with. That passage of
Christ with Nicodemus ( John 3.12.) gives credit and countenance not a little,
to this reason. if I have told you earthly things, and ye believe me; how shall
ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things? meaning, that if they did not
apprehend and believe the truth and certainty of the spiritual or new birth,
now he had explained plained and set before them the nature and manner of it,
in things obvious to their outward senses (as, viz. in the similitudes of the
natural, or carnal birth, and the wind) they would be much farther off from
believing him, if he should discourse unto them of spiritual and heavenly
things in the dialect, or language of Angels, without accommodating them to
their understandings and belief by Figures, or resemblances, borrowed from
earthly and sensible things. So when Christ, having opened these similitudes,
or parables unto his disciples, wherein he had taught the secrets of the
Kingdom of God, demanded of them, Have ye understood all these things, [meaning
with a consenting and erstanding] they made him answer, Yea Lord, Mat. 13.51.
Which shows, that things mysterious and spiritual may be the better and more
readily apprehended, and believed, when they are propounded, or held forth,
unto men in apt and proper resemblances, of sensible and known things, and
these resemblances dexterously explained, and applied unto them. The like might
be argued from the former part of his answer to this question of his Disciples,
Why speaked thou unto them [the people] in parables? ver. 10. He answered and
said unto them, because it is given unto you to know [that is, to have the best
and most effecteal means, whereby to know] the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and clearly implying, that one reason why he taught heavenly things so
much in parables, was, that they, to whom he intended always to unfold them (
Mark 4.34.) might, by means of both opportunities, the one of the Text, or
Doctrine, the other, of the gloss or exposition, more readily attain unto both
the understanding and belief of them.

Besides, it lies (it seems) within the confines of the light of nature, to
conceive, and believe, that the wisdom and goodness of God have judged it meet
(as some of the Platonique addiction express it) Uno sigillo diversas signare
materias, i.e. to set the same seal or stamp upon different matters: their
meaning is, to contrive and make this inferior and material world, and the
superior and invisible world, to correspond each with other in analogies, and
proportions between natures and properties of the things contained in, or
relating unto, the one and the other (respectively) yea, it is a received
notion among the Jewish Doctors. Opera creationis externae, habere in se
imaginem creationis internae, i. e. the works of the outward Creation, carry in
them the image [or likeness] of the inward [Creation.] And the truth is, that
he that shall diligently, and with a discursive understanding, consider, how
the Scriptures, in setting forth and discoursing spiritual and heavenly things,
abounds with metaphors, parables, and similitudes taken from things that are
earthly, and yet further, that very frequently they express, or call,
spiritual things, by the very names, wherewith material, or earthly things are
called, by reason of some lively resemblance, or likeness between them: be (I
say) that shall duly ponder these things, and follow the reasonable tendency
and guidance of them, cannot (lightly) but e're long arrive at this conclusion,
that this visible and terrene world was molded and formed by God with a kind
of subservient conformity to the world of invisible things; o subservient I
mean, in special reference unto men, as namely, that these, being naturally,
and without much care or endeavor, acquainted with this present world,
wherewith, as being members of it, they converse daily, might by the
opportunity of this their knowledge, be the more capable, not only of
conceiving or apprehending aright, but even of believing also, the things of
the other world, when God should cause these to be declared, or preached unto
them in and by their respective parallels of earth y things. As for instance,
men seeing and knowing that God has made such an earthly element as water,
which is proper to cleanse, and to separate, and wash off any soil, or material
filth, that is contracted by, or cleaves unto, their flesh or bodies; they are
hereby taught, and assured (the said proportion, or parallel, between the two
worlds, and their respective furnitures, or things found in the one, and in the
other, supposed) that there is somewhat in the other (the invisible) world that
is proper and effectual, for the purging or cleansing their souls and
consciences from the spiritual filth or defilement of sin. And when it shall be
declared unto men that this invisible or heavenly water, which is so effectual
and proper for the washing of the soul from sin, is the blood of Jesus Christ,
this doctrine, upon the advantage of the said supposition, must needs come to
their reasons and judgments, with much credibility, and likelihood of truth;
especially if it be considered withal, that there was never any thing reported,
or heard of by any tidings from or out of the invisible world, that had the
property of washing and cleansing the conscience from sin, vested in it, but
this blood only; and yet farther, that is not imaginable, that there should be
any other thing in this world it self (I mean the invisible world) alike proper
for such a purpose. There is the same consideration of the material Bread and
Wine of this world, with their natural and known properties, and ends, compared
with the Bread and Wine of that other world, and those properties and effects,
which the Scripture attributes unto them. So then, if the notion of the
sympathetical accord between the two worlds, which has been mentioned, and
which (as you have heard) is greatly favored (if not somewhat more) by the
Scriptures themselves, will abide the touchstone, and shall be found a truth,
the commodiousness of Sacramental Ordinances for the quickening, encouraging,
and supporting of Faith, will recieve much evidence and confirmation by it. Or
however, there being an analogy, or resemblance between those material and
sensible things, which have part and fellowship in these Ordinances, and those
heavenly things, or matters of Faith, which are here in their natures
represented, and in their reallity and truth ratified, and confirmed, the said
Ordinances must needs be subservient unto Faith, and to the joy thereof, partly
by occasioning, or causing more effectual and lively impressions of the things
to be believed, upon the minds and spirits of men, then are usually wrought by
hearings; partly also, and more especially, by fixing or fastening them in
their minds or memories, with less danger of losing them, or suffering by the
forgetfulness, vanishing, or slipping away of them. For as a small key (or the
like) being fastened and tied to a greater, or to some other thing of greater
bulk, is not so soon lost, as when it is carried, or worn, alone: so neither
are spiritual, or heavenly things so apt to vanish, or slip out of the minds
of men, when they are delivered unto and received by them coupled with material
and outward things, these not being any way likely to be forgotten by them, not
(consequently) any thing that is fastened to them. This then may be one reason
of the Counsel of God in those Sacramental Figures, Rites, or Ordinances, which
he has judged meet to plant in the Paradise of Christian Religion, the
accommodation of the Faith of the professors thereof.

Question. 7. What is an other reason, which you conceive may be given upon the
same account, or of the same disposition of things by God?

Answ. The two Nations that had been in the womb of the world (I mean, Jews and
Gentile) until the blessing of Christian Religion came upon it, were now under
this, and by means of it, according to the gracious Counsel and purpose of God,
to be united, and made one and the same body, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16 3.6. Now one
of these Nations, the Jews, having from their forefathers, for many ages
together, been trained up in a Religion, and this unquestionably, and in a very
extraordinary manner delivered unto, and imposed on them by God, which
consisted of a multitude, and great variety of external Rites, and significant
Ceremonies, would in all likelihood, have been much more averse from the
embracing of Christian Religion, if it had in no degree at all symbolized with
that, which they had received from their Forefathers, and so lately professed.
And upon this account the Apostle Paul remindeth them, (upon occasion) of the
Sacramental significant Ceremony of Baptism in Christian Religion; as
supplying the want of their (circumcision, endeavoring and hoping by th^^
means, the better to accomodate this Religion to the temper and frame of their
minds. Col. 2.11. In whom also ye are circumcised with incircumcision made
without hands, in putting off (...) body of the sins of the flesh, by the
circumcision Christ, Buried with him in Baptism, wherein ye are also risen with
him, etc. So that very probable it is, that one reason why God was pleased to
temper the body of Christian Religion, with Sacramental institutions in the
frame of it, was to render it the more accessible unto the Jews, as having by
this means somewhat in it of the notion and nature of that Religion, which they
and their Fathers for many generations (as was said) had professed, and unto
which, in this respect they were very importunely addicted and devoted. For, as
the Apostle Paul says, That unto the Jews he became as a Jew [that is,
conformed, or subjected, himself to many of their humors, and practices] that
he might gain the Jews, (1 Cor. 9.20.) So may it (with reverence, and speaking
after the manner of men) be said of God himself, that he also in modelling the
scheme, or body, of Christianity, became a Jew, [condescended to the weakness
of the Jewish genius] that he might the better gain the Jews thereunto. So that
as the multitude of Rites and Ceremonies in the Jewish Religion, whilst they
continued, were as a partition wall, ( Ephesians. 2 14.) that separated, or divided,
the Jews from the Gentiles: So on the contrary, the few Ceremonies inserted,
and implanted in Christian Religion, are a means contributing (and so intended
by God) toward the healing of this separation; and reconciling the two Nations
into one.

Quest. 8. What may be a third reason, why Christianity was set forth by God,
and recommended unto the world with Sacramental Ordinances in the frame, or
fabric of u?

Answ. God in his treaties with men about tne great and important affair of
their salvation, delights much to apply himself unto them in the same
principles or rules, and by the same methods, usages, or ways, which
themselves frequently observe, and walk by in their ordinary transactions of
their civil affairs amongst themselves. This the Scripture makes manifest in
several places. For men verily swear by the great, and an oath for
confirmation is to them an end of all strife: So God willing more abundantly to
show unto the hiers of promise the mutability of his counsel, confirmed it by
an oath, etc. And because he could swear by no greater, he swear by himself,
Heb. 6.13.16, 17. instances of like ^inde we find, Mat, 7.9, 10, 11. ^^^.
9.15, 16, 17.12.11.17.25. Luke 5.36.11.5, 6, 7. etc. Luke 12.48. 1 Cor.
9.7.14.7, 8.2 ^^m. 2.4. (to omit many others.) The reason why God thus treats
with men (I mean, by their own principles, and according to the terms on which
they deal one with another) may be, because those dictates of the light of
nature, by which all rational and civil converse amongst men is managed and
maintained, are the same with those impressions of wisdom and righteousness in
the divine nature, by which he judges it most for his glory, and most
commodious also, and beneficial, for his creature man, for him to direct, and
order, all his proposals unto, and requirements of, men, in that great Treaty
about Life and Immortality, whereunto he has most graciously invited, and
admitted them, and which is yet depending between him, and the world, or the
living party of men. Now then it being a frequent custom (and this not useless,
or without ground) amongst men, who live in a civil community distinct from all
others, to require of those, who desire admittance into their society, and to
partake of the privileges, and conveniences, which are enjoyed by the members
of it, to submit unto some Ceremony or other (such as they have thought good to
appropriate in this kind unto themselves) at the time of their admittance
hereinto; yea, and afterward, whilst they continue members of their Community,
at times, and upon special occasion, to profess their relation hereunto, either
by wearing some distinct habit (significative hereof) or by the performance of
some services, whereunto, according to the course and custom of the society,
they shall be called; it seemed good in the sight of God, to accommodate the
profession of Christian Religion unto these, or the like usages amongst men, by
imposing it as a law upon all that should desire part and fellowship in the
great and holy community of Christians to subject themselves unto those
Ceremonies, Rites, or Sacramental Ordinances, which he, by his great ^ien,
potentiary, and supreme Apostle of the said Profession, Jesus Christ, has with
great wisdom, and in his most gracious condescension, contrived for them, and
commended unto them for that purpose.

Quest. 9. What is the fourth reason, which, as you concieve, may be rendered
why a place should be given unto Sacramental appointments in Christian Religion?

Answ. Any promise or undertaking, made, professed, and declared, not by words
only, but with, and by some Ceremony, or Solemnity of action likewise, is more
strongly binding, and engaging, and the falling off, or turning aside from
either, the more dishonorable, and obnoxious unto reproach, or punishment,
otherwise, then if they had been uttered, or overtur'd only in words. The
subscribing with a man's hand, and the affixing of his Seal, make a Bond, or
Covenant in writing the more authentic, and binding, not only in Law (which
gives no force or validity at all to a writing unsubscribed, and without a Seal
annexed but in equity and reason also. There is much the same consideration of
both cases. For there is in both a repetition, or second acknowledgement (if
not a third) of a man's consent, and purpose, to stand to what he promises, or
undertaketh: and consequently, a clear and distinct acknowledgement, that he
has not been surprised, or inconsiderately drawn into such his engagements,
but has deliberately, and time after time digested the import, and consequents
of them. And to recede, or go back from any thing, which has been undertaken,
or promised upon such terms as these, argues a very high degree of
unworthiness in men, and that they are not fit for humane society, or converse.
For when, or in what cases can a man be trusted, or his profession, or words,
relied upon, if not when he solemnly, and seriously acknowledges, and this
over and over, yea, and not by words only, but by actions (which both
naturally, and customarily, have more of the hearts of men in them, then bare
words) devised, and intended to declare and signify the full and absolute
purpose or resolution of men to do, and to perform, what they have promised,
professed, or undertaken? Now then, God, desirous to prevent that most horrid,
and soul threatening sin of Apostasy (with all sinful demeanors disposing unto
it in those that should ever enter into the profession of Christianity, was
graciously pleased to render it as ignominious and reproachful unto men, as
hateful and dreadful to their consciences, as lightly could be, by causing it
both to be undertaken at first, and to be managed also afterward, with the
open and public observance of such Sacramental Rites, which he contrived on
purpose (and has declared accordingly) to persuade and prevail with them to
cleave fast and close to that their profession unto the end. It is much more
easy for the weak and foolish heart of a man to refrain such sins, which he
either knows, or has rational and convincing grounds to suspect, will either
certainly ruin and destroy him, or else make a very sore and wide breach upon
his comfort and peace; yea, though he be very inclinable, and many ways
tempted unto them, then those, that are of a less threatening, import in his
eye, being equally solicited, or disposed, unto them.

Quest. 10. What is the fifth (and last) reason, which you suppose may be
rendered, why Christian Religion should be in any degree, or part of it, ritual,
or set forth by God with any such typical observances, as those, which we call
Sacraments?

Answ. God, as he desires, and designeth to engage the Professors of this
Religion with constancy and perseverance unto their Profession, so, in order
hereunto, willing and desirous he is to secure them of his constancy, and
perseverance in full purpose of mind, to perform unto them all conditions,
terms, and promises whatsoever, unto which he has obliged himself according to
the tenor, and contents, of this Religion. Upon this account he has delivered
unto them all the said terms and promises, not in writing only, but sealed
also, ratified and confirmed; with, and by, those Sacramental devisements,
which he has appended, and a fixed in the nature of Seals unto them, and has
himself so interpreted and declared his intent and meaning in them. [I mean,
that they should be so construed, and looked upon by men, as signs from heaven*
whereby he most solemnly, and as in the presence of heaven and earth, and
against all possibility of repentance, or recedure, ingageth himself to stand
to, and make good, all those great and precious promises, (how incredible
soever, and above humane belief, they may otherwise seem to be) which are
issued forth unto the world, and contained in that Gospel, wherein the said
Sacramental signs, or seals, are held forth likewise. So that the Sacraments we
speak of, according to the most gracious counsel and intent of him, that has
armed them, as they are strongly and most severely engaging upon men, who
submit unto, and use them, unto their profession; so are they no less (if not
rather more) engaging upon him, that has given them (I mean, God) unto his
profession also [that is, as was intels hinted, to perform with all constancy
and faithfulness, all those terms of grace, love, mercy bounty, etc. which in
the Gospel he professes unto all those, who love him, and believe in him. And
as it will full heavy upon men, who shall either revolt from their Christian
profession, or behave themselves scandalously in it, when they shall have once
Sacramentally engaged, or obliged themselves unto it: So, were it passible to
imagine, or suppose, that God should suffer his truth and faithfulness to fail
by a nonperformance of any thing he has promised in the Gospel, his own
Sacraments here would testify aloud against him to his high dishonor; even as
his bow in the Clouds also would, in case he should destroy the world with a
stood any more.

Question. 11. How does it, or may it appear that the Sacraments of the New
Testament were intended by God to serve, in the nature or property of Seals,
for the full confirmation, and final ratification, of the truth of the Gospel,
and of the great promises here? or that he is desirous that men should conceive
of them, as obliging him, as being the Author and imposor of them, to make good
the gracious contents of the Gospel, or (which comes to the same) all things
signified and imported in them [the Sacraments] themselves?

Answ. Concerning Circumcision, which was one of the greatest, and most
properly called Sacraments, of the Old Testament, it is expressly said, that
Abraham received the sign of circumcision [ i. circumcision, which was a sign,
or significant character] a seal of the righteousness of the faith [or, of that
faith. i. e. of that kind of Faith] which he had yet, being uncircumcised,
(Romans 4.11.) This is not spoken of Abraham's being circumcised, or of his
reception of Circumcision in his flesh, (nor of his justification, or being
made righteous in particular) but of his receiving order and command from God
for the use and practice of Circumcision by all the males of his Family and
Posterity, ( Genesis 17.10) although himself was to submit unto it also with them.
The word, received, is used in such a sense elsewhere, 1 Corinthians
11.23.15.3. In this sense John Baptist may be said to have received from God
the Sign or Ordinance, of Baptism, and so Christ to have received from God the
Revelation sent unto, and recorded by his Apostle John, Rev. 1.1. when it is
said, that Abraham received the sign of circumcision, a Seal of the
righteousness of the Faith, which, etc. the clear meaning is, that God
delivered Circumcision unto Abraham, and imposed it upon him, his family, and
posterity, with a purpose and intent that it should be resented and understood
both by him and them, as a sign given them, that whosoever should truly believe
in him, as Abraham did, whilst he was yet uncircumcised, should upon the
account of such their Faith, be justified, or accepted as righteous by him. Now
the state of righteousness or justification implicitly, vertually, and in a
consequential way, comprehending in it all the good things, and blessings from
first to last, which the Gospel promises: as sometimes the head, or first
Founder, and sometimes some famous Ancestor is made the significate of their
whole race and posterity, and used to express them as Abraham, signifies
Abraham's posterity, Genesis 13.17, 18.18.19. So Jacob, (often his posterity. with
others.) So Justification, being (as it were) an head privilege, or benefit of
the Gospel highly considerable, may well signify and import the whole system
and succession of all the good and great things promised in the Gospel. And
thus I conceive it is to be understood, Romans 4.25. For Christ did not rise
again for our justification, only, but for the procuring and obtaining all
other benefits and blessings also, which are consequential unto justification
(as the Scriptures testify in several places) In this sense it is likewise to
be taken, Romans 5.18. and elsewhere it is interpreted by blessedness, as by a
word of a parallel import, Romans 4.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. the sealing, or confirming, of
the promise hereof, is, interpretatively, and in effect, the sealing and
ratifying the contents of the whole Gospel, and of all the promises in it. The
Sacraments of the New Testament are of the same consideration and import
sealing, and securing the faithfulness of God, in the performance of all things
promised in the Gospel, unto those that believe. Concerning Baptism, the brief
description of it, which we have, Mark. 1.4. Luke 3.3. clearly evinceth it. In
both these places John is said to have preached the Baptism [that is, the
doctrine of the Baptism] of Repentance for the remission of sins: the meaning
is, that he preached and declared unto all that came to him, that he had
received from God a new Ordinance, unto which he strictly required and charged
them to submit, viz. Baptism, or such a wasshing, which much differed in
signification and import from all those, with which they had been acquainted
hitherto, this being given, or sent, by God unto them, to signify and assure
them, of the forgiveness of their sins upon their repentance. The expression
(by the way) or phrase of stilling Baptism, the Baptism of Repentance for the
remission of sins, much resembles that of the Prophet Elisha concerning the
arrow, which the King of Israel, by direction from him, shot out of the window:
this arrow as it went from the Kings hand, the Prophet termed, The arrow of the
Lords deliverance, and the arrow of deliverance from Syria, [meaning, that the
shooting of it by the King in the manner directed by the Prophet, was a sign
and pledge from God, that he would deliver the King and his people, from under
the power of the Syrians,] 2 Kings 13.17. So is Baptism, a sign from Heaven, or
a pledge of assurance from God, that unto Repentance he will always grant
remission of sins. Now remission of sins, which is promised unto repentance,
and this promise sealed and confirmed by Baptism is the self same thing with
the righteousness of Faith. This is briefly touched, cap. 5. in answer to the
fourth question, and afterward, and is clearly delivered by the Apostle, Romans
4. v. 5.6, 7. (compared) I mean, that the righteousness of Faith, or
justification, consists in remission of sins, [that is, the righteousness
promised unto, and obtained by Faith] of which [or of the promise of which]
circumcision (as was lately said) was a sign, and seal, under the Old
Testament. For whether Faith, and Repentance, be the same thing, really, and
materially, differing only in consideration or respect, or whether they be not
(a point briefly touched in answer to the fourteenth question of the fifth
Chapter) certain it is, that they are so parallel in their respects with God,
that they are both dignified with the great and precious promises both of
Justification, and salvation (as was also showed in the same Chapter.) So that
the Sacrament of Baptism, being a confirmatory sign from God of his promise of
justification or forgiveness of sins, to all that shall truly repent is
interpretatively, and in effect, (as was lately argued in the case of
Circumcision) a securing pledge from him, that the whole Gospel shall, from the
least to the greatest, from the lowest to the highest, of all the promises in
it, be performed and made good by him unto the world. There is the same
consideration of the Sacramental Ordinance of the Supper likewise. For this is
not only, or barely commemorative of the death of Christ (although a
commemoration of what has been done, being continued, and kept on foot, from
the time of the doing it, has a great confirmation in it unto after times, of
the truth of it, and that it was done) but was intended further by the founder
of it, for a significant pledge unto men, that Christ died for the remission of
sins. For these words are found in the tenor of the Institution of it. This is
my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins,
Mat. 26.28. Mark 14.24. Now that which seals or confirms Remission of sins,
confirms (in the sense lately declared) the whole Gospel. Nor can these words
of Christ (speaking of the Wine in this Sacrament) This is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed; etc. be reasonably drawn to any other signification,
or import, them that he should intend, and desire, that the Wine, which
(according to his Institution, and Command) should be drunk in the Celebration
of this Sacrament, should be as rich, as lively and pregnant a security, as can
be imagined, or desired, that his blood was very soon after, to be shed to
purchase and procure Reemission of sins for men. So that Sacraments in respect
of their Institution, and imposition on men, are most holy and solemn
engagements upon God to perform unto them, all that he signifies, or
professes in them, or by them, that is, all the great good things promised in
the Gospel: So in respect of their reception, or submission unto by men, they
are most sacred and severe obligements upon them to perform unto him, what they
reciprocally profess by such their subjection unto them; that is,
conscienciously to endeavor to believe him in all his promises and to obey him
in all his precepts and commands.

Question 12. From whence have Sacraments that obliging force upon God, which
you have declared, and asserted?

Answ. From himself, or from his own most gracious and free consent, to
condescend unto the weakness of his poor creature man, upon such terms, as to
put himself into bonds of his own making, unto them, for the performance of all
articles on his part mentioned in the Covenant between him and them: that so
they may repose themselves upon him with all possible security, and ease of
heart and soul, for the receiving of all from him without fail in due time. No
creature can dispose of the least mite of his treasure; but himself may do with
his own what he pleases ( Mat. 20.15.) and consequently may enrich his
creature with what engagements of it self unto it he judges meet.

Queft. 13. From whence arises that obliging force, whereof you lately spoke,
which Sacraments have over men?

Answ. The obliging force which Sacraments have upon, or over men, to stand
fast and close to their holy profession, and to make good the terms of it by
suitable actions, and deportments, arises partly from the wisdom, goodness,
and authority of God; partly also from men themselves, and their voluntary
submitting of themselves unto them. God, out of his Wisdom, and Goodness, and
by his Authority, has made it a Law, that they that shall come under
Sacramental dispensations, and submit to the reception, and use of them, shall
hereby become debtors to observe and obey the whole Gospel in all the precepts,
and prescripts of it. But this Law takes no hold on such persons, who never
accepted, nor submitted unto, any of these Ordinances. Therefore that they come
to have any such obliging force upon men; as that we speak of, proceeds (at
least in part) from their own free consents to become proselytes unto them. It
is true, as far as importunity, by exhortations, and command, by arguments and
motives, on the right hand, and on the left, may be said to compel men; many
that are brought to submit unto the use of them, may be said to be compelled by
God hereunto. But the act, or acts, unto which men are drawn by such compulsion
as this, commonly have more of the will in them (and in this respect may be
said to be more voluntary) then these that proceed from it in a spontaneous
way, and when it acts merely out of its own inclination. As he that has been
by Gospel arguings, and motives, prevailed with to believe, has (as the saying
is) more good will on his way, then an unbeliever has on his; especially if he
has not taken some course more then ordinary to make him wilful in his way.
But this by the way.

Quest. 14. Whether does God command, or require of all men, to submit unto his
Sacramental Institutions, as to be Baptized, and from time to time, upon
occasion, to be present at the Lords Supper, and to partake of the
administration?

Answ. A thing may be said to be commanded, or required of a man in a twofold
sense, or consideration, either 1. absolutely, immediately, and (as we use to
say) without any more ado, or else 2. in a certain order and method, and upon a
precedence of some things (one, or more) and these also required, to make him
regularly capable of doing it Under the Law, the Jews were commanded to offer
gifts and sacrifices: yet in case any man knew, or remembered, that another had
taken an offense at him, and was not yet satisfied, he was not to offer his
gift until he had first reconciled (at least endeavored to reconcile) himself
unto him: but this being done, he was to offer it, Mat. 5.23, 24. So to pray
unto God is a duty required of all men: yet if any man be resolvedly wicked,
and turns away his ear from hearing the Law, he is first to relent, or
repent, of such a resolution, and then he is bound to pray, not before or
otherwise: Such a person is bound to pray but in sensu diviso, not in sensu
composito; that is he, is bound to forsake his abominable wickedness before he
prays: but he is bound to pray, upon the performance of this condition, [
viz. of forsaking his wickedness] which he is bound to perform likewise, even
before he has performed it. In the former sense then of the two propounded,
God does not require of all men subjection to his Sacramental Institution, but
in the latter he does. He requires not of unbelievers, or of persons wholly
ignorant of the Gospel, or scandalous or debauched in their lives and
conversations, that whi st they continue such, they should have any part or
fellowship in Sacramental transactions: but even whilst they are such, he does
require of them, and command them, that they truly repent, and unfeignedly
believe, and then (consequentially hereunto) that they apply themselves to
partake of those administrations.

Question. 15. But does God require of all persons that have repented, and
believe, that they communicate in his Sacramental Ordinances?

Answ. God requires of all such that they despise not, that they neglect not
these Ordinances, nor yet the means, or the doing of those things, without
which they cannot orderly be admitted to partake in them, by those, with whom
the dispensation of them is entrusted, and to whom it appertains by way of
duty, or charge, to take care that all things be done decently, and in order,
about, and in the administration of them.

Question. 16. Who are they, to whom the duty, or charge you speak of, does
appertain, and are entrusted with the dispensation of the Sacraments?

Answ. Every Congregation, or Church-Body of Believers, or persons upon Gospel
grounds, reputed such, together with their Officers lawfully chosen, Elders,
and Deacons, are put in trust by Christ with his Sacraments, and the
administration of them, in, and amongst their own bodies, or members
(respectively) and may, Salvo jure coeli, keeping to the rule, and orders
prescribed by God in such cases, admit whom they please into their Sacramental
Communion; or (to speak more warily) are bound, and ought to admit all those
unto this their Communion, who shall orderly desire it of them. That such
Churches as these are entrusted by Christ with those holy things of God we
speak of (with the ordering of Sacramental concernments, evidently, appears
from several passages in the two Epistles, written by the Apostle, to the
Church at Corinth; and more particularly in the fifth Chapter of the former,
and seventh of the latter: It is clear from ver. 27.12, 13. Of the former of
these Chapters, that the Body of this Church offended, (for to this was the
Epistle written) in tolerating a notorious wicked person in their Communion,
from which, had they quitted themselves according to their duty, and charge
imposed on them by God, they had excluded him. Much more might be argued to
this point from the Scriptures.

Quest. 17. When, or upon what terms may a person (one or more) be said orderly
to desire Sacramental Communion with a Church of Christ, not being a Member
hereof; and so, that his motion, ought not by this Church to be refused?

Answ. When either some of the Members of this Church shall testify upon
knowledge, that he is a person of an honest and Christian life and
conversation, or else that he is a Member of some other Church in Gospel Order,
and not under censure; or if the said person shall be recommended by any such
Church as this, as being a Member of it; and further, if this person (whether
he be a member of some other such Church, or not) having by one means or other,
satisfied the Church, to which he addresseth, that he is a person walking
orderly in the profession of the Gospel, shall declare likewise unto it, that
whilst he shall desire to continue, or frequent the said Communion with it, he
will be content to submit to the Discipline and Government thereof; he (I say)
that shall thus, and upon these terms desire Sacramental Communion with any
Church of Christ, may (I conceive) be said to desire it orderly.

Quest. 18. Why needs, or why ought, a Church of Christ to be thus strictly
inquisitive after the Faith and Manners of those, whom they receive and admit
unto their Sacramental Communion?

Answ. The reasons hereof are many: I shall briefly touch upon, only five,
First, the Apostles exhortation, or caution, unto Timothy (1 Timothy 5.22. in a
case not altogether unlike) is considerable in this also. Lay hands (says he
unto Timothy) suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins; keep
thy self pure, implying, that they Communicate in the guilt of other men's sins,
who having a lawful power to prevent their sinning, shall not be diligent and
careful to use it accordingly. Thus Eli the High Priest was partaker of the
sins of his two Sons, and was severely punished by God for it, 1 Samuel 3.13, 14.
compared with c. 4.18 Yea, the said caution reaches yet further, involving
those in the guilt of other men's sins; not only who neglect to make use of that
power, which is lawfully vested in them, to keep those from sinning, who either
they know, or have ground to suspect, that they will sin, unless they use their
power to prevent it, but even those also who shall through carelessness or
remissness, suffer such persons to pass through that door, the key whereof God
has entrusted them with, without examination, who, for ought they know, or
have reason to judge otherwise, will sin by the opportunity, or means, of that
passage to easily given them. For in case Timothy should have laid hands
suddenly upon any man, possibly this man thus inconsiderately admitted into the
Ministry, might have quitted himself as well, and worthily in this great
Office, as another, that should have been admitted with the greatest caution;
yet Timothy, even in this case, should have neglected the charge given him, and
consequently, incurred the crime of being partaker of other men's sins: unless
(happily) we shall interpret the clause, neither be partaker of other men's sins
thus (which I take to be the true meaning of it) and do not run the hazard,
expose not thy self to danger, of being involved in the guilt of other men's
sins. This exposition might be cleared, and confirmed, by comparing it with
sundry passages of like phrases, and construction, but this is not so proper
here. But (doubtless) the mind of God to Timothy in the dehortation, or charge
mentioned, is alike to all others in cases of like nature, or consideration.
Now then, inasmuch as they, who (in the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 11.29.) eat and
drinks unworthily [at the Lords Table; and why may there not be the like
misdemeanor committed, and consequently, the like guilt contracted, in, or
about, the other Sacrament also?] eat and drink Judgment [or damnation] unto
themselves, and consequently, must needs sin, in that action, at a very
grievous rate; those Churches that shall suddenly admit men, or women, unto
their Sacramental Communion, or without some rational ground of their meetness
to bear a part in so great and holy a Service, having a right of power (as has
been said) vested in them by God to maintain the reverence and honor of it
within their own Community, and consequently to shut the door of admission here
against all unknown persons whatsoever, evidently by such a behavior, incur the
guilt, or (which amounts to little less) expose themselves to the danger, of
being partakers of other men's sins, which they cannot do without their own.

Secondly, the holy things of God must needs suffer loss in that reverence and
high esteem, which either they have, or ought to have, in the Souls and
Consciences of men, by being made common, or not managed with a solemnity of
care and circumspection, and (as it were) with an holy fear and trembling, by
those that are instrusted with the ordering of them. We read that the
wickedness of the Sons of Eli, being Priests, occasioned men to abhor the
offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.17. And it is recorded of Jeroboam, that
designing to bring the Worship of God in the Temple at Jerusalem, out of
request and credit with the people, and to establish the Idolatry of his Calves
he made Priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the Sons of
Levi, I Kings 12.31, Yea, after he had been admonished of this his wickedness
by a Prophet sent on purpose unto him by God, who confirmed his mission by a
double miracle, the one of Judgment, the other of Mercy, upon his person, and
by a double Miracle also upon his idolotrous Altar, (1 Kings 13.4, 5, 6.) it is
written thus: After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but
made again of the lowest of the people, Priests of the high places; WHOEVER
WOULD, he consecrated him, and he became one of the Priests of the high places.
And this thing became sin to the house of Jereboam, even to cut it off, and to
destroy it from off the face of the earth, v. 33, 34. From whence this (amongst
sundry other things) is of ready observation; that the majestic awful and
pleasing reverence which is due unto the holy things of God, by their coming
unto unsanctified and undue hands is in danger of being ecclipsed, and falling
low in the hearts of men. See and consider, Psalm. 50.16. Therefore great care
is to be taken by all the Churches of Christ (respectively) that, as far as is
possible, no wicked person have the right hand of fellowship given unto him,
amongst them, in declaring, or showing forth the Lords Death: which they have,
that are admitted by them to eat and drink at the Lords Table, (as the Apostle
himself interprets this action) 1 Cor. 11.26.

Thirdly, every Christian Church, or Congregation should endeavor the
perfectest resemblance that may be unto the Kingdom of Heaven (by the very name
whereof these Churches, at east in their collective body, are frequently
styled) or the New Jerusalem, which is, coming down from God out of Heaven
(Rev. 21.2.) Into this, it is expressly said that there shall IN NO WISE [(...),
that is, upon no terms whatsoever; or most assuredly there sha l not enter into
it any th ng that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a
lie, but they [only] which are wr tten in the Lambs book of Life [that is, who
by means of their Faith and Holiness, come under Gods eternal decree of
election unto life: which 1, is compared to a Book, wherein names, or persons
are written, to show, that those that shall answer the terms of that decree,
that is shall truly and perseveringly believe in Jesus Christ, shall be as
certainly saved by virtue of that decree, as if their names were written in
such a Book, the title whereof should be, the Book of Life, or, of Salvation:
or, A catalogue of the names of those that shall most certainly be saved. 2.
This decree is termed, The Lambs, that is, Christ's considered as the Lambs of
God slain (...), from the foundation of the world, that is, immediately upon or
soon after the foundations of the world was laid, namely, when, or as soon as
man sinned; a thing being frequently in Scripture said to be, or to be done,
when the cause producing, or occasioning it, takes place, and is in being,
either because the life, which this book insureth unto those that are written
in it, is of the Lambs procuring; or rather because the Lamb gave an
opportunity to the mercy of God, notwithstanding his justice, or just severity
against sin, to write, or make such a Book; mean of election of sinners unto
life, upon the performance of such, and such conditions; in which respect,
believers are said to be elected, or chosen in h m, that is, through, or by
means of, him, as the preposition (...), in, often imports: but this by the
way] Rev. 21.27. Therefore every Church of Christ, being bound to conform it
self with all diligence and care unto the holiness of the New Jerusalem, ought
not to suffer all comers, hand over head, to enter into their communion, or to
partake of their holy things with them.

Fourthly, Several particulars recorded we find that God, even under the Law,
was very jealous over his holy things, that the honor and reverence due unto
them might be maintained at their height, and without the least imbezilement by
neglect, or profanation, what by declarations, precepts, and charges given in
this kind, what by exemplary judgments inflicted upon transgressors of these
precepts, what by provisions made otherwise to prevent all delinquency of that
kind we speak of (I mean, about the sacred things of his worship) he has
largely testified unto the world, his great zeal to secure the honor, and awful
esteem of these things, from all indignities and affronts that are otherwise
like to be put upon them by the superstition, neglect, or presumption of men;
yea, and his full resolution to avenge with great severity, the contempt of
them, or the violation of those wise and holy prescripts, or significations of
his holy will and pleasures, which he has given concerning them, and the use
of them. First, there were many strict and peremptory charges given by him in
this kind. I WILL be sanctified in them that come nigh me, etc. Lev. 10.3. Ye
SHALL keep my Sabba^h^, and reverence my Sanctuary, Lev. 19 30.26.2. Neither
shall ye pollute the holy things of the children of Israel. LEST YE DIE, Numb.
18.32. In the former part of this Chapter no less penalty then death is
threatened both to Priests and Levites, and strangers upon their delinquency
about holy things. God speaks very frequently in the voice of this thunder in
the Books of the Law: We shall not need to cite more places.

Secondly, neither was God more strict in charging men about the managing and
using his holy things, then severe in his executions upon those that neglected
his directions and commands in this kind. He was so far from dispensing with
the violation of the Sabbath by the poor man that gathered sticks on this day,
that he expressly commanded that he should be stoned to death (which was
esteemed the heaviest of all the four kinds of death that were wont to be
inflicted on Malefactors amongst the Jews) Numb. 15.35. Nor did he spare the
Sons of Aaron himself, when they neglected his appointment concerning the fire
which they were to offer; and instead hereof put strange, fire upon their
Censers [that is, fire which he had not commanded them to offer.] It is said,
that there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and they died before
the Lord. God did terrible execution upon them (as it were) with his own hands,
and that suddenly, upon their sinning, not affording them (for ought that
appears, or is in any degree probable) any time for repentance, Lev. 10.12.
So the two Sons of Eli. Hophni, and Phineas, for their misdemeanors about the
Sacrifices, and holy things of God, were sentenced by him both to dye in one
day, 1 Samuel 2 34. Which Sentence was soon after put in execution by the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 4.11. To hear of his severity against Uzzah, for his
miscarriage, with the circumstances of it, considered, is enough to make both a
man's ears to tingle. His offense was only the putting forth his hand to stay
the Ark, being a person not commissioned by God to meddle with it. Yet 1. He
was one of the two that drove the Cart on which it was now carried; which might
seem to require of him some care about it. 2. His intention (doubtless) in what
he did in the case, was good and commendable; which was to prevent any hurt,
which, as he reasonably conceived, the Ark was like to receive by being more
then ordinarily shaken (as it seems) by the stumbling of the Oxen. 3. Nor is it
like that he saw any of the Priests, who might lawfully have done that for it
which he did, near at hand (or at least) offering to do it. And yet,
notwithstanding the favor of these circumstances, God was so jealous over his
Ordinances, concerning the Ark, and Priesthood, that he could not be satised
with less then the present death of the offender; although at the same time he
could not but be highly pleased with the zealous devotions and services of
David, and all the people. And David and all Israel (says the text) played
before God withal their might, and with singing, and with harps, and with
psalteries, and with timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets: and
ordinarily times of much satisfaction and contentment, dispose both God, and
man, not to acts of severity, but of kindeness and bounty. Therefore
(certainly) God was most highly displeased with the fact of Uzza, breaking out
upon him in so sore a judgment at such a time, 1 Chronicles. 13.8, 9, 10. Nor did
he show himself a respecter of persons, when he smote Uzziah the King with the
plague of Leprosy (and would not restore him until the day of his death) only
for presuming and attempting to do that about the Worship of God, which
appertains not to him to do* but to the Priests (as viz. to burn Incense upon
the Altar of Incense) And it may be a question, whether he did know, at least
whether at that time he did remember, that what he would have done, was
unlawful for him to do: however he only intended and attempted the irregular
fact we speak of, but acted it not, being prevented, first by the Priests who
withstood him in that his attempt, and then by God himself, who fell upon him
with that sore judgment of Leprosy, before he had actually perpatrated the
sin, 2 Chronicles. 27.16, 17, 18, 19.

Thirdly (and lastly for this) God to secure the honor and reverence of his
holy things under the Law, to preserve them in their purity, appointed a
numerous and strong guard about them, to whom it was given in charge to be
vigilant, and careful that nothing should be done, in one kind or other,
contrary to his mind and pleasure in his Institution, and appointment of them
(respectively) we read of four thousand Levities that were appointed as
Porters, 1 Chronicles. 23.5. whose office and employment was, partly to stand at the
gates of the house of the Lord, that none that was unclean IN ANY THING, should
enter in, 2 Chronicles. 23.19. 1 Chronicles. 9.19.21, 22. partly to oversee the vessels
and all the Instruments of the Sanctuary, and the fine flour, and the wine, and
the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices (with other things appointed for
the worship of God in the Sanctuary) that is, to take care and see that all
should be of the right kinds (respectively) so as to answer the commands of God
concerning them, 1 Chronicles. 9.27, 28, 29, etc.

Now if God, under the Law, when the Rites and Ordinances about his Worship,
were so exceedingly numerous, was notwithstanding so jealous and tender over
them all, that the neglect, contempt, or profanation of any one of them,
caused his anger and jealousy (as we heard) to smoke against every offender in
this kind; is there not very great cause to fear, or (rather) to conclude that
now, under the Gospel he will be yet more jealous over those few, wherewith he
has here contnted himself in his Worship, for the ease and accommodation of
men? Will he be patient under the careless violation of any of these, when they
who did not reverence his Counsels and appointments concerning those other,
found him (as we heard) a consuming fire? where great multitudes are,
particulars (commonly) are not so much minded or regarded, or where the number
is but small. Therefore as God plainly told Aaron, that he and his Sons, and
his Fathers house with him, should bea^ the iniquity of the Sanctuary, and of
their Priesthood [meaning, should answer for all miscarriages, in, and about,
his holy things, which lay in their power, and within the compass of their
office, to prevent] Numb. 18.1. So has he now laid it upon his Saints, whom
Christ has made Priests unto him, (Revel. 1.6.) in their respective Bodies and
Congregations, to bear the iniquity of the Holy Ordinances of the Gospel, and
to be accountable unto him for all irregularities about them, whereby, through
their negligence, or unfaithfulness, they shall at any time suffer in their
purity, and honor.

Fifthly (and lastly) there is little, or (rather) no question to be made, but
that the looseness, indifferency, and remissness in Christian Churches about
the holy things of God entrusted with them, and matters relating unto the
purity of his worship have been the desolation and laying waste of all those
Churches, from whom their Candlesticks have a long time been removed, and will
be of like sad consequence (in time) to all those yet remaining, if they shall
profane their excellency with the guilt of them. As on the other hand, no
instance (I believe) can be given of any Church wholly dissipated, or plucked up
by the roots, but only such, who leaving their first love, let loose the reins
of their Discipline, and so exposed the holy things of God amongst them to
pollution, and profanation. Several passages in the Epistles dated from
heaven, and sent by Christ to the seven Churches of Asia, ( Rev. cap. 2. and
cap. 3.) stand well affected toward such a conclusion. I shall instance only
in this (in the epistle to the Church in Sardis, cap. 3.23.) Be watchful, and
strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to dye. -- Remember
therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If
therefore thou shall not watch, I will come upon thee as a thief, etc. The
condition in the last clause, If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come
etc. clearly implies, that as the neglect of it would certainly e're long
bring Christ in a desolating judgment upon them, so a timely and conscientious
performance of it would be their security and peace. Now by watching (the
condition here mentioned) is meant, their constant care, and intenseness of
mind, to strenghten the things which remained [amongst them] but were ready to
dye; that is, to put in vigorous and due execution those orders and injunctions
of Christ for the regulating their Church affairs, and matters relating to the
worship of God amongst them; which though they did not wholly neglect, or cast
aside, yet they languished, and grew extremely remiss in the exercise and
practice of them, and were in a short time likely to give over all. So that it
concerns all Christian Churches, as they prize their Canstlesticks, and the
incomparable privilege and blessing of the presence of God, and the
continuance of his saving Ordinances, amongst them, to preserve and vindicate
the chastity and honor of their Sacramental Communion as far as humane care and
diligence are able to promote so worthy an undertaking.

Quest. 19. But is it not contray to the Law of Christian Charity to suspect
any person of unworthiness, when we have no sufficient ground for such a
suspicion?

Answ. 1. To suspect that a person unknown to us, may (possibly) be unworthy,
is not contrary to any Law of Christian Charity: for no man stands bound by
any such Law, to presume, that all men (nor consequently, that any particular
man) unknown to us, have true Faith. For no Law in this kind obliges us to
believe any thing contrary to what we know. Now if we believe the faithful
witness, and great Prophet of the world, Jesus Christ, in that his Doctrine,
many are called, but few are chosen, we cannot (lightly) but know, not only
that any particular person, unknown to us, may (possibly) be void of true
Faith, but that it is more probable that so he is: which is a competent ground
for suspicion in the case. Therefore when the Apostle says, that charity
believes all things, hops all things, (1 Cor. 13.7.) his meaning is, that
Charity disposes, or inclines, a man to believe, and so to hope, all things
[that is, all good things concerning others] which are believable, and
hopeable, that is, of the truth, whereof there are reasonable and competent
grounds, though not demonstrative, or necessarily convincing. For otherwise, it
is not the charitable man, but (as the wise man informs us) the fool (or
according to our last translation) the simple, that believes every word (
Prove. 14.15.), that is, as well that, which is most unworthy, as that which is
best worthy to be believed. Yea the Apostle himself was jealous of the
integrity and soundness of many, professing Christianity, even in his days,
when this profession ran in a much straiter channel, then now it does, and was
taken up upon a far better, and more serious account, by those that professed
it, then now it is. For I am jealous over you, etc. (says he to the
Corinthians) and I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through
his subtilty; so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ, 2 Cor. 11.23. See also Gal. 4.11. 2 Cor. 12.20, 21.

2. When our belief, or hope of the goodness of another relates only to our
selves, so that in case we be deceived, we alone are like to suffer by it, the
Law of Charity seems to require of us, that we be satisfied with arguments, and
testimonies, of less weight, then when we believe, or hope, in this kind, for
other and more especially for God (I mean when such a belief, or hope, as now I
speak of, directly tend in their miscarriage and frustration, either to the
damage of others, or dishonor of God. I may trust such a man with a sum of
money out of a persuasion of his honesty, which I should offend against Charity
to commend unto another, to be trusted in like manner by him. But when the
Glory of God, or the honor of his holy things, are interessed in our belief, or
persuasion of men's goodness, it is so far from making any breach upon the Law
of Charity, to use all diligence and care for our satisfaction, that a
facility, or over-easiness of belief in the case, is like to expose us to that
curse: Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently, (or,
deceitfully, according to the saying in the civil Law, Negligentia dissoluta,
dolus est.] Jer. 48.10. Christ in his Epistle from Heaven to the Church of
Ephesus, takes notice of this, as very commendable in them, that they could
not bear them that were evil, and that they [examined, or] tried, even those
that [pretended to be, and] said they were Apostles, yet, and were not so, and
accordingly, being so narrowly sifted and searched into by this Church, were
found liars. And the Apostle Paul expostulating with the Church of Corinth
about their remisness in keeping their Church Body in sanctification and honor,
demands of them, Do not you judge those that are within? [meaning, within
their own community] clearly implying, that Churches ought to make it a very
serious and solemn business not to suffer a vile or unworthy person to leven,
or pollute their holy communion, either by his coming in, or by his abode
amongst them, if they be able by any reasonable diligence, or process, of
inquity, to discover him for such.

3. (And lastly) If a person be meet for Sacramental communion with a Church of
Christ, it cannot be repugnant to any Law of Charity, that so Christian and
honorable a qualification should be tried, and, brought to light; especially
considering that such a person is always willing and free, (if not desirous
also) to come to such a trial, according to that saying of the Lord Christ. But
he that does truth, comes to the light [willingly, freely, and of his own
accord needs not to be importuned to it] that his deeds may be made manifest,
that they are [or because they are] wrought in God [that is, according to the
will of God] John 3.21. The trial of any man's Pains, as well by other means of
trial, as by sufferings, will be found, as Peter expresses it, 1 Pet. 1.8.)
unto his praise, and honor, and glory, not only at the appearing of Jesus
Christ, but even during his state of mortality amongst the Saints, in this
present world. Now that which is done to any man, having a direct tendency to
his honor, and without any prejudice to him otherwise, and besides, is fully
comporting with his own disposition, and will, cannot reasonably be supposed,
or suspected, to contradict any rule of Charity, being so manifestly of a good
and friendly accord with it. On the other hand, if the person desiring
Sacramental Communion with a Church, be unworthy, this Church by detecting it,
and hereupon, denying him that, which would be sinful, and of sad consequence,
unto him, shall in, and by one and the same act, both please God (as the Church
of Ephesus did, by discovering those to be liars, who said they were Apostles,
as we lately heard) maintain the honor of his holy things, keep a soul from
making it felf actually guilty of the body and blood of Christ (1 Cor. 11.27.)
and withal, consult the honor, peace, and safety of themselves, or their own
Church-body.

Quest. 20. But are not the Sacraments converting Ordinances? If so, ought not
sinful men, and unbelievers be admitted to partake of them?

Answ. It no where appears that God ever intended them for converting
Ordinances, nor does reason lead us to conceive of them under such a notion. Or
if this should be granted, or supposed, I mean, that they are converting
Ordinances) yet will it not follow from hence, that therefore ungodly and
unbelieving persons (other then those, that happily may deceive the Church under
a plausible profession of Faith and Holiness) should be admitted to receive, or
to partake of, the elements themselves in their respective administrations.
Preaching of the Gospel is (without controversy) a converting Ordinance; yet
ought not profane or unbelieving persons be admitted, or persuaded, to preach
the Gospel in order to their conversion. But as Faith (and so Conversion)
comes by hearing [the Gospel preached by others, orderly called hereunto, not
by preaching it a man's self] so may Sacramental Administrations be ordained by
God, for the conversion of men, yet not by their own acting, or bearing a part,
in the execution of them, but by being present, and beholding, and minding
these administrations, whilst performed by others. But that God intended not
the conversion of men as yet unconverted, by a self-acting in Sacramental
dispensations, or that these by such an interposure of the said persons in, or
about them, should be any means of their conversion, but rather obstructions in
the way thereunto, is fully evident from that of the Apostle, where (speaking
of the Sacrament of the Supper) he says thus: For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks [not conversion, or Salvation, but] damnation
unto himself, not discerning the Lords body. 1 Cor. 11.29. Doubtless an
unconverted person or unbeliever, cannot discern the Lords Body [that is,
exhibit in any degree that reverence, or those sacred respects unto it, which a
Sacramental memorial, or participation, of it requires of all those, who do
partake of it in this Ordinance] and consequently, cannot but eat and drink,
unworthily, at the Lords Table (if he eats and drinks here at all.) Other
arguments of a demonstrative eviction of the same truth, might be readily drawn
from verse 24, 25, 26. of the same Chapter.

Amongst many grounds in reason that might be insisted on to give further light
and confirmation to this truth. I shall (at present) mention only two.

First, God is not wont to set up one Ordinance in competition with another; or
(which is the same) to appoint more then one for the effecting of one and the
same end (I mean, one and the same proper and immediate end: for otherwise, all
Ordinances are given by him to effect and bring about the same general, remote,
or ultimate ends.) This principle the Apostle Paul supposes to be a truth, and
argues from it in several places. I do not frustrate the grace of God: for if
righteuosness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, (Gal. 2.21.)
implying that God accounts more ways, or means of justification then one, to
be superfluous and vain; and consequently, that if he had ordained, or
appointed, one for this purpose, he would not have appointed another. He
reasons and concludes from the same ground, in the same case ( Romans 4.14.)
thus, For if they which are of the Law, be heirs, Faith is made void, and the
promise made of none effect. So also in somewhat a different case he argues
from the same supposition, Heb. 7.11. If therefore perfection were by the
Levitical Priesthood (for under it the people received the Law) what further
need was there that another Priest should rise after the order of Melchisedeck,
etc. From these, and the like reasonings of the Apostle, it is clear, that when
God has sufficiently provided for the obtaining of any benefit, or end, by one
means, he never brings another (as it were) over the head of it, but resolves,
that that which is already, or first established, shall (at least, ordinarily)
have the honor entire to it self of investing men with the benefit, or
blessing, for the attainment, or procurement, whereof it was appointed by him,
and that no corrival, or competitor shall be set up by it to divide with it.
And accordingly the Apostle reasons, Gal. 3.21. For if there had been a Law
given, that could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the
Law. So likewise David of old (in another case) Then David said, none ought to
carry the Ark of God, but the Levites; for them has the Lord chosen to carry
the Ark of God, etc. 1 Chronicles. 15.2. Now then it being certain that the
attentive hearing of the Gospel preached is an Ordinance or means, appointed
and sanctified by God for the work of conversion, it is no ways consistent
with the Counsel of God (lately declared from the Scriptures) to imagine that
Sacramental participation should be a means also appointed by him for the same
purpose. It is true, God may (and sometimes does) prepare, dispose, and bring
men nearer to conversion, then they were before, by other means, then by the
Gospel preached, even in such places where it is preached, and may be heard:
and where it is not preached (I mean, by men) out of his great compassion to
the precious souls of men, he takes a liberty, though (I believe) somewhat
sparingly, to substitute other means in the place thereof, and works
conversion by these. But where there is opportunity to hear the Gospel preached
by men, I can ill believe the full and through conversion of any person without
it. But securely confident I am, that there is no other ordinance, or means,
designed, or assigned by God, wherein, or whereby the saving conversion of any
man ought to be, or reasonably can be, without this, hoped, or expected. It is
not probable (and the sense of some of the best expositors is the same) that
the conversion of Paul was perfected by all that which passed between Christ,
and him, on the way to Damascus, or until he had heard and learned more of the
mind of Christ from Ananias; who, in the judgment of some Ancient Writers,
was one of the seventy Disciples, whom Christ himself ordained, and sent forth
to preach the Gospel, Luke 10.1. or, as Calvin conceives, was upon this
occasion, and in the present vision, wherein Christ appeared unto him, made a
Minister of the Gospel by him.

Secondly, there is this reason evincing the Sacraments not to be converting
Ordinances; namely, because persons unconverted, and unbelieving, are not
regularly capable, no not of that Sacramenct, which is most like to be
converting, I mean, Baptism: This clearly appears from the answer, which
Philip made to the Eunuch, desiring Baptism of him in these words, See, here
is water, what does hinder me to be Babtized? Philip answers him, if thou
believe with all thine heart, thou may (Acts 8 37.) plainly implying that
otherwise [ viz. in case he did not thus believe] he might not, or ought not
[to be Baptized.] This had been a very uncharitable, and unchristian answer, in
case he had not so believed, if to Baptize him had been so much as a probable,
or likely means to make him a believer. For to require that of a man, which he
has not, but stands in great need of, as a condition for the imparting of that
unto him, which would supply him, is extremely disingenuous and importune,
especially when we may impart such a thing unto him without any trouble, or
damage to our selves which had been Philips case in refusing to Baptize the
Eunuch, because of his unbelief (supposing he had been an unbeliever) if
Baptizing him had been a means to heal his unbelief, and to turn him unto God
by believing. This which has been argued concerning Baptism from the Text
lately cited, might be demonstrated from several others, if need were.
Concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that persons un-converted are
altogether, as (if not rather more) incapable of this [and consequently, that
neither can this be looked upon as a converting Ordinance] appears, from the
nature, or import of it, or the ^ounsel of God in it, as the Apostle describes,
whether the one, or the other, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. The cup of blessing, which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? that is, was not the
drinking of it instituted, ordained, and appointed by Christ, that the
Communion, which believers have in his Blood [that is, in the great benefit of
Redemption purchased by his Blood] should hereby be, both professed and
declared by them openly, and likewise nourished, strengthened, and confirmed in
them inwardly? Therefore they that are duly capable of drinking this cup, must
have communion in the Blood of Christ with believers (and consequently, must be
converted) before they drink it; otherwise in drinking it, they shall act
hypocritically, and make profession of having that, which they have not. Now
(doubtless) to act hypocritically is no means of conversion: or if it were,
then the most wicked and Profane persons, who stand in most need of
conversion, ought rather to be invited, encouraged, and freely admitted to the
drinking of the cup we speak of, then to be debarred, or kept off from the
opportunity, or to be cast out from amongst those, that orderly drink it, by a
sentence of Excommunication (in case they had fellowship with them in the
business, before their wickedness break out) which yet we know was the
Discipline of the Primitive Churches enjoined them by the Apostles themselves.
This likewise plainly evinceth, that the meaning of the words mentioned, The
cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the Blood of Christ,
(is not as some weakly pretend) as if the Apostle did imply, that the Cup he
speaks of was the means of any man's first obtaining, or bringing into the
communion of the Blood of Christ. Such a sense of the words as this, as it is
opposed by the discipline planted (as has been said) by the Apostles, and
practiced, in the Primitive Christian Churches; so is it inconsistent with the
scope of the context, and other expressions herein; as might be showed more at
large if it were needful, or proper to our present undertaking. Thus then it is
as clear as the Sun rising in his might, both by the light of the Scriptures,
and of grounds in reason attested by them, that Sacramental Ordinances are not
converting.

Quest. 21. Whether do Sacramental administrations produce any real effects,
in, or upon, the hearts and souls of men, that do partake of them, or work any
real alteration in them?

Answ. If answer be made in Scripture language, according to the manner of
speaking here, the effects of Sacramental actions, are, or may be, not simply
real, but sometimes very great and excellent. For this frequently asscribeth
even miraculous effects to such causes, or means; which are of a Sacramental
nature. Thus the dividing of the waters of the Red Sea, when the Israelites
passed through over dry land, is by God himself attributed unto Moses his
lifting up his Rod, and stretching out his hand over it. But lift thou up thy
Rod (says he to Moses) and stretch out thine hand over the Sea, and DIVIDE it,
etc. Exodus 14.16. So likewise the reducing of this Sea unto its former course,
after it had been thus divided, and whilst Pharaoh and all his Host was in the
midst of the Channel of it, is ascribed unto the same cause. And the Lord said
unto Moses, stretch out thy hand over the Sea, that the waters may come again
upon the Egyptians, ver. 26.27. In like manner the bringing of water out of a
Rock, is promised by God unto Moses and Aaron their speaking to it. Take the
Rod, and gather thou the assembly together, thou and Aaron thy Brother, and
speak ye unto the Rock before their eyes, and it shall give forth its water,
and TH0U SHALL BRING FORTH to them water out of the Rock, etc. Numb. 20.8. Thus
the dividing of the waters of Jordan, through which they passed into the land
of Canaan, seems in like manner to be ascribed to the Priests bearing the Ark
before them, Isa. 3.15, 16. So the falling down flat of the walls of Jericho,
to the sounding of the Trumpets made of Rams Horns by the Priests, before the
Ark (together with the performance of some other like things prescribed unto
them by God, in order to the same effect) Josh. 6.13, 14, 15, etc. There are
several other instances of like consideration in the Scriptures. See Exodus
17.11, 12, 13. Josh. 8.18.19, 26. 2 Kings 5.14. If God was pleased to work such
great and notable effects as these, by means that were not natural, or proper
by any inherent quality, or virtue, to produce them, but of the same, or the
like kind, with those, which are strictly and properly Sacramental; it is but
reasonable to conceive, that he works, by these [I mean, the Sacraments
themselves] all such effects, whether in, and upon, the hearts, and souls of
men [using them aright] or otherwise, which were intended by him in their
institution, and for the obtaining of which he has commended, and commanded
the use of them unto men.

Quest. 22. What are the ends, or, effects, intended by God in the institution
of the Sacraments, and in the participation of them by men according to his
command?

Answ. The general ends projected by God, in, and by the Sacramental
dispensations (for we shall not speak of the particular ends, which are proper
to each Sacrament by it self, until we come to unfold the nature of them in
particular; but the general ends we speak of, have been mentioned already
(toward the beginning of the Chapter) nevertheless if you desire it, we shall
here recount them with some addition and variety.

Quest. 23. What may be one of these general ends?

Answ. To cause the holy profession of Christianity to bear the more awfully,
and with the greater weight, upon the souls and consciences of men, and
consequently, to move them to walk worthy of it, and avoid all things repugnant
to the honor and interest of it. Upon such an account as this, the Apostle
presses the believing Romans, with the remembrance and consideration of their
having been Baptized, ( Romans 6.3, 4.) and the Corinthians, with their
accustomed eating and drinking at the Lords Table, 1 Cor. 10 16. 21. What a man
has openly, and publicly declared himself to own, or to consent unto, by a
voluntary submitting unto any Ceremony, or usage, which is commonly known to
signify or import as much, he is by such a declaration as this the more
seriously and solemnly engaged to stand by and promote, the interest of what he
has thus owned; and yet much more to refrain from whatsoever is like to
prejudice, or endamage it. And this (questionless) is the reason why
admissions, and entrances into several Corporations, and Societies, are
commonly transacted with some ceremonial, or rite (in one kind or other)
appropriate to each of them (respectively) unto which, he that desires the
relation of a Member, or a Brother, in any of them, must submit. Yea, in some
of them, the members are at certain times, and upon occasion, required to
testify their relation unto their Community, by wearing such, or such,
distinguishing habits, or performing such, or such Services, or the like. So
that God in his institution and appointment of Sacramental Rites for those that
profess Christianity to submit unto, and exercise themselves in, from time to
time, does that, which in many other cases he does likewise, that is, in his
spiritual transactions with men, and matters of their eternal salvation,
applies himself unto them in their own methods, ways, and customs, which they
practice and follow in their civil and secular occasions, and affairs; only in
some particular cases avouching himself more benign and favorable then they.
Instances of this notion and import the Scripture holds forth not a few. See
Jer. 3.1. Amos 3.3.5, 6. Isa. 49.15, 62.5. Mat. 7.9, 10, 11. chap. 13.44, 45,
46. Luke 12.48. 1 Cor. 9.7.2 ^im. 2.4.5, 6. Heb. 6.16, 17. (to omit others.)
The reason hereof we shall not at present insist upon, although it be not far
off.

Quest. 24. What may be another general end of Sacramental Ordinances?

Answ. To prevent Apostasy, and the dreadful sin of falling off from the holy
profession of the name of Christ, after a person, man, or woman, has once
taken it up in the sight of the world. This depends upon the former, and this
in two considerations, or respects. First, with the greater solemnity and
observation, any thing is undertaken, and entered upon, and accordingly managed
and pursued from time to time, the undertaker is so much the more engaged in
point of honor, or repute, and as he desires not to be undervalued as a man of
desultory, light, and empty judgment, to abide by his undertaking, and pursue
it to the uttermost; unless (happily) in his persuit of it he should evidently
discover, or meet with, some such grand inconvenience, or evil, which as it
was, (...), above an ordinary man's wisdom to foresee, from the beginning, so it
is above his power to prevent, if he goes forward with his undertaking, or to
balance it with any proportionable good, by carrying such his undertaking an
end. Now neither the first, nor the last of these provisoes, or exceptions, can
have place in the profession of Christianity (and so the middle is impertinent,
and inconsiderable.) For 1. There is no evil, whereunto this profession renders
a man at any time obnoxious, but what by the clear light of the Gospel he might
have foreseen from the beginning ( Luke 14.26, 27, 33. Mat. 24.9. Romans 8.36.
Acts 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12. with others.) Nor 2. But what this profession
undertaken and made good to the end, will recompense an hundred fold. Therefore
to take up and prosecute a Christian Profession upon such terms, which render a
man's action and engagement in this Kind the more considerable, and matter of
more expectance, and discourse, unto the world (which is done, when it is taken
up, and pursued with any solemnity of Rite, and Ceremony) is a rational and
proper means to make him resolvedly willing to adhere unto it, and to
dis-incline, or indispose him to a renouncing of it.

Secondly, The thoughtfulness and care of not wronging, or disparaging a
Christian profession, whereunto the heart of a man is apt to be wrought (as was
lately said) by a reverence and awe of this profession found in him, must needs
be a great preservative against Apostasy, because Apostasy from it, is of all
other the greatest reproach and disparagement, that can be cast upon it,
tending to possess the world with hard thoughts of it, and this with an high
hand of endeavor, and persuasion; it being no less then a pawning of men's
souls, and a confident waging of all their expectations of good from God, both
in this world, and that which is to come, that it is a profession of vanity,
and that it will deceive, if not destroy, all those that shall engage in it,
and not abandon it in due time. So that such a tenderness as we speak of, I
mean, of dishonouring or scandalizing a Christian profession, is an effectual
means, not simply to prevent Apostasy, but to keep at the greatest distance
from it.

Quest. 25. What (...) you conceive may be a third general and, designed by God
in planting Sacraments in his Church?

Answ. To prevent superstition, and to keep his Worship and Service pure, and
entire within the compass and pale of his own contrivance, and commands, free
from all heterogeneal Ceremonies, Formalities, and Conceits of foreign device.
For having himself appointed some Ceremonies in his Worship, he does plainly
enough hereby declare, and say unto men, that if he had a mind to be
worshipped, or served, with more, he both could, and would, have appointed them
himself, and not have entrusted the weak and wandering, the over-officious, and
importune fancies of men, either with prescribing the number, or with inventing
or devising the form, and figure of them. For as by the exquisite genius and
frame of those, which he has now appointed, he has approved himself a better
inventor of Ceremonies, by a thousand degrees, then men, those invented by them
being ridiculous and childish, in comparison of his: so by the fewness of them,
he clearly shows that he delights not in a multitude of them; and consequently,
that he intended not to refer the matter of Ceremonies in his worship unto
those, who are so impotently addicted unto them, that having once tasted the
lawless pleasure of ingendring, and imposing them, they never know when, or
where, to make an end.

Besides, as God considering the weakness of the nature of man, and how arduous
and difficult a thing it is unto the generality of men effectually to resist
such motions, and temptations, unto the sin of Adultery, wherewith he knew they
would be frequently and dangerously assaulted, was graciously pleased to allow
and appoint them the Ordinance of Marriage, to prevent their falling under the
guilt of that sin (1 Cor 7 29. but this allowance renders the guilt of the sin,
when contracted, the more inexcusable, Heb. 13.4. In like manner, to keep men
chaste and pure in his Worship, free from Superstition, and the use of all
unclean and unsanctified Ceremonies in the exercise of that Religion, which he
commends unto them, knowing how precipitately prone the generality of them
are to such sensualities as these in their spiritual Services, he has
mercifully condescended unto them in giving them those sensible Ordinances,
which are known by the name of Sacraments, by which condescension nevertheless
he has doubled and trebbled the condemnation of those, that shall pollute
themselves with Rites and Ceremonies of a baser and more ignoble extraction.
The Sacraments of God make the Ceremonies of men to be high misdemeanors,
(which upon other accounts are obnoxious enough also.)

Quest. 26. What my be a fourth end of Sacramental Institutions (in the
general?)

Answ. That the sum and substance of things that are most spiritual, and so of
greatest difficulty to be believed, in the great profession of Christianity,
might, as much as may be (as namely in Figures, Signs, and external
resemblances) be exposed, and exhibited, even to the outward senses of men: and
so be rendered (proportinably) the more familiar unto their minds, and the more
e^^ie to be believed by them. As God, when of old he sent his holy Angels about
any gracious message, or treaty, with men, he caused them to cloth themselves
with visible shapes and appearances, whereby they were the better accomodated
for ^onverse with them, in respect of the infirmity of their flesh (being
otherwise, in their simple natures, very disproportiona^e hereunto) in like
manner in his Sacramental Ordinances he makes the mysterious and spiritual
things of his Gospel to represent and show themselves, and (as it were) to
speak, unto the understandings, minds, and consciences of men, in sensible
forms and similitudes of outward things, by means whereof they become the more
familiar, and hereby the more credible unto them. In these words of Christ to
Nicodemus, If I have spoke unto you earthly things [that is, spiritual things
made, as it were earthly, and of as ready a perception, as earthly and outward
things are, by fitting and explaining them by similitudes of such things;
spiritual things thus declared and set forth, being ^ermed, earthly things, in
such a sense, or figure of speech, as Angels are frequently called men, in
respect of their appearings in the likeness of men] and ye believe not, how
will ye believe if I tell you [or spoke unto you] heavenly things [nakedly, and
without explications borrowed from earthly things, as the Angels are wont to
speak, and discourse of them] in this passage (I say) it is clearly supposed,
that sensible resemblances of spiritual and heavenly things, aptly chosen, and
sitted to their natures, render them much more passable with the reasons and
understandings of men, and give them an opportunity to contemplate, or look
upon them with the eye of the inner man, more steadily, and intensely, then
otherwise they would be able or (at least) were like to do; and that such a
contemplation of them as this, is a great encouragement, and advantage, to
their believing the reality and truth of them. The reason hereof may be,
because it is not hard, or troublesome, to conceive or believe, that whatsoever
is found in this material or visible world, has its parrlel or some thing
corresponding by way of analogy, proportion, or likeness with it, in the
spiritual or invisible world. This notion was apprehended by some of the
ancient Philosophers, and believed as a truth; one of them expressing himself
in the point, in these (or the like) words, Deum uno sigi (...) sa sig^^re ^^t^
(...), That God with one and the same Seal imprinteth different matters; the
meaning seems to be, that though the matter or substance of the one world, and
the other (the visible, and invisible be very different, yet God has (as it
were) cast them in in the same mold, and made the one to answer the other, much
after the same manner, that (in Solomon's expression) fa^e answers to face in
the water (Prove. 27.19.) For as in this correspondency, the face in the water
is but a shadow, a light, and empty resemblance of the substantial face, unto
which it answers: so is this visible and material world (with the furniture,
and things belonging to it) but a slender, faint, and transient representation
of that world, which is immaterial and invisible (with the things appertaining
unto it;) yea, the Scripture it self often speaket (at least, seemingly; but I
verily believe, really, and intentionally) in favor of this opinion; and more
especially wherever it either calls things of a spiritual nature, and
relating to the invisible world, by the names of things that are visible, or
relating to this present world; or else expresses things relating unto the one
world, and the other, by the same appellations. Places of both these Characters
are frequent and numerous. Thus we read of men that are rich in this world, and
of men that are rich toward God, Luke 12.21. compared with 1 Timothy 6.17. and
other places: of spiritual, and true treasure, Isa. 33.6. ^^a. 6.20.19.21. and
elsewhere; and so of earthly treasure Prove. 15.6.16. Mat. 6.19. of spiritual
bread which came down from heaven, and is called living bread, John 6.32.48.51.
of material bread, often. Instances of this kind are too many to be here
rehearsed. These few texts (with their fellows) may be considered at leisure,
Romans 2.28, 29. Phil. 3.3. Mat. 16.6.12. James 1.18. and John 3, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1
Pet. 2.5. 1 Cor. 15.44, 45, 46. Neither is it improbable in the least, but that
this inferior and material world was formed by God in all points, as now it is,
furnished with such creatures, in respect of their shapes, properties,
qualities, sympathies, antipathies, mutual dependencies, subservencies,
relations etc. as are now known to be in them, that it might be subservient
unto him, who was made the Lord of it, man, not only to supply him with all
outward things requisite for his accommodation in his state of mortality, but
rather to make his way more passable and easy, to the understanding,
knowledge, and belief of the state and condition of the invisible world, and of
the affairs and concernments thereof, his greatest interest lying in the
knowledge and belief of these things. And this seems to be the reason why the
Apostle speaking of Circumcision (the great Sacrament under the Law) first
calls it a sign, and then immediately, a seal, [ And he received the sign of
Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of Faith, etc. Romans 4.11.] intimating
hereby, that being a visible and external action, it did signify and import,
that there was a spiritual and invisible action, analogous to it [as, viz.
that, which the Scripture calls, the circumcision of the heart, which is
performed by God upon a man's justification by Faith] and consequently, was a
seal to ratify and confirm the reallity and truth of it unto men. This then
may be another reason of Sacramental appointments by God; namely to facilitate
and promote the belief of the invisible things of the Gospel, by a
representation unto the outward senses of such material things, which in figure
and similitude sympathize with them.

Quest. 27. What may be another reason of those Divine appointments you speak
of?

Answ. To teach and encourage those who believe the Gospel, to make application
of the great and precious promises thereof unto themselves: that is, to look
upon, and conceive of themselves, both as really entitled by God unto the
inheritance of the great and precious thing herein promised, and likewise as
actually enstared by him in the comfort and joy of the hope and expectation of
them; which, when they are pregnant, lively, rich, and strong, have the express
relish and taste in the Soul, which the actual and litteral possession, and
fruition of the things themselves will have. The real and sensible exhibition,
or application of the Sacramental Elements made in their administrations
(respectively) by the Minister who now stands in the place, or acts in the
name of God, unto those that are partakers in these administrations, is of an
encouraging and imboldening import unto them, to make the like application of
the spiritual and heavenly things themselves.

Quest. 28. What is your sixth reason of the Counsel of God in founding
Sacramental Services in his Church?

Answ. That they might be as Seals affixed to the writing of the Gospel, to
secure the minds and consciences of those that should be willing to receive
and submit unto it, that God never would, nor (indeed) could (at least, not
without their consents) recede from the contents of it, or refuse to perform,
and make good the Covenant of Grace therein declared and set forth, according
to all, and every the Articles, and terms thereof, from the first, to the last,
as they are here particularly mentioned, and declared. If he that has a
promise from another, that he will convey such, or such an Inheritance, or
Estate in Land, unto him, has only the instrument, or writing of the
conveyance, delivered unto him, the Seal of him that has made this promise,
not being put to it, he has no other security hereby to enjoy what has been
promised unto him in the case, but only the honesty, faithfulness, and
constancy of the person that has promised: if these should fall him, his
writing without a Seal would signify little for his relief. But if such a
writing shall be delivered unto him before witness under the stand and Seal of
him that has promised the conveyance, having a right in Law to make it, now he
depends not (a least, needs not to depend) upon the goodness of him that has
promised he has the Law it self the force and authority hereof, for his
security, whi h is the greatest and highest assurance of which he is capable,
or that can be given him. So God, being more abundantly willing. (as the Holy
Ghost informs us) to show unto the heirs of promise the mutability of his
Counsel [concerning their eternal Salvation by Jesus Christ, Heb. 6.1^] that by
this means they might have strong c^^s^^^^ion ver. 8.) besides his engagement
unto them in his Covenant, both by promise, and by Oath (though these, from
him, be a super-sufficient security for the performance of greater matters,
then the salvation of more souls, then can be numbered by men or Angels) he has
yet further ratified and confirmed his said Covenant by certain Sacramental and
significant actions, which he has declared were intended and meant by him for
Seals thereunto (as we lately heard in the case of Circumcision) the exercise
and practice whereof he has likewise, upon this account, commanded to be
concurrent with the preaching, and receiving, the Gospel throughout the world,
in all ages. So that the Sacraments are to be looked upon as subservient to the
Gospel, and as appointed by God to attend upon it, for the strengthening and
completing of that, which the Letter and Ministry thereof leaves week and
imperfect in the Faith of the Saints.

Quest. 29. What may be ^^ seventh reason, why the Wisdom and goodness of God
consented about the appointment of Sacramental transactions in the Church?

Answ. It is not improbable but that he intended likewise hereby, the breathing
and exercising the devotion of his people with the greater variety. As the
Scripture says of him in a case not altogether unlike: He knows [that is, he
considereth] our frame: he remembers that we are but dust (Psalm. 103 14.) and
in regard hereof, makes us a proportionable allowance in mercy and compassion
(as is there, in effect, said) so considering the temper and frame of our
minds, as that being always kept to one and the same kind of exercise and
employment of themselves, as well in matters of Religion, as otherwise, they
are apt to grow weary, listless, and dull, and that on the other hand, they are
refreshed and cheared with variety and change; he has accordingly so contrived
the terms of that profession of Religion, whereunto he inviteth and calls all
men, that in the regular management and practice of it, they shall have
occasion to vary the streams of their devotion, and frequently to interchange
the tenor of their applications unto him, in and about his worship. In their
Christian converse more privately they were allowed, yea, invited, upon
occasion to recreate themselves, and one another, with Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual songs, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. In their public Assemblies, they had
constantly some variety of Ordinances, as Prayer, and the Ministry of the word
(Acts 6.4.) this word being sometimes read and expounded, and sometimes, if not
at the same time, preached and applied also: yea, besides these they had
sometimes Psalms and Hymns sung amongst them, 1 Cor. 14.26. Mat. 26.30. Yet did
not God (it seems) judge all this variety of Ordinances competent, or
sufficient, to answer that imbred desire in the minds of men to be often
shifting and changing their employments, and actings (even in matters
appertaining to himself, and his Worship) and therefore has condescended
further to their satisfaction herein, by making the variety yet greater, and
enlarging it with Sacramental institutions in consort with them, the exercise
and engagement of their minds and souls about these in their several
administrations, being much differing from their actings in, and about other
Ordinances, and so the more contentful, and pleasing to them.

Quest. 30. What is your eight, and last reason, for which you conceive God
might judge it meet, that the Gospel should be accompanied with Sacramental
Ordinances in his Churches?

Answ. That the Jews, who upon the coming of Christ into the world, were to
incorporate and make one body, or spiritual building, with the Gentiles, might
be the better, and in a rational way, prepared and induced to entertain and
believe it For the Sacraments, being a kind (...) Ceremony or typical
transaction attending the Gospel, render it symbolical (in part) and of some
affinity, with the Levitical or Mosaical Law in the observation whereof the
Jews had been trained up all their days; and from which by reason of their
conscientious and high esteem of it, and most zealous addiction unto it, it was
next to that which is impossible to withdraw them unto any other way of
worshipping and serving God; especially unto any such way which should not in
some sort, or degree, sympathize and accord with it. And if there had been
nothing of Ceremony, or ritual observance, enjoined in the Gospel, and to be
practiced by men in the profession of it, it would, in all likelihood, have been
such a stumbling block in the way of this people, that few, or none of them
would ever have hearkened unto it, or submitted to the Doctrine and Discipline
of it, yea by what we read in the Acts of the Apostles, and especially in the
writings of the Apostle Paul, it appears, that very many of them, even a good
time after they had believed, and made open profession of the Gospel, were much
subject to qualmes, and shaking fits of Conscience, through the remembrance of
their old Ceremonies, and ever and anon looking back toward them. Now the
Apostle, amongst other means used by him to compose and settle them, under such
distempers, remindes them, that even the Gospel has its Ceremonies also, and
particularly such, which answer two of the greatest, and most considerable in
their own Law, Circumcision, and the Passover; Baptism in the Gospel, the
former, and the Supper of the Lord, the Latter, Col. 2.11, 12. 1 Cor, 5.7, 8.

Quest. 31. You lately either said, or implied, that God formerly wrought
greater and more wonderful effects by causes, or means of a Sacramental nature,
then he was wont to work by those that are natural, proportioned to their
effects. What then may be the reason why he works at so low a rate by
Sacraments themselves, as (it seems) he does, those who partake of them
seldom finding any great, or sensible effect of them, or benefit by them?

Answ. First, it is to be considered, that those Sacramental causes, by which
God wrought the miraculous effects mentioned, were taken up, and used by him
only once, and in reference to those particular ends, or effects, respectively
produced by them. Whereas the Sacraments themselves are intended by him for
standing, constant, and ordinary causes, and means, in the Church; and so in
this respect, are of like consideration with causes and means that are natural.
So that as such natural causes, whose property is to work softly, silently and
in a secret way, do not produce their effects with a bluster, or with much
observation, although, under their proper and due applications, they work
constantly in their way: in like manner, God by the Sacraments may work at a
good rate of efficacy and power, in and upon, those who regularly and duly
partake in their Administrations, although the effects wrought by them, be not
conspicuous, or easily discernble, no not by him, in whom they are wrought, at
least for a time (whereof some account may be given upon another question.) The
effect of the Sacraments (in conjunction with other causes, or means) is
spiritual growth, as in Grace, in Faith, in Love, in Holiness, etc. Now growth
in Nature is not at all discernable, or perceptible, in the motion, progress,
or in every division, or degree of it, when, or as soon as it is attained, but
only after some space of time, and when many degrees have successively
advanced, and brought it forward. No person ever diserned, or felt himself
growing, but only that he had grown.

Secondly, the least increase of Grace, Faith, Holiness, or of any thing that
is saving in the soul, is a greater and more considerable effect, then the
removing of Mountains, or then any of those miraculous productions, which we
found ascribed in the Scriptures unto the Sacramental causes mentioned. So that
the Sacraments, in excellency of working, or greatness of effects, come not
behind any of those Sacramental causes, which the Scripture (as we heard)
honors with those great and wonderful performances specified.

Thirdly, it is in my eye to a very great degree probable, that the counsel and
design of God in working at the high rate of efficacy and power, in and by
Sacramental causes, which the Scriptures record (as was lately signified) was
to bring his Sacraments into the greater esteem, and higher respects with men;
and to insinuate unto them, that in a regular and diligent use of them, they
may confidently expect from him great and gracious things to be wrought in
them, and for them. For as he that has injured one, has (as the Civil Law
says) threatened many: So God, having once, and again, and ten times over, done
great things for men using such, or such a kind of means, which he appointed
and directed them to use, has hereby [ constructively] promised that he will
do great things for all those who shall duly use the like means appointed by
him. Our Savior himself argues upon such a principle as this, and
strengthens the hand of men to pray upon rationality of it, Mat. 7.7, 8.

Fourthly, for men to come to Sacramental administrations with an erroneous
opinion, or conceit of the Ordinances, as when they conceive of them, either
above, or beneath, what is meet, and agreeable to the Counsel of God in them,
as well the one, as the other of these, may render their communications in them
unprofitable and fruitless. The Apostle Paul (as it seems) judged it
prejudicial to the success of his Ministry, as well to be over-valued, as
undervalued, by those that were to hear him, 2 Cor. 12.6.11.11.5.6. 1 Cor. 3.5.
and therefore desired such a steady esteem with men, which might justly and
adequately answer than worth (that is, those gifts and graces of God) in him,
whereof he gave a sufficient account in his Life and Ministry, together with
the Dignity of that Office and work, whereunto he had been called by God. In
like manner, if men shall expect greater things from the Sacraments then they
are able, or then ever God intended them, to perform, as that they should
commend them unto God, or work Grace in them ex opere operato (as the dreaming
Papist fancieth) that is, by the bare, or mere receiving them, how unworthily
or unpreparedly soever, etc. this is like to render the participation of them
empty and void; unless it be of an imaginary and windy conceit that God
respects them the more for their partaking of them, even upon such terms; a
conceit much like unto that of Micah, who was very confident that ^ God would
do him good, because he had gotten A Levite to be his Priest, for the service
of his Idols, Judges 17.13. So also on the other hand, if men shall sin against
the Sacred worth and Dignity of the Sacraments, by a common and mean esteem of
them, coming unto their administrations rather of course and custom, then out
of any raised expectation of reaping any spiritual blessing from them: this
likewise portends a barren and fruitless participation of them; even as Michals
despising David for dancing before the Ark, is observed by the Holy Ghost to
have been the cause of her perpetual barrenness; THEREFORE Michal the daughter
of Saul, had no child until the day of her death, 2 Samuel 6.23. The reason why
an irrational and incongruous esteem of opinion of the Sacraments, as well on
the right hand as on the left, render them unprofitable unto those, who under
such misapprehensions come unto them, may be, because God (as the wise man
informs us, Eccles. 5.4.) takes no pleasure in fools [that is, in persons
who neglect either to employ, and improve their understandings for the
knowledge of the truth of things, or to act according to the import, and
rational ducture of it, being known.] Now then the exercise, or exertion of the
beneficial virtue and operativeness of the Sacraments, depending wholly upon
the Counsel of the Will of God, there is no ground to think that they should do
any great thing for those, in whom he takes no pleasure [that is, whom he is
no ways inclined to show more then ordinary favor unto] of which kind of
persons are those (as has been intimated) who are (whether through carelessness
and sloth, are through any unworthiness otherwise) ignorant of the nature of
the Sacraments, and of the Counsel and Design of God in them. It is said, that
the Lord Christ could do no mighty work in his own Country, because of their
unbelief, Matthew. 13.58. compared with Mark 6.5, 6. Now ignorance and unbelief
are very near of kin (1 Timothy 1.13.) and when voluntarily contracted, or
persisted in, as well the one as the other, disableth the hand of God (in
Scripture notion) from putting forth it self to do things that are excellent
for the children of men. Besides, if God should cause his Sacraments to give
out their strength unto those, that come unto them with erroneous and false
persuasions concerning them, he should seem to comply with them in their error,
and to strengthen and harden them in the way of it. Yea and further, by means
of prospering their souls under it in their Sacramental engagements, to invite
and draw others into the same snare with them.

Fifthly, An unworthy frame of heart at the time of our drawing near unto or
conversing with God in his Sacraments, unsuitable to their nature in respect of
the holiness, and spiritual solemnity and weightiness hereof, presents us
before God, not only incapable of any benefit or blessing from them, but as
preparedly obnoxious to such impressions, or effects, of his displeasure, which
will render us twofold more the children of death, or condemnation, then we
were before, or otherwise should have been. This the Scripture plainly
declares in the case of the Lords Supper: For he that eats drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation [or judgement] unto himself, not
discerning the Lords body; [that is, because in this eating and drinking he
does not by an holy and thankful frame of heart, and an outward deportment
suitable, acknowledge and give testimony unto the transcendent Worth and
Dignity of the Body of Jesus Christ, this being the proper end and intent, at
least one special end of that solemn action, or service, wherein he is now
engaged] 1 Cor. 11.29. There is a like consideration of the Sacrament of
Baptism, whether we be the receivers of it by being at present our selves to
be Baptized, or whether we be only present at the administration of it made
unto others. For the highly-adorable Grace of God in the remission of sins, is
held forth, and parabolically acted, or transacted, in this Sacrament: in
respect whereof it requires a behavior both inward and outward, answerable in
reverence and thankfulness to the inestimable worth, and adorableness of it, of
those that expect or desire benefit by it; as they may, not only unto whom, but
in the presence of whom the administration of it shall be duly made at any
time. God does not ordinarily (if at all) either begin, or carry on, or perfect
any saving work in any man, but only where he finds his subject, equitably
prepared, or regularly and rationally capable of such a gracious and worthy
application unto it, and where he meets with any person thus prepared, and
capable, he never fails to answer such his preparations, or to fill his
capacity. Sanctify your selves (says Joshua unto the people) for to morrow
the Lord will do wonders among you, [meaning, if you shall sanctify and
prepare your selves for such his appearing among you] Josh. 3.5. The Scripture
is full of the notion of this truth.

Sixthly (and lastly) When the Sacraments are corruptly administered, not
according to Divine prescription, the tenor of their (respective) institutions,
or will of their Founder, but either with forms of humane device, or
ceremonious impositions of men, or with the omission or neglect of any special
caution, or direction about them, imposed by God; any of these irregularities
(I say) and much more, more, or all of them, found in any Sacramental
administration, may cause God to take no pleasure in it, or to refuse to join
himself with it, and so render it as a dead Ordinance, without life or soul,
unto those that partake of it. For any addition unto, or substraction from, any
ordinance, or command of his destroys the property of its relation unto him,
and causes him to look upon it as none of his, according to these declarations
of his mind in this behalf: Ye shall not add unto the word that I command
you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that you may keep the commandment
of the Lord your God, which I command you [clearly implying, that they which
either add any thing unto, or diminish ought from any command, or ordinance of
his, alter the property of it, and make it no longer his, but their own] Deuteronomy.
4.2. So again, What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shall
not add thereto, nor diminish from it] meaning, that if they should either
add to it, or diminish from it, they should not observe, or do, the thing
which he commandeth] Deuteronomy. 12.32. Now then it is no ways like that God should
bless strange Ordinances, or such which he cannot own or acknowledge for his,
with the same, or the like blessing, wherewith he honoreth his own, and thereby
seals and confirms them for his own. It is much more like that he should
curse, then bless, such ordinances of men, which obtrude themselves in the name
and place of his; and consequently, that they should edify men rather to
destruction, then salvation.

Quest. 32. What may be the reason, why many, yea, the greatest part of those,
whom we cannot reasonably but judge do reap benefit by Sacramental
administrations, are yet little sensible of any benefit received by them in
this kind?

Answ. Two reasons hereof were insinuated about the beginning of the Answer to
the next preceding question. One was because the proper and chief benefit of
our conversing with God, and Jesus Christ in the Sacraments, is spiritual and
inward growth, or the nourishing, or battleing of the new man, or hidden man of
the heart (as the Scripture speaks.) Now growth (generally) or rather
growing, that is, the motion or progress in growth, is like the moving of the
shadow, which the style, or cock, projecteth upon a Sun-Dial; the motion
whereof, by reason of the leasurableness or flowness of it, is imperceptible:
only after some competent advancement, and progress of it, it may be perceived
that it has moved. Such is the nature and property of augmentation from an
inward principle, which we call growth; it is discernable, not as in making,
but as having been made. And as we are little sensible that our young children
being daily present with us, increase in stature, till after some considerable
time, or by making trial by some mark, or measure: so is the spiritual growth
of the inner man the less discernable, because we are ever and anon looking
upon it, and this with a cursory and little observant eye, few being able to
make an exact, or satisfactory experiment in the case, and fewer willing to
bestow so much time and pains in making this experiment as it requires.
Another reason why the benefit, or blessing, accrusing unto men upon their
attendance on God in his Sacraments, is not so sensible unto them, may be this;
viz. because when an effect arises from a plurality of causes jointly
operating and contributing toward the production of it, it is very hard (at
least in most cases) to assign unto every of these causes their proper
efficiency, or to apprehend what it is, that is severally, and apart afforded
by them toward the raising of it. As for example, the health or strength of
the body is the effect of meats, and drinks, and sleep, and exercise; as also
of all those natural faculties residing in several members, or parts of the
body, which act jointly with these, though severally, toward the one, and the
other, of these effects. But now, how few are there so thoroughly acquainted
with the secret and mysterious ways of nature, as to be able, especially on
the sudden, or without study and much intense speculation, to determine, what
every of the said causes, severally and appropriately conferreth toward either
of the mentioned effects. In like manner there being a great variety of causes,
or means, by the co-efficiency and co-working of which, spiritual growth,
edification, or increase in grace are produced in the soul; as reading,
hearing, meditating of the Gospel, or Word of God, Communion of Saints, Prayer,
Sacraments, minding and studying providence in the world, communing with our
own hearts, etc. It is no easy matter to be clearly sensible what it is, which
the Sacraments in particular cast into this treasury; as Peter thought it was a
strange question of Christ to ask who touched him, when great multitudes of
people thronged him on every side. This (briefly) for the latter reason why we
are, for the most part, little sensible of the good we receive from the
Sacraments though it be much.

Quest. 33. How many Sacraments are there?

Answ. Only two (properly so called, as was formerly intimated) viz. Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord. As for the five which the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome adds unto these, they are only such (I mean, Sacraments) in the general
signification of the word, viz. as it signifies either a sign, or pledge, of
something that is holy, or else something in matters appertaining unto God,
that is in some degree mysterious, or remote from common apprehension (for in
both these significations the word is sometimes used in the writings of the
ancient Fathers, as well as to signify a Sacrament properly and strictly so
called.)

Quest. 34. Why are not the other five, accounted Sacraments by the Papists, as
well as Baptism, and the Lords Supper, as truly and properly Sacraments as
they?

Answ. Because their institutions, or respective precepts upon which they are
built, are not Sacramental, as those of Baptism and the Lords Supper are on
all hands acknowledged to be. A Sacramental institution requires these things.
1. Something that is elementary, natural, and visible, usually called the
matter of the Sacrament. 2. Some spiritual good thing, which is invisible,
signified by the other: this some call rem Sacramenti [meaning (I conceive) the
thing intended, either to be exhibited and given, or else to be ratified and
confirmed, in, or by the Sacrament.] 3. Some proportion, or resemblance between
these two [I mean, between that which is natural and visible, and that which is
spiritual and invisible.] 4. An external action, or something to be outwardly
done, whereby the elementary part, or matter of the Sacrament is exhibited, or
applied unto men. 5. (and lastly) A form of words of a Divine prescription,
wherein as well the said proportion, or resemblance, between the elementary and
spiritual parts of the Sacrament, is declared, as also the said applicatory
action directed, and enjoined. All these particulars are easy to be found in
the respective institutions of Baptism, and the Lords supper: but the
Pontifician Rabbis are not able to produce an Institution of any of their five
superadded Sacraments of like Character with them. Yea, their Institutions have
all of them so little of the face, or feature, of that which is confessedly
Sacramental, that the pretenders have more to do, then they can perform, in
satisfying one another, where it is best for them, and least obnoxious to say,
that they are to be found. For 1. As touching Confirmation, their greatest
Clerks cannot agree about the institution of it, as neither when, nor by whom,
it was instituted; as whether by Christ, either before, or after, his
resurrection (for some there are that teach the one of these, and some the
other) or whether by his Apostles, or whether by some Council (for some have
affirmed the one of these also, and others, the other) but no marvel (is it) if
they agree no better about the institution of this imaginary Sacrament, when as
the Scriptures, which any one party of them fancieth and insisteth on, for
proof of this institution, are so scant, impertinent, and irrelative to their
purpose, that their arguing and concluding from them, are broadly obnoxious to
the fancies, yea, to the reasons, and judgments of others of their own. But
the opinion, that either this, or any other Sacrament, should be instituted by
any Council, one, or more, is (it seems) now generally antiquated amongst them,
it being the current Doctrine of this Church, that the institution of
Sacraments appertains, prerogative-wise, unto Christ only. So 2. for their
Sacrament of Penance, the institution hereof (in a Sacramental notion, or
consideration) is so far to seek, that some of their Doctors run one way, and
some another, to find it: and that which the most quicksighted, and withal,
the most diligent seekers, amongst them, do (upon this account) find, does not
satisfy many of their fellows; having (indeed) nothing more in it of any
likeness unto a Sacramental Institution, then is to be found in every precept,
or command with a promise annexed. Besides, if Penance, or Repentance be a
Sacrament, it must be a Sacrament of the Old Testament, rather then of the New,
it having been instituted and commanded there, yea, and practiced in the times
thereof, long before any mention made of it in the New, Levit. 5.5. Ezekiel.
14.6.18.30, 31.2 Sam. 12.13. Concerning the third of their five supernumerary
Sacraments, Extreme Unction, neither has this so much as an hairs breadth of
Sacramental ground in the Scriptures. Yea, that place, James 5.14, 15. in
which, as in a glass, Bellarmine (with others of his persuasion) strongly
imagine that they see the Unction we speak of, completely dressed up by the Holy
Ghost in Sacramental Habiliments, and thus set forth and commended unto the
Christian world. Casetan (another Cardinal Doctor of the same Church, no whit
inferior in parts and learning unto him) upon better grounds, carries another
way, clearly evincing from several particulars in the words, that there is no
institution of any such Sacrament lodged there. It is much more worthy
consideration, whether that anointing of the Sick with Oil, by the Elders of
the Church, praying likewise over them, which the Apostle there advises unto,
ought not, or at least might not, with the desirable success here mentioned,
promise-wise, be at this day practiced in the Churchs of the Saints. There are
several Arguments of no easy solution, strongly persuading this way. And 4.
For that of their five by Sacraments, which they call, Order, or (as some of
them, who pretend to a more distinctive exactness in speaking, then their
Fellows, had rather call it) Ordination; neither is the Institution, or
Appointment of this by Christ any whit more Sacramental, then of the former.
For if Ordination be a Sacrament, there being several kinds of Ordination
especially distinct, as the Ordination of Apostles, of Prophets, of
Evangelists, of Pastors, and Teachers, of Deacons (for we hear nothing of any
Ordination of Bishops, as of a Superior degree unto, or of a distinct Office
from, Presbyters, or Pastors and Teachers, made, or appointed by Christ) there
must in reason be as many distinct kind of Sacraments, besides the other six,
as there are distinct kinds of Ordination: and so the seven will be multiplied
unto a Bakers Dozen. Besides, if Ordination were a Sacrament, why should it not
be a Sacrament of the Old Testament, as well as, or rather, then of the New,
considering that the first Institution of it was under that? Heb. 5.1.8.3.
However, there is no proportion, or similitude, between the matter of this
supposed Sacrament (whatever it be deemed to be, hands, or imposition of hands)
and the spiritual Grace exhibited herein, whether this be a right, or a regular
power, publicly to teach, or whether it be an inward ability, or gift, for the
work of teaching. Nor is there in any Institution of it any Word of God to be
found, which declares, or intimates, any such Analogy, or resemblance,
between them; and consequently, it can be no more then only a Sacrament falsely
so called. For concerning the former of these, the saying of Austine, Si
Sacramenta quandam, similitudinem earum rerum, quarum Sacramenta sunt, non
haberent omnino Sacramenta non essent, (often cited with approbation, by
Divines of both persuasions) is positive and express: If Sacraments [he means,
in respect of that which is elementary, or visible in them] have not some kind
of similitude with those things, of which they are Sacraments, they could in no
wise be Sacraments at all. 5. (And lastly) By what cords of reason Matrimony
(of all the rest) should be drawn into the number of Sacraments, especially of
Sacraments of the New Testament, where there is no Institution of it at all
(for of the Old Testament, where the Institution of it is found, it was never,
I suppose, reputed a Sacrament by any) requires a very comprehensive fancy to
imagine. For is a man of an ordinary genius able to conceive that so many
metaphysical Disputants, who take upon them to be masters in Israel, should
reason thus: Paul speaking concerning the relation between Christ, and the
Church, says, This is a great mystery. Therefore Matrimony is a Sacrament? Or
is not this passage of the Apostle (extant, Ephesians. 5.32) only upon an occasional
mention of the conjugal tie preceding, the best Sanctuary they have, to save
their Doctrine of a Matrimonial Sacrament, out of the hand of those that oppose
it? And if Matrimony be a Sacrament, why do they judge it as an unclean and
unholy thing for their holy persons, their Priests, and Clergy men, and all of
both Sexes, whom they have tempted into a profession of any of those
Superstitious Orders (by themselves called, Religious) amongst them, to partake
of it? Are not all Sacraments Pearls of the Gospel? And are the Religious
Votaries in the Romish Church, all of them (in our Saviors Metaphors, Mat.
7.6.) either Swine, before whom these Pearls are not to be cast; or Dogs, to
whom these holy things are not to be given? But there are too many
inconsistencies (and these palpable and broad) between Matrimony, and the
nature of a Sacrament, to be so much as mentioned here. So that the Sacraments
(properly so called) under the New Testament, exceed not the number of two,
which are Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Quest, 35. What is Baptism?

Answ. A Sacred Rite of being washed with Water, in, or rather into, or unto
[(...)] the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat.
28.19.

Quest. 36. What is it to be Baptized, or to be washed with Water, in or into,
or unto the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost?

Answ. It is, by the Authority and Command of these Three Persons in the Divine
Essence, to be in, and by this Rite consigned over, delivered up, or
consecrated unto them, or separated unto their Service, and withal, to be
openly declared accordingly.

Quest. 37. Is it not lawful to Baptize, or to be Baptized, in the name of some
one of these persons only, as (for example) in the name of Christ, or of the
Son, especially considering, that the Apostle Peter commanded those that did
believe upon his preaching, and had received the Holy Ghost, to be Baptized in
the name of the Lord [ meaning, Christ] Acts 10.48. as he has also exhorted
others of his Converts before: Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be
Baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Chtist, etc. Acts 2.38. See also
Acts 19.5. Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.27.

Answ. To be Baptized in, into, or unto Christ, is constructively, and in
effect, to be Baptized in, or into, the Name of the Father, the Son, and Holy
Ghost; These three being one (as the Apostle John teaches us, 1 John 5.7.) and
as Irenaeus of old interpreted, In Christi nomine subanditur qui unxit and ipse
qui unctus est, and ipsa unctio in qua unctus est: In the name of Christ is
[comprehended, or] understood, both he that did anoint [meaning the Father] and
he that was anointed [namely, the Son] and the anointing it self, wherewith he
was anointed [that is, the Holy Ghost.] Nor is it to be thought, that either
Peter, or any other of the Apostles, who either themselves Baptized, or
commanded others to Baptize, in the Name of Christ, without mentioning the
Name, either of the Father, or of the Holy Ghost, in either, acted contrary to
the rule, or charge given unto them by Christ concerning Baptizing, but rather
that they only abridged, or contracted it into a narrower compass, without
diminishing, or omitting any thing of the just import, or meaning of it; and
this by the direction and guidance of the Holy Ghost himself, possibly to
instruct us, that forms of words are not to be rigorously urged, where
substance of matter is sufficiently expressed. Or else it may be said, that
Christ in the words mentioned, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, etc.
did not intend to prescribe unto them any certain, or set form of words to be
always used, in the act, or at the time of Baptizing, but rather to instruct
them how they should declare the Doctrine of that Baptism, which he commanded
them to administer; as namely, that the precept, or injunction of it, proceeded
jointly from all the three Persons in the Divine Nature, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and that with this intent, or for this end, that they who believe the
Gospel, should, they and their children, over whom they have power, submit unto
it, and receive it, and by it, be, and openly declared to be, delivered up unto
the care and Government of all the Three. This, or the like Doctrine, the
Apostles might teach, and declare, when any person was to be Baptized by them,
or by their order, although in the act of Baptizing there was mention made of
the name of one of the Three only. Or else (3d. and lastly) it may be said,
that a person may properly enough be said to be Baptized in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, although in terminis, or in words, he be Baptized
in the Name of Jesus Christ only, because the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, unto
which, upon the account of his Baptism, in his Name, he is to hearken and
subject himself, plainly asserteth the same Nature, Dignity, and Authority of
the other two, with his own. And one special reason why Christ does not
prescribe the administration of Baptism in his own name only, although the
administration performed in his Name alone, be regular enough, and Apostolical
(as was declared in the question) may be this; that upon so solemn an occasion
as the Doctrine of the administration of Baptism, he might not omit to declare
himself as zealous a remembrancer, and assertor of the Divine Glory of his
Father, and of his Spirit, as of his own. Of his care and zeal in this kind,
we have many other great testimonies in the Gospel. But though Baptism
administered in the name of Jessus Christ alone (I mean, without mention of the
names of the other two in the act it self of administration) be (as has been
said) authentic, and valid: yet (doubtless) the custom of those Churches,:
which (...) constantly administer it in that very explicit^^ ^^or, and form, of
words dictated by our Savior to his Apostles, wherein all the Three, are (as
we heard) distinctly named, is more commendable, as being both more edifying
and safe, and is not to be exchanged by any particular man.

Quest. 38. Why is Baptism called, The Baptism of Repentance? Acts 13.24.19.4.

Answ. Either because by the Law of the Institution of it, and according to the
Counsel and Intent of God herein, they who do submit unto it, and are Baptized,
do hereby solemnly profess themselves penitent, or that they unfeignedly repent
of all their former sins, and more particularly, of their unbelief, (as seems
to be intimated, Act. 19.4. Mark 1.15.) Or else 2dly. Because Baptism is a
most solemn and sacred engagement (according to the declared intendment of him
that appointed it, who had in this respect, a right of power to make the terms,
or conditions, of receiving it, what, and as he pleased) upon him that
submits to it, to repent, in case he has not yet repented; (however upon a
profession of Repentance he has been Baptized) or, if he has already truly
repented, to persevere in a repentant frame of heart, and course of life, unto
the end. For Baptism, as it is called, the Baptism of Repentance, (as you
have showed) so is it said to be, the Baptism, (...), unto Repentance [that
is, which solemnly ingageth, or obliges the receiver of it, unto Repentance.]
For so John Baptist himself declares the purport and intent of it: I indeed
Baptize you with water unto Repentance, Mat. 3.11. meaning hereby to invite,
quicken, and provoke; yea, to impose a necessity upon you, to repent, that is
(according to the Scripture dialect, in which the tree is put for the fruit, or
the cause for the effect, or the inward princiciple, for the outward actings
agreeable to it, etc.) to bring forth fruits, (...), worthy Repentance, (as he
had interpreted himself, ver. 8.) Bring forth THEREFORE [that is, since you
come and desire to be Baptized, it will highly concern you upon the account of
your Baptism, to bring forth] fruits worthy Repentance: that is, let your
future life, ways, and actions be such, so honorable and worthy, that they
may answer the Dignity of that Heavenly Principle of REPENTANCE, and give a
full testimony of the glorious excellency of it unto the world.

Quest. 39. Why is Baptism styled, The Baptism of Repentance, rather then The
Baptism of Faith, when as Faith is as well, or as much, as Repentance,
required in those, who (if capable of both) are regularly capable of it? Acts
8.37. and elsewhere.

Answ. The reason may be, either 1. Because Repentance, importing unfeigned
grief of Soul for sin committed, and herein a real hatred of sin, whereby it is
separated, and removed to a distance from the soul; so that the person
repenting, hereby becomes inwardly and spiritually clean, is more significantly
held forth by the Sacramental action of washing with water, then Faith. For
though it be the nature of Faith also to purify and cleanse the heart, Acts.
15.9. Yet 1. This property of it, is not imported in the signification of the
word, as it is in that of Repentance. 2. It is said to purify the heart [ i.e.
the conscience, or soul] immediately and directly, rather from the guilt, then
from the corruption or defilement of sin: from these, it purifieth rather
consequentially, and by the mediation of, hope, according to that of the
Apostle John: And every man that has this hope in him, PURIFIETH himself, even
as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. Or else 2. The reason of what you ask, may be, to
give notice beforehand unto all that desire to enter upon the profession of
Christianity, or of the Gospel, that there is no good to be done upon, no
earnings to be made of this profession, without Repentance. and that no Faith,
other then what is accompanied with this, is available unto Salvation. The
calling of Baptism the Baptism of Repentance, is (as it were) to write over
the door, by which men are to enter into a Christian profession: Let no person
enter here, who is not fully resolved to forsake all his former vain and sinful
ways. Or 3 (and lastly) Because Repentance, in the comprehensive and full
signification of the word [that is, as it includes our subjection unto the will
and pleasure of God in all things concerning us, or the practice of all
righteousness, together with sorrow and brokenness of heart for sins past, and
full purpose of soul to refrain our selves from them, and from all their
fellows for ever] is the general and main scope, and end, of a Christian
profession, and so intended by God himself: whereas Faith is only a principle,
or a means (and intended by God for none other) to render us duly capable of
this end. As when a man desires grapes, or any other convenience, which he
knows the Vine to be most proper to afford, he planteth it accordingly; the
Vine it self is not the end why he planteth it, nor yet the growing of it in
his Soil, but the benefit or commodity in one kind or other, which he knows
that such a Plant naturally yields. So God desirous to bring his creature
man, to such an happy estate, wherein he might serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of his life (Luke 1.74,
75.) and knowing that such a Faith in himself, which he requires of men in the
Gospel, is by the innate virtue and property of it, efficacious hereunto, he
has made provision accordingly to work, and raise it in their hearts and
souls, not as if the planting of this Faith in them were his primary intendment
in the Gospel, but because in the nature and constitution of it (as was
signified) it has an effectual and direct tendency to produce that in their
lives and conversations, which he more principally intends. Now then,
Repentance [in the complete sense of the word, lately declared] and not Faith
importing the great end of a Christian Engagement, or profession, and Baptism,
or a submission unto Baptism, being the entrance upon, or beginning of, this
profession, it must needs be more opposite and proper, to call it the Baptism
of Repentance, then the Baptism of Faith; because the end of a thing, or of an
engagement or undertaking, is rather to be represented to the mind at our
entrance upon it, then any particular means relating to this end. It is a
common saying, Sapiens debet incipere a fine, A wise man should begin at his
end: the meaning is, that he should thoroughly consider the nature, and
consequence of his end, before he engages in the prosecution of it.

Quest. 40. Why is Baptism called, The Baptism of Repentance for the
remission of sins? Mark 1.4.

Answ. Not (I suppose) because it contributeth any thing toward the obtaining
of the great blessing of Remission of sins, much less, because it absolutely
and universally is rewarded, or accompanied with this blessing, wheresoever, or
unto whomsoever it is administered (though many of the Ancients, and too many of
our modern Divines have been thus minded, only under this Proviso, that the
person receiving it, hinders not the effect by laying some obstacle in the
way; a Proviso which signifies little) but because it is a divine pledge of
assurance, and as it were a sign from Heaven to confirm this for truth unto all
Baptized persons (yea, and unto others also) that upon their Repentance, their
sins shall be forgiven them. So that these words, For the remission of sins, in
the clause [ the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins] relate
primarily, and directly, unto Repentance, and not unto Baptism, save only as
it is subservient unto Repentance, giving aloud this testimony unto it, that in
whomsoever it shall be found, it shall be honored and rewarded by God with the
invaluable privilege of forgiveness of sins. The phrase of speech, wherein
Baptism is termed, The Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, is
somewhat of a like Character with that of the Prophet Elisha unto Joash King of
Israel, concerning the arrow which he now shot by the Prophets direction, out
of the window, And he said, The arrow of the Lords deliverance, and the arrow
of deliverance from Syria (2 Kings 13.17,) meaning that God by that Arrow, shot
by the King according as he had ordered his Prophet to direct him, promised
unto, and assured, as by a sign from himself, both this King and his people,
that they should be delivered out of the hand of the Syrians. In like manner,
when the Holy Ghost styles, or describes Baptism thus; The Baptism of
Repentance for the remission of sins, his meaning (questionless) is this (or to
this effect) that God has sanctified, or set apart the external Rite, or
Ceremony of Baptism, to give assurance unto his Church and people more
especially (and in general, unto all the world) that upon an unfeigned and true
Repentance, they shall every person, and soul of them, obtain the pardon of all
their sins; much after the same manner, as he has consecrated his bow in the
Cloud (Genesis 9.13.) to be a token of the Covenant between him, and men (with
every other living creature) that the waters shall become a flood no more to
destroy all flesh, Gen, 9.13.15. This, or the like to be the undoubted sense of
the words mentioned [ The Baptism of Repentance for, etc.] may, with evidence
enough be evinced, from the Apostle Paul's doctrine concerning Circumcisien,
which was the Sacramental predecessor unto Baptism, and instituted by God
himself, upon the same, or like account with it, and to perform the same or
like service in, and to, the Church. And he [Abraham] received the sign of
Circumcision, a Seal [that is, for or as, a seal] of the righteousness of the
Faith which he had yet being uncircumcised (Romans 4.11.) First, the
righteousness of Faith [that is, which God has promised unto Faith, or those
that believe] whereof Circumcision was, in the institution of it, intended by
God for a seal, was, and is, the very self-same thing, with remission of sins
or (which is the same with these) the non-imputation of sin; as the Apostle,
toward the beginning of this Chapter, had expressly proved from the Prophet
David. Now the sign of Circumcision is said to have been received by Abraham
[as, or for] a seal of the righteousness of Faith [that is, of a true and
unfeigned Faith, Faith of the same kind with that, which was found in himself,
whilst he was yet uncircumcised, and by which he was justified, or made
righteous before God] because it was intended by God in the institution of it,
for a confirmatory or securing pledge, that whosoever truly believed in him, as
Abraham did, should be justified hereby, or made righteous, or (which is the
same, as was lately said) should obtain remission of sins. Therefore Baptism
succeeding Circumcision in place, and office, in the Church of God, cannot
reasonably but be looked upon as intended by him for a Seal likewise of the
same great benefit or blessing (for greater there is none) to be conferred on
men by him upon the same, or the like terms. For the Covenant of Grace was
always, for substance, one and the same (though differently managed under the
Law, and under the Gospel, according to the various or manifold wisdom of God)
and the difference between Faith and Repentance, whatever it be, makes no
difference in the terms of this Covenant to be performed by men, as well the
one, as the other, having the same promises, and being equally required of them
under both the said dispensations of the Covenant.

Secondly, There is no whit more reason (if so much) to conceive that Baptism
should procure, or contribute any thing toward the procurement of remission of
sins, then that Circumcision should, in the days thereof, have procured, or
wrought somewhat toward the procurement of, the righteousness of Faith, which
is the same (as was lately showed) with remission of sins. But the Apostles
Doctrine in the context before us, is clearly this, that Abraham was invested
with the righteousness of Faith before he was circumcised; and consequently,
that circumcision did not procure it, or act any thing toward the procurement
of it, but was only a Seal, or confirmation of it, being already obtained.
Therefore neither is Baptism any procuring cause, or means, of remission of
sins, but only an insuring pledge from God that by, and upon Repentance, it
has been [namely, in case men have repented before Baptisme] or else shall be,
obtained by, or upon their repenting afterward, in case they shall repent.
Notwithstanding even from hence it appears, that in some cases, Baptism
possibly may, in a kind of remote sense, contribute toward the obtaining of
Remission of sins; as namely in such a sense, in which Miracles, in the
Primitive times, did sometimes operate and contribute toward the obtaining of
the same blessing. This they did, by awakening and prevailing with some to
believe the Gospel preached unto them by those, who wrought them; by means of,
and upon which believing, they had the blessing of remission of sin* conferred
upon them by God. So Baptism being preached unto men, who have not yet
repented, as a pledge or sign from God to assure them, that upon their
repentance, the great blessing of forgiveness of sins shall come upon them,
they may hereby be admonished, and persuaded, to repent, and so upon their
repentance, come to have part and fellowship in the inestimable privilege of
remission of sins.

Quest. 41. But if remission of sins can no otherwise, or in no nearer-hand
sense, then that you have now declared, be ascribed unto Baptism, how shall we
understand those Scriptures, which seem to promise this great privilege unto
it in a more plain and direct way? As, Then Peter said unto them, Repent and be
Baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, etc. Acts 2.38. Here the promise of remission of sins is made to
Baptism, as well as to Repentance: and so of Salvation, as well as unto Faith,
or Believing, Mark 16.16. Again, And now why tarriest thou? Arise, and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling, etc. Acts 22.16. In this Text,
Baptism alone seems to be entitled to remission of sins.

Answ. 1. Although Baptism be joined with Repentance in the same exhortation,
unto the obedience whereof remission of sins is (in effect) promised; yet it
does not follow from hence, that the obtaining of the blessing here promised
depends, either in whole, or in part, upon Baptism, but may depend upon
Repentance only: unless we shall conceive (which is not improbable) that in the
promise of remission of sins, the Apostle intended to include the sensible and
present fruition and enjoyment of it. Taking the promise in this comprehensive
sense, Baptism may well have a part in the obtaining of it, it having been
instituted by God (as it were) on purpose to give men the fullest assurance of
remission of sins upon their Repentance (as was lately argued.) But otherwise,
it is a true and useful rule, which Peter Martyr gives us, where he says,
Neque semper conjunctio utranque partem necessario ponit. P. Mart. loc. com.
class. 4. c. 8. sect. 18, that a conjunction copulative does not necessarily,
or always, entitle both the particulars, which it conjoyneth unto the
procurement or attainment of that which is promised, or ascribed unto them.
According to this rule he interprets the saying of Christ, John 3.5. Except a
man be born again of water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God; with which he paralleleth this, Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in tbine heart, thou shall be saved.
That, Mark 16.16. (pointed at in the question) is of like character with these.
Thus when Christ says, John 6.40. This is the will of him which has sent me,
that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting
life: his intent is not to make the seeing of the Son, of a like necessity
(nor, indeed of any necessity at all) with believing on him, for the obtaining
of everlasting life, although the tenor and form of the words seem so to carry
it. For after his resurrection he speaks thus unto Thomas, Thomas, because
thou best seen we, thou have believed; BLESSED are they that have NOT SEEN, and
yet have BELIEVED, John 20.29. But that remission of sins, strictly taken, is
by God settled upon Repentance, and not at all upon Baptism; besides, what was
lately argued in proof hereof, might be evinced from sundry other passages of
Scripture. These words are twice uttered by Christ within the compass of three
verses, -- Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.3.5. The
sentence is of the like truth, whether we understand it of perishing by a
temporal judgment, or of perishing eternally; nor is this latter to be
excluded from the words, although it be supposed that the former was more
directly intended. But the saying clearly supposes, that Repentance, without
Baptism, is available to save men from perishing, and therefore to obtain
remission of sins also, without which, perishing will be the portion of every
man. So Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, etc. See also, c. 8.22. The validity of Repentance, without the
additional help of Baptism, for the obtaining remission of sins from God,
might be effectually argued and concluded yet further from all these places
(and happily from more) Luke 24.47. Acts 5.31.11.18. Rev. 2.5.16.22. And if the
case were otherwise, so that forgiveness of sins could not be had without being
Baptized, he that should sin after Baptism, must be baptized the second time
(and so, toties quoties) or else remain for ever incapable of the pardon of his
sin. To pretend, that Baptism received many years before, may operate toward
the forgiveness of sins committed many years after, is to speak at an unheard
of peradventure, and to think to quench men's thirst with an empty cup. If it be
said, that Baptism at the time when it is received, interesseth a person in
the great blessing of the forgiveness of his sins, but if he shall sin
afterward, leaves him to make the best he can of Repentance; I would know
whether the meaning of such a saying be, that it interesseth him at the time,
and in the blessing mentioned, whether he be penitent or repentant, or no. If
it be said, he must be penitent, otherwise he shall put a bar in the way of his
Repentance, and hinder the working and effect of his Baptism; I answer, that
in case he be penitent, what reason can any man give why he should not be
thought to obtain the forgiveness of his sins, rather by his Repentance, then
by his Baptism? That an impenitent person obtains remission of sins by being
baptized in his impenitency, is (I presume) no man's sense or assertion.
Therefore,

2. When Ananias said unto Paul, -- Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy
sins, etc. He does not suppose him now to have been in a state of condemnation,
or under the wrath of God for sin, or (which is the same) that his sins were
yet unpardoned; (this is clear from the three verses next preceding.) Therefore
when he exhorts him speedily to be baptized, and wash away his sins, his
meaning only is, that by being baptized, he should typically, or sacramentally
wash away [or wash off the guilt of] his sins, and so receive a pledge of
confirmation from the hand of God himself that he had forgiven them, or washed
them away. It is frequent in Scripture to speak of things as done simply, and
absolutely, when they are done sacramentally, or in figure. Thus Moses is said
to have divided the red Sea, when he lift up his rod, and stretched out his
hand over it, Exodus 14.16.26.27. Thus Aaron, when he stretched forth his hand
with his rod, over the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds [in Egypt]
is said to have caused frgos to come up on the land, Exodus 8.5, 6. So when the
Ark passed before the children of Israel into Jordan, the Lord of all the earth
is said to have passed likewise, Josh. 3.11. see c. 8.26. And when Christ gave
unto his Disciples the Sacramental Bread, he said (in effect) that he gave them
his Body; these words clearly implying as much: Take, eat, this is my body
which is given for you, Mat. 26.26. Luke 22.19. compared. Thus the Apostle
speaking of the Israelites in the wilderness, says, they did all drink the
same spiritual drink, when they drank the material water that came out of the
Rock 1. Cor. 10.4.

If it be replied and said. But if Paul, by being baptized [that is, by
submitting unto Baptisme] washed away his sins typically and sacramentally
only, and not really; why did Ananias encourage him hereunto, by suggesting
unto him, the washing away of his sins hereby, and not rather by some other
argument, or motive?

I answer, it is a matter of worthy concernment unto him, whose sins are really
pardoned and washed away already, to have them typically and sacramentally
pardoned, and washed away also. Christ had forgiven the sins of the woman in
story, Luke 7.37, 38, etc. and this was (indeed) the greatest and highest
vouchsafement of grace, that he was capable of conferring on her; yet he judged
it not beneath him, or his infinite love and bounty to the woman, to make her a
certificate that her sins were forgiven her; And he said unto her, Thy sins are
forgiven, v. 48. He did the like unto the man sick of the Palsy, Mat. 9.2. In
like manner, Baptism is (as it were) a certificate written by the hand of God
himself, reached forth, and offered unto all persons truly penitent, or
believing, that their sins are forgiven them, and they who submit unto
Baptism, do receive it from him; although many, who do receive it, cannot
distinctly read the contents of it, notwithstanding the writing be fair, and
legible.

Yet after all this, it is not to be denied, but that there is a sense (and
this differing too from that formerly mentioned) wherein Baptism, together
with Repentance and Faith, may be said (at least ordinarily) to make up a
complete title to remission of sins. But neither is this the sense so much
contended for by those, who being ignorant of the Counsel of God in Baptism,
have sought it above that which is written, where there is seldom any thing but
fancy and imagination to be found. In the sense we now mind, First, Baptism
being the first solemn act, and (as it were) the head of a Christian
profession, is, by the figure Synechdoche, to be taken for this profession it
self, absolutely, or indefinitely considered, as whether it be of a shorter, or
longer continuance, whether finished and completed by fewer, or more, acts
otherwise, etc. even as Israel, and sometimes Jacob, frequently signify the
whole and entire Nation of the Jews whatever their numbers are, or shall be)
being the great Father of the race. In like figure of speaking, Esau, Moab,
Ammon, (with others of like consideration) are often used in Scripture to
express the people descending from them (respectively) Secondly, Remission of
sin, is not to be taken, either for that state or condition, into which a
person is translated immediately upon his Repentance by having his sins
pardoned, or for the act of God, by which he pardons his sins upon his
Repentance, and hereby translateth him into such a state; but for that act of
absolution, or acquitment from all his sins, which shall be pronounced over him
by Christ at the last judgment, of which the Apostle Peter speaks, Acts
3.19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he
shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you, whom, etc. See
also, Acts 26.18. So then these two, Baptism, and Remission of sins, thus
understood, when it is said, that Repentance and Baptism are in ordinary cases
jointly required as necessary for the obtaining of Remission of sins; the
meaning is, that a Christian Profession of Repentance by ways and works,
suitable unto the nature of it, in case a man has time and opportunity after
his Repentance to walk in them, (which for the most part men have) is as
necessary to salvation, or (which is, in effect the same) to the obtaining of a
final absolution from the great Judge in the great day, as Repentance it self.
This is nothing but what perfectly agrees with the tenor and import of all
those Scriptures, which either exclude persons of unholy, and wicked, or
unfruitful lives from the Kingdom of Heaven, (which are obvious, and in great
numbers) or else which require an open profession, and confession of the name,
and words of Christ, upon occasion, as well as Faith in him, unto salvation.
For this, see Mat. 10.32, 33. Mark 8.38. Romans 10.10.

Quest. 42. Whether is the use of Baptism necessary, by way of Precept, and as
a duty in these days of the Gospel? some conceiving that the obliging force of
the precept concerning it, expired with the times of the Apostles?

Answ. An answer unto this question has been given in part formerly; namely
where we inquired into the grounds and reasons, upon which the Gospel was, or
well might be, set forth by God with Sacramental institutions accompanying it.
See what was answered to Quest. 5, 6, 7, etc. in this chapter. For if the
reasons and ends of these institutions, be perpetual, and relating as much, in
matters of spiritual benefit, and service, unto us in these days, as they did,
or could do, to those who lived in the days of the Apostles, there is little
question to be made, but that the use of the institutions is intended by God as
well, and as much, for us in these days, as it was for them. Besides,
Baptism, (as was more lately argued) being the seal of this Gospel Covenant
(which God has made with men) that upon their Repentance, their sins shall be
forgiven them, it may with as much reason, or with very little less, be
conceived, that he has disanulled the Covenant it self, as the seal of it;
especially not having appointed another in the place thereof. Again, that
Baptism is no legal, but an Evangelical Ordinance, and consequently to be
administered, and practiced, under the Gospel, during the ministry hereof in the
world, might be made evident by the light of many reasons, were it not a thing
evident enough without it. As 1. He was a Gospel Minister, to whom the Counsel
of God concerning it was first revealed, with a commission and charge to
publish it by preaching, and then to administer it. All the Prophets (says
Christ, Mat. 11.13.) and the Law prophesied until John [exclusively] meaning,
that God by the ministry and writings of the Prophets and by the Law recorded
by Moses, instructed the world, and more especially the Jews, in matters
appertaining to his Worship and Service, and to their own eternal peace: but in
his servant John he intended to found a new Ministry, of a more glorious and
heavenly import. And that John was no Minister of the Law, but of the Gospel,
is evident; because he preached the Messiah as being come into the world; yea,
and showed unto some his very person to be beheld by them. 2. If Baptism were
a legal Ordinance, being an initiating or introductory Ordinance, as
Cirumcision was, it should bind the receivers of it to the observation of the
whole Mosaical Law as Circumcision, according to the Apostles Doctrine, ( Gal.
5.3.) did. 3. It was given down from Heaven unto the world upon the account of
Christ, and for his manifestation in the world (a new Rite, or Ceremony, in
Religion, or in the Worship of God, being as the shaking of the Heavens, and an
Item from God, that he was now about to dissolve and remove, the ancient frame
of his Worship, which had been once solemnly enjoined, and since approved, and
continued by him in the world, from the days of Moses until then, for the
space of a thousand five hundred years, and upwards; which great alteration was
to be made by the Messiah.) And I knew him not (says John Baptist, John 1.31.)
but that he should be made manifest unto Israel, therefore am I come, baptizing
with water. 4. If coming into the world upon so solemn, high, and sacred an
account, as for Christ's sake, and to signify and give notice of his coming
into it it, is not likely, that he should abrogate it, especially after so
short a continuance of it in the world, as it had from the day of its first
entrance into it, until the day of Christ's death 5. If Christ had abolished it
by his death, would he after his resurrection, either have joined it with Faith
it self in the same promise, wherein he promises salvation, as he does, Mark
16.16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved? or have charged his
Apostles (with those that should succeed them in the ministry of the Gospel,
and unto the end of the world) with the administration of it unto those amongst
whom they should preach the Gospel, if they received it? yet this also he did,
Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, BAPTIZING them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. To understand the word
Baptizing here, in any improper, or by-signification, is repugnant, both to
that wholesome and sound rule concerning the interpretation of Scripture, which
enjoins the ordinary and proper sense of words, when ever the context, and
matter in hand will bear it; as also to the judgments of all expositors, one
or other, ancient or modern, who (according to the best intelligence that my
reading, and hearing, in conjunction with my memory, are able to afford me)
have expounded it of baptizing with water. 6. The Apostles, after the death and
resurrection of Christ, had a liberty indeed for a time, but (as it seems) with
limitation unto cases of much convenience, and expediency for the Gospel, to
make use of legal Rites and Ceremonies, and accordingly they were very tender
and sparing in the use of them; yea, in such cases, wherein they apprehended
that the Gospel was like to suffer, by the use of them; they resolvedly opposed
them. But we find them very diligent and earnest in exhorting and persuading
men unto Baptism upon all occasions, that is, upon their first conversion to
the faith of the Gospel. Therefore (certainly) Baptism was no legal Service,
or Ceremony, nor numbered amongst those, which Christ abrogated by his death. 7.
(and lastly) If it were such (I mean, a legal Ceremony, and not Evangelical)
there would be no visible door of entrance, or admission into a Christian
profession, no external solemnity engaging to a conscientious observance of the
terms and requirements hereof; whereas there was such a door and solemnity as
we speak of, (and as we lately signified) by which, and through which, men
entered upon the profession of the Jewish Religion and Worship of God delivered
by Moses unto this Nation. But that there was a like door of entrance into, or
upon the profession of Christ, and of the Gospel (and consequently, that this
door is still remaining in its place and use; for doors are not to be taken
away whilst the house is inhabited; especially not by servants, without express
order from their Master, which, in the case before us, is not to be found) and
that this door was Baptism (and therefore, as we now reasoned, is so still) is
the Apostle Paul's express Doctrine, Gal. 3.27. For as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have [hereby] put on Christ. As in the morning, a man by
such actions which nature teaches him, puts on his Clothes, which he
wears in he day: so a person at the time of his Baptism, and by being
baptized, according to the signification and import of this action intended,
and declared by God, investeth himself with Christ [that is, enters upon an
open and avowed profession of the Name, Law, and Discipline of Christ, wherein
he stands hereby also bound to continue all the days of his life.] See also
Romans 6.3.

Quest. 43. Who, and what manner of persons are they that may lawfully be
baptized?

Answ. All without exception, of both Sexes, who desire it in case there be the
least ground of hope that they are in favor with God: yea, and all those also,
on whose behalf it is desired by others (themselves being incapable, through
want of years, to desire it) who are in authority over them, and have a right
of power to dispose of them.

Quest. 44. Why must, or ought those, who are duly capable of being baptized,
being of years of discretion, to give any testimony, or ground of hope, that
they are in favor with God?

Answ. We find from place to place in the New Testament, that some such
testimony was insisted upon, and required [if it were not already given) of
those who desired to be baptized, by those that were to administer the
Ordinance unto them: and commonly a profession of Faith, or Repentance, was in
this case demanded, because such a profession* was (especially in these times,
when the profession of Christianity exposed the Professors to many dangers and
troubles) a competent and probable ground, on which to judge men to be in favor
with God, and withal, was the most commodious and proper that could be given
suddenly, or within a short time. Upon this account, these Scriptures (with
their fellows) may at leisure, be consulted, considered, and compared, Mat.
3.7, 8. Mark 1.5. Luke 3.7, 8. Acts. 2.38.41.8.12.37.10.47.18.8. The reason why
such persons only are meet to be admitted unto Baptism, who give some
reasonable account of their being in favor with God, is, because Sacramental
Ordinances (and this of Baptism in particular) were intended by God, (the
great Founder of them) for his own House and Family only, for his Friends and
Servants, not for strangers, or enemies, or (in the Apostles expression) for
those that are within, not for those that are without. They are somewhat of a
like design with the Mosaical Ceremonies of old in that notion or consideration
of them, wherein they were a partition wall between his own people, the Jews,
and the rest of the world, the Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.14. For so do these
Institutions, or Divine Ceremonies, distinguish and divide the holy, from the
unclean, the believing, from the unbelieving party of the world; at least those
that profess and pretend to, Holiness and Faith, from those that neither
practice, not profess either. And they would perform this distinguishing and
dividing part much more effectually, and exactly, and much more to the honor
and advantage of the Gospel, then now they do, did not men think themselves,
either more charitable, or more wise in building Churches, then those master
workmen themselves [the Apostles) at least did they not act in this kind of
work, as if they judged the Apostles but novices at it, in comparison of
themselves: But this by the way. Indeed supernatural signs, or miracles, when
God is pleased to unbare his arm in working them, are commonly intended by him
for strangers, and unbelievers (in order to their awakening, and conversion by
Faith unto him. 1 Cor. 14.22. Exodus 4.3, 4, 5. John 2.23.4.48, 6.30, 12.37.
Acts 8.6.) But Sacramental signs are (as has been said) peculiarly for those,
that are already awakened to a believing in God, or at least profess so to be.
Now why God was pleased to appoint, and appropriate Sacramental signs unto his
Churches, and so for the use and benefit of those, who are by the death of
Christ actually reconciled unto him, and in favor with him, a sufficient
account has been formerly given. See the answers to Question 5.6, 7, etc. of
this Chapter. This then is, or may be, the reason why persons of years, before
their admission unto Baptism ought to give some testimony of their interest in
the paternal love and favor of God; or rather, why God has imposed this upon
them, as a condition, the performance whereof qualifieth them for the reception
of this Ordinance? Other reasons hereof might be given: but where the will of
God is express, and plain, and nothing found in it disturbing, or offensive, to
the reasons, or apprehensions of men, there is the less need of them.

Quest. 45. Whether may Infants, or young Children, lawfully be baptized,
considering that they are not able to give any testimony, as either by a
profession of their Faith, and Repentance, or otherwise of their being in the
favor of God; and besides, there is no record found in the Scripture, that
mentions the baptizing of any Infant?

Answ. The controversy about Infant Baptism, chiefly through the too-resolved
inconsiderateness of those who have opposed it, but partly also by reason of
the insufficiency of some grounds, upon which it has been maintained, and
likewise of the answers, that have been given to sundry of the allegations
brought against it, by some of those, who have undertaken the defense of it, is
of late years become (almost) boundless, and endless. That which I judge
necessary to answer (at present) to the question propounded, I shall comprize
within as narrow a compass of discourse as can reasonably be expected, and as
the opening of my mind in the business will bear.

My sense then in the case of Infant Baptism, is, that Infants not only
lawfully may, or ought to, be baptized, but that they are the most proper, and
primarily intended subject of this ordinance, even as they were of Circumcision
also (although none but men, or persons not wanting in years much of men, were
circumcised at the time of the first institution of it; Abraham himself was 99.
years old, and Ishmael 13. years old when they were circumcised, and all the
men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger were
circumcised with him, Genesis 17.24, 25, 27.)

By the way, if it be substantially proved that they lawfully may be baptized,
I judge it but a reasonable presumption, or inference, from hence, that they
are the most proper subject of Baptism, and that this ordinance was primarily
intended by God for them (however men, and women, not having been baptized in
their infancy, or in their younger years, ought to be baptized likewise, and
this with the first opportunity, as was practiced in the days of John the
Baptist, of Christ, and the Apostles; and Circumcision also was, in the days
thereof, administered unto men in the like case, Josh. 5.4, 5, etc.) For if men
(and so women) might, when and whilst they were yet children, have been by
their Parents, or those that were instead of Parents unto them, as lawfully
devoted, consecrated, and given up unto Christ and to his Service, as now they
have attained unto discretion and knowledge, they may by a free act of their
own, (questionless) it had been more reasonable, and more agreeable to the
declared will of God in such cases, that this dedication, or consecration of
them, should have been made early and in the morning of their days, and with
the first opportunity, then after the delay of many years. For God is wont to
require timeous, early, and expeditious applications of the creature unto him,
and his servants, well understanding his disposition and desire in this kind,
have girded up the loins of their minds, and applied themselves accordingly.
See, consider, and compare, Prove. 22.6. Eccles. 12.1. Zach. 8.21 Exodus 34.8.
Psalm. 119.60. Acts 9.20.22.16. Genesis 17.12.23.

Now that children, other circumstances concurring, (as the serious and
conscien cous desire of the Parents, one, or both, or of those, woe are loco
Parentum, as Guardians, or persons entrusted with their education, or those
that have charitably undertaken, or interessed themselves in it, etc.) lawfully
may be Baptized, I demonstrate (first) from the ground lately mentioned thus:
All persons of Adam's posterity, being known to be in favor with God, are
subjects duly capable of baptism, and may lawfully, other circumstances
consenting, be baptized: But children are persons of Adam's posterity, and
known to be in favor with God. Therefore they may, in the case mentioned, be
baptized. The former proposisition, that all persons of mankind known to be in
favor with God, may lawfully be baptized, is owned for truth by some of the
most learned and judicious in the Antipaedo-baptismal cause it self. If it
could be known (says Mr. Tombs, or words to the same effect) that children are
in the favor of God, I should not doubt but that they might be baptized. By the
way, he that speaks and conceives thus, clearly grants and supposes (with
us) that when Faith, or Repentance, or the profession of either, were required
by the Apostles, or others, in men and women, that were to be baptized, they
were not required of them in any other respect, or consideration, but only as
being professed, they were a testimony (though far from infallible too, and
only such, which very possibly might, and sometimes did, deceive them, as in
the case of Simon Magus, etc.) of their being in favor with God. Nor is it
lightly imaginable upon what other account they should have been required to
make profession of them, in order to their baptizing. So that if it shall by
any other argument, or proof, appear as certainly [that is, as probably, for
there was no higher proof, in a profession of Faith and Repentance, then what
was only probable, as was lately hinted, that men and women were in favor with
God] that children, or others, are in favor with God, as it could appear by
their profession of Faith and Repentance, this must needs render them subjects
as regularly qualified for Baptism, as such a profession, were it made by
them, should (...) The Baptism of the Lord Christ, was (^^estionless) as
lawful and regular, as the Baptism of any other person. Himself implies as
much, when to satisfy John about his baptizing him, he says to him, Suffer it
to be so now: for thus it becomes us to fulfill all RIGHTEOUSNESS, Mat. 3.15.
And yet he made no profession of Faith, or Repentance, nor was he indeed)
capable of them, especially not of the latter, having never sinned; no, nor of
the former in such a sense of the word, Faith, wherein believers unto
justification did, and do at this day, make profession of it. Therefore that
which qualified him regularly for Baptism, was, his being known, especially
unto John, to be in favor with God. Upon a like account the Apostle Peter also
caused those to be baptized without any more ado [I mean, without any
particular, or solemn profession of their Faith and Repentance] unto whom he
perceived that God had given the gift of the Holy Ghost, interpreting this as a
sign that they were in favor with God; Can any man (says he) forbid water,
that these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost, as well as
we? Acts 10.47. Other instances of like import might be produced. So that the
truth of the major proposition [that persons known, or that with probability
may be hoped, to be in favor with God, may lawfully be baptized] is
unquestionable. Nor can I apprehend that such men keep company with their
principles, who subscribing this truth (as we lately heard that some of the
leading men amongst the Anti-paedo-Baptists themselves do) are yet
non-conformists as to Infant Baptism. For even such a reprobation of, or
amongst children granted, as the Anti-Remonstrant party of them supposes, yet
is there as large a ground of hope (or however, not much less) that particular
children, especially children of an holy extraction, one, or both of whose
Parents are truly godly, are in the favor of God, as that men and women should
be in his favor, who make an outward profession of Faith and Repentance. If it
be said, that frequent experience has showed that the Children of good Parents
have proved Reprobates, the answer is at hand, namely, that the like experience
has showed the like sad event and issue in many, that have made an oral
profession of Faith and Repentance, who notwithstanding were found in the gall
of bitterness, and bands of iniquity afterward. And though it could be made to
appear that there is more hope, that persons, who having arrived at year of
discretion, and shall make a profession of their Faith, are in favor with God,
then Infants lately born, though of godly Parents, and that more such Infants
have in time proved Reprobates, then of the others, yet neither does this
prove, that Infants ought not to be baptized, although the other may. For
(according to the known rule in reason, Magis and minus non variat speciem,
More or less do not alter the species, or kinds of things) greater hope, that
one person is in favor with God, does not make any such difference between him,
and another, concerning whom there is somewhat less hope of his being in favor
with him likewise, as that the former should be a subject duly qualified for
Baptism, and not the latter. And for as great a difference of the hope we
speak of, concerning person and person, (doubtless) it may be, and frequently
is, found, even amongst, and between, those, who make an oral profession of
Faith and Repentance, some of these giving a better and more satisfactory
testimony of the truth of their Faith, then some others. So that they who
grant, that a reasonable and probable hope that a person is in the love and
favor of God, duly qualifieth him for Baptism, cannot reasonably deny, but
that Children, at least some Children (and in particular, those lately
specified, who in Scripture are termed Holy, 1 Cor. 7.14.) are thus qualified,
and consequently may lawfully be baptized. Yea, all they who grant, and yield,
that a vocal and personal profession of Faith and Repentance, gives a regular
and due title unto Baptism (which the whole universe of Anti-paedo-Baptists
do) if they would be so ingenuous as to follow their own concessions in the
case, and not notion, or interpret, a profession of Faith and Repentance, in
the nature of a charm, or a spell, but rationally, and spiritually, these would
turn them aside from the way of their error, and lead them unto Infant Baptism
(which is the way of the truth) For if a profession of Faith and Repentance,
does not qualify for Baptism in respect of the literal sound of the words
uttered, but as it exhibiteth, or affords a ground of hope, that men and
women who so profess are the children of God, and so in favor with him (for in
what other consideration it should so qualify, is not lightly imaginable) then
there being a ground of hope, and this altogether as pregnant, that Children
are partakers of the same grace and favor of God with them, they must needs be
as regularly qualified for Baptism, as they. Nay, if the regularness of a
Baptismal capacity be to be estimated by a reasonable ground of hope that a
person is a Child of God, and in favor with him, young Children have the
pre-eminence at this turn above any, above all, the men and women, that have
ever yet made, or ever shall make, a profession of their Faith. For as the
Apostle John argues, If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is
greater, 1 John 5.9. Children having the testimony of God himself in the
Scriptures (as we shall show presently) that they are in favor with him, and
this without any condition, or proviso, whereas the testimony which men and
women give themselves of their being in favor with him by professing Faith and
Repentance, is (as was lately hinted) very uncertain and fallible, it is a
plain case that the reason and ground of our hope concerning Children, that
they are in favor with God, are incomparably more weighty and satisfying, then
any we have, or can, have, of the like hope concerning men and women. And this
consideration, with some others, so far prevails upon me, that I cannot but
judge (as I lately signified) that children are the more proper, and the
primarily intended subject of the Ordinance of Baptism. Nor does it at all
weaken my belief in this kind, that there is no particular or express command
for the baptizing of Children, nor yet any such record of any Child baptized,
to be found in the Scriptures. For as God in nature (as the natural Philosopher
observes) is not defective in things that are necessary, so neither is he
redundant in things unnecessary or superfluous; so is it reasonable and meet to
conceive, that he observes and walks by the same rules of Wisdom and
Goodness, in his Word also. Now then considering that there are grounds and
principles, either clearly laid down in the Scripture, or evidently deducible
from hence, which in a rational way lead unto the baptizing of Infants, as a
duty (only the general or indefinite commands baptizing, together with the
several administrations here recorded, supposed) it was no ways necessary that
God should any further declare his mind for their baptizing (although it stood
never so much this way) as by any particular or express command, example, or
the like. It has been a true observation of some, and pertinent to the
business in hand, That for the greater part of the duties in general, which we
stand bound to perform, yea, and which conscientious persons do perform, are
neither commanded by any particular and express precept, nor warranted by any
the like example; but are enjoined (in an argumentative and consequential way)
partly in general commands, respectively including them, partly in such
principles and grounds, which by the ordinary light of reason lead unto the
practice of them. It is no where particularly commanded that a woman should
partake in the administration of the Lords Supper, nor is such a practice
warranted by any example; yet is it more then warranted [I mean, it is charged
upon, or required of, that Sex] in the general or indefinit commands concerning
the practice of that duty, in conjunction with those grounds, and reasons
(contained in the Scriptures) for the practice, which indifferently respect
both Sexes. For though some (to avoid the force of this instance, making so
strongly against the substance and effect of all they have to say against
Infant Baptism) plead, that the word (...), translated, Man, in that precept.
But les a MAN examine himself, and so let him eat, etc. 1 Cor. 11.28. being of
the Epicoene Gender, signifies as well a Woman, as a man, and consequently,
that Women are as particularly as Men, here commanded to eat the Lords Bread,
etc. yet this Grammatical criticism has no weight in it to prove the inference
intended and projected by it. For albeit the said word [(...)] in the extent of
its signification, signifies a Woman, as well as a Man: Yet 1. It does not
always, or necessarily, signify a Woman, wherever it was used: places might
be cited in great numbers from the Scriptures themselves, as well as from other
Authors, whereby this would be made manifest. 2. In very many places of
Scripture it signifies determinately an individuum of the male Sex, or, a man,
Mat. 8.9.27.9.8.9.32.10.35, 36.11.8.19.12.10 11.13, (to omit double and trebble
this number of instances in the New Testament only.) 3d It sometimes signifies
a man as contradistinguished to a Woman, Mat. 19.3.5. 1 Cor. 7.1. So that the
Text mentioned (1 Cor. 11.28.) contains no particular or express precept for
women's receiving the Lords Supper. There is no word here that particularly, or
expressly and necessarily signifies a woman. And were it not for some Scripture
grounds, one, or more, from whi h it may be proved that there is the same, or
the like reason, why women should partake of this Sacrament, which there is for
men, that place would signify little as to their receiving it; especially
considering yet further, that the Apostle manageth his whole discourse in this
place about the Supper in the masculine Gender only, as appears, v. 20, 21, 22,
27, 29, 30, 31, 32.33: But suppose this place should be admitted to pass, as a
particular precept unto women to partake of the Lords Table, yet there will be
found no such precept, nor any example, in the Scripture to justify the act of
him, that shall administer, or deliver this Sacrament unto them, but the
lawfulness (or necessity rather, by way of duty) hereof, must be argued, or
inferred, either from some general precept, or from some principle or ground,
which in a rational, constructive, and consequential way require of Ministers
such an action, as being the will of God concerning them upon occasion. It is
more easy then needful, to give instance in many more particulars of like
consideration: So that an action or practice, may be not only warrantable, and
lawful, but even highly necessary by way of duty, when there is neither an
express command, nor example, to evince either the lawfulness, or necessity of
it. This for the former proposition.

For the minor proposition, which affirms, that all Children, at least of the
Church, and of believing Parents, are in favor with God, it has both the
greater light of the Scriptures, and the lesser light of reason, shining
clearly on it. From these two heads of arguing, a just volume of discourse
might be drawn up in the demonstration, and defense of it. I shall (at present)
give you a taste only of the genius of the one, and of the other, about the
point; reserving the clearing of difficulties, and answering of objections,
until we meet with an opportunity of more liberty for discourse. The Scripture
speaks aloud the truth of the said proposition, as in many other places, so
especially, Romans 5.18, 19. compared with v. 15. Therefore as by the offense of
one, judgment came upon ALL MEN to condemnation^ even so by the righteousness
of one, the free gift came us on ALL MEN unto justification of life: For as by
one man's disobedience MANY were made sinners; so by the obedience of one shall
MANY be made righteous. Evident it is, that the Apostle from the end of the
14th. verse to the end of the chapter discourses the typical resemblance, or
similitude (declaring by the way, and upon the occasion, the dissimilitude
likewise) between the first, and the second Adam in their respective
procurements, of evil by the former, of good, by the latter, unto men. That
which is most observable to our purpose in the discourse, is, that the number
of persons restored unto an estate of righteousness, and of life, by the second
Adam, is still made commensurable and equal unto the number of those, who were
brought into an estate of condemnation and death by the first Adam, both
numbers being all along expressed, and described as the same, and in the same
words, (as was even now showed) As by the offense of one judgment came upon
all MEN to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift
came upon ALL MEN unto justification of life. That ALL MEN, in the former part
of the verse, includes all persons of mankind, without exception of any
(capable of the judgment mentioned) and consequently all Infants, or young
Children, is no man's doubt, or question, and that that self-same expression
used again in the latter part of it, should here so far vary its signification,
as to exclude far the greater part of mankind, and signify only an handful of
them (comparatively) is too far both from reason, and from example (as well in
the Scripture, as in other Writers) for any man reasonably to conceive.
Therefore all Infants, whilst such, and until the committing of acutal sin, are
partakers of the Grace of God vouchsafed unto the world by Jesus Christ,
according to that of John Baptist, John. 1.29. Behold, the Lamb of God, which
takes away THE SIN of the world. The sin of Adam, by which the whole world
became obnoxious unto death, is most properly termed, The sin of the world: and
the Evangelist John when he speaks of the Redemption wrought by Christ in the
extent of it, as well unto the the personal and actual sins of men, as their
guilt derived from the sin of Adam is wont to express it by mentioning sins (in
the plural number) not sin (in the singular, unless it be with a note of
universality, which is somewhat more emphatical, and altogether as
comprehensive, as the plural number: for which see 1 John 1.79.) but for the
other, see 1 John 2.2.3.5.4.10. This Doctrine, that Infants, and young
children, are in favor with God, might be argued and proved from several other
places also, as Mat. 18.3.19.14, 15. Mark 10.14, 15.9.36, 37. Luke 18.16, 17.
John 8.34. (to omit the rest) and those texts likewise might be as readily
answered, which are thought by many to oppose it, as Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. job 14.4.
John 3.5, 6. 1 Cor. 7.14. (with some others) But we intend not in this work a
large discussion of any thing.

In reason there is this (amongst many other things) to confirm the said
Doctrine. Some Infants are in the love and favor of God; therefore all are so
likewise. The antecedent in this argument is granted by all, no man (I presume)
affirming, that God hates, or is an enemy unto all Infants without exception:
therefore some are in his favor. The consequence is built upon that worthy
character, or property in God, which the Scripture from place to place, (with a
kind of emphatical solemnity) asserteth unto him, I mean, his (...), (1 Pet.
1.17.) or, non-accepting, or non-respecting of persons. See Deuteronomy. 10 17. 2 Samuel
14.14. 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Job 34.19.37.23, 24. Mat. 22.16. Acts 10.34. Romans 2.11
Gal. 2.6. Ephesians. 6.9. Col. 3.25. 1 Pet. 1.17. Now if God be no respecter of
persons, but of the cause only (for this is implied therein by way of
antithesis, and is elsewhere frequently, and plainly affirmed of him) certain
it is, that he shows the same respects of love, and hatred, unto all Infants;
especially that he puts no such vast difference between one infant, and
another, as his eternally-saving love, and his everlastingly-destroying hatred,
do import. For in respect of any reasonable, or equitable cause either of love,
or hatred, all Infants are every ways equal; all of them being equally
involved in the guilt of Adams transgression, and hereby equally liable to the
judgment of God; all of them equally prone, in respect of their natures, and
of themselves, unto all evil; all of them equally distant from, and equally
nigh unto Faith, Righteousness, Holiness, and every other saving qualification.
Therefore if God loves some of them with a love unto salvation, and hates
others with an hatred unto condemnation, he must needs be a respecter of
Persons, there being no difference at all, in, or between, the cause of the
one, and of the other, whereon to build that different award of affection. For
that the affection, whether of love, or of hatred, which God bears unto
Infants, is not an affection of mere pleasure, or will, but (as we may call it,
for want of a better term) a judiciary affection [I mean, such an affection,
which essentially includes in it a judiciary sentence, or an award, either of
reward, or punishment, to be irrevocably passed upon the persons of these
Infants, dying such] may be easily proved. For the Counsel and Intent of God in
the Gospel, and restoration of the world by Jesus Christ, was in a regular and
formal process of judgment, to declare his goodness and bounty in rewarding
those highly, who by the Law of the Gospel should be found capable and meet to
be rewarded by him; and on the other hand, to show the severity of his just
displeasure against sin, when found in conjuction with stubbornness and
impenitency, in the punishment of obdurate and final unbelievers. This is a
truth visible enough in the very superficies of the Gospel from place to place.
So then the case, and cause of all Infants, in reference to their final
judgment, being (as we have seen) in every respect one and the same, if God
should pass a sentence of absolution and reward upon some of them, and a
sentence of condemnation and death upon others, it must needs proceed from his
respects unto the mere persons of the former above the later. His intendments
of more of the good things of this present world into some of them, then unto
others; as in health, wealth, prosperity, natural endowments, etc. do not argue
any such affection, either of love, to the one, or hatred unto the other, as
that we now speak of, and lately called judiciary; because the largest measure
of temporal good things given unto men, (otherwise, at least, then after, and
for, some special service performed) is not given unto them by way of reward,
or by a judiciary award; as neither is a scanter measure in these things,
dispensed in a way of judgment unto those, to whom this dispensation is made
(unless happily it be after some sinful provocatiand with relation hereunto) but
both the one dispensation and the other, are acts of will and good pleasure in
God, and proceed from him, not as he is the judge, but as he is the sovereign
Ruler of the world, and at full liberty to do with his own what he pleases.
And though sometimes in Scripture he is said to love those to whom he intends
more liberally in outward things; and (on the other hand) to hate, where he
intends more sparingly (as in the case of Jacob and Esau, Mal 1. v. 2.3. Romans
9.13.) yet evident it is, upon the account lately given, that for such love,
and hatred as these (with their different fruits, and effects) there is no
color why accepting of persons (in the dishonorable notion of the words)
should be imputed unto God, because accepting of persons (in this sense) has
place only in matters of judicature between men, and men; whereas both those
affections in God, with their respective expressions, import only matter of
liberty, and what he stands not engaged unto by any Rule, or Law, no not of
his own (as has been already declared.) Hereunto this may be added, as not
altogether irrelative to the business in hand: Although love, and hatred, be
(figuratively, and after the manner of men) ascribed unto God, as contrary
affections (or rather indeed, at least sometimes, as the same affection,
diversified only by degrees, an inferior degree in love, being frequently
expressed by hatred, in the Scriptures) in respect of their (seemingly)
contrary effects [the more bountiful, and the more sparing collations, or
donations, of the good things of the world] yet according to the true estimate
of the case, and this ruled by the Scriptures themselves, there is not more of
that love which is saving, or of a saving tendency in the one of those
dispensations, then in the other. For upon this account (doubtless) it was,
that the wise man Agur desired Riches of God no whit more then Poverty [ Give
me neither poverty, n r riches, Prove. 30.8.] Certainly if he had apprehended
the least degree of Gods saving love toward him, in his casting riches upon
him, above what he conceived in his sending him either poverty, or food
convenient, he would have desired it before either of them. But this by the
way. However the argument propounded stands firm upon its basis; if God loves
any young children savingly, he loves them all upon the same terms, because he
is no accepter of persons; and amongst them, there is nothing of cause to be
found why any of them should be differenced in judgment from others, or be
justified, when others are condemned; or (which is the same, in effect) why any
should be loved with such an affection, which carries a sentence of
justification in it, more then others. This is one reason demonstrating the
truth of this Doctrine; that Infants may lawfully be baptized. I shall (at
present) only subjoyn another upon the same account.

If God before, and under the Law, judged it meet, that men, whilst they were
yet Children, should be admitted into the profession of his Name and Worship
[or, into his Church] by the door of a Sacramental solemnity, and has no where
declared any alteration, or change of his mind, or pleasure, touching this,
then is it his will and pleasure that children should be baptized, under the
Gospel, as it was that they should be circumcised under the Law.

But the Antecedent in this Argument is true; therefore the consequent also:
and so children are, by the will of God, to be baptized.

The former part of the Antecedent is unquestionably true. For men, both before
and under the Law, were, whilst they were yet Children, admitted into the
Church of God by Circumcision [or, by being circumcised] and this by the
express order and command of God. Genesis 17.10, 11. etc. Levit. 12.3. Nor is this
(I suppose) denied by any. The latter part is no less certain.

FINIS.

