THE NEW PLOT OF THE PAPISTS: BY WHICH They Designed to have laid the GVILT of
their HELLISH CONSPIRACIES AGAINST HIS MAJESTY AND GOVERNMENT, UPON THE
Dissenting Protestants.

DUBLIN, Reprinted, Ann. Dom. MDCLXXIX.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE NEW PLOT.

CErtainly had not Catiline lived before the Coming of CHRIST, he would have
been taken for a Jesuit; so like was he to them in his Conditions, his Tenets,
and his Practice. His Conditions were Bloody and Cruel, his Plots against the
Magistracy and Government of the whole Nation; and his Doctrine, That there was
no way to be safe for them that begin high acts of villainy, but by Attempting
greater, How near the Catilines of this Age, whose Plots against his Majesty
and His Government have been so lately Discovered, followed the Footsteps of
Father Cethegus, and Father Curious, and the rest of that Bloody Gang, every day
more and more discovers. Here has been Plot upon Plot, and greater Ills
attempted to conceal the shame and Ignominy of former Impieties; Treason so
foul and horrid, that Treason it self could not Rest till it had revealed it 3
while Laboring against the Stream of Providence, the Contrivers fall into
those Snares themselves, which they were so cunningly Covering to Entrap others.

The First notice of this last Contrivance was given by Colonel Mansell; So
that His Majesty was pleased upon the Twenty seventh of October last; to have
a full hearing of the Business in Council: Where the Colonel made his Complaint
against one Willoughby alias Dangerfield, alias Thomas, alias Day, who had been
about six Weeks ago a Prisoner in Newgate under Conviction for several
Notorious Crimes, and was thence discharged by the Solicitation and Expense of
one Mrs. Cellier a zealous papist and Mids Wise to the Lady Fowis, and several
other Ladies of the Romish Per^wasion.

The Main of the design, as it appeared, was this; That certain persons
intending a new Plot, thereby to throw the Old One upon the Protestants began
to put their contrivance in Execution, by the Assistance of this most special
instrument, Willoughby, who to this effect beginning with Colonel Mansell,
lyingin Ax-Yard in Westminster, tock a Lodging in the same House, where having
lain but one Night, the very next Day he goes to the Commissioners of the
Custom House, and informs them, That at such a House in Ax Yard there lay
conceal^d several parcels of French Lace, and other prohibited Goods; desiring
their Warrant withal, and Authority to Search for and Seize the same: Which the
Commissioners readily granted, and sent two of their Officers along with him
for farther security and Assistance.

These Persons coming to the said House, declared that they came to search for
above a thousand pounds worth of prohibited Goods that say concealed therein.
Their Errand very much surpr^zed the Mistress of the House, in regard (that to
the best of her knowledge) she had never lodged any that were either Merchants
or Traders in Foreign or other commodities whatsoever. Notwithstanding which,
the New Lodger and the Officers proceeded to make a diligent search in all
places, and coming into the Colonels Chamber, by Willoughbies particular
directions very strictly examined every Corner, but more especially the bed and
bedsted, which was removed and carefully searched by the help of a Candle,
which the Mistress of the house brought up. After the Officers had made a long
search, and could find nothing, they applied themselves to put up the Golonels
Cloths and Goods which had been tumbled and misplaced, intending to depart. But
in the Interim, Willoughby who had continued all the while behind the bed,
cried out, What? were we all blind? come look what this is. Whereupon the
Officers returning to see, what they could not imagine they had seen there
before, found a broad large and thick Packquet p^nned to the head Cloth of the
bed, which they pulled down and found sealed; but presently broak open and
perceived it to be a Packet of Letters: One of which Willoughby suddenly
catching up, in a great surprise cried cut, Treason, Treason; these are all
traiterous Letters; Thereupon the Officers carried the Letters to the
commissioners, and made a full report of all that had happened, which seemed a
strange kind of an intregue to them. The Colonel who was absent all this while;
at length comes home, and understanding what had passed, found means to retrive
the said packet; and immediately carried it to his Majesty, with an account of
what had befallen him, assuring His Majesty of his own Innocence, and produced
such proofs thereof, that he occasioned Willoughby to be committed to Newgate,
and an order to be given to the Attorney General for the Drawing up of an
Indictment of High Treason against Willoughby

Upon November 1. 1679 Colonel Mansell further proved by good witnesses, that
the forementioned Willoughby had stood twice in the pillory, once at Salisbury;
and that in Berkshire he had been whipped at the carts-tail. That he had been
Convicted at the Old Bailey in London, for Defacing the Kings Arms upon the
milled shillings and stamping the Cross Scepters upon them; after which he Gilt
them, and passed them away for Guinies. Some of the Letters which were in the
Packet, pretended to be found in the Colonels Chamber, were written in
Carracters, all of different Hands, and Contained Treasonable Matters; with the
names of a great many worthy Gentlemen, whose untainted Loyalty was thereby to
have been rendered obnoxious. This Willoughby appeared at court very splendid
in Habit, with a servant in a Livery attending him: And it is said, he was by a
great person brought to his Majesty about a month since, and recommended as a
person much concerned in a Presbyterian Plot against his Majesty, and
Government, of which he would give his Majesty a continual account: And indeed
his carriage and confidence was such as might deserve some credit at first,
till he appeared so Black, by the discovery of the whole cheat; that the
Council declared, That they looked on this master as a Design of the papists to
put a stop to the prosecution of the plot, and that they were of opinion that
his majesty's person was still in danger.

Upon Saturday, November 1. aforesaid, the Council sat late upon the further
Examination of this Willoughby, and the midwife mrs, cellier, who was by
Willoughby charged for holding a correspondence to Assassinate the King and the
Lord Shafts bury, naming also several other instruments engaged; among the
rest, the Lady Powis. He aso further insisted, That the said mrs. Cellier had
upbraided him with cowardice, for not stabbing the Lord Shaftsbury which he
confessed he had undertaken and resolved to have done; but had not power to
Execute, though his hand was twice on his Dagger: and that thereupon she took
the Dagger from him, saying, she would do it her self; in order whereunto she
made a Visit to his Lordship, upon pretense of business; but was by providence
prevented, many other detestable Crimes she was charged with, which were
attended with such circumstances of Guilt, that the council ordered her from
the gatehouse to Newgate.

One Mr. Rigault, a Virginia Merchant, inhabiting in the City, but a Frenchman
born, was also accused for being in confederacy with her, and Examined, and
afterward committed to Newgate, The Earl o^ Castlemain (being under Bail on a
former accusation) was likewise accused, examind, and Committed to the Tower.

On Sunday at Four of the clock the Council being again Assembled, Danger
field, Mr. Cellier, and Mr. John Gadbury the Astrologe^ were all Three brought
and Examined: Mr. Gadbury was charged as a Confederate with the former; and
that he had cast the Nativities of His Majesty, and his Royal Highness, and had
from thence drawn Treasonable Conclusions, with diverse other Matters of a High
Nature for which he was sent to the Gate House.

These Plotters had contrived a Scheme of Government wherein they had placed
the Prime of His Majesty's most Faithful Nobility at the Helm of Government, by
the old Name of Conservators of the Liberties of England: And so in other
Employments and Qualifications such other Worthy persons as were most opposite
to their Interest, intending thereby their utter Extirpation, and the Ruin of
the Government and Protestant Religion.

The Papers containing the Model of their Plot was found by Sir William Waller
in Mr. Celliers House in the bottom of a Meal-Tub under Meal, where no doubt
they thought them safe enough from being seized; but the diligence of Sir
William (Providence directing) found them out, to their no small Amazement and
Confusion.

Within a day or two after, Sir William Waller seized in a House near the Arch
in Lincoln's Inn Fields leading into Duke-Street, several Habits, Vestments,
Crucifixes, Relics, and several other Popish Trinckets, all very rich, and of
considerable value; as also diverse Trunks and Boxes stuffed full of Books and
Papers* which, as it is said, belonged to Father Harcourt lately executed, and
contain matters of great Importance to the farther discovery of the Plot, and
confirmation of the King's Evidence.

They were discovered by means of a Bricklayer, who was mending the Tiles of
the House, and perceiving them to be lodged in that obscure place, said nothing
till he had finished his work; but then informed Sir William thereof, who
coming with the Bricklayer and some other Assistants, searched the House, but
could find no such place; i so much that he began to suspect some fraud in the
Bricklayer, which put the Bricklayer in such a rage, that he got upon the House
and until'd it. The Tiles were no sooner laid open, but they discovered what
they came for, and being got the wrong way into the Room, they soon found the
right way out again.

From that House they leaded a full Cart-load of the concealed goods
beforementioned, part of which consisted of some hundreds of Books, very well
bound in large Octavo, called the difference between Spritu^^'s and Temporals,
being the Translation of a Spanish Jeuit, by Sir Vivian Molineux, Dedicated to
the present Queens Majesty of England, and Printed in the year 1672. with many
I opish Catichisms and School-Books, to corrupt and poison the Youth of the
Nation.

By the Time since these Books were Printed, the vast quantities which have
been by Sir William Waller and other gentlemen, already Seized and burnt, by
the quantities (which may be certain are still concealed, and by the vast
Numbers which we may easily conceive) are already scattered and dispersed into
private Hands and Families; we may readily calculate to what a Lofty Stature
Popery would have grown in a few years more, by such careful Waterings of the
Tender English Plants as these: if not thus, in every thing, by a Miraculous
Providence prevented.

Books are no less Criminal than men, in regard they intend the same
Destruction of the Soul, as the other to the Body: And therefore it is as
necessary to bring Books to condign punishment, as any other sort of
malefactors whatsoever. These howsoever had the happiness to accompany their
Lord and Master Antichrist, the rise and source of all Europe's Calamities,
condemned by the people to those Flames to which he had condemned the whole
Kingdom. To which purpose, on the Fifth of November last, in the Palace-Yard at
Westminster, a great Bonefire was made, which proved the Funeral Pile of all
these venomous Seducements of Popery, and several Copes, and other Vestments
and Habits, Beads and other Trinkets, belonging, or at least in the custody of
Father Harcourt, who had the impudence to avouch his innocence and allegiance,
with all this Trumpery and Testimonies of Rebellion, at the same time committed
to his keeping.

Among these baubles was found one piece of great antiquity, and by computation
of time almost 800 years old. It was a Cross of Gold, weighing about Four
ounces, upon which on the one side was engraven these words, Defendite
Gentes-hanc partem Crucis Omnipotentis; in English, Defend O ye Nations this
part of the Omnipotent Cross: On the other side were engraven the Arms of
Alfred, King of England, who dyed in the year 901. Besides which Engraveing, it
was empail'd with diverse precious Stones of a considerable value. Within this
Cross was another Cross of Ebony, to which the Gold one seemed to serve only
for a Case; and as if it had been a little Nest of Serpentine Idolatry, the
Ebony Cross was inlaid with another Cross of a quite d^fferent Wood, which it
is supposed their superstition believed to be a piece of the Cross upon which
our Savior suffered.

There was also a Gold Ring with a Motto, wrapped up in white Paper, upon which
was written The Ring of the Bishop of Glascow, with several other curiosities,
which are as yet preserved. The cross was presented by Sir William to His
Majesty, who said, he would keep it for its Antiquity.

Soon after was seized one Mr. Curtis, who is reported to have been formerly a
clark to Sir William Bucknal, one of the Farmers of Excise; after that a
servant to mr. Henry Nevil; and lastly to a worthy member of Parliament, from
whose service he betook himself to a debauched course of Life; and falling into
the acquaintance of Dangerfield, and the rest of that Gang, appears to have
been designed for one of the eight witnesses, that were to have sworn in
confirmation of this New Mockplot. He was first examined by Mr. Warcup. and
sent a Prisoner to the Gate House, and afterward was sent for before the
Council, where doubt^ess he confessed something of Importance, not yet fit to be
made public; whereby he obtained the favor of Bail, which was granted him
accordingly.

As for the Lady P. it is said she has confessed all she has been charged with,
save only that she was not privy to any Design to murder His most Sacred
Majesty. And indeed, that Lady was so brisk at her first Examination as to deny
that ever she knew, or had seen Mr. Dangerfield; to which he replied, that she
had sufficient Testimony in her own breast to convince her that she knew him;
which words he was afterward forced to explain, no way to the advantage of the
Lady.

One Mr. Bedford, being fallen into the Gang, was designed to have been a
Witness with Mr. Dangerfield against Sir Thomas Player, for Treason, which
Dangerfield had ready drawn up (as if spoken by Sir Thomas) in the nature of an
affidavit for him to set his Hand to. All Dangerfield put him to before, went
down well, 'till this writing appeared, at which he boggld. And this being put
to him in the very interim of Colonel Mansell's discovery of the cheat, Bedford
fairly came in and confessed all he was privy to, which being backed with
several Evidences more against Dangerfield, was the first, occasion of his
Commitment: who though at first, as all Ma^^actors do, he thought to have
blinded the Eye of Justice by a brazen^^ced denial, yet such has been his
discovery since, and so well attended ^ith circumstances, and credible
evidence, besides something considera^^e of matter of Fact also, that His
Majesty and Council have thought ^^t to grant him his pardon, as they have done
to one Mr. Sergeant, a Se^^lar Priest, lately come from Holland with Mr. Sidney
His Majesty's Embassad our to that State, who has given His Majesty an account
of the proceedings of the Papists abroad, in order to the accomplishing their
designs against His Person and Government at home, which God of his infinite
mercy preserve.

Thus we may observe a Counterplot carried on by the same party, that is to
say, the Jesuits and their accomplices; designed to cover their own
dishonorable Guilt, by accusing the Innocent, and endeavoring to incense His
Majesty against his own Subjects, in hopes thereby to disable and enervate the
strength of his Kingdom; managed with a malice suitable to the Crimson
cogitations of Rome, but with such a precipitation, as has utterly defiled the
Fame of Jesuitical Craft, and showed them rather actuated by the violent
Springs and Resorts of Necessity and Revenge, then by the regular rules of
Knavery: or rather enforced by providence to farther confusion, and hastily
driven forward with such a choice of Instruments, that must for ever Obliterate
the Scandals of those infamous Libels which have endeavored to invalidate the
Kings Evidence by the Glamorous reproaches of poverty and perjury, who were
themselves so impiously contriving to blow up the Loyalty, integrity and
innocence of so many persons of indelable worth and Honor, and with them he
Reputation of so considerable a part of the People with a con^ineed series of
the perjuries and false Testimonies of debauch^ry and impiety: as if St. Omers
College were at such a low ^bb, that it must beholding to our College of
Newgate, for dexterity of Execution in the Canon^ of Popish Contrivances.

FINIS.

