THE LADY ELEANOR HER APPEAL Present this to Mr. Mace the Prophet of the most
High, his Messenger.

2 PETER 3.3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days
Scoffers, saying, Where is the promise of his coming?

JUDE 18. Remember ye that they told you, there should be Mockers in the last
time, having not the Spirit.

Printed in the Year, 1646.

From the Lady Eleanor the Handmaid of the Holy Spirit, TO Our beloved Brother
Mr Mace, the Anointed of our Lord.
HAving in the burden of his precious Word been my self a partaker, made a
public Example, no mean one, concerning the way before the Lords coming to be
prepared, Have thought it not unnecessary by what means it came to pass, to
impart and publish the same unto your self, in making known some passages, the
truth of which unknown not unto the whole world, almost ever since the Year
1625.

Showing withal about a few days before the former Kings departure this life,
how first of all there came a Scottish Lad to this City, about the age of
Thirteen, one George Carr by Name, otherwise called the dumb Boy or
Fortuneteller, so termd, that spoke not for some space of time, with whom it
was my hap, upon a visit, to meet where some of them would needs send for this
Boy, although few more jealous of such acquaintance or sparing, yet able to
discern between such a one and Impostures, making bold before my departure
thence, to direct him the way to my house, where care should be taken of him,
not the less because a Stranger, accordingly who there abode, where no simple
people, but expert and learnd as any, tried no few conclusions, some instanced
as here:

Sometimes who would take the Bible or a Chronicle, and open it, and close it
again, then cause the aforesaid Youth to show by signs and such like dumb
demonstrations, what was containd therein; which things he so to the life
expressed and acted, as were it a Psalm or Verse then feignd to sing, though saw
not a letter of the Book; and sometime that suddenly behind him would blow a
Horn, whereat never so much as changed his look, seemd so hard of hearing. And
again thus, to sound him farther, one must stop his ears fast, and then what
two whisperd at the other end of the Gallery, he must declare what they spoke
in the ear, as often as they pleased several times.

Having by that time gotten a whistling voice, as plain as any can speak, like
a Bird; before that had used signs for the space of three Months, then no
longer dumb or deaf.

To conclude, whatsoever it were he able to manifest it, whether containd in
Letters enclosed in Cabinets, or by numbering how many pence or pepper corns in
Bag or Box before it was opened, or any thing of that kind fit for the vulgar
capacity too; or when he was brought into any place amongst Strangers, one
should write in several papers every ones Name, and he must give them
accordingly to each his own Name, at first making as though he were in some
doubt which way to bestow himself, where the chief Divines of the City present,
some of them bestowing a shilling on him, without farther consideration thought
it sufficient, etc. whilst others of that calling as liberal of their
slanderous tongues; that no longer might be harbored in our house, likened to
Friar Rush, Servants had so incensed their Masters, setting all on fire, with
Justices of Peace and Churchmen, giving out he was a Vagrant, a Counterfeit,
or a VVitch. Immediately upon which the Spirit of Prophecy falling likewise
upon me, then were all vexed worse then ever, ready to turn the house upside
down, laying this to his charge too: when laying aside Household cares all, and
no conversation with any but the Word of God, first by conference with the
Prophet Daniel, cap. 8. ver. 13. I found out this place, Then I heard ONE Saint
speaking unto another Saint, said unto that certain Saint which SPOKE (in the
Orinal (to wit) The Numberer of Secrets, or the wonderful Numberer (Hebr.
Palmoni) How long the Vision concerning the daily, and the Transgression making
desolate, to give the Host, etc. And he said unto me, Unto Two thous and three
hundred days, then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed.

The sum of it this, as much to say, Inquired of such a one that spoke not at
first, How long from the Vision before this Prophecy shall be reveald, or
whether I should be able, etc. as now about Two thousand two hundred years
complete since the Captivity, as here answered, O Son of Man, for at the time
of the end it shall be: Behold, I will make thee know in the last end of the
indignation, for at the time appointed shall be the end, Daniel, cap. 8.

And thus not only providing for that aforesaid admired Guest, but adored him
almost; how it afterward came to pass, like that least of all seeds, how it
sprang up, as follows: Here following the Prophets their order in these
circumstances, Time, Persons, and Place, observed: Showing,

In the aforesaid Year, 1625. the first of his Reign, the first of his Name, in
the Month of July, so called after the first Roman Emperor, in Berks, the
first of Shires, my self whose Father the prime Peer, or first Baron, being at
my House in Englesfield, then heard early in the Morning a Voice from Heaven,
speaking as through a Trumpet these words;

There is Nineteen years and an half to the Judgment day, and be you as the
meek Virgin.

When occasioned through the plague, that heavy hand, like the Wise men's
coming from the East, the Term came down to Reading our next Market town; and
that first Parliament following it posting down to Oxford, not far off either:
And sometime as in Augustus days, so in this of great Britains second Monarch,
taxed likewise with no ordinary taxes levied; when this morning Star, this
second Babe born, ruling the Nations with an iron Rod, no light Judgments
foreshewing at hand: which words in a Manuscript annexed to an Interpretation
of the Prophet Daniels Visions, A few days finished before, was then immediately
for to be published, carried to Oxfords Parliament, that ancient'st of
Universities, this golden Number heard, extending to the Year 1644. January.

Which Book perfected about the first of August, was with mine own hand
delivered and presented to Abbots Archbishop, where the Babe signed in the
presence of no few witnesses, with this token, That the great Plague should
presently cease; that Curse so furiously pourd out on the desolate City, where
grass grew in her chief streets should be inhabited.

At which time the weekly Bill amounted to Five thousand; but because the next
week it increased Six hundred, this Token of such deliverance was utterly cast
out of remembrance: Howbeit before the end of August, scarce Five hundred of
the Plague deceased, in such an instant vanished, which sometime was grown up to
that height as the Age of the World, Five thousand fix hundred.

Concerning which aforesaid judment or blow, foreshewed no other then the day
of Judgments express forerunner, the worlds final blow at hand; upon farther
consult with the Scriptures, the Book of the Revelation, understood how with
the 7. Chapter it accorded, saying, And I saw four Angels standing at the four
corners of the Earth, holding the four Winds that they should not blow, until
expired such a time, such a year.

Where that new prognostication beginning with the loud Month of March, shows
till 1644. those pernicious winds restrained under the sealed Number of One
hundred forty and four, etc. the conseald time in those Characters enclosed: So
again Chapter 14. where those mustered Troops on Mount Zion, sealed in the
forehead with the same Number, One hundred forty and four thousand, encluding
the fourth thousand year of our Redemption, when he born of a Virgin not only,
but the year of Grace, 1644. when Babylon falls; She Is fallen, she is fallen:
together with the Calendar for that year, beginning with the blessed Virgins
feast (verse.) saying, They are Virgins, etc. Redeemed from amongst men the
first fruits.

And so much for the new Song, which none besides could learn, too difficult
for former Ages, too high a noat to reach.

To which the 21. Chapter answers, where she that virgin Cities walls measured,
One hundred forty four Cubits, the Churches preparation then, or Reformation
before the end.

And since prophesies Thundering Reign began, what judgments since the year 1625
July, shall give you a list of some of them; beginning at home first, where this
Book of mine was sacrificed by my first Husbands hand, thrown into the fire,
whose Doom I gave him in letters of his own Name ( John Daves, Jove's Hand)
within three years to expect the mortal blow; so put on my mourning garment
from that time: when about three days before his sudden decease, before all his
Servants and Friends at the Table, gave him pass to take his long sleep, by
him thus put off, I pray weep not while I am alive, and J will give you leave
to laugh when J am dead.

Accordingly which too soon came to pass, for contrary to a solemn Vow within
three Months married to another Husband, who escaped not scotfree: he like
wise burning my Book, another Manuscript, a remembrance to the King for beware
great Britains blow at hand, showed him thus, Dan. 12. And at that time shall
Michael the great Prince stand up, and there shall be a time of trouble, such
as never was since a Nation, with the Resurrection in his time to be
prophesied: and for a token of the time, At that time the people shall be
delivered, their oppressors put to flight; where very Parliament-Stars shining
for ever, as by such a solemn Oath taken there sworn, etc. the contents of that
last chap. verily concluding with the first year of the present Reign, 1625.
fignified in those no obscure characters, Blessed is he that waits: And comes
to Three hundred thirty five; which being added unto the former reckoning of
Two hundred and ninety, amounts to 1625. to wit, when this sealed Vision before
the end shall be revealed, witness the troublesome time.

And of Daniel signifying Judgment too: Thus about two years after the
Marriage, I waiting on the Queen as she came from Mass or Evening Service,
All Saints day, to know what service she pleased to command me, The first
question was, When she should be with Child. I answered, O port^t habere
tempus, Interpreted by the Earl of Carlisle: and the next, What success the
Duke would have, who (the queen said) was intrenching, and much for wardnesse
in? Answered again, As for his honor, of that he would not bring home much, but
his person should return in safety with no little speed; which to neither side
gave content, satisfied not his Friends, much less such as looked after his
death.

Besides, told the queen, for a time she should be happy, But how long said
she? I told her, Sixteen years, that was long enought. But by the Kings coming
in our discourse interrupted, saying, He heard how I fore, told my former
Husband of his Death some three days before it: Said I, I told him of a certain
Servant of your Majesty's, one extraordinary proper, etc. that forth with was
to come upon earnest business to me; and that he asked me the next day before
his Death, when I expected My Gentleman: To which his Majesty replied, That was
the next way to break his heart, who was pleased so much to commend my choice
without excepting any.

And so that time Twelve Months the queen conceived of Son; and although had
forgotten me, yet some about her I informed, that her Son should go to
Christning and Burying in a day.

And the Duke accordingly too miscarrying, arrived safely the week after I had
been there; of whose month of August to continue till then, not misinformed of
it by persons of quality, told him from me; whereat Sir Archibald my Husband so
much vexed, ventured (at my motion) to lay the Breeches, before Mrs Murrey for
one, and Mrs Maxfield, if I would be bound when it came not to pass, to abjure
such my predictions, wimzees, as he termd it, that sold the blessing was
disappointed.

VVhereupon seconded by his Uncle the Dean of Winchester, who wrote up to him
to put me in mind September was at hand, and that secret things belongs to
God, and c, but shortly after craved me pardon, because it seemd I had added,
The Duke should never see a day in September; one bewaild on all sides, as
though would chrow the houses out at windows, Worshipped so much before; But
still pressing Great Britains blow, for which purpose to be near the Court,
taking a house at Saint James, where the King not pleased with such Alarms,
commanded one of his Bed chamber, Mr. Kink, to go from him, and know what J had
to do with his affairs; and if J desisted not, he would take another course: To
which my answer was, I would take my course against him, namely, Sir Archibald
Douglas that had burnt my papers to purchase his favor, and that he and all
should know shortly.

In the conclusion Mr. Kirk said, He was not carried with the vulgar, but
prayed me to tell him whethor the King should have a Son, or no: unwilling to
fend him empty away, assured him a Son, and a strong Child; which he not
sparing to impart, accordingly solemnized was with Bonefires, etc. within a
Month.

At which time, the first day of June, his Servant Sir Archibald Douglas in
Martins Church at the Communion, was strooken bereft of his senses, in stead of
speech made a noice like a Brute creature, doubtless his heart changed into a
Beasts too, for so would put his head into a dish of Broth, of Lettice or
Herbs, and drink Oil and Vinegar, and sometimes Beer all together, insatiable
that way, knew no body but only my self, though it was not my hap to be at
London then, nor when my former husband as suddenly dyed, but in Berkshire,
through Gods providence the day before that saw them both.

Some three months before in the presence of the Lady Berkshire and the Lady
Carlisle, who imputed it to want affection, that needs would have reconciled
tne business, declared sentence, upon him, Not so happy to be as to dye, nay
worse then death should bef al him; and so before all his Friends, who
witnessed it with their Hands, the writing was drawn up, bearing Date in March
1630, etc. That if in the Month of June next some such wonderful judgment
from God came not upon him, then in a Sheet I would walk to Paul's barefoot;
whilst he boasting, How with a Greybound he could run up a hill in the Snow,
and the like. Where a witty Divine, one of the witnesses, saying, Sir, give my
Lady Youly for it: And so though until the Month of Youly given, yet
accomplished the first day of June on a Sunday at London, going up to give his
Attendance at the Princes Birth: his Uncle Dean ^oung when he saw him, saying,
I had turned him now into his long Coats indeed: And which aforesaid Divine was
drowned, soon after the Boat cast away, that then lose his jest, would sooner
lose his friend.

And as Elisha said to Elijah, He would not leave him; so passing on with what
became of the house where those papers of mine at Saint James received
Martyrdom, Lex taliono^s, immediately was burnt down, with no few of his
Majesty's choice Books, re-edified since; And first of all as since in Ireland
in a house of ours burnt eighty, all Scots; which unhappy house (left by me)
Mr. Patrick Young the Deans Brother would needs take it, turned to a Library, and
he following his Brothers Text, Th^^ reveald things belongs (...). Deuteronomy. w^^
his hand in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, written on a piece of the Book, having to
the fire, like an old Sot for his pains, sacrificed the rest.

And not thus resting, shall give you a passage or two more; showing the holy
Spirit besides speaking with other Tongues, able to speak without a Tongue
sometime, as by the Prophet Ezekiel to that rebellious Age, growing downward,
by his portraying and the like: Showing a few days before my deserting the
aforesaid house, coming home, having been forth, and meeting with one seeming
dumb, that came along with me, Soldier like, with a long garment or russet
Coat, a red Cross on the sleeve, by signs uttering his mind; where leaving
him at door, without other notice, cold welcome, that had watched about the
house all day, as they told me, calling to mind what trouble by such a one
befell: presently after comes in Sir Archibald Douglas my Husband from
Whitehall, followed with a Chaplain and some six Servants, affrighted all,
protested he had met with an Angel, whose custom always to give something to
the poor, saying, He was come with him, a young man very handsome, about his age,
praying me to come forth; the Servants vowing he came out of Heaven, otherwise
might (in the open fields) seen him before suddenly who caught their Master by
the arm.

Which man applying himself wholly to Sir Archibald Douglas by such discoursing
signs, of his late marriage, and former course of his life; would not a look
vouchsafe me, till at last by locking, as it were, and unlocking a door, which
I interpreting to presage prison, he assented unto this token bestowd on me;
and Sir Archibalds back turned, then stepped within the door as none should see
him but my self, by pointing at him, and bending the fist, looking up as it
were to Heaven, as though some heavy hand toward: About a Month after that
lost both Reason and Speech, by like signs feign to learn his meaning, as he
able to impart his mind, formerly showed.

When this Messenger departing, as though had far to go, as swift as an arrow,
having taken a shilling in good part, though promised as many pounds would he
come again, by spreading the hands which he seemed to understand; where like
conference to have, many of the Court sending after him, standing at St.
Jawes's gate to staid him; but no more of him heard, amongst the poor though
inquired, whether knew any such. Moreover showing us a Verdict should pass on
our side for Englefield, pointing westward; about a fortnight after coming to
pass in Easter Term: whereof all our neighbors at Berkshire house, and Master
Gwin and the rest till it came in much expectation, the only Trial that gave us
our right.

And since fallen on this chronological Discourse, a passage or two more that
would fill almost a Library, were all written as that Disciple wrote, the world
would not contain the Books: Upon day visiting the Countess of Berks, where
the Earl of Holland present and others, and the Countess of Carlisle, who as I
was informed by Lord Andevere, made no secret of it; And some Relating of the
Lord Stewards sending about casting his Nativity to one at Clarkenwel; the
wiseman had told he should live to the Age of Fifty nine: But my judgment
otherwise I told them, for being born when the great Earthquake was, by the
same token his mother saying, He would prove a Coward, whisht him to harken to
me, for 49 was his time appointed, who suddenly (...) a day and (...) deceased
(...) day 49. William Earl of (...) by some Citizens there weighing plate, on
fames wing was mounted.

As this for another then blazed, being invited by the Lady of Berkshire to her
Childs Christning, sent word I might not, nor would not come; howbeit a
fortninght after went, being Neighbors, finding there the Lord Goring and the
Lady Carlisle, the Lady Berks aspect somewhat sad, relating my denial to her,
saying, She knew it boded something to her child: The Lady Carlisle saying, He
is well, is he not? Yes, J praise God said she, as any of the rest: Then quoth
the Lord Goring, J pray let us know what thundering thumping thing it is about
my Lady Berkshires Son: to which only thus before I went, enquired of her the
Name of the other born before this last, as I take it she said was Philip, then
he must be again the youngest I again replied, as after a few hours the same
night the Child suddenly was gone and died, etc.

And though these things not done in corner or remote place, restraind neither
city nor court from such violent doings, vain laughter, like the crack-of
thorns, as the wiseman, cap. etc. shows to be regarded as much, of whose high
presumption on record, such a blast from Whitehall, bearing Date October, 1633,
etc.

From the Court of Whitehall, etc.
HIs Majesty does expressly Command the Lord Archbishops Grace and his
Commissioners, for causes Ecclesiastical, That the Petitioner be forthwith
called before them for presuming to imprint the said Books, and for preferring
this detestable Petition.

Sidney Montague.


Which blasphemous accursed reference thus occasioned was upon their taking
away of my (...) at Amsterdam: But (...) to have them restored passages taken
out of the Scripture concerning great Babylons* blow, Dan. 5. And the Beast
ascended out of the Bottomless pit, Revel. 11. Applied to Great Britain, with
the Handwriting ( cap. 5.) Thou art found wanting, etc. extended from that
Marriage feast, ever since 1625. into the year 1645. or from the abomination,
etc. Dan. 12.

And of the aforesaid reference, thus; save Reverence his Grace the foreman of
the Jury, 1633. October. 23. commanding first a Candle, he that would not be
warnd; but said No more of that; burnt the Book, saying, My Lords, J have made
you a smoother of Doomsday, to be in such a year about Candlemas, till the she
takes time enough: What shall we do next? when with one voice, Let her be fined
Three thousand pounds, Excommunicated, no Bible allowed her, or Pen and Ink, or
woman Servant; carry her away, as by a VVarrant under twelve Hands, confined to
the Gatehouse for ever, where kept a close prisoner for two years, the Lords
day unknown from another, the rest for brevity and modesty sake dismissed.

To this day which sentence and remains of the smoked Book remain extant in the
Office, Trophies of his Triumph, buried by this Achan, this golden wedge or
tongue, he surnamed the Beast, from Oxford deriving his Name, smothered as
other things.

And Irelands Massacre, was it not October 23? and Edgehil fight the 23? Then
Octobers VVine-presse trodden; even showing you a Mystery withal, Rev. 17. The
Beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and
goes into Perdition. Even Kings and the Beast both put together; as from H. 8.
H. 7. etc. with his 7. years complete, and 8. current, the Archbishops lawless
term before his going into prison, that Son of Perdition, translated to which
place 1633. September, his ascending then, etc.

And twelve Bishops at once, were not so many sent to the Tower? he likewise
in the year 1644. January on a Friday put to death or killed, according to the
tenor of that Petition, styled in such a probrious manner; composed as follows:

Most humbly shows to Your Majesty,
THat the Word of God the first year of Your happy Reign spoken to the
Petitioner, upon Friday last did suffer early in the morning, the B. Beast
ascended out of the Bottomless Pit, seven Heads having signified seven years
his making War, has overcome and killed them Books sealed with the Prophets
Testimony, etc.

ELEANOR. 1633, etc.


For unfolding the mystery of which referring unto Rev. 11.

And so much testified in this Compenduary for this crucified Book, containing
the year of God 1644. for the treading down then his foes, suffering between
Sir Archibald Douglas on the one hand, and the Archbishop on the other; as both
in one year, Sir Archibald Douglas departing this life 1644. July 28. on Sunday
the Lords Resurrection, interred in Pancras that Mother of Churches, Aged 44.
the other on a Friday, the day our Lord descended, etc.

And with Job that good man with evil things, not unmindeful of the good, so of
this man's double portion, living the flower of his days such a Monastical life,
not admitting his own Brothers to see his face, sent from his parents out of
Scotland, with such violence set upon the Kingdom of Heaven, wrestling like
Jacob, his Candle till three in the morning not put out, he subscribing Elisha,
calling the Clergy no other then Baals Chaplains from pregnant Scripture
proofs; and at his death admitting none, saying, His place without them was
prepared, with Moses enjoying a view of Canaan: as in truth such despisers of
Prophecy could not conclude them other then such, even forbidden to bid them
God speed, it being styled the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 19. and by showing them
of their saltlesse Collects out of season, praying as it were, Hear us for thy
Servant St. Andrews sake, St. Thomas, St. Bartholomew, etc. without a word or
mention how Peter served him, and St. Thomas; the like Joseph's Brethren, so
envying the other twain, all because they would be greatest as about the Keys,
now at such strife: Turned to the keys of the Gate house prison and Bedlem,
those in their custody without question of such marvel may boast.

So lastly showing of that writ served on the Kings house, Dan. 5. this also
Zech. 5. served for our meridian; The flying roll twenty Cubits in length,
visiting the house of the false swearer, the thief; appointed for plundring
perjured witnesses and Jurors, their whole Estate of it, robbing no few: And
with the Coat of the present, displayed too, directed to the sign of the Flying
Stork, not unlike the French vertugal like sails, the wind in their wings,
mounted in the Air, that fugitive Mother (Sorcerers wickedness) and her
Daughter, erecting Castles, old Babels, decaid Towers, (besides their Sedans)
where the leaden weight bids beware the sheet of lead, Zech. as by her sitting
in the midst of the Ephah carried, etc. So no farther of their carriage, his
weighd in the Balance, as hers measured by the Bushel.

And to like purpose, witness our Parliament LIKE-VVISE daily visited, though
showed our God a Revealer of secrets, Daniel 2. Sets up Kings, puts down,
changes Times and Seasons, by the great massy Image, as that for ONE piece
armed at all points (great Britains figure) points withal to Idolatries downfall
for ever; And this although declared unto them aforehand, the Whitsontide
before the Irish Rebellion brake forth, that the brittle iron feet of the
fearful Image broken in pieces, served for the Kingdom of Irelands Sad Climat,
the first blow to be given there; but so taken up, like the Athemans, every one
hearing and telling News, passages coming forth every day cried, spending their
times in nothing else but such Commentaries.

This the sentence of our aforesaid Wisemen, What will this Babbler say?

That it might be fulfild, showed and assured also by our Savior, There is
nothing so secret and hid which shall be unreveald or not preached on the house
top, from that below, even to that High High Court or House, yet a sleep all,
like that sleeper Jonah, or those bidden sleep on: So thank thee, O Father,
that have hidden from them the^^ these things (of thy council not made) but
(...) us reveald them. Dan. 2.19. Then was the secret reveald to Daniel, Ver.
21. and 28. and 47.

Anagr. Reveal O Daniel. Eleanor Audeley.


FINIS.

