A SERMON OF JUDGMENT, Preached before the Queen Dowager, In Her Majesty's
Chapel AT SOMERSET HOUSE; ON THE First Sunday in Advent. Being the 27th. of
November. 1686.

By J. D. of the SOCIETY of JESUS.

Published by Her Majesty's Order.

LONDON, Printed by Not. Thompson at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden,
near Charing Cross, 1687.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN DOWAGER, On the first Sunday of Advent.
Luke XXI. Verse 27. Tunc videbunt filium hominis venientem in nube, cum
potestate magna and Majestate.

Then shall they see the Son of Man coming in a Cloud, with great Power and
Majesty.


TUnc, Then: A day Then shall come, the last of days, unknown to Man, but known
to GOD, which putting the Heavens to a stand, and a full stop to Time, shall
benight the Sun, Matt. 24.29.
shall darken the Moon,; so closing the Eyes of a dying World, and even throw
the Stars from the Firmament. Come it shall, and making all Nature to Tremble,
with horrid Commotions of Mountains and Plains, Agitations of Hills and
Valleys; shall lay the ambitious of the Earth under their once Palaces, but now
Tombs; shall level with the ground, your best designed Fortresses, and Noblest
Cities; and of so many Renowned Kings, and Empires, shall leave no more than a
place of Burial. It shall say to the broils and noises of a buisy, clamorous
World: Silence. To the bloody contests of Warlike Nations, Peace. To the deep
Contrivances of Politicians, Have done. To Nuptial Joys, Titles, and Grandeurs,
No more. To the long descent of Ancient Families, An End. To all Mankind,
Return into your native Dust. Merchants, Lawyers, Soldiers, Youth, Ladies,
Nobles, all is vanished when this day appears. No more Meetings at Change, no
more Pleadings at Bar, no more Mustering at Camps, no more flocking to
Theaters, no more Gallantry at Balls, no more idle Conversations, Courting,
Coaching, and Gaming; no more Pastimes, nor time to pass. Wit, Courag^, Beauty;
Wealth, Pleasure and Glory, are reduced to Ashes, to cover a mournful World;
One thing only remains, slight it if you can, Judgment, God's dreadful
Judgment. Surgite mortui and venite ad Judicum; Arise you Dead, and come to
Judgment. The Trumpet of the Archangel will sound; which did it now awake the
Living, as it shall then revive the Dead, in silence I Would give place to your
Compunction, and Eloquent Tears* But alas! We are 'no S. Jeroms, no Lewis's, to
hear, at such a distance, those dreadful Summons's. We are too short-sighted to
discover so far off, that frightful day: To excite therefore, and quicken our
present Faith of what is to come, joining Reason with Divine Authority, I shall
endeavor to set before your Eyes, God's final Judgment, divided into Three
Parts.

First, The Indictment, which is General.

Secondly, The Trial, which is Impartial.

Thirdly, The Sentence, which is Unalterable:

Tunc videbunt filium hominis venientem in Nube, cum Potestate magna, and
Majestate.

Then they shall see the Son of Man coming in a Cloud, with great Power, and
Majesty.

But let us first Invoke the assistance of the God of Mercy, by the
Intercession of his ever Virgin Mother, an Advocate to him for Sinners, Ave
Maria.

TUnc videbunt, etc. Then they shall see, etc. The Indictment is General. There
is nothing so Formidable, the Terror of which, is not much allayed by its
Uncertainty; For Uncertainty makes way to hope of avoiding it, Hope diminishes
Fear, and so what otherwise might surprise the soberest, and stoutest
Resolution, is often, if not contemned, at least undervalu'd by the weakest
sort of People. What more Terrible to the Ear, than a clap of Thunder? Yet a
confidence, we are not the mark of angry Heaven, dulls our apprehension of it.
What more frightful to the Eye, than a stormy Sea? And yet because its fury
frequently ends in Threats and Foamings, it is encountered by a World of
Mariners. Could the strict Judgment of God be declined, we might have some
cause to mitigate that Fear, its very Name strikes into the Veins of True
Believers. But we are already Summoned, and Indicted; without possibility of
Traverse, or Appeal: God's Judgment undoubtedly is to ensue. No hope then of
flying it; no motive of lessening our Fear, or preparation for it.

Should I assume, without farther proof, this grand Verity; A day of Judgment
is to come: I should make bold with no more, than what the Belief of each
Christian allows me, and speaking to Christians, what more could be required?
Can we have a stronger evidence, than what relyes upon the immovable ground,
of Divine Revelation? We cannot. Yet Reason, you may suggest, works more
Con-naturally upon the generality of Men, and that ^a^th is at least Dormant in
many, if not Dead in some, whereas Natural Reason is awake in all. Is it so? I
wish it were. Were Natural Reason awake in all, were it not cast into a dead
Sleep, by Sensuality and Passion, it would not suffer Divine Revelation to pass
for a Dream, Hell for a Fable, Heaven for a Paradise of Fools, the Gospel for
an Alcoran. However, it being your Suggestion, my Duty is to comply with your
Inclination; Reverently therefore setting aside for a while, what is consigned
unto us, in the ever, and thrice Holy Bible; I find we are Indicted, even by
Reason it self, declaring for a Day of Judgment, from all Eternity assigned
for Men. To the Proof.

Moral Philosophers, though Gentiles, termed this World a Prison, Men the
Prisoners; and by consequence, could not but acknowledge, as it were, a general
Sessions, where all Causes should be Tried. But their Authority goes no farther
than it suits with your own Reason. To your Reason then I appeal to be Judge of
this Truth. Is there not an inbred desire in each Man, to be righted, i^
injured, to require sati^faction, if affronted? Nay, if the affront be public,
do not you exact public recomp^nce, and this, seconding the conduct, and ^aws
of Natural Justice? Are not these first and palpable Notions obvious to all,
and ratified by daily Practice? They are. And if so, give me leave to prosecute
my Discourse. What is just in our Selves, shall we deny to be just in GOD? Has
He less Right than We? We have our days of Oyer and Terminer, and shall not God
have his day too? Shall he not in the face of the World, hold his Court of
Justice? How many give him the lie with Heresies? How many with Blasphemies, do
what they can, to post him for a God of Wood? How many with Imprecations,
Curses, and Oaths, take a pride in Profaning his Sacred Name? His Inspirations
are repulsed, his Counsels not heard, his Orders neglected, his Commands
disobeyed, his Mercy scorn^d, his Patience trampled under foot; and shall not
Justice take in hand the Cause? What say you? You are Rational Men, debate it
with Reason, and give in your Answer. Does not Reason speak ^loud, and cry out
for a day of Judgment; and what is this Verdict of Reason, but a Citation to
Appear? Yes, Yes, Videbunt filium hominis venientem in Nube, They shall see the
Son of Man coming in a Cloud; A Cloud which shall burst out into a Thunder of
Justice, and Revenge against the Impious. Videbunt, They shall see; Yea, a day
shall come, They shall see, and We shall see. But again:

As God is a First and Necessary Being, so of necessity he must be the first
Rule of Justice; and can any one be so fond as to imagine, That the first Rule
of Justice it self, can put up so many wrongs, done under pretense of Authority
derived from him? To Enact unjust Laws, which carry the Woe of God in their
Forehead, written by, Isaiah, Vae qui condunt leges iniquas, (...)
ut vim faciant causae humilium populi me^: Woe to those who make unrighteous
Laws, to use violence to the Cause of the humble of my people. To quit the
Guilty, to condemn Innocents, are things possible. I say no more: Sometime
Passion, and oftener Mistake, overrules Judges. They are Men, and the Learned
know, That Humane Laws cannot sufficiently provide for all Contingencies. Now
if it be the part of a Superior Court to Retrieve the Errors and Disorders of
an Inferior, Tho the written Word of God were Mute, were not in Being, would
not Reason decide, That it is but just and equitable, That all Injuries, uneven
Dealings, and Oversights, Voluntary, and Unvoluntary, should be Rectified in a
Supreme and Final Judgment? More.

Is it fit that any Crime should pass unjudged, and unpunished, Good and Holy
Actions unrewarded? But that is performed, you will say, at the hour of each Man's
Death. And the Judge himself, is He not to be Vindicated? What murmurings at
Providence for the Prosperity of the Ungodly, and hard fortune of the
Righteous? These Poor, those Wealthy, these Scorned, those Honored, these
Depressed, and those Raised: Is not the mouth of Malice to be stopped? Besides,
is it not just, that a public shame should now check, and then punish the
privacy of Sin? That a public honor should now Cherish, and then Crown Merit
and Virtue? I end not here, be pleas^d to take yet one step with me. How
inconsiderable a part of our Actions fall under the Verge of Humane Authority?
Amongst Divines, and Canonists, it is a current Rule, De internis non judicat
Ecclesia: The Church it self judges not of the interior; it takes
Recognizance only of apparent things. And is it credible, that thoughts and
desires, the Origin and Source of all exterior Evil, surmounting in number and
quality, whatever betrays it self to our Sense and Knowledge, so offensive to
God, so pernicious to our Neighbor, and our Selves, shall pass un-try'd, and
un-chastiz*d? Rash Judgments, Treacherous M^chinations, Malicious Designs,
Rebelli^u^ Rancours, as they p^^judice the whole, by being destructive to
Hum^n^ Society, and Christian Charity; so before the whole Universe, they are
to be accounted for, and not only at the point of Death.

The substance of my Dis^^^^se is reduce'd to this; if there be a God, he is
Just; and if there be a Just God, there will be a final Judgment. But there i^
a God, and a Just God, as Light of Nature evidences. Therefore a day, a
Judgment there will be. Tunc videbunt, etc* Then they shall see.

Reason then turned Herald, proclaims Judgment; Reason Summons us to Appear;
Reason moves us to Apprehend, Fear, and Provide for a Trial, either with
pleading Guilty, by a timely and true Repentance; or Not Guilty, by the
continuance of a harmless and godly Conversation. Fratres hora est jam nos de
somno surgere, R^^. 13.11.
says the Apostle in the Office of this day, It is now the hour for us to rise
from sleep. Nunc enim propior est nostra salus, For now our Salvation is
nearer, We are in a holy time, dedicated to the coming of Christ, and therefore
termed Advent, implying a Coming. One coming of Christ, is pass*d^ the other is
drawing on; that which is passed was the coming of a Savior, that which is
drawing on, is the coming of a Judge; the first we Celebrate, for the second we
are to provide. In the first, the Son of God became the Son of Man; in the
second, the Son of Man will become Judge. Fear the Judge, and you will not slight,
but adore the Infant, Timuit omnis homo, ^sal. 6^.1^^.
says David, All Men were replenished with Fear; where S. Augustine, as he is
wont, divinely puts in; Qui non timuerunt nec homines fuerunt: If all Men
feared; they who feared not, were not Men. Cease then to be Men, or fear
Judgment; for he that fears it not, according to S. Austine, is void of
Reason, is no Man, Qui non timuerunt nec homines fuerunt.

Now what Reason declares in general; the Spirit of the Lord lays down in more
express and significant terms. I say nothing, of the foretelling Sibyl, or of
the persuasion of some An^^ents, touching the Conflagration of the World: I
take no notice of the fantastical Conceits, relating to the end of the
Platonic year. To you, O holy Prophets, for your Oracles and Summons, I
address my self. Know then, says the Prophet Ezekiel, Finis venit, venit finis,
super quatuor plagas terrae: The end is come, there is come an end, upon the
four parts of Earth: Et judicabo te juxta vias tuas. A^^^ will judge thee
according to thy ways.

And why twice, An end is come: there is come an end? It is a Force, an
Emphasis, a Replication becoming so important a Truth; Or give me leave to
throw in a thought, and say: The end of Time is come, and so is that of
Eternity; for Eternity has but one End, and that is its Beginning. An end then
is come, there is come an end; and between this End, and End, the End of Time,
and Beginning of Eternity; J^^licabo. says the Lord; I will erect my (...) meant.

(...) Eyes, says the Prophet (...) ^veniet crudelis and (...) Behold (...)
^^all come full of ^n lig^ (...), and fury. And if you yet (...) the nature of
the Day, Sop^oni^^ bid^ you take your Pen in hand, and wr^^ the Index of
Epithets he sets do^n; (...)
Dies Domini magnus: The great day of the Lord: Dies irae, the day of Anger^;
Dies illa, The Day; Dies Tribulationis, and Angustiae, The Day of Tribulation,
and Disiress; Dies calamitatis and miseriae, A Day of calamity and misery; Dies
tenebrarum, A day of Darkness; Dies Tubae and Clangoris, A day of Trumpet and
Alarm. Such is the Day which is to Usher us in to Judgment.

And here I stop, for not to repeat what last Sunday has left so fresh in your
minds. Then you saw, and to your terror and fear, by expert Pencils in both
the Royal Chapels, the gast piece of the expiring World, drawn out to life.
The Sun darkened, the Moon in blood, the Stars falling, the ^arth in smoke, and
fire, the Sea in rage: Here an Angel, with one foo^ upon the Sea, the other
upon the Land, lifting his hand to Heaven, and ^wearing by him that lives, The
End of Time: There, the overflowing Caldron of God^ Indignation; Jeremy, and
the Prophets heartless. (...)
Here the ^ust trembling, and almost daunted; There, Men, or rather wandering
Skeletons of Men, seeking D^n and Caves, and withering for fear; For fear of
what, do you conceive? And with this thought I end my first part.

Tell me not for the roarings of an invading Sea, the howlings of the Winds in
the Air, the gapings of the Earth. No, these were not the subject of their
fear, These are but Summons's to Judgment, They are piercing, they are amazing
True: But to such as feel not Judgment near at hand, its Judgment terrifies
them. They are but Messengers, and it is not the Messenger, but the Message
which chills the Delinquent; its the horror of Judgment which causes Men to
rave for fear, and beg the Mountains to fall upon them. Quaerent homines
mortem, says the beloved Disciple, (...)
Men shall seek Death, and Death shall fly from them. O what a Change! O what
an Alteration! Hear, and Admire; Men now dread to dye, and then for fear of
Judgment shall dread to live; they shall seek Death, but Death will not be
found.

Ah cruel Death! they would say, were not their grief too excessive, to speak;
Death ever Cruel; Cruel when Men fled from thee, and more Cruel now thou fliest
from Men: Cruel thou were to the loft entreaties of Ladies; Cruel in scorning
Infants Tears, Cruel to the desires of comely youth, Cruel in deriding the
Prayers of the Ancient, Cruel in feeding upon the Carcasses of all Mankind; but
Crueller in thy flight, than in thy approach, in thy retreat, than in thy
onset. Ah Death, Death, be piteous, by continuing thy former Cruelty, be
merciful by being Death unto us, and concealing us from the Eye of the enraged
Judge. Quaerent homines mortem, Men shall seek Death, Et mors fugiet ab eis,
and Death it self, frighted at their ear, shall take its flight. O what
apprehension then must Judgment raise! which renders easy the Convulsions of
Nature, the disorders of the Elements, the Menaces of the Heavens, the deadly
Symptoms of an agonizing World* M^^. 24.^^.
Those are but Init^t dolorum, The beginnings of sorrows. They can but Kill;
and Death is now a Comfort: When Life was loved, such Evils were feared: The
terror of Judgment drawing near, Life is hated, and Death coveted.

Yet Death at last, having left none living, must again withdraw, and render
its spoils. The final call to our Trial sounds, the Voice of the Archangel
fills the Graves; the powerful Trumpet reaches the remotest parts of Sea and
Land; the command of the Judge urges: Heaven, Hell, and Earth obey; Souls are
united to their respective Bodies; All, none excepted, shall Arise: Omnes
res^rgemus, says the Apostle. 1 Cor 13.^^.
And for a moment I leave you, in the midst of Alexanders, Scipios, Hannibals,
Caesar's and Pompeys, no more what they were, the terror of the World, (...)
but what they are, sinking for fear; Potentissimi quondam Reges nudo latere
palpitabunt, says St. Jerome; The hearts of the once most powerful, now naked
Kings, shall beat and palpitate. Vouchsafe to recollect your selves, for the
hearing the Trial, and Sentence in my second part, to which I now come

TUnc videbunt filium hominis, etc. Then they shall see, etc. Your attention,
beloved Brethren, your attention. The much I have said, to what I have to say,
is little: Now the Scene of Terror is opening. The rest was but a Prelude; Now
for Life and Death, and that Eternal; Judgment begins: and the Trial will be
as Impartial, as the Judge is above Bribe, Mistake, or Passion.

The Souls united to their Bodies, those of the Damned with greater violence,
than ever they were separated, with reproachful Curses charging each other, (an
effect of sinful Friendship) as being the cause of their Perdition, shall be
placed in the Valley of Josaphat, interpreted, Valley of Judgment, to the
fulfilling the Prophecy of Joel. 3.2. and verse 14. styled Vallis concisionis,
The Valley of Slaughter. The Souls and Bodies of the Just, gre^ting each other,
with a Reciprocal Love and Joy, shall be raised into the Air, both giving their
Appearance, in way to a Trial: And the Judge in order to the same, likewise
appears; all like themselves; the Wicked burning with confusion, the Just
replenished with considence; and the Judge attended by innumerable Legions of
Angels, with the Crown of Majesty on his Head, the Scepter of Power in his
Hand, shall seat himself on his Throne, and Judgment begins.

Tunc videbunt, Then they shall see: And Tunc Plangent, Then they shall weep;
(...)
Omnes Tribus Terrae, All the Tribes, the Adorers of the Earth, compelled to
appear in Judgment* The first Ceremony used in our Criminal Causes, I conceive
may be practiced there. Hold up your Hand, that is your works, O Reprobates!
Hold up your Hand. Guilty, or not Guilty. Pardon my forwardness, I mistook,
Guilty, or Not Guilty, will not be questioned there. And why so? The Reason is
clear, to plead Guilty, and so pretend to Mercy, it is too late; the time of
Clemency is passed, it is a day of Justice, Anger, and Revenge. To be Guilty,
and plead Not Guilty, before an Allknowing Judge, where every one comes in
Witness against himself, is vain. The Trial will be orderly, the Evidence
without exception, and what I set out by parts, will be done in a Moment, and
therefore the more surprising. Tunc plangent, Then they shall weep, and to the
increase of their unhappiness, their Tears shall be a proof of their guilt.
Tract. ^^.
Planctus, says Origin, ad hoc erit, ut sponte contra se sententiam proferant,
and seipsos condemnent; Their weeping shall serve for a spontaneous Sentencing,
and Condemning themselves, Tears of Guilt, and not Repentance.

The Judge shall examine, and they shall weep, Read Rationem, says the Judge,
Luke 16.2. An account, all you, who I entrusted with the Government of the
World, you who I made accountable to none, are now to be accountable to me, of
what Nature were your Decrees, Statutes and Laws? How was Justice observ^d?
what Officers were employed* were you guided by Flattery, or Truth by Passion
or by Conscience* was Vice discountenanced, was Virtue encourag^d, wa^ Religion
protected? you were glorious, but were you Pious, often at Balls, but how often
at Sermons and Prayers* They weep* Read rationem. An account, O Prelates, of
the Church, were you called as Aaron, or did you intrude? did you feed your
Flock, or fatten your selves? was your hand stretched out to Alms, or to fill
your Coffers? were you a Peter, or were you a Simon? were Benefices and
Church Livings conferred on the Unworthy, and who would give most, or to the
worthy, and who either could, or would give nothing? They weep* An account, O
Priest! and what a strict account are they to give? with what Reverence and
Fear of God, did you approach to the dreadful Sacrifice of the Body and Blood
of Christ, at the holy Altar? The Sacrament of Penance, was it tyrannically,
remisly, or with a fatherly Love and Vigor administered by you? The Prisoners
and infirm, were they visited? as well Poor as Rich, were the dying assisted?
Children, were they catechized? They weep* Preachers an account, by whom were
you commission^d? were you sent, and empowered by the Church, directed by my
Spirit? or was it the private Spirit, of a capricious Fancy, moved you, and set
you up? did you preach me, or your selves? out of Zeal, or Ostentation? my
word, did you never turn it against my self, that is, against my Church, and my
anointed? my word, is a word of Peace, my word, is a word of Obedience, my
word, is a word of Charity, and mutual Union. And how came you to make it the
seed of mutual Hatred, Disobedience, and Rebellion? They weep. Read rationem.
An account, O Scholars! you had Wit, and why pretended you to more Wit and
Science than you had? what you had, was it not venial and mercenary* was it not
profane? was it not too bold in questioning my Mysteries* your Quill, was it
not snatched either from one of Cupid^s wings, flowing with poisonous Amors,
or from one of the Harpies, pe^king, fowling, and snatching away the
Reputation, even of the most sacred Persons* They weep. An account, O Lawyers.
The Causes you defended, were they Just? were they at least doubtful were they
not opposite to law, though joined with gain? why was the just claim of that
indigent obstructed, by a false Action laid against him? why was Justice put
off with Demurs, deluded with quirks, and the Orphan and Widow starved, because
forced to starve their Cause, for want of doubled and redoubled Fees? They
weep. An account, O Soldiers! you received Pay of your Prince, and was you
Covenant real? were you Loyal? were you resolute to serve him with the last
drop of your Blood, or to serve your own turns? and then you ought to have paid
your selves. Your discipline was exact, but what was your Religion? you were
punctual in observing orders, and how complaint with my commands? you were
stout, but had you courage to duel your own Passion? you were valiant, but were
you not haughty, quarrelsom, and abusive* They weep. An account, O Ladies! How
tender of your selves, but neither tender of Conscience or of the Poor? why was
a hair misplaced, a freckle in your countenance so offensive, and the greatest
blemishes in the Soul not considered? in time of Prayer your lips went apace,
and how far did your thoughts then wander from me? your eye was too severe, as
to your dress, and was not your tongue more severe in cutting out for others?
They weep. Read rationem. An account, finally, O Christians, you pretended to
Christianity, and id not you live like Heathens, Matt. 18.17.
not hearing the Church? I left you a Church, a Pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.14.
invincible to the gates of Hell. And why was this Church left by you? Matt.
16.18.
I settled but One Faith, Ephesians. 4.5.
how dared you divide it into so many, to the destruction of Charity, division
of Unity, and arming Insurrections? I called, why was I not heard? I knocked,
why was I not admitted? My toils, my labors, why were they spent in vain?
Where are the fruits of my Blood, Passion, and Death? They Weep.

But weeping will not suffice. To each Question, a distinct Answer shall be
given. The Books shall be opened, Men's Consciences shall be displayed before
the whole Court, to be read by all. Tunc videbunt filium hominis, Then they
shall see the Son of Man; and by light of the Sun of Justice shall view their
own, and others Crimes, Revelabit condensa tenebrarum, Psalm. 28.9. He shall
reveal the profoundest works of darkness. O what abominations? What shameful
Actions? What disgraceful Passages will then appear? There the hidden Atheism,
which lurked in the heart of the un-wise, shall be discovered, and the Fool,
who, Psalm. 23.1. said in his heart there is no God, shall by force Adore a just
One: There the Deist shall meet with what he questions, Job 22.13. Quid enim
novit Deus? and quasi per caliginem judicat? How does God know? Can he judge
through the dark Cloud? Sad Repentance will learn him, that God Registers every
moment, Thought, Word, and Circumstance of the Life of Man, and in a Cloud more
pure than Light it self, he is come to judge him. Nihil opertum quod non
Revelabitur, Matt. 10.26. Nothing covered that shall not be Revealed. That
close supplanting; that undermining Honesty and Worth; Those frauds, those
deceits in Shops and Wares; That infidelity amongst Partners, Apprentices and
Factors; Those Perjuries in Witnesses, those breaches of Trust in Stewards and
Servants; Those palliated Usuries, and Simonies. Those sly Insinuations to
steal away the good Name of some, and rob undue Favor and Esteem from others:
They who could not withstand Power, shall then lay their loud claims, against
concealed injustice. Those Debaucheries not to be named, shall be no more
concealed. Nihil occultum quod non scietur: Nothing hidden which shall not be
known.

Go now wise Sinner, seek the remotest Solitude, the secretest Cave, the
darkest Nights, to sin the freer. And do thou think, that Solitude, that
Cave, that Night, will keep thy counsel, from an All-seeing God? But grant it
could, thou will not be able to keep it thy self. Thy self shall stand up
against thy self, in judgment; thy Conscience shall come in a Witness against
thee, and what thou bashfully do now refuse to bury in the Breast of a
Priest, bound to Eternal Silence, by an humble Confession, Then Thou thy self,
in such an Assembly, shall publish to the World, Arguam te, and statuam contra
fa^iem tuam, Psalm. 29.21. I will rebuke thee, says the Lord, and place thee
against thy own face. And behold the Trial is impartial, as the Indictment was
general, for what more impartial, then that the Criminal is admitted to be his
own Evidence. But the more impartial the Trial, the Sentence, which is
unalterable, more just: Continue, I crave the favor of your attention.

The Trial performed, Man being his own Evidence, Man his own Jury. The Judge
proceeds to Sentence. This Son of God having surrounded all, with a look full
of Majesty, terrible to the Reprobrates, and pleasing to the Chosen, seated at
his Right Hand: To these with a charming Voice he says, Matt. 23.34. Uenite
benedicti Patris mei, possidete paratum vobis Regnum a constitutione Mundi;
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
beginning of the World. And with a stately, and stern Turn to the Wicked,
placed at the Left, with a Voice of Thunder, with Eyes of Lightning, and five
Stars shining from his Sacred Wounds, shall dart his fatal Sentence: Discedite
a me maledicti (verse. 41.) in ignem aeternum qui paratus est Diabolo and
Angelis ejus. Depart from me, ye accursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. And Judgment is done, the Sentence and Execution is
doing for all Eternity.

Discedite, Depart: Venite, Come. O fatal Departure! O blessed Access! Of Whom?
From Whom? To Whom? Whither? And, How long? A sad Departure of Men from God;
from the Center of Bliss, to the Devil, to Hell fire, and that for Ever. O
joyful Access! of the Creature to his Maker, to his sweet Redeemer, to the
Mansion of Happiness never to End. Come, O Blessed! Depart, O Wicked! But is
there no Atonement to be had? None. No hopes of Mitigation? Not the least. Is
the Sentence Unalterable? Unalterable. In aeternum, for ever. Its God's Word.
To question it, were to Impeach our Reason, and God's Veracity.

Discourse it thus if you please: To deprive Man of a Temporal Life, for an
Offense to Man equal in Nature, your Reason tells you is just. And for an
Offense against God, so great in Goodness and Worth, so infinitely above Man,
by a proportion of Justice, the Punishment, ought it not to be Eternal? O
imprudent! O rash Mortals! Were the Case but doubtful, in Wisdom you should
provide for the worst; much more were it probable, most of all, it being
Certain. We are indicted both by Reason, and God's Word, and yet we prepare
neither for the impartial Trial, nor unalterable Sentence, by a timely
Repentance, and Reformation of our Manners: God send we hear not, Discedite
maledicti in ignem aeternum: Depart you accursed into Eternal flames.

Tunc videbunt; Then they shall see the Son of Man* Never to see him more. Tune
plangent; And then they shall mourn; to mourn for ever: Where I cannot but
reflect, that Tears of Punishment begin from Seeing; Tears of Repentance from
Believing. They deferred Weeping till they saw the Judge, then too late; They
Weep, they Sigh, they Groan, they Gnash their Teeth, and so they shall for
Ever; Plangent; they shall Mourn, and that Eternally: Whereas the Just grounded
in a true Belief, now wash away their Failures, with Pious and Devout Tears,
and therefore shall Weep no more, but Videbunt, shall see Him, whose sight is
Life Everlasting. Depart O Accursed for Ever: Come ye Blessed for Ever. O Ever!
Ever! After Hundreds, and Thousands, and Thousands of Millions of Ages, yet
Ever remains; Suppose all Heaven and Earth turned into Ciphers, put an Unit
before them, you will find written at the end of them; here Ever, here Eternity
begins.

O Holy Penance! O Happy Repentance! Thou alone art able to prevent the
perpetual Torment, and Disgrace due to our Sins. Thou have filled Heaven, and
changed Sinners into Saints. Thee from this Hour we heartily Embrace: Aspire, O
Lord! with thy moving Grace, melt our flinty Hearts, dissolve them into Waters
of Compunction, that joining our Sorrow with thy Passion, our Tears with thy
precious Blood, which so abundantly flowed from thy Sacred Wounds, we may wash
away the Guilt of our Crimes. Peccavimus, We have sinned, but we Repent; To thee
an Infant Savior we have Recourse this Holy Time of Advent, that at thy Second
Coming, as a Judge, we may have cause to Rejoice, and not to Mourn. Be it so
beloved Brethren; for who in this Life has Sinned, and does not Repent, shall
Mourn, and Burn for Ever; Ever, Ever. Discedite in ignem aeternum, etc. From
which, God of his infinite Mercy preserve us all, In the Name of the Father,
etc.

FINIS.

