A SERMON PREACHED IN CHRIST's-CHURCH* DVBLIN NOVEMBER 18. 1693. AT THE FUNERAL
Of His GRACE FRANCIS Lord Archbishop of DUBLIN.

By the Reverend Father in GOD, ANTHONY Lord Bishop of MEAD.

Printed by Joseph Ray on College Green, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers
of Dublin. 1694.

II COR. V. 1. For we know that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were
Dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, Eternal in
the Heavens.
THE Words that I have read unto you, are a Reason rendered by the Apostle of
something before discoursed of; and if we look into the preceding Chapter, we
shall find that he is there rendering an Account of his Sufferings for the
Gospel, and his cheerful Submission to those Sufferings, on the hopes of being
better Rewarded in another World. It was the Contemplation of those Eternal
Joys which God has prepared for those that love Him, that made him run through
so many Dangers, and endure such a Numerous Train of Misfortunes, with so
Heroic and Undaunted a Courage as he did. That made the Primitive Christians
despise the Swords and the Axes, the Racks and the Tortures of their
Persecutors; that taught them to sing in the midst of the most scorching
Flames, and expire in the midst of the most cruel Torments, with as much
Serenity and Unconcernedness as if they had been Reposing themselves on a Bed
of Roses. For they had an Eye to the Recompense of a Reward hereafter, and were
as certain of enjoying it as if they had it in actual possession: They looked
upon all their Sorrows and Afflictions as light and easy, in respect of that
far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory that was ready to Crown all
their Labors, 2 Cor IV. 17. They looked not at the things that were seen,
which were able to affright them with the Terror of their Appearance; but at
the things which were not seen, at that invisible state of Joy and Comfort,
which was abundantly sufficient to comfort and refresh their Spirits in the
height of their greatest Sufferings. And when their Persecutors were tormenting
of their Bodies, and exercising all the Cruelty upon them that the Wit and Rage
of an Enemy could invent, they were so far from shrinking back, or complaining
under their Pains, that they looked upon them as an hastening of their Joys,
and an Emancipation of their Souls from the dark and melancholy Prison of their
Bodies: Being well assured that when the Earthly House of their Tabernacle was
Dissolved; they had a Building of God prepared for them, an House not made with
Hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

By the Earthly House of this Tabernacle, we are to understand the frail and
mortal Body of Man, which the Apostle calls an Earthly House, and a Tabernacle,
because of its similitude to them. It is compared to an House, because it is
the Habitation of the Soul that is lodged within it, our Bodies being only
given us for the Entertainment of our Souls, and the more easy exercise of
their Operations: And so much the Stoics have instructed us out of their
Philosophy, whilst they compare the Body to a Casket, but the Soul to a rich
and precious Jewel that is lodged within it* It is called an Earthly House,
because it was first framed out of the Dust of the Earth, and must again return
to its first Principle; and it is resembled to a Tabernacle, not only in
Conformity to the Phrase and Idiom of the Jews and the Pythagoreans, who do
frequently call it so in their Writings* but also because of its Mutability and
Uncertainty, it is the nature of a Tabernacle to be removed from place to
place; and it is the Nature and Constitution of our Bodies to be subject to
Changes, and at last dissolved and pulled in pieces. By the House not made with
Hands, Eternal in the Heavens, we are to understand that state of Dignity and
Immortality to which our Bodies shall be advanced in another World, which is
therefore called a Building of God, because it is of his ordering and
preparing. An House not made with Hands, because not subject to Changes and
Decays, and it is called Eternal in the Heavens, to denote the place and the
perpetuity of it, our Immortal Bodies shall be placed in Heaven, and shall be
no more subject to Dissolution or Corruption.

So that the sense of the Words may be explained by this short Paraphrase: We
Christians do certainly know that our Bodies shall be Dissolved into Dust and
Ashes, and we do not in the least doubt but that after their Dissolution they
shall be raised up again to a state of Immortality and Incorruption, and placed
in the Heavens, where they shall no more be subject to Decays and Alterations.
From the Words thus Explained, I shall raise these following Observations.

1. That these Bodies that we carry about us are only the Outward Shell or
Covering of some more Excellent Thing that is lodged within them.

2. That they shall be Dissolved, and pulled in pieces.

3. That after their Dissolution, they are not to remain Eternally Rotting in
the Graves, but shall be Advanced to a better state than they enjoyed before,
to a state of Immortality and Eternal Happiness.

4. That the Place or State in which they shall be fixed, is the Heavens above.

5. That we Christians have the highest Reasons, and the strongest Arguments to
induce us to believe all this, for we know and are assured, That when the
Earthly House of this Tabernacle is Dissolved, we have a Building of God an
House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

1. I bgin with the first particular, That our Bodies are only the Outward
Shell or Covering of some more Excellent Thing that is lodged within them. For
the proof of this, I shall only insist on such Arguments as do arise naturally
out of the Text: They are here compared to an House and a Tabernacle, now the
Notion of an House, does imply some Person or another that is to inhabit it, no
Man being so Unreasonable as to Erect it, but with a respect to this End, and
out of a Design to fit it for the Conveniences of some to dwell in it. And the
Notion of a Tabernacle does imply the same thing, and direct us to the same
Sense and Meaning: We read in the Old Testament of the Tabernacle of the
Testament, and of the Tabernacles of the Shepherds,; the former directs us to
the Presence of God that was pleased to dwell in it* and for whose Honor and
Service it was Erected; And the latter points us to the End and Use for which
those Tabernacles were Erected, namely, For the Conveniences of the Shepherds
that were to lodge in them. It is so likewise in the state and condition of
these mortal Bodies that God has given to the Sons of Men, which are only
prepared for the Receptacle of our Souls, to be an Help meet and convenient for
them, and to serve as a ready Organ or Instrument of their Actions.

When Almighty God breathed into the First Man the Breath of Life, and quickened
the first Lump of Clay with an Active Principle of Heat and Motion, it was none
of his Design that Men should fall in love with the Beauty of their own Faces,
or the neat Contexture of their Parts. This were in effect to place our
Affections on things below them, and make an Idol of our selves; we should
rather consider that all this Symmetry and Proportion of Parts the Activity of
our Bodies, and the Strength of our Limbs, and the admirable Order and
Proportion of all the Members of our Body, were principally given us for the
Use and Convenience of that Ray of Himself, that Divinae Aurae Particula, that
he was resolved to place in so fair a Pile of Building. And from thence we
should descend to an Admiration of his Wisdom and Providence in the Contrivance
of it, and conclude with our selves, That when he made us after his own Image
and Similitude, by placing an Immortal Soul within us, that it was our
incumbent Duty, not only to honor that Divine Guest which he sent to inhabit
it; but also to take a care of treating it with as much Ceremony and Respect as
men do the richest Jewels in their Cabinet. Let the Consideration therefore of
this Particular, prevail with you, my Brethren, to prefer your Souls before
your Bodies, to look upon them as more Valuable, and more Useful; and
consequently to spend more of your Care and Time in the Salvation of your Souls
(which are so precious in the Eyes of God) than in the Adorning of your Bodies,
or the vain pursuits of the Delights and Profits of the World.

2. But because this Proposition is only implied in the Text, I shall therefore
enlarge no longer on it, but proceed to the next Particular, That these Bodies
shall be Dissolved and pulled in pieces. The Similitudes that the Apostle makes
use of, do import as much, for he calls them Houses of Clay, and Earthly
Tabernacles; by the one referring to their Original, by the other to the
Uncertainty of their Stations. Had he barely compared these Bodies of ours unto
Houses, we might perhaps flatter our selves with some vain Confidence and
Expectation of their more lasting Continuance; for as some Houses have been
observed to out-last the Violences of Wind and Weather, so some Persons might
perhaps presume upon a more long Continuance and Duration of their Bodies. But
when it is considered that he accounts them no better than Tabernacles, and
Houses of Clay or Earth, this alone is an Affrighting Consideration to the
Carnal Man, and a Dreadful Allay to all his Mirth and Jollity: For by these
Similitudes he designs to inform us that there is a Principle of Corruption
within our Bodies that will bring them to Decay, though no Exterior Accident
should conspire to destroy them. That they molder and decay every moment, and
are in a constant progress to a Change: That they have not only an Internal
Principle of Corruption that hurries them to their Ruin, but that they are
subject to the Will of Almighty God, who removes them from place to place, as
the Shepherds do their Tabernacles: That we have no abiding City in this World,
but are tossed about like a Ship in the Sea, and become the Sport and Pastime
of every wanton Wave: That in the midst of Life, we are in Death; and when we
think our selves most Secure, then Danger is at hand: That our Lives are not at
our own Disposal, nor is it in the power of our hands to preserve these Bodies
from Sickness and Distempers: For they are either sent upon us by the hand of
God, or we invite them to our selves by our own Riot and Debaucheries; and when
the Physician comes to cure our Distemper, he unhappily mistakes the Disease,
and hastens his Patient to his long home. Thus every thing almost, either in
Art or Nature, by a secret and undiscernable Hand of Providence, contributes to
the Dissolution of our Tabernacle; and whilst we look for Life, he turns it
into the shadow of Death, and makes it gross Darkness.

I need not, I hope, enter into a tedious Harrangue concerning the Necessity
and Unavoidableness of Death, nor use many Arguments to convince you that your
Earthly Tabernacles shall be dissolved: Your own Experience is sufficient to
persuade you to the belief of it, there being hardly any House or Family in the
Country which has not some Buried out of it; you daily see your Friends
Expiring before your Faces: You are present at the Closing of their Eyes, and
attend them after to their Graves. The Ringing of the Bells, and the Mourners
about the streets, the frequent Lamentations of Wives for their Husbands, and
Children for their Parents, and Friends for the loss of their Relations, are a
sufficient Evidence of the Triumphs of Death over all Ages, all Sexes, and all
Conditions. Or if these do not convince you, of the declining state of your
Mortal Tabernacles, yet cast your Eyes I beseech you on that dismal Spectacle
that has assembled you together, and now lies before your Eyes, as the Spoil
and Conquest of the King of Terrors. He was once as fresh and active as any of
you that pay this Charitable Office to his Memory, but behold he now lies as an
useless and unactive lump of Clay, without any other use or signification than
that of a Deaths Head, to put you all in mind of your own mortallity. In his
Fate you ought to consider the uncertainty of your own condition; and from the
view of his Senseless and Unactive Body, to reflect upon the frailty of your
own, and so to number your Days, that you may apply your Hearts to that true
Wisdom, which alone will comfort and support you at the last. For this is the
true end and design of Funerals, which were not so much intended for the
Commendation of the Deceased, as the Information and Instruction of the Living:
and so much Solomon has told us, Eccles. 7. 2. It is better to go to the House
of Mourning, than to go to the House of Feasting, for that is the end of all
Men, and the Living will lay it to his Heart: That is, they ought to be
seriously affected with it, and awakened to prepare themselves for Death.

3. I now proceed to the 3d. Particular or Observation, viz. That after the
Dissolution of these Frail Bodies they shall again be advanced to a state of
Immortality: So the Apostle tells us in my Text, That after this Earthly
Tabernacle is Dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with
Hands, Eternal in the Heavens; And this will be made good from Two
Considerations. First from the Texts of Scripture that affirm it: Secondly from
Natural Reason to ensorce it.

If we consult the Scriptures we shall find them plain and decretory in the
point: Thus St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 15. 42. That it is sown in Corruption,
but raised in Incorruption: That this Corruptible shall put on Incorruption,
and this Mortal shall put on Immortallity, verse. 53, 54. And in Phil. 3. 21.
it is his express Affirmation, That Jesus Christ shall change our Vile Body,
that it may be fashioned like unto his Glorious Body according to the mighty
working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. Now if our Bodies
in the Resurrection must be like unto our Saviors, it will then follow that
they must be advanced to a state of Incorruption, since his was so after his
Resurrection; for so the Scriptures affirm concerning him; Christ being raised
from the Dead dies no more, Death has no more dominion over him, Romans 6. 9.

But secondly, Natural Reason may come in for the proof of this particular;
Reason is able to inform us of these following postulatums to prove the truth
of it.

1. That a Resurrection in general is not impossible. To him that believes that
there is a God, it is more easy to convince him of the possibility of a
Resurrection than of the contrary; for it is founded on the Power and the Will
of God; to the former of which nothing is impossible; and he has no reason to
doubt the latter, if God had any where revealed his Intentions concerning it.

2. That it is no impossible thing to make a Body immortal, since it is no more
than the devesting it of its corrupting Qualities, and arraying it again with a
fresher Luster; It Is only done by taking away the Internal Principle, that
inclines it to Corruption, and placing in its stead a Seed and a Principle of
Incorruption; and he that thinks this impossible to an Omnipotent Power must
have very mean and dishonorable thoughts of the Power of God.

3. That it is highly equitable, that the same Numerical Body should be raised
again that once lived upon the Earth, that, as it has been a Partner with the
Soul, in doing Good or Evil in this life, so it may again partake a share of
its good or bad fortune in the life to come: We do all know that the Body is
the great Instrument of the Soul, by which she acts and exerts her Operations,
that it is fitted with Organs for the performance of them; That as it is the
Unhappy Parent of most of the Sins that we commit, so it is a necessary
Instrument for the discharge of several commendable Virtues; such as Fasting
and Temperance, Sobriety, and Chastity, etc. And would it not be the most
absurd and unreasonable thing in the World, to Punish one Body for the Sins
committed in another; to have one worn out with Paleness and Mortification, and
another snatch away its Reward.

It Is the Argument that Tertullian insists on De Resurrect. Cap. 56.
to prove the Resurection of the same body, Quam absurdum, quam Ethnicum,
utrumque autem quam Deo indignum aliam substantiam operari, aliam mercede
dispungi, ut hoec quidem caro Matyrio lanietur, alia vero coronetur: Nonne
prestat omnem semel fidem, a spe resurrectionis abducere, quam de gravitate
atque justitia Dei ludere, Marcionem pro Valentino resussitati. It Is a thing
unbecoming the Justice of God to oblige one substance to Toil and Labor, and
give away its Recompense to another: That one body should suffer the pains of
Martyrdom for the sake of Christ, and another shall receive the Crown that
never labored for it, and it were much better to Deny the Article of the
Resurrection, than so to Sport with the Wisdom and the Justice of God, as to
suppose him to raise up Marcion in stead of Valentinius

4. That where God has declared his Mind that he will do so, and we have no
just reason to doubt that it his will to have it so; it is then highly
reasonable to believe that it shall be ordered according to his Will: Now all
Christians are agreed, That the Scriptures do contain the Revelation of the
Divine Will, that God has therein made a discovery of his Intentions, as to the
future state of our Souls and Bodies: And since we have an account given us in
those Scriptures, that God will raise them to a State of Honor and
Immortality, we have no reason to distrust either the possibility of the thing,
or the actual performance of it, in its due and appointed season.

I should now descend to the Consideration of those particulars that remain,
but I must pass them by at present, and show you what use you are to make of
what has been already discoursed unto you: I shall only name the Heads and so
conclude.

First. This may inform us of the indispensible necessity of so ordering all
our Affairs in this Life, as persons that expect to be called to an account for
them in the next; if it be so that after Death our Bodies must again be raised
out of the Dust, and entered into a state of Eternal Joy or Pain, and if every
Man must receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy
Conversation and Godliness, looking for, and hastening to the coming of our
Lord Jesus.

Secondly, This should learn us not to abuse these Bodies of ours by Riot or
Intemperance, by Adultery or Uncleanness; for if they must be raised again to a
state of Immortality; is it any wisdom in us to treat them at that rate, as if
we were never more to see them or enjoy them: Do we act like prudent and
considering persons? like Men that wish well to those Bodies we seem so fond
of? as to ingulph them in a state of endless and irremediable sorrows.

Thirdly, It may instruct us farther in the necessity and advantage of a
patient Submission to the Will of Heaven, whenever any Sharp Pains, or Accute
Diseases are sent upon our Bodies, knowing that these Distempers will not last
for ever; that they are sent from Heaven with a design of Kindness to wean us
from the World, and prevent our falling into that place of Torments from whence
there is no Redemption: We ought therefore to bear with patience all those
Pains that Arrest our Bodies; For as our own Sins have pulled them upon our
Heads, so our Repentance may make them the salutary Instruments of our
Reformation. We may comfort our selves in the midst of our Agonies with the
Reflections of reposing them, and our Bodies together in our Beds of Dust, and
that how crazy soever and disordered they may be in this life we shall receive
them again in an improved condition, like a Tottering House pulled down to the
ground that it may be re edifyed to for better advantage.

These are the Considerations with which every one of us may entertain our
Thoughts, in the midst of Infirmities, and Acute Distempers; and with such
Reflections as these, I doubt not, but this Reverend Deceased Prelate did
entertain himself in the intervalls of his Sickness, till the violence of an
Appoplexy discomposed his Reason, and rendered all farther Meditation useless
to his Expiring Soul.

And now that he has submitted to the Laws of Death, and is become a Captive to
the King of Terrors, it will I presume be desired by some, and expected by most
that are present at this Mournful Solemnity, that some short account should be
given of his Life and Actions, who had the peculiar Talent of Concealing
Himself, and of being known to None so well as to God and His own Conscience;
and happy is that Man who can so order his Actions, and the whole Course of his
Life and Conversation, as to have them approved by his own Conscience, and to
be able to appear with Confidence at the Tribunal of the Searcher of Hearts,
whatsoever Censures and Opinions the vain World may either make or entertain of
them: It Is the Affirmation of St. John, That if our Hearts condem us not, then
have we Confidence toward God; we need not fear that he will lay any thing to
our Charge that we are not guilty of, but may appear before him with a modest
Assurance of his Approbation of all that is good in us, and of his Pardon for
these Infirmities which we could not help.

I shall not pretend to give you an exact and entire History of his Life and
Actions, which have been so much in the View and Observation of the World, by
the several Eminent Stations that he has passed through in the Church, but
shall only confine my self to some short and imperfect hints, and leave the
rest to the Sober Reflections of such as were his Intimates and Familiars. He
was Born in Gloucester-shire in the Year 1629, and Educated in the Free-Shool
of Gloucester where he made such early and nimble advances in Gramaticall
Learning, that by Thirteen Years of Age he was fit to be Admitted into Emanuel
College in Cambridge; A Society Famous for the Education of Men of Parts and
Learning, and happy in Three of its Members, Men of Great Learning and Fiety,
of Great Prudence and Moderation; the late Reverend Dr. Bedle, Bishop of
Kilmore, together with the Late, and Present, Most Reverend ArchBishop of
Canterbury; from thence he was Elected into a Fellowship in Gonvill and Caius
College, in which Society he continued till the Restoration of the Royal
Family, applying himself with so much Industry and Application to the Knowledge
of all the several parts of Useful Learning, that (if I am not misinformed in
my Accounts) he obtained the Reputation of a good Mathematician, an excellent
Crittick in the Greek Tongue, and was looked on as one of the most Eminent
Persons of his Standing in the University:

He was well skilled in the Old, and the New, the Aristotelian and Cartefian
Philosophy; and as he took a particular fancy to the Platonic and the Stoical
Philosophy, the one tending to the Explication of the Christian Doctrines and
Institutions, and the other to the Reformation of the Immoral Lives of the
Heathen World; so he had fully Imbibed all the Principles that those
Institutions could instruct him in, and gave a convincing Evidence of the Power
of those Principles, and the Influence they had upon him, in the (...), and
(...), the great Composure of his Mind, and the Moderation and Undisturbedness
of his Passions: No man ever yet saw him Angry at any Injury or Affront that
was offered him, nor Disturbed in his Thoughts by any cross Accidents that came
in his way, but he remained Unmoved, like a Rock in the midst of Angry Billows,
they only broke themselves into Fragments by Dashing on the Outward Man, but
could make no Impression on a Mind that contemned the exterior Blasts of
Fortune, and understood the Art of Calming the Force, and Moderating the
Impetus of them.

In the Year 1660 he was Invited into Ireland by that great Master of Parts and
Learning, of Eloquence and Ingenuity, the late Reverend Pious and Learned Dr.
Tailor, Lord Bishop of Down and Connor; a Person that had all the Requisites
and all the Indowments of a Scholar and a Gentleman, a Great Philosopher, and
an Excellent Divine, a Sublime Wit, and an Admirable Preacher; and had besides
that the advantage of so Obliging a Conversation, that as one (that knew him
well) affirmed of his Discourses, they had all the Pleasantness of a Comedy,
and all the Usefulness of a Sermon: This was that Great and Worthy Man that
first Invited your Diocesan into Ireland, and I take it to be no small
Character and Advantage to this Deceased Person, that so Great a Master of
Learning, so Exemplary a Person for Devotion, so Wise a Discerner of Spirits,
and so Able a Judge of the Abilities of Others, did pitch upon your Departed
Archbishop as a Person worthy of his Care and Favor: By him he was first
Admitted into the Orders of Deacon and Priest, as if he had thereby a fatidical
and presaging Spirit of the growing hopes of that Plant which he had first
planted in the Lords Vineyard.

And as it is natural to all Husbandmen, to intend the cultivation of that
Plant which answers their Pains and Expectation, so he soon afetr procured his
Advancement to the Deanary of Connor, from whence, by the Unexpected Kindness
of the Lord Chancellor Hide, he was Removed to the Deanary of Ardmagh, and had
a Patent sent him for it out of England without any seeking or application of
his own. In this Dignity he continued discharging the Office of a Dignatary and
a Private Minister, with all Faithfulness and Diligence, till in the Year 1667
he was Advanced to the Bishopric of Lymrick, from whence, by gentle and easy
steps, he was removed to Kilmore and Ardagh, and at last to the Dignity of a
Metropolitan in this Province: And all these Promotions fell upon him (as he
affirmed) he knew not how, otherwise than by the Providence of God, and the
Kindness of his Friends, that negotiated his Removals without his application
for them.

It Is an argument of an Extraordinary Providence, as well as of great Merit,
that Preferments drop into the mouths of some, when others are forced to court
like Coy Mistrisses, and after all meet with Disappointment; But you have had
the honor of an Archbishop that has been rather courted by Preserments than a
Soliciter of them, which ought therefore to give a due Value and Esteem to his
Memory and Reputation.

I need not put you in mind of his Actions and Behavior in so public a
Theater of Promotion, you are all witnesses of them as well as my self, and are
able to contradict any Narrative, that is not founded upon the greatest Candor
and Veracity; you know that he has walked, according to the Character of the
Apostle, by Evil Report and Good Report, that some of his most innocent Actions
have had the Misfortune to be misrepresented; and tho it is not possible for
Men in his Eminent Station to walk with so much Caution, but that some one or
other shall blame their Conduct, especially in a Censorious Age, and among a
Busy People, that are more Ready to enquire into the Miscarriages of others,
than Reform their own; and who, like the Athenians, spend their time either in
Telling or Hearing some New thing, yet this I will be bold to Affirm, because I
know the Truth of it, That no Man was more willing to retract an Error when
told of it, nor more thankful to his Monitor, than he was.

And if a Man may make an estimate of his Love of Learning, and his real
desire of advancing and rewarding it in others, by the Choice of his Chaplains,
no Man in his Station, could make a more prudent choice, nor perform it with
more frankness and generosity, for he courted them to it with out their own
intercession for it. For being well versed in Ecclesiastical Antiquity, and
having observed the Lives and Behavior of the Primitive Bishops, how ready
they were to advance the Glory of God, and promote these to Officers in the
Curch, whom they believed most likely to carry on that design after their
Death; He Resolved to conform himself to so Glorious a President, and make
their Examples a Pattern for his Imitation.

Nor was he less Remarkable for his Charity to the Poor, then his love of
Learning; many Indigent Persons partakeing of his Bounty, without knowing the
Hand from whence it came, and dispencing it with that Secrecy and prudent
Caution, that his Left Hand knew not what his Right Hand did. He was loath to
loose the Reward of a Good Action by making it Pompous and Theatrical, and
thought it more valluable to receive the Approbation of God, and the Applause
of Men and Angels, than the Praises of Men in this life.

I need not mention his great Temperance and Abstemiousness in the midst of a
Plentiful Table, and a Luxurious Age, least it should seem a silent Reproof of
that Riot and Debauchery that too much reigns among us, and for which we have
so lately been scourged by the Hand of God. An Abstinence so much the more
commendable, because it seemed to be done in Imitation of the Ancient Eremites,
that fed upon Roots and Herbs, preferring them before the greatest Dainties;
it was the putting a Knife to his Throat, in the Phrase of Solomon, and a
voluntary act of Penance, and Mortification upon himself: A mighty and
convincing evidence of self Denial, and an argument of his mastery over his
Appetite, that he could restrain its motions at a season, when Pleasures and
Temptations invited to the contrary.

Shall I mention it as an argument of his Peaceable Disposition, that he
abhored Controversies and Suits of Law, choosing rather to Remit something of
his Right, then to be Vexatious and Uneasy to himself and others. That he
followed the things that made for Peace, and chose rather to prevent and close
a Breach, then suffer the Wound to sester and rankle by an unseasonable
opposition; that he was of a most Compassionate and Resenting Disposition,
being not only willing to Pity and Relieve the Necessities of his wanting
Brethren: But besides that, full of Indulgence and Compassion to his Tenants,
in making them considerable Abatements for their sufferings by the Calamities
of the Times.

These my Brethren, and several other Instances that I could give, of his
Regular and constant Devotions in his Family, of his Liberality in adorning of
his Episcopal Palace, of his great Humility and Affability, are an argument
of a rare and an excellent Spirit, and a fit president for the Imitation of
others. And now that our Elias is taken up into Heaven, and stands no more in
need of our Prayers, or our Wishes, let us all join in an united Prayer to God,
that a double Portion of his Spirit may descend upon his Successor, when he
shall be Invested with his Robe and Mantle; That so he may, not only Imitate
him in every thing that is comendable, but be a wholesome pattern to the Flock
of Christ which he has purchased with the shedding of his Blood. Amen.

FINIS.

