THE MOURNERS DIRECTORY, Guiding him to The Middle Way BETWIXT The Two Extremes
DEFECT Of Sorrow for His Dead. EXCESS Of Sorrow for His Dead.


To which is added, The Mourners Soliloquy.

By THOMAS DOOLITTLE. M. A.

John 11.31. The Jews then which were in the house with her, and comforted her,
when they saw Mary, that she rose up hastily, and went out, followed her,
saying, she goes unto the Grave to weep there. 33. When Jesus therefore saw
her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came with her, he groaned in the
Spirit, and was troubled. 34. And said, where have ye laid him? they say unto
him, Lord, come and see. 35. Jesus wept.

2 Cor. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies, and the God of all Comfort. 4. Who comfort us in all our
Tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Tho. Cockeril, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks Market, 1693

THE EPISTLE To the Congregation Assembling in Mugwell-street, London.
Beloved for Jesus sake,
DEath that by the God of Life for many Years had been restrained from my
Family, at last by a Commission from him brake in, and has taken from me One
that was nearest to me; the smallness of the Gift presented to you at her
Funeral begs its Excuse from the greatness and necessity of the Subject [LOVE
TO CHRIST] and from her Desire, t^^^ that Book might be the last Token of her
Love to the followers of her Body to its long (but blessed be God, which is one
of my great Supports, not to its last) Home, being lodged there only till the
Lord shall come: and this one thing was all the Care she took about the
Circumstances of her Funeral, for your Spiritual good to beget, and more and
more to inflame your Love to the Lord Jesus, both ours and yours.

Her Death was the Occasion of this ensuing Discourse; first studied for my own
use, when my design was to labor after, till I had attained these two things,
A lively sense of Gods afflicting Hand in the Death of one so dear, and a
quietness of Mind, patiently submitting to his Wise, Righteous and Holy Will:
next preached to you; and because Death will also part you and yours, now
presented to your view, for the Comfort, Guidance and Support of those that
shall be the sorrowful Survivors.

The reason of its delay so long, was the holy Hand of God in Afflicting me
with my usual painful Distemper shortly after her Decease, which made
interruptions in the preaching of it to you; in which Sickness, I thank you for
the concernedness of your Spirits for me, and the Prayers I understand you put
up to God in your Families for me, and when I heard it was your design to meet
together among your selves to spend some time in Prayer upon my account, it was
no small refreshment to me in mine Affliction; and when I desired it might be
where I might have the benefit of hearing and joining with you, you readily
consented. The next Lords day following, God healing of me, contrary to the
expectations of any (except some few that visited me on Saturday) brought me to
my public Work amongst you, which I hope you will take notice of as an
Encouragement to pray on a^ Occasions, since this (late) Experience you have
had, that God suffers not the Seed of Jacob to seek his Face and Favor in
vain, but is so ready to return answers to a praying People.

Amongst those that thus did meet, some were such as were Catethized by me
twenty years since, whom now God has made Masters of Families, Religiously
maintaining the holy Worship of God daily in your Houses, and have often said
to me, you still bless God for the good you got then, and for the foundation
thereby was laid, on which you still continue to build.

And tho there are now above fifty Youths, and Young Men, that twice every
Lord's Day (usually) present themselves as Catechumens, yet considering the
Ignorance of many Married and Ancient People, I lately preached and urged such
with many Arguments to get into their Memories the Catechism, as the nearest
and easiest way that I can think of to help them to the Knowledge of the first
Principles of Christian Religion, which (alas!) they are yet unaccquainted
with, and offered them my Assistance by private Instructions (at first) to
understand what they should this way commit to memory.

The effect it then had, brought above fifty Persons from 24 to 70 years of Age
to receive Catechisms from my hand, making a promise one by one, that they
would learn them, and come to me to explain^i^ to them, and this many of them
did with many Tears, bitterly bewailing they had lived so long in so much
darkness and Ignorance of things so necessary to salvation: these I have since
publicly invited to come and receive what help I can yield them herein; but
some seem to have forgotten their promise, which hereby I claim and mind them
of, and renew the offer of my assistance to them, or if they refuse, that this
may be left in writing as a witness against them.

I am sensible I have but a little time to carry with you; in my Grave, whither
I am going, I can neither Preach nor Catechize, nor do any thing for my self,
or you, the daily Thoughts whereof are spurs and goads to me, to put on, and
hasten to do all I can while I am with you: Oh that I could preach every Sermon
as a dying man, and so near unto Eternity! Oh that you might hear as those that
stand upon the brink of the Grave, and borders of another Eternal World, not
knowing which of you might pass out of Time into an everlasting State, before
you might have an opportunity to hear again! that you and I might mind and
practice what is preached and heard, according to Gods Word. With blushing I do
acknowledge my inability for such great work; but tho I have but half a ^alent,
the Lord knows I do desire to use it and improve it for his Glory, and the
advantage of Immortal Souls, that shortly must be damned or saved, and that my
endeavors might be so watered with the blessing of God, (who can work by whom
he will) that they may issue in the Conviction, Conversion, Sanctification of
the hearers, that they may be saved, and not damned, and the account might be
given at last by me and them, with joy, and not with grief.

For this I beseech you, that you would constantly and importunately pray, yea
strive and labor in your Prayers that out of our Assembly (as well as others)
some might be daily added to the Church, that might at death be of the Church
triumphant, and therein sing eternal Praises to their glorious God, powerful
Redeemer and Sanctifier, for which also my Prayers shall be added to yours, who
am

Alas! (Lord forgive) your unprofitable Servant, tho studious (as I can) of
your Spiritual and Eternal Good,

Thomas Doolittle.

The CONTENTS.
THE Mourners Complaint, his Warning to others, the Explication of the Text.
page 1. to 9. Doct. I. The actings and workings of Sonrow in the Living for
their Dead are allowed, and law^ull, and ought to be. The want of the workings
of natural Affections in many upon this occasion calls for the handling of this
doctrine. 10, 11, 12 Proved by approved Examples, and by Reasons. p. 13 to 29
Use I. Of Reproof. Where Eight Conclusions concerning Sorrow for the dead. p.
31 I. This question. What are the aggravations of want of Sorrow, and sense of
Gods hand in this Case? answered in 10 particulars. p. 35 to 46
Use II. Of Examination of the Kind of our Sorrow. II. Quest. When is our
Sorrow for our dead Kindly and pleasing to God, and when a turbulent Passion, a
Vexation of Spirit, and provoking to God. Ten Answers. p 46 to 66
Use III. Of Caution. p. 66, 67 III. Quest. When is our Sorrow for our dead
spiritually defective, tho it be naturally abundant? Or when is it too little
as we are Christians, be it never so much as we are Men? Eight Answers. p. 69,
to 83
Doct. II. Christians ought so to bound their sorrow for their dead, that it be
not Excessive and Immoderate. p. 84 Ten Rules concerning the Kinds and Degrees
of sorrow for the dead. p. 87, etc. Eight Questions propounded to such as
sorrow with distracting sorrow for the death of Impenitent Relations, for the
composing of their minds, p 101, etc. Q. When is our sorrow for our dead
excessive and Immoderate? Twelve Answers. 116, to 137 4 Remedies against
excessive sorrow for our dead. p. 137, etc.
I. Rem. The consideration of the state of the Bodies of departed Believers;
that they sleep in Jesus. 4 Notes of this Scripture expression of death as a
sleep, 142, etc. 10 Meditations of Death as a sleep, moderating our sorrow for
them that sleep in Jesus. 145, to 152 II Rem. The knowledge and Belief of the
glorious state of their separated Souls, while their Bodies sleep in the Grave,
152 to 158. Proved, and Improved for the asswaging of our Sorrow.
III. Rem. The Resurrection of those dead we mourn for to glorious Eternal
Life. Proved, as a ground of great Comfort in our sorrow. 158, to 165 Seven
Properties or Endowments of their Bodies when raised, as so many alleviations
of our Sorrow. 166, etc.
IV. Rem. The Antecedents Concomitants Consequents
Of their Resurrection, 174 1. The Lord HIMSELF will come from Heaven, and call
them out of their Graves. Our sorrow abated by the Certainty Nearness
Publickness
Of Christ's coming for them. 175, to 183. 2. The Shout and sounding Trumpet,
what it will be. The Ministration of Angels about the dead in Christ. 183, etc.
3. The Privilege of those that sleep in Jesus, or their Pre-eminence before
those that shall then be found alive. 190 4. Our dead shall then meet the Lord
in the Air. 191 5. They shall be with the Lord for Ever. 192 Opened, With whom
they shall be? With the Lord. Who shall be with him? The dead in Christ, whom
we now sorrow for; all Believers sound alive. How long? To all Eternity. 193,
etc.
Use, Of Comfort. 200, 201 24 Questions added to the former grounds of Comfort,
for the quieting of our Minds, and moderating our sorrow for our dear Relations
now dead. 201, to 211.
The Mourners Soliloquy, or Reasoning with himself about h^ sorrow for his
Dead, that it might be kept within the bound of Moderntion. 215, etc

THE Mourners Directory.
1 THESSALONIANS. IV. 13. But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope.


CHAP. I. The Introduction and Explication of the Text.
THe Survivor (according to his Circumstances) by sympathizing Persons, will be
allowed to unload his burdened heart, by pouring out his Complaints in some
such manner:

Has God afflicted me? Has he chastised my Children? both me and them with
such a smarting Rod, as Death bereaving me of the choicest outward Comfort of
my Life, and removing out of the World from them a tender Mother, that brought
them into it, and thereby caused us all to drink deeply of the Waters of Marah,
and filled our Eyes with overflowing Tears, and our Hearts with overwhelming
Sorrow, and is it not time to cast about what Remedy Scripture does yield,
which Nature cannot afford? Do I stand before you this day in such
Circumstances, as in Preaching for the space of almost forty years, I never
did, and may I not borrow from you some hours in your hearing to speak to my
self and them, deprived of so great a Mercy? Paul was in a great strait whether
he should choose to live or dye; and I am in a strait how I should without sin
Sorrow for my dead. For if defect of Sense and Sorrow in this case be a Sin, I
will strive to Sorrow, that through stupidity I might not Sin. If regular
Sorrow be my duty, I will study and pray that it might be so regulated, that
whilst I Sorrow and not Sin, I might please and delight my self in this
Sorrow, and take some comfort from my Sorrow: If excess be my weakness, without
Divine Assistance I cannot remove it, therefore bent my mind to muse upon these
words, I would not have you to be ignorant, concerning them which are asleep,
that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope.

But may not that which is my Sorrow to day, be some of yours to morrow? Or
within a little time will it not, must it not be done to you and yours, which
at the present is done to me and mine? Are not your Relations mortal as well as
ours was? And if you have not sinned so much as we, yet have not you so much
Sin, as might call Death into your Houses? Will not Death shortly knock at your
doors, and enquire who lives here, upon this design that there they may die?
Will it not break through your strongest Gates, scale your highest Walls,
climb up to your Windows, enter into your Chambers, come into your very Beds,
and take the Wife out of your Bosom, and the sucking Child from the Mothers
Breast? Will it not in a few Days and Nights more, tear and rend from you the
desire of your Eyes, tho you would hold them fast in your Arms? Shall not the
shriekings be heard in your Houses, as lately were in mine, and the doleful cry
go round; while one Child begins, saying, My Mother, alas, my dear Mother is
dead! and another shall echo to the voice of the former, with weeping Eyes,
with wringing of Hands, and bitterness of Soul, shall say, What shall I do?
what shall I do? My tender, loving Mother is dead! my Mother is dead! I could
never say so before, and the first time it is said, it is a sorrowful saying.
May Sin invite Death into your Families, saying, Come in thou Messenger of the
Lord, come in; here is one deserves to dye, and there is another, seize him,
and hale him out, apprehend him, and take him away; he lives not as he should,
let him die as he ought. May it shortly be said by you, my Wife is dead, my
Husband is dead; and is Grace and Nature in you so equally poized, and have you
such a just temperament and mixture of both, as not to sorrow less or more than
you ought; that now your Relations are round about your Tables, and no ones
place is empty; you might not at present hear, for time so shortly to come,
what might be said concerning Sorrow for the dead, and cure your ignorance
concerning them which are asleep; that you sorrow not as others which have no
hope: or tho they dye, yet you sorrow not, as such do not, that have neither
Faith, nor Hope, nor natural Affection.

Nature and Religion binding me to promote the temporal and spiritual Good of
so near a Relation all a long, pressed more hard upon me to give my utmost
diligence to assist her in her last Sickness by Night and Day, by Prayer and
Discourse, that she might (and God through his rich Grace and Mercy in Christ
to her Soul did enable her) with abiding comfort, and settled hope of Heaven,
look Death in the face, overcome this King of Terrors, and conquer the Fears
thereof, when Death by its stroke without a Sting did conquer her.

This Portion of Scripture from the Text to the end of this Chapter was the
last I read and urged, before she left her own to go to her Father's house,
which I do make the first to explain and apply in this place for my own and
your sake: Wherein are three generals.

1. A Doctrinal Conclusion concerning Sorrow for such as sleep in Jesus, or dye
in the Lord, v. 13.

2. The Confirmation of it, by many argumentative Reasons, and are helps
against sinful Sorrow by excess; from ver. 14. to the 18.

3. The Application of this Doctrine so confirmed, or the use of Comfort to be
made of it against such Sorrows, V. 18. Wherefore comfort one another with
these words.

The Doctrinal Conclusion laid down in the Text, consists of these particulars.

1. A familiar Representation of Death, that the thoughts of it might be more
easy to our minds; to dye, sounds more harsh; to sleep, is a softer expression
of Death. Death and Grave you would every day avoid; Sleep and Bed, you every
night desire; yet Death is but as a Sleep, and the Grave is but as a Bed; and
both so called in the Scripture.

2. The Deportment and Behavior of the Survivers, in reference to such as
sleep the sleep of Death, which relates unto their Sorrow upon this occasion.
And in this, these two things are couched in the Text.

1. A Sorrow supposed, granted, and allowed to the living for their dead. For
should the living be as senseless as the dead, when Death has taken away Life,
and Breath, and Motion from them, shall Sin take away all workings of natural
Affections from us? Shall Death snatch them out of our Bosoms, force them out
of our Arms, and tear one piece of our selves from our selves, take the one
half away, and leave the other behind, and we stand and look on without a Tear
in our Eyes, without Sorrow in our Hearts, as if we had neither sense of Gods
heavy Hand, nor love to them, nor feeling of the stroke that thereby is laid
upon our selves? Sorrow we may, tho not as others.

2. Excess of Sorrow is corrected. Lay not the Reins loose upon your
Affections, lest they carry you to Sin in your Sorrow. Lavish not those Tears
in washing your dead, which should be kept for lamenting of your Sins. Let
there be a difference betwixt your Sorrow, and the Sorrow of others, as there
should (...) betwixt those that have hope, and those that have no hope of a
joyful Resurrection to Eternal, Glorious Life. The Heathens have no such hope,
for they are without Christ, the cause of hope; without the Church, the place
of hope; without the Covenant, the ground and reason of hope: While you are
allowed to mourn as Men, do not exceed the bounds and limits becoming Christian
Men. The Heathens mourn for their dead beyond all bounds of Moderation, while
they lament them as such that shall live no more. But let Christians limit
their Sorrow, as for such, that tho they be dead, shall live again, and after
that shall die no more.

3. In the Text, is the Cause of excessive Sorrow for the dead, that is,
Ignorance concerning the State of the Dead, now and hereafter, at the present
and for ever, both as to Body and to Soul.

4. The cure of excessive Sorrow. Knowledge, Meditation, and firm belief of the
present and future State of those that dye in the Lord. I would not have you to
be ignorant; others are, and therefore mourn to excess; but I would not have
you so to be, that you may not sorrow as they do. Did ye know, think, and
believe, that their Death is but a Sleep, out of which they shall certainly
awake; their Graves, their Beds, out of which, when the morning of the
Resurrection shall come, they shall arise, and that their Souls in the mean
time are with God, and Christ, and the Eternal Spirit, admitted into that
glorious Society of Angels and Saints above, perfectly Loving, constantly
delighting, perpetually Praising and Triumphing in that God that did choose
them, in that Jesus that did redeem them with his Blood, in that Holy Spirit
that made them meet to be partakers of that Inheritance of yonder Saints in
Light, and Life, and Love; would you groan while they rejoice? Would you mourn
while they sing Songs of Praise? Are you grieved because they are exalted? Do
you take on, as if they were for ever lost, when by saving Mercy they are now
for ever found in the glorious Presence of their Lord, and Father, and
Redeemer? Could you hear them speak to you, they would say, you are in daily
Trouble, we in everlasting Rest, and Peace, and Triumph; you are in the Field,
we have got the Victory; you are in danger of Sin and Satan, we are freed from
them for ever; your love unto our Lord and yours, is imperfect love, while ours
wants no degree; you know not what we do know of God, and Christ, and Glory;
you see not what we do see, nor enjoy so much as we enjoy, therefore spend your
Tears upon your selves, and not for us; weep for your selves, and not for us;
lament your selves being yet in a sinful World, and not us that are lodged in a
pure, spotless Place and Kingdom. You pray, and wait, and hope to be where we
are, but we have no desire to be where you be. We have a better House than you
live in, better Company, and better Work, and sweeter Employment; therefore
Sorrow for your selves, and not for us.

But Earth is a place for Sorrow, which we must taste in handling the first
Doctrine; and after we have pleased our selves with it, from love to them, we
will endeavor and seek for Comfort as to them in the second.

CHAP. II. The First Doctrine, proved by Scripture Instances and Reasons.
Doct. I. THE Actings and Workings of Sorrow in the Living, for the Dead, are
allowed, and lawful, and ought to be.

For he says not, Do not sorrow at all; this defect or want of sorrow is so
far from becoming Christians, that it is unworthy of a Man as a Man. How
incongruous is it, for a Man to sorrow for a dead Beast, that lays not to Heart
the Death of a Child, or of some nearer and greater Relation? There are too
many Stoics in practice in this point, that are not so in Opinion. At the
Losses of the World, sorrow fills their Hearts; you may see their Tears, you
may hear their Groans, and bitter Complaints, I am undone, this Loss is my
Ruin: And the sense of this, and sorrow for it shall last long, may ^hey will
not stick ^o tell you, they shall never get over it, but it will break their
Hearts: But these that melt like Wax for a Worldly Loss, are as hard and
senseless as a Stone, not regarding the D^^th of a Wife of their Bosom, of a
Child of their Loins, or a Brother from the same Parents; but have a secret
gladness in their Hearts, when their Children die, because they have the fewer
to maintain; or a weak and sickly Wife by Death is taken away, because the
burden of the charge is thereby eased. Lord! what kind of Christians are these,
that have not so much value for an Humane Body, nor an Immortal Soul, as for
the more ignoble things of this World, without Life, or Sense, or Reason! This
horrid and unnatural Sin against the Lives of their Parents, is in too many
Children, who expecting the Possession of their Goods and Estates at their
Death, think they live too long, long for their Decease; and though they may
cloth themselves in Mourning to follow them to their Graves, yet secretly
please themselves that they are gone, and their Riches come to them. Neither
may any please themselves with Stoical Apathy, or want of grief and sorrow for
the Death of Relations, because they were wicked and ungodly, lived and died in
Sin, which should rather increase than diminish their mourning for them; for
must not that Man have an Heart of Stone that is neither moved for the Death of
the Body, nor for the Damnation of the Soul of any so near in relation to him?
Is it nothing to such a Man that the Body is consumed in the Grave, and the
Soul tormented in Hell? Is it nothing that the Body is meat for Worms, and the
Soul a prey to Devils? As there is no greater alleviation of our sorrow for the
dead, than well-grounded hope that the Soul is lodged with God above; so there
can be no greater aggravation of sorrow for the death of the Impenitent, than
the Thoughts that the Soul is Damned, before the Body can be Buried. Who or
what manner of Man is he, that can forbear to grieve and sorrow for the death
of a Wife, or a Son, because she was a froward, graceless, or a wicked Wife; or
because he was a disobedient Son; yet was not the one a Wife, and the other a
Son, and both had Immortal Souls? And if you had no ground to hope at death
they were received into Heaven, must not you conclude they were then cast down
to Hell? And take on and say, Ah my Son, my Son, how miserable, for ever
miserable art thou, my Son, my Son? Did I beget thee to be a prey for Devils,
to be Fuel for the Flames of Hell? The Son of my Loins, a part of my self is
for ever lost, because he died in his Sin. He sinned, and never repented; he
went on in Sin to his dying day, and never turned to the Lord, and when he died
was condemned. Oh my Bowels, my Bowels for thee my departed Son! thy Death I
could have better born, if Damnation after death by dying in thy Sin had not
been thy Portion. What! gone from me to Devils? What! from my House to Hell?
While thou in Hell, and I on Earth; I cannot but sorrow on Earth, when I think
thou art tormented in Hell. I have lost thee, and that is bad; and thou have
lost God, and that is worse, infinitely worse; because the God that thou have
lost is infinitely good. If you cannot sorrow for the death of a Relation
because he was bad, that will be no proof that you your self are good. And if
you justify your self, though you sorrow not at all; do you not condemn the
practice of David in mourning so much for an Incestuous, Murderous, and
Rebellious Son, because he died in his Sin, and unprepared for Death, and a
better state in another World? 2 Samuel 18.33. And the king was much moved, and
went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept; and as he went, thus he said, O
my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee, O
Absalom, my son, my son. This is the first thing in the Survivers Carriage for
the dead; sorrow is allowed: The defect is both their Sin and Shame.

That we may and ought to give a lodging to sorrow in our Breasts, even for
those whose Souls are lodged with God above, and whose Bodies being lodged in
the Grave do there sleep in Jesus, will be apparent and justified by these
Arguments pleading for it.

First, The approved Practice, and commendable Examples of Holy Persons
Recorded in Sacred Scripture, mourning and sorrowing for their deceased
Relations. Instances we find in the several respective Relations in which they
stood while they did live together, that the Surviving did mourn for, not only
in habit but in heart, when death had parted ^h^^ ^^^der.

1. (...) Death had dissolved the Conjugal V^^^^ be wixt ^usband and Wife, the
Surviving Husband (that wa^ la^^ly s^^) mourned for his deceased Wife. So
Abraham for Sarah. Genesis 23.2. And Sarah died in Kiriath-arba, the same is
Hebron, in the land of Canaan: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep
for her. Tears for a departed Wife are not unworthy of a Man, nor unbecoming;
but he that has not a Tear to shed upon such a sorrowful occasion, was
unworthy of a Wife. Abraham wept for Sarah. So Wives for their Husbands. The
Tidings that Vriah was dead, were grievous to Bathsheba, and caused her to
mourn. 2 Samuel 11.26. When the wife of Vriah heard that her husband Vriah was
dead, she mourned for her husband. Powerful Death has made many sorrowful
Hearts, because it has power to do that which all the Created Powers in Heaven
and Earth could not do; that is, to separate those that God by his Institution
had joined together. This Knot of unfeigned Lovers none but Death could untye:
This Union none but Death could dissolve. God that has given a charge that no
Man should part asunder such as he had joined together, has given a
Commission, Alas, he has given a Commission to Death to part them (as to that
relation) for ever: In one instant I could say, this Woman is my Wife; in the
next, thou, even thou, O powerful Death, did both stop her Breath, and tie my
Tongue, that I could no longer call her mine: Mine, and not mine, in that
instant, and not in this that was joined to the former. Lord, give me leave to
sorrow, that that which was most mine, is no longer mine.

2. When Death snatcheth away Children out of their Parents Arms and Bosoms,
which before were in their Loins, the Parents have sorrowed, and lamented
Deaths doings. Jacob when he did but suppose his Son Jos^ph was dead, did
grieve and sorrow as though his Heart would break, and refused to be comforted.
Comfort me! Is Joseph dead, and do ye speak of Comfort? My Son dead, and I
admit of comfort? no, I will give place to sorrow: My Son is dead, and my
sorrow shall live as long as I live; and I will go sorrowing to my Grave, to
him. Genesis 37.32. And they sent the coat of many colors, and they brought it to
their father, and said, This have we found; know now whether it be thy sons
coat or no. 33. And he knew it, and said, It is my sons coat: an evil beast
has devoured him: Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces. 34. And Jacob rent
his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many
days. 35. And all his sons, and all his daughters rose up to comfort him, and
he refused to be comforted; and he said, for I will go down into the grave unto
my son, mourning: thus his father wept for him. David grieved for the death of
his Son Amnon. 2 Samuel 13.37. David mourned for his son every day: and for his
son Absalom. 2 Samuel 18.33. and 19. 1. It was told Joab, Behold the king weepeth
and mourns for Absalom. 2. The people heard say that day, how the king was
grieved for his son. 4. The king covered his face, and the king cried with a
loud voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom my son, my son.

(1.) This sorrow is used to express degrees of sorrow for the afflicted
Church. Should not we mourn for the Miseries of the Church, for the Calamities
of the best Men? Should we not grieve and sorrow, when the Sword of an Enemy,
and fear is round about us? When the Spoiler comes upon us? And should not the
degree of our sorrow be equal to the degrees of the evil that befalls us? What
are those degrees? Such as are equal to the degrees of sorrow of Parents for
the death of an only Son: When the Spirit of God chooses out such sorrow for a
pattern of sorrow for the Church in great distress, does it not import that
such sorrow for Children removed by death is great sorrow? Jer. 6.25. The sword
of the enemy, and fear is on every side. 26. O daughter of my people, gird thee
with sackcloth, and wallow thy self in ashes: make thee mourning as for an only
son, most bitter lamentation; for the spoiler shall suddenly come upon thee:
Let Parents that are little affected with the death of a Child, inquire where
are their natural affections, their sense and feeling of the Hand of God in so
severe a blow, when God himself ranks girding with sackcloth, wallowing in
ashes, bitter lamentations, and mourning for an only Son, as equalizing each
other in degrees of sorrow.

(2.) To set forth the degrees of sorrow under sore and heavy Judgments. When
God threatens to bring such sore and heavy Judgments that shall cause Men's
Mirth to cease, their Joy to be banished, their Sorrow to be multiplied; he
compares it to the mourning for an only Son; as what uses to be in highest
degree. Amos 8.10. And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your
songs into lamentation, and I will bring up sackcloth upon all loins, and
baldness upon every head; and I will make it as the mourning of an only son,
and the end thereof as a bitter day.

(3.) The degrees of sorrow of convinced, repenting Sinners. This manner of
mourning is used to set forth the great degrees of sorrow that the repenting
Jews should have, when they should be convinced of their Barbarous and Bloody
Fact in Murdering of the Son of God. Zech. 12.10. And I will pour upon the
house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace, and
of supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, How much? As one mourns for his only son, and shall be
in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. All
these show not only what sorrow is allowed, but what degree also is required,
and has been in Parents for the death of Children, that have had a due sense
of God's afflicting Hand in taking their Children from them by death; Even
sorrow setting forth, (1.) The sorrow for the Calamities of the Church. (2.)
The greatness of the sorrow Men are filled with when God's heavy Judgments are
upon them. (3.) The sorrow of true Penitents for their sinful carriage to God's
own Son. Though the parallel will not hold in all respects, yet the greatness
of the sorrow of the one is made use of to declare the greatness of the others;
which is sufficient evidence that such sorrow is great in it self.

Though Love does descend from Parents to Children, more than it does ascend
from Children to Parents, yet Children the more dutiful they were to their
Living Parents, the more they mourned for them when removed from them by Death.
(1.) For their Father. So Joseph with the rest of his Brethren for Jacob. Genesis
49.33. When Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he gathered up his
feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered to his people.
Genesis 50.1. And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and
kissed him. 7. Joseph went up to bury his father. 8. And all the house of
Joseph, and his brethren, and his fathers house. 10. And they came to the
threshing-floor of Atad, which is beyond Jordan, and there they mourned with a
very great, and very sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his father
seven days. 11. The inhabitants of the place when they saw the mourning, said,
this is a very grievous mourning. (2.) The Death of Mothers has been no less
lamented by their Children. Isaac mourned for his Mother, Genesis 24.67. When
David would express the greatness of his sorrow for others, he aggravates it by
this, I was bowed down as one that mourns for his mother, Psalm. 35.14.

3. When breaches have been made by Death betwixt Brethren and Sisters, the
Surviving have greatly sorrowed for those that were removed from them. Mary and
Martha lamented the death of their Brother Lazarus. John 11.19. Many of the
Jews came to Martha and Mary to comfort them concerning their brother. 31. The
Jews which were with her in the house, and comforted her, when they saw Mary,
that she rose up hastily, and went out, followed her, saying, she goes to the
Grave to weep there. 32. When Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she
fell down at his feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou had been here, my
brother had not died. 33. Jesus saw her weeping. Can Brethren and Sisters that
descended from the same Parents, that were bred in the same Womb, sucked the
same Breasts, brought up together in the same Family, see any of them carried
to the Grave before them, and not follow with weeping Eyes, and sorrowful
Hearts?

4. Ministers heretofore have not died unlamented, nor followed to their Graves
without Weeping and Sorrow. They that watched over the People while they lived,
were bewailed by the People when they fell asleep. When Death did tie their
Tongues, and silence them; when the Seers eyes have been closed, and the feet
of them that brought the glad tidings of Salvation to lost Sinners, are
fettered by the bands of Death, that they can come and bring no more: When they
that brake the Bread of Life, became meat for Worms, and could pray with them,
and for them, and preach to them no more; when they had done their work, then
the Peoples sorrows did begin. The children of Israel wept for Moses thirty
days, Deuteronomy. 34.8. And for Aaron, Numb. 20.29. When all the congregation saw
that Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of
Israel. When Samuel died, all the Israelites were gathered together, and
lamented him, 1 Samuel 25.1. Stephen was not buried without much sorrow, Acts
8.2. Devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over
him. But now Ministers Widows and Children might mourn, when many others are
not concerned for them living or dying.

5. Tho now in our Iron Age some can scarce sorrow for departed Relations, yet
in former times they have greatly mourned for servants that have died out of
their Families. Deborah, that was Rebecca's Nurse, belonging to Isaac's house,
had her Funeral attended with Tears, Genesis 53.8. Deborah, Rebecca's nurse, died,
and she was buried beneath Bethel under an oak; and the name of it was called
Allon Buchuth, that is the oak of weeping; because of the many Tears that were
shed at her burial.

6. The compassionate Bowels, the troubled Heart, the weeping Eyes of our Lord
Jesus for a departed Believer, are significant Indications of the Sorrow there
should be upon such Dispensations of Divine Providence. When Lazarus was dead,
Mary and Martha wept; the Jews wept; and when Jesus came after he was buried,
he wept also; he was troubled with them that were troubled, and wept with them
that wept for their dead, on which occasion he was troubled, he groaned, he
wept, John 11.33, 35.

If all these did thus sorrow fo their dead, may not we for ours? Dear Jesus!
when thou did not rebuke Martha and Mary weeping for their deceased Brother,
but did weep with them; did not show thine Anger, but thy Pity to them in
their Sorrow for the removal of a Brother from them; keep us that are
concerned, because afflicted, from sinful Sorrow, and show thy Compassion to
us, whilst we do case our burdened Hearts by venting of our Sorrow, and
weeping out our Grief. Since we have so many approved Examples of Holy Men and
Women that in the like case have sorrowed in the like manner.

Secondly, Defect of Sorrow, where there is true cause of Sorrow, is a falling
short of the exercise of those Affections, which God himself has implanted in
our Hearts. Why has God given us the Affection of Love, but that it may be set
upon obj^cts of Love? And the Affection of Delight and Joy, but that we may
rejoice when God affords us matter of Joy? And why the Affection of Grief and
Sorrow, but that we should duly grieve when his dealings with us call aloud,
and provoke us to it? And if Losses are causes of, and calls to Sorrow; what
greater loss in things below, than the loss of such as should be dearer to us
than all things here below? Religion does not destroy Nature, but rectify it.
Grace does not abolish natural Affections, but directs them to their Objects,
and keeps them in their due Proportion, that as they should not be excessive,
so not defective in their measure.

Thirdly, Love to, and delight in Relations while they live, must needs
constrain our Sorrow when by death removed from us. What is that which you
truly and duly love, and delight in the enjoyment of, that you can forbear to
sorrow for the loss of? Nay, if it be unduly loved (as a worldly Man does his
Riches) when lost, can sorrow be concealed? And shall not we be allowed to love
near Relations, more than worldly Riches, and so to sorrow more for the loss of
the one, than of the other. I do know what it is to meet with losses of the
World; but I do not know that they did break my Sleep; but I cannot deny, but
my late loss of one so near, has kept mine Eyes waking in the deep silence of
the Nights. How any should have due due degrees of Love to Husband, Wife,
Parents or Children while they live, and not have equal Sorrow for them when
they dye, is not easy for me to give a rational Account of. For if the Goodness
of the Object beget love to it, the Absence of it excites desires after it; the
loss of it must fill us with Sorrow for it. Want of Sorrow, when they are taken
from us, does argue want of Love while they were continued with us. If you
groan not at their Death, there is room for this question; Were not you
burdened with their Life? Did you look upon that Relation when alive, as one of
your Enjoyments, when you do not look upon the Death of such a one, as one of
your Afflictions? When Husband and Wife are known not to live in love, every
one has a Tongue to say, Such will not mourn for her Death. How should he
afflict his heart with Grief, when separated by Death, when it was empty of
Love when joined in Life? David's different Carriage at the death of his Son
Absalom, and of his young Child, does not show, that when he had so much Sorrow
for the one, he had no Sorrow for the other, but that he had something to
moderate his sorrow for the one, which he had not for the other; when he had
hopes that the one was saved, and fears that the other was damned.

Fourthly, The want of lamentation and mourning is a punishment that God
inflicts upon Sinners at their Death. Job 27.13. This is the portion of a
wicked man with God, and the heritage of oppressors, which they shall receive
of the Almighty. 15. Those that remain of him shall be buried in death, and his
widows shall not weep. That Husband was unkind, while he lived, or his Widow
unnatural, that cannot weep when he is dead. Psalm 78.64. Their priests fell by
the sword, and their widows made no lamentation. When God takes away his
loving kindness and Mercies from men for their great wickedness, while they
live, as a token of his wrath, he will not have them lamented when they die,
Jer. 16.3. Thus says the Lord concerning the sons, and concerning the
daughters that are born in this place, and concerning their mothers that bare
them, and concerning their fathers that begat them in this land. 4. They shall
die of grievous deaths, they shall not be lamented, neither shall they be
buried, but they shall be as dung upon the face of the earth, and they shall be
consumed by the sword, and by the famine, and their carcases shall be meat for
the fowls of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. 5. For thus says the
Lord, Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament, nor bemoan
them: for I have taken away my peace from this people, says the Lord, even
loving kindness and mercies. 6. Both the great and the small shall die in this
land, they shall not be buried, neither shall men lament for them, nor cut
themselves, nor make themselves bald for them. 7. Neither shall men tear
themselves for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither shall
men give the cup of consolation to drink for their father, or their mother.
Dying by Sword and Famine, denial of burial, the Flesh of the dead lying as
Dung upon the Earth, devoured by the Beasts, consumed by the Fowls, and no
Sorrow, no Lamentation for them, are Judgments of God upon wicked Men: And
should those that dye in the Lord, be no more lamented, than those that dye in
their Sin, and for their Sin deserve no Lamentation? Tho the Name and Carcass
of the wicked rot in the Grave together, yet should not the name of the
righteous be had in remembrance? And can we remember their Name without Sorrow,
that we have not their Presence and Company, and opportunity of getting good by
their Counsel and Example?

Forms usual in Mourning for the dead; as, Ah my Brother, or ah my Sister; My
Wife; Ah my Husband; are foretold by God should not be used concerning Persons
by Name, as a Judgment upon them for the wickedness of their Lives. As
concerning Jehojakim, Jer. 22.17. Thine eyes, and thine heart are not but for
thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for
violence to do it. 18. Therefore, thus says the Lord concerning Jehojakim, the
son of Josiah King of Judah, They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my
brother, or Ah my sister: they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah Lord, or Ah
his glory [or Majesty]. 19. He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn
and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem. Jehoram for his wickedness was
punished by God in his Life, his Person with an incurable disease in his
Bowels, pained therewith for the space of two years, at the end of which time,
his Bowels fell out by reason of his Sickness; at his Death, in his Name and
Reputation; in that the People made no burning for him, like the burning of his
Father, that is, did not honor him at his burial, by burning of precious and
sweet smelling Spices, as they did for Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.14. But Jehoran
departed without being desired. 2 Chronicles. 21.18, 19, 20. And shall those that
lived to the Lord, and died in the Lord, be no more sorrowed for, than those
that lived and died in their Sin? Shall not leave be allowed that such that
were desired in Life, might be lamented at their Death? Oh, let not that saying
be used of any that sell asleep in Jesus, He, or She, lived undesired, and died
unlamented.

Fifthly, Sorrowing and Lamentation for the death of others, has been
appointed and commanded by God in Honor to them in whom real good and worth
was found while they lived. Jeroboam (his Child being sick) sends his Wife in a
disguise to the Prophet, to know what should become of the Child; Who bid her
return to her House; and when her Feet entered into the the City, said, Her
Child should die, and that all Israel should mourn for him, and bury him; for
he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him is found some good
thing toward the Lord God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam: The Child died,
and they buried him, and all Israel mourned for him according to the Word of
the Lord, which he spoke by the hand of his servant Ahijah the Prophet, 1 King
14.12, 13, 17, 18. Josiah was buried, and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for
him, and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing men and singing
women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations, and made them an ordinance in
Israel, and behold they are written in the Lamentations, 2 Chronicles. 35.24, 25.
True and real goodness, the Image of God in meaner Persons is precious and
honorable, tho in Persons of higher Rank is more honored, and might make them
more useful while they live, and so the more lamented when they die; yet as
Angels convoy the Souls of poorest Believers to Heaven, and show their Love and
Respect to them in conducting them thither; so those that live, should lament
and sorrow for the death of their Bodies, as remaining still united to Christ.

Sixthly, It is complained of by God, and condemned as an Evil, that Righteous
Persons should be taken away by Death, and those that live do not lay it to
heart, Isa. 57.1. And can it be laid to heart, without any sorrow in the Heart?
Some may sorrow without Tears, but most show the sorrow abiding in their Hearts
by the Tears running from their Eyes? Shall a godly Man, an holy Woman be
removed by Death, and lamented by none? Not by those of the Family from whence
they were taken? Lord, let not this complaint be made by thee, nor this charge
brought against any of the Family more immediately concerned in thy late
afflicting Providence that did befall all of them.

CHAP. III. Want of Sorrow blameable. Conclusions premised.
IT being made manifest that the Apostle allows, and takes it for granted,
that sorrow for those that are fallen asleep may be, should be in those that do
survive, for two Reasons I will study Answers to these Three Questions in this
case, in so many Uses to be made.

1. For my own sake, and the sake of my Children, that when we hear, we may
sorrow, and Natural Affections spurs us on thereto, we may take heed of sinning
in our sorrow, and may turn our Natural sorrow to our Spiritual advantage; that
in much sorrow we might not be defective in our sorrow, nor sorrow with sorrows
displeasing to God.

2. For your sakes, because our case will be shortly yours; and you may be to
seek how to govern your sorrows, as we are at present put to it to study and
pray, how we ought to rule and manage ours. And for both you and us, because it
is a subject I have not read of, and I suppose, you seldom hear: The Theme of
moderating our sorrow for the dead is more usual and ordinary, and an Use of
Consolation for the comforting of the Living at the Burial of their Dead, is
more frequent in Funeral Discourses. And tho the Natural Affections of many
need rather a Bridle to hold them in, than a Spur to put them forwards, yet it
cannot be denied, that some have so little sense and feeling of the death of
near Relations, that they are a shame to Humane Nature; or if they do sorrow
and mourn, it is with a sinful, passionate, vexatious, but not with a right and
kindly sorrow.

Quest. I. What are the Aggravations of defect or want of sorrow for our Dead?
In an Use of Reproof.

Quest. II. When is our sorrowing for our Dead kindly and pleasing unto God?
and when turbulent Passion, a mere vexation of Spirit, and provoking to God? In
an Use of Examination of our selves concerning our sorrow.

Quest. III. When is our sorrow Spiritually defective, when it is naturally
abundant? Or when it is too little as we are Christians, when it is never so
much as we are Men? In an Use of Caution.

USE I. Tho some are to be blamed for sorrowing too much for the dead, yet it
cannot be denied but that there are those that are weary of their Relations
while they live, wish they were dead, and rather please themselves because they
are eased of them by death, than sorrow because they are dead. The death of a
Child, of a Wife, of an Husband, of a Father or Mother is an heavy stroke; and
as some lay it too much to heart, and mourn as if they had no Grace to moderate
their sorrow; so some make so light of it, as if they had no natural Affection
to move them to mourn on such a mournful occasion. O Lord, are not thine Eyes
upon the Truth? thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved, Jer. 5.3.
These turn not to the Lord that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of
Hosts, Isa. 9.13. But to prevent mistakes, misinterpretations and
misapplications, I judge it necessary to premise these Conclusions.

1. Sorrow for the Dead, as such, is no special Grace; nor as such, and in it
self considered, acceptable unto God; because it has been, and may be in
Heathens, as much as in Christians.

2. In this Discourse, sorrow for the Dead is not to be separated from a sense
of Gods afflicting Hand, which should be in Christians more than in Heathens. A
Sparrow falls not to the ground, nor a Body to the Grave without God's Hand,
which we should mind.

3. Tho sorrow for the Dead, as such, be no Grace, yet it becomes Christians,
and should be their care so to exercise their Grace in and about this sorrow,
that their sorrow might not be provoking, but pleasing unto God. Many Graces in
our sorrow are to be drawn into Act, as our Faith and Hope concerning their
Resurrection to Eternal Glorious Life: Patience under his Rod, Love to God, tho
he does afflict us, Blessing God when he takes from us, as well as when he
gives to us; and thankfulness to God for his Mercy and Grace to our departed
Friends for their preparation for death, and his assistance in inabling them to
conquer the fears of death, for the happy End that they did make, and rejoicing
in God for the receiving of their Souls to the Mansions in our Fathers House;
sorrow for the dead, that is no Grace, mixed with the Actings of these Graces,
and regulated by them, is more becoming Christians, than when it is alone, and
separated from them.

4. Tho Loss of Relations befalls none but such as have sinned, and thereby
made a forfeiture of their Lives; yet the death of Relations might not be
inflicted for any Sin committed by the Survivors beyond the Case of others that
have their Relations yet continued with them. Job had seven Sons and three
Daughters in one day removed by a strange and sudden Death, and yet he had this
Testimony from God himself, that he was a perfect and an upright Man, and one
that feared God, such a one that there was nor such another, Job 1.8, 18, 19.
Tho we have many Humane Infirmities come to our Thoughts after their Death,
which being bewailed, for Christ's sake shall be pardoned; yet when no Sin above
Saints in an imperfect state, or no Conscience-wounding, wasting Sin; or but
what is common to the good, and is too often found in the best Men, upon
serious search, under such a Loss, has been committed by them when joined in
Life, the Loss is more easily born, than when some aggravated Sin remembered,
after they are parted by death, and proves the sting of that Affliction.
Therefore be advised, to live in Love with them, discharging carefully and
constantly all Relative Duties in Life, that you may part with less stinging
sorrow, and more quieting comfort; whoever in the Family be first taken from
the rest by death. It will be no small Comfort to the Surviving when the dying
Relation shall give them thanks for all their Love to them while they lived
with them, and as great a Terror to those whose Consciences are not past
feeling, if they leave a complaint behind them on a dying Bed; My Husband to me
has been a bitter Husband; or my Child to me has been a disobedient Child,
and a grief unto my Heart; or if they do not, if an awakened, reflecting,
accusing Conscience does, will cause sorrow at parting; and when their Bodies
are consuming in their Graves, will be filling and loading your Hearts with
griping grief.

5. Persons might be filled with sorrow at the death of Relations, when it is
not for their death, but for their own Self-interest in the World. As when a
Man had an Hundred Pound per Annum by the Life of his Wife, and loved the
Estate more than her, does sorrow for the loss of his Wife upon no other
account, but because by the loss of her he lost so much of the World. Such
selfish sorrow as this, is base, and might be in those that have no right
sorrow for their dead.

6. Sorrow for the Dead upon Spiritual Reasons, because we are deprived of the
Spiritual Good, we might have got by their continued Life, or are made more
incapable of doing good by their death, tho it relate to our selves, is to be
cherished, but the want of such sorrow is to be reproved.

7. Whether we sorrow, or not sorrow for our dead, is easily known by our
selves. Such as do, need not apply this reproof to themselves, nor be offended
at it: Such as do not, should take it to themselves, for they are to be
reproved, tho they be offended. We must have the Tongue of Christian Preachers,
tho some Hearers have not the Natural Affections of Heathen men.

8. Whether the death of Relations be a Punishment to some, or a Chastisement
to others that remain alive, a Penal Evil, or a Correcting, Trying, (since it
is a Smarting) Rod, all should have such a sense of Gods Hand, as to produce
feeling sorrow in their Hearts; want of sorrow under both, is a Sin thus
aggravated.

CHAP. IV. Ten Aggravations of Want of Sorrow for our Dead.
1. WAnt of sorrow, and sense of Gods Afflicting Hand, is not Patience but
Stupidity; not Submission but Rebellion; not Heroical Fortitude of Mind, but a
Sottishness of Spirit. Is that Patience, when you feel no smart or suffering?
Is that Submission to his Will, when you have no feeling of his Rod? Is it
patient yielding to his Hand, when you have no sense of the smart of the Rod
that by his Hand is laid upon you? Submission in this case has these
Requisites in it. (1.) A desire of the continuance of the Relation, before it
was taken from us. (2.) A thankfulness of Heart, if God would have continued
the Relation to us. (3.) A sense of the Loss that has befallen us. (4.) A
reckoning of all the Inconveniences, and discomfort of our Lives by their
removal by Death; and yet, (5.) A quieting of our Hearts under God's dealings
with us in taking them away from us; because it was his Will in his Wisdom so
to do unto us. But if you did not desire their continuance; but rather, for
Carnal, Worldly, Selfish Ends, their removal; could not have been thankful for
their Life, but secretly glad of their Death, still for sinful, selfish Ends,
have no sense of the Loss, nor did esteem it a Loss, but some Advantage, and
please your selves with reckoning the conveniences you have by their Death;
will you blind the World, or your selves, by calling your unsensibleness of
Gods Hand in their Death, a submitting to the Hand and Will of God? However,
take heed, that you go not about to impose upon God himself the Searcher of
your Hearts, with such a blind as this is. When you have such love unto, and
care of, and desire after the continuance of your Children ^s Job had, and such
a sense of their Death, as he, of his, and yet carry it, as he did, we will
call yours a submission, as his was, Job 1, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. so (...) sense
and sorrow under God's Afflicting s^^nd in this kind, is hardness of Heart,
when such a lash can make no print, nor impression of the Rod: It is
stiffneckedness when such a burden will not make it bow. It is
stout-heartednes^ against God, when such a severe stroke does not make you
relent, and melt, and yield to him.

2. It is accompanied with the Loss of that Spiritual good which y^u should
have got by such an Afflction; so in it self, tho by you not looked upon to be
so. When you are corrected, should not you be reformed? When you are scourged,
should you not be amended? When i^ the Furnace, should not you be purified?
When in the School of Affliction, should not you learn the Lessons there to be
taught? Is all this, or any of this like to be, when you make light of Gods
heavy Hand in the death of your near relations? And do not you make light of
it, when you have no sorrow for the stroke, nor sense of the Wound inflicted by
it? The loss of a Relation is a great loss, but the loss of a sanctified
Improvement of it for your Spiritual and Eternal good, is a greater loss,
because the one might be a Penal Evil, the other is a Sinful Evil. The one an
Affliction, the other a Transgression; the one is a stroke of God upon you, the
other is a Sin in you against God. Jer. 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but they
have not grieved; thou h st consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction: they have made their faces harder than a rock, they have refused to
return. The death of your Child, of your Father, Mother, Wife, Husband, should
have been improved so, as to have be^n the death of your Sins, but behold they
are dead, and your Sins alive; they are rotting in their Graves, and your Sins
are still raging and ruling in your Hearts.

3. Want of Sorrow from the want of the sense of Gods ^fflicting Hand in this
case, argues want of the sense of Sin, that did procure it, of Gods displeasure
that did inflict it, and hinders your Repentance for those Sins, and humbling
your self under the Hand of a displeased God. Tho the death of Relations might
not always be for the Sins of those that do survive, yet sometimes it is: Tho
God may not always take them away in displeasure to those that remain, yet
sometimes he does: and thus it may be with those that are in a state of Grace;
as with David, 2 Samuel 12.14. Howbeit, because by this deed thou have given
great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is
born unto thee, shall surely die. Should not you then search and enquire, What
is my Sin? And what is my offense? And wherein have I displeased God? Have I
sinned, and shall I not sorrow for my Sin? Is God displeased, and shall I not
seek to have him pacified? Is my Relation broken by my Sin, and shall not my
Heart be broken for my Sin? Or do I make light of the death of my Father, or
Mother, Husband, Wife, or Child, and of my Sin, and God's displeasure too? Or
can I have any sorrow for the Cause, when I have no sorrow for the Effect: Tho
many might have sorrow for the Effect, when they have no sorrow for the Cause
thereof? Many might be full of sorrow for the death of Relations, that have no
sorrow for the Sin for which God by death did take them away from them that yet
do liv^; but can a Man have sorrow for the Sin, and for Gods displeasure for
that Sin, that has no sorrow for the death of the Person, caused by the Sin of
the Living? Can you grieve, or repent of the Sin that caused the death, and not
be grieved, nor sorrow for such of your dead? Surely this should make you
sorrow for your dead, more than others, that by their Sin did not hasten their
death, saying, Oh what have I done! What have I done! Have I sinned my Child
into his Grave! Did I sin against God, and has God taken away my Child, my
Father, my Mother, my Wife, my Husband from me, for my Sin? Have I shortened
their days, and provoked God to cut in two the Thread of their Lives? And so
sinned against a Living God, that cannot die, and against my Living Relations,
which for my Sin, now are dead. This would cause sorrow upon sorrow, when many
have cause to sorrow for both, do yet sorrow for neither. Indeed God was
displeased with David for his Sin, and for his Sin his Child did die, and yet
after the Child's death we do nor read he sorrowed for the Child that died for
his Sin, with such sorrow that he did for Absalom that died in his own Sin. But
is your Case and David's alike? He sorrowed for his Sin, and humbled himself
for his Sin, and fasted and prayed with weeping Tears to God, but did you do
so? He obtained the pardon of his Sin, but have you also? Is it not to be
questioned when you have no sorrow for Sin, nor God's displeasure, nor the
dead, when your Case (which is not the case of all) was such, that one did
cause the other.

4. Want of Sorrow for the dead taken from them, from want of sense of God's
hand upon them, and against them, argues, That they are spiritually Blind, and
cannot see; spiritually Deaf, and cannot hear; spiritually Benumbed, and cannot
feel. When your living fall down dead, God's hand is lifted up, and you do not
see. You see them fall into the Grave under your fe^t, but you do not see the
hand of God lifted up over your head. Isa. 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted
up, they will not see. When your living Relations do dye, there is Gods rod
upon you, and it has a Voice, a loud, a sh^ill, and doleful crying Voice; but
you do not h^ar, did I say, a Rod? Nay, God has been in your House with his
Ax, hewing down your Living, lopping off the Children, as so many Branches;
cutting off the Father, or the Mother, or both, and plucking up the Family by
the Roots, and yet you do not hear the sound of the Rod, nor of the Ax, nor
consider who it is that did appoint both. When your Relations dye, it is a
stroke of God upon your selves; he kills them, and smitteth you, and yet you
have no feeling of his blow. What! are the living dead, while they do live? Are
the living become like unto their dead? Having eyes, but do not see; and ears,
but do not hear; and flesh, but cannot feel? You stand before them, but they do
not see you; you call to them, but they do not hear you; you strip them, and
put on them their Grave-clothes, and remove them down your Stairs, and carry
them from your House to their Lodging-dust, and let them down into the pit, and
all this while they do not feel you. So are you toward God, as they toward
you. God, a displeased God, is come into your House, into your Chamber, but you
do not see him, nor his anger: He calls to you by your Dead that lies before
you, but you do not hear his Voice: He is punishing, correcting of you, but you
do not feel the smart of his stroke. Behold, the dead burying their dead! men
spiritually dead, burying their naturally dead. The Lifeless corpse do not
sorrow that they are let down into the Grave; and the Liseless-living (living a
Life of Nature, but not a Life of Grace, not having the Sense of Christians,
nor of Men, of the death of their dead, nor of Sin, nor of God's displeasure)
do not mourn to see them lodged th^re.

5. Want of Sorrow in this case, from want of sense of God's hand that brought
you into it, argues, That you wanted love to them, and a prizing, and a valuing
of them. Love your Money, and do not sorrow when you lose it. Love your Health
and Ease, and do not grieve when you want it in sickness and in pain. Will you
say you cannot? How did you love your Child when living, if you cannot sorrow
for its Death? How did you love, and prize, and value the Com^ (...) ^f Father
or Mother, Husband or (...) live without Sor^ (...) them? If Sor^ (...) of what
was be^ (...) bear some (...) of Lov^, then how (...) was the love to them when
living, when th^re is no sorrow for them when dead? The s^ying of a poor Man,
seeing a rich Man burying his Child, told me, was this, It Is the privilege of
the rich to bury their Children, when the poor must keep theirs. Are not
Children, Husbands, Wives, Fathers, Mothers, a burden to such that look upon it
as a Privilege that they may dye, that they may be buried? What hearts have
they that do not sorrow for their dead, when want of Sorrow argues they wanted
love, and yet the thoughts of their want of form^r love to them, does not fill
them with present Sorrow? But something to this has been said before.

6. Want of Sorrow in this Case, argues, A contemning, and a despising of the
afflicting hand of God. When God gave you a good Husband, or Wife, or Parents,
or Childr^n, and you did not prize them when you had them, this was a despising
of Gods merciful and good Hand unto you; when God took them from you by death,
you laid it not to heart; this is a despising of the chastening Hand of God
upon you. When living, you were not thankful; when dead, you were not
sorrowful; in the one, you despised his love; in the other, you despised his
anger: As if you should say, Let God do what he will, you will despise all his
doings. God's command to Man, is this, Heb. 12.5. Despise not the chastening of
the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him. One man despises that rebuke
from God, which another is ready to sink under: One bears it without feeling of
it, when another faints at the smarting of it. When it is a small Affliction, a
man despises it, this is a light thing, and easily born. When it is a great
Affliction, man faints because of it, saying, No man's Affliction like to
mine; no man's Sorrow like to mine; my Flesh fails, my Strength fails, my
Heart and Spirit fail, for this is grievous to be born; but behold the Man we
are speaking of, is under a great Affliction, (for such is the loss of a near
and good Relation) and yet being not sensible, despises that which another
finds heavy to bear.

7. Want of Sorrow in this case, argues, a man to be pred^min^ntly a selfish
man: To have love to, or care of none but himself. What if a Child dye, so long
as he himself does live? What if a Father or Mother dye, while he himself does
live? And yet, which is more, what if a Wife be laid under ground among the
dead, so he himself has Life and Strength to walk above ground among the
living? He can set the comfort of his own Life a^^^nst all Sorrow, tho he see
all in his Fa^^ly removed by Death; and tho he be l^f^ a^^ alone, it is all one
to him, for himse^^ alone is all to him. It was fitter for such a man to have
lived alone in some Cav^rn of the Earth, than to have been troubled with Wife,
or Children, whom he can part with without any trouble to himself.

8. This w^nt of Sorrow in the ^xpl^^^ed Sense, is a prov^cation to God to
afflict (...) more and more, till he is sensible of the Ass^^ (...), and of the
hand that laid it on God ^e^^ (...) one Child by Death, and you ^ave ^o sens os
the breach made in your House, nor sorro^ for it; you do not feel the smarting
(...). God removes a second, and yet y^u do not f^^l it; God proceeds from a
Child to a Wife, and yet you do not feel it; n^xt he comes unto your sels, and
then you feel, and lays you dead also, and makes you as to your Body, till the
Resurrection, to be past feeling.

9. Want of Sorrow in this Case, makes you worse than many Heathens. They
sorrow too much, and you too little. They are excessive; the Man called
Christian is defective in his Sorrow. They act more like men; the Christian (so
called) worse than the Bruits, who show their Sense and Sorrow when deprived of
their young.

10. Want of Sorrow in this Case, fills Funerals with Dissemblers; and they
follow the Corpse acting the Hypocrite openly in the Streets; he walks with
Mourning on his Head, and Back, and Hands, without mourning in his Heart.
Others think he sorrows, but he knows he does not, and yet he pretends he does;
if People knew him, as he knows himself, would say, either get a mourning
Heart, or put off your mourning Robes. If I have said in your Judgment too much
upon the want of Sorrow, bear with me, for I have said it out of a detestation
in my heart of such, more than brutish Temper in many toward their deceased
Relations, worthy to be lamented, when yet the better they were, by some are
sorrowed for the less. If you think there are none guilty in this Case, it is a
sign you are not much acquainted with People in the World.

CHAP. V. Resolves this Question: When is our Sorrow for our Dead, kindly and
pleasing unto God? and when a turbulent Passion, and vexation of Spirit, and
provoking to God?
USE II. IF your hearts be filled with Sorrow for your Dead, and with a Sense
of God's hand upon you; examine your Sorrow, what manner of Sorrow it is: For
Sorrow, merely as Sorrow, I have not been pleading for, nor reproving the want
of, under such a smarting Dispensation of Divine Providence; which may be the
better managed by resolving the second Question propounded, which is this, When
is our Sorrow for the Dead, kindly and pleasing unto God? And when a turbulent
Passion, a v^xation of Spirit, and provoking to God?

Ans. 1. Kindly Sorrow for our Dead, and pleasing unto God, is joined with
lively Prayer. What is all our weeping for them in the Grave, without praying
to God in Heaven? What is all our Lamentation for them without Supplication to
God? And the more kindly your Sorrow is, the more your Heart will relent, and
melt, and the more servent your Spirit in Prayer will be. While they were in
their Health with you, it may be you tendered up Sick prayers to God; when they
did live, your Prayers were dead, and dull, and slothful Prayers; when they
were waking with you, you prayed with them in a drowsy, sleepy manner; when God
roused you by their Death, you prayed after with more Life; when they fell
asleep, God awaked you to more earnest and importunate Pleadings with him at
the Throne of Grace. If fear, lest Mother and Children should be put to death
by Esau, moved Jacob to mix his fearing and sorrowing, with Prayer and
Wrestling; should not feeling of the stroke of Death upon a Mother, a Wife, a
Child, put us on to the like praying to, and pleading with God? If he, when his
case only was, it may be they must die, now should not we, when we must say,
He, or she is already dead? If he did it to preserve life, may not we for the
loss of their Life? He for the good of Preservation, we under the sense of our
Af^l ction. Genesis 32.9, 10, 11, 24, 25, 26. Hos. 12.4. He wept and made
supplication to him. Job lost ten Children in one day; to express his Sorrow,
he rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground; all
which he did not under all his former losses, till the sad tidings of the Death
of his Children were brought unto him: And in all this great Sorrow, what did
he do? He worshipped, he bowed down before God, and gave Divine Worship unto
him by Prayer and Praise. Job 1.19, 20, 21. in all this he pleased God, for in
all this he sinned not, ver. 22. What if we weep night and day, but pray not
neither night nor day? What if we pour out our Tears, but do not pour out a
Prayer? Could we weep our selves blind, kill our selves with Sorrow, or rent
our Garments, and wring our Hands, and tear our Hair, and never Worship, all
this is exorbitant Sorrow, turbulent Passion; neither profitable to our selves,
nor pleasing to God, nor advantagi^us to the Dead. Some Persons when one lies
dead in the House, tho on a Lord's day will stay at home and weep, but not go
out and worship God in Holy Duties; but when you have any dead, it is better
drop your Tears into God's Bottle, than with them wash your own Faces, or wet
your Hankerchief from such turbulent Sorrow.

Ans. 2. Kindly Sorrow in this Case will usher in Sorrow for our Sin,
especially such Sins as at such a time come to our Thoughts, relating to the
Persons w^ose Death we mourn for; as neglect of our Duty to them, unjust and
ungrounded grieving of them, or any sinful and unsuitable Carriage toward them,
when they lived with us. As, do I mourn for the dead Corpse, I will shed my
Tears for omission of my Duty, for the good of the living Soul. That I did not
instruct them, nor did I pray with them, nor for them; did not teach them how
to live, nor help them to prepare to die. When Nathan came to David, his Child
died; when David was convinced of his Sin, for which his Child did dye, David
turns his Sorrow for his dead Child, into Sorrow for his Sin; and laments, and
weeps, and wails for the one, much more than for the other. Psalm 51. Title and
Psalm compared. So you, Shall I lament my dead child, and not my dead heart?
shall I shed tears because it is under the power of natural Death, and have not
I one tear to drop, because my Soul is under the power of spiritual Death? Do I
look upon its pale Face, and feel its cold Flesh, and thereby pierce my self
through with many and bitter Sorrows? And do I feel my own cold Affections to
God and Christ, and all that is good? Do I see the deformity of my Soul by
reason of Sin, and am I more loathsome in the sight of a pure and holy God, by
reason of my sin, and shall I be grieved more for the lesser than the greater
evil? Is it not sin that has captivated my Soul, worse than Death that has
taken my Wife, or Husband, my Father and Mother, and carry them Prisoners to
the Grave? O my Soul! correct thy Sorrow, and turn the stream of thy Tears into
another Channel; abate thy Sorrow for the Dead, and increase thy Sorrow for thy
Sin. If thou Sorrow never so much, thy Dead shall live here with thee no more;
but if thou Sorrow not for thy Sin, thou must be shut out from living with God
for evermore. Natural Sorrow had almost swallowed me up; and for want of
Spiritual Sorrow I am in danger of being cast down into Eternal Misery.
Therefore, tho I will sorrow for my Dead, I will sorrow more for my Sins: The
loss of God, and Christ, and Heaven by my Sin, will be a greater loss, than the
loss of my dearest Relation by Death, infinitely greater: The one by my Natural
sorrow cannot be recovered; the other by Penitent-gospel-sorrow may be
prevented; therefore while I do the one, I will take special care that the
other be not left undone.

But if your Sorrow be only turbulent Passion, you add sin to sin in your
Sorrow. And instead of sorrowing for former Sins, you will be falling into new,
and sorrow neither for new nor old. You will vent your Passion by the actings
of Corruptions, saying, Oh, that I had never been born! Since my Relation is
dead! Oh, that I might also dye! God has dealt with none so bitterly, as he
has dealt with me. My Husband dead! H^w shall I be maintained? My Father and
Mother dead! and I not disposed of in the World; who is there to take care of
me? My Wise dead! My bosem Companion dead! the comfort of my Life fallen into
the Grave? When I am sick, and in danger of Death, who have I to take care of
me, now my meetest help is gone? How! is this your sorrowing for your Dead? Do
you thus mingle your Sin with your Tears, and your Corruption with your
Lamentation? If your Father, or Mother, or both be dead, in your Passion and
turbulent Sorrow, do you forget that God does live? If your Husband be dead,
cannot God provide for you without him, that did provide for you by him? If
Children dye, is not God more to you than many Children? If your Wife be taken
from you, cannot God help as much as such a Creature did, or could to bear your
Burdens and Afflictions; cannot he provide or prevent? Oh, let us bridle our
turbulent Sorrows, and vexatious Passions, lest they hurry us from God, and
cause us to yield to great Temptations.

Ans. 3. Kindly Sorrow for our Dead will move us to seek for relief and support
in a regular way, dispose us to r^ceive Divine Impressions by the Word and
Spirit of God, and belief of the great Articles of Faith beyond the reach of
Reason, Lazarus was dead; Mary and Martha mourned, their Hearts were filled
with Sorrow, their Eyes with Tears, and their Mouths with Lamentations. What
did they do? Sit still and feed their Sorrow? Give place to Grief, and yield
unto dejection and despondency of Spirit? Or seek out for Counsel and Direction
in their sorrowful Circumstances? It was told Martha, Christ was coming; Is
Christ coming? I shall have some help from him; he will teach me, and instruct
me. He will say, and do something for my succor and support. Wherefore as soon
as she heard that Jesus was coming, she did not stay till he came, but
immediately went out meet to him: If Christ be coming to her, she will be going
to Christ. When she met with him with Tears, declared her Sorrow, and the
Ground and Reason of it; Lord, my Brother is dead, but if thou had been here,
he had not died. What Christ said to her, she believed and received, and
declares her Faith concerning the Resurrection of the Dead at the last day,
concerning the Power and Will of God to give to Christ whatsoever he should ask
of him: Concerning his Person, that he was the Christ, the Son of God, that was
to come into the World. When she had thus discoursed with Christ, she returns
to her Mourning Sister Mary, saying, The Master is come, and calls for thee.
As soon as she heard that Christ was near, she rose up hastily to go out of the
Town to meet him also, falls down at his feet, makes known to him the Death of
her Brother, and her Faith in his Power; That if he had been present, he could
and would have prevented his Death; for she said, If thou had been here, my
brother had not died. Christ asked, Where have you laid him; they and the Jews
that mourned with them, entreated him to go unto his Grave, saying, Lord, come
and see. Jesus comes to the Grave, commands the Stone that lay upon it to be
taken away. Martha obj^cts, His Body is corrupted, for he has been dead four
days. Christ replies, Did not I tell thee, if thou would beli^ve, thou
should see the power of God. They that wept and mourned, obeyed, and did as
Christ commanded. His words made an Impression upon them, and they yi^ld
Obedience to him, and had Faith in him, even to and for the raising of the
Dead. John 11.19, to 45. Kindly Sorrow leaves room for Faith and Obedience;
Faith and Obedience keeps Sorrow from degenerating into a turbulenc Passion,
which is nourished by Unbelief and Disobedience; and in this Sorrow men can
deride what they should believe. Luke 8.49. Jairus his Daughter was dead. 52.
They wept and bewailed her. Christ said, Weep not, she is not dead, but
sleeps. 53. They laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. But Christ
by his call and command to arise, brought her Soul into her again, to the
astonishment of the Father, and the Mother of the Maiden, 54, 55, 56. who in
their kindly Sorrow did believe, what others in their turbulent Passion did
deride.

Tho we have not Christ visibly, corporally present with us in our Sorrow to go
unto, yet we have his Word to go unto, and his Ministers to go unto, and to
hear the words of Christ opened and applied to us by his Servants, and under
such an Affliction, what Impressions might be made under a Sermon, when you
hear of Sin, the evil of it, the aggravations of it, the bitter effects of it;
how will you when Sorrow is already working, be inclined, and disposed to
sorrow for your Sin? The word of God does tell me, Sin is bitter, and I do find
it so. That Sin brought in Death, and I am mourning for such doings of Death by
reason of Sin. That the Life of man is short, a vapor, a shadow, and quickly
gone, and I do find i^ so; what else mean these Tears that I do shed for my
departed Friend? What else does mean this Sorrow in my Breast for my deceased
Relation, that the other day was in my Bosom, but now in the Bowels of the Earth?
When you are pressed to prepare for your own Death, by the Necessity and
Advantage of such holy Preparations, you heart will more readily yield now than
at another time, when this will be the Language of your Heart, Speak Lord, and
I will hear; make known my duty, and I will obey.

Ans. 4. In ki^dly Sorrow for the dead, the heart is much quieted by returns of
prayers made by God, to the Requests that in our Sorrow we made to him. When we
prayed while they lived; and we prayed that they might longer live, if our
Prayers were consistent with his purpose, or that by his Grace and Spirit he
would help them to dye prepared, and to make an happy and comfortable end, and
give us grounds of hope, that if they may not live with us on Earth, they
should live with him in Heaven. That if God would take them from us, he would
take them to himself; out of ours, into Abraham 's Bosom: The one he did deny,
which we thought would have been good for us that live; the other he did grant,
which in sober Reason, and in a composed Mind, we cannot but judge to be better
for them; they did dye contrary to our prayers; they did dye with peace, and
comfort, and hope of Heaven, according to our prayers, in our kindly Sorrow for
them when dead; the Heart is much quieted, the Mind composed; we grive, but are
sedate; we Mourn, but the Spirit is calm within; we Sorrow with bitter sorrow,
but our Sorrow is sweetened, that when God did deny our prayers, he did hear our
prayers; when he denied them in one kind, he heard them in another; which in
his Wisdom he saw best, for the Persons prayed for. Thus David praying, and
fasting, and mourning for his Child when Sick, that it might live, or be saved,
if it died, when it was dead; his heart was quiet, in hopes that his Prayers
were heard, that tho the Body was for the Grave, yet the Soul was for Heaven,
whither he also hoped he himself should go to it.

So after the Relation is dead, we go and pray against the Workings of
Corruption by reason of God's Dispensation, that we might not murmur, nor
repine, nor charge God foolishly for his dealings with us; we find Sin
stirring, we cry to God, and they are crushed; we feel Temptations assaulting
of us, we call to Heaven s^t help to resist them, and they are repelled; we are
sensible of our own weakness with Patience, and due Submission to bear so great
a Trial; God by his Grace comes and makes it more easy than we thought it
could have been; our sorrow for our dead, being kindly sorrow, gives place to
our minding of these returns of Prayer; that in my sorrow, I have so much
leisure for consideration, as to observe and say, Tho God has taken away my
dear Relation, for whom I prayed, and therefore do sorrow; yet he has taken
away my S^n, and taken ^own the power of it, against which I prayed, t^a^ in my
sorrow I might not sin, and my sorrow shall not s^ far blind me, that I should
not s^e what at my Prayers God has done for me: He has taken my Relation from
me, but I have prayed he would not take away himself, nor his quickening Spirit,
nor the sense of his Love, and he has not; the Creature is gone from me, but
God continues with me; the one I shall see no more in this World, but God I
often since have conversed with, and he has showed his Love to me, and such
returns must quiet my Heart in the time of my grief and sorrow.

But turbulent sorrow, not merely natural, but becoming Vicious and Exorbitant
by the workings of Corrupt Nature, stirred up by the grievousness of our
Affl^ction, hinders the exercise of Grace, and blind^ us that we cannot see,
nay, makes us to deny that God does hear our Prayers (though he does) while our
Affliction does remain. Job 9.16. If I had called, and he had answered me, yet
would I not believe that he had hearkened to my voice. God takes a Mercy from
you, and yet he gives demonstrations of his Love unto you; but in your
turbulent sorrow you say, You will not believe that God is reconciled to you,
you will not believe but his anger and displ^asure is kindled, and burns
against you. He he^rs your Prayers, but you cannot see it, and you will not
believe it. This is sorrow, not of mere but of corrupt Nature.

Ans. 5. In kindly sorrow for our dead, there will be an harkening to, and a
receiving of Alleviations of our sorrow propounded to us by men, upon grounds
of Reason and Religion. Arguments for ^^^^gating of our g^^^f from the Promises
of God, from the common case of all Men, even most beloved of God, that they
have died, as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Moses, Aaron and Samuel, the Prophets,
Apostles, and all believing Primitive Christians, and more still must: From the
happy state of those that die in the Lord, the Evils they are delivered from,
the Good they are possessed of, the Joys they are filled with, the Holy,
Heavenly Work they are employed in, will find Entertainment with you, and will
be hearkened to, and considered by you. But turbulent Passions of corrupt
Nature will put by all that tends to the asswaging of it, after all Arguments
from Reason, and all Topics from Religion, will refuse to be comforted. Thus
Jacob's sorrow for Joseph, when he supposed he was dead, was too Exorbitant,
when all his Sons, and all his Daughters rose up to comfort him, and he refused
to be comsorted. When if they had not spoken one word of Comfort to him, the
very sight of so many Sons and Daughters living might have assuaged his sorrow
for one (supposed to be) dead. Genesis 37.33, 34, 35. So Rachel, Jer. 31.15. A
voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for
her children, refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not.

A^s. 6. In kindly sorrow for our dead, we shall be more ready to justify God
in his dealings with us, and rather accuse our selves than him, and say, The
Lord is righteous in his ways, and holy in all his works: I have sinned, but he
is just; I am bad, but he is good; and though I think his Hand is heavy upon
me, yet he has laid less upon me than mine I^iquities have deserved: Has he
laid my Relations in the Grave? he might have lodged me in Hell. Has he denied
longer Life to one I could have wished might have longer lived? he might deny
to me Eternal Life. Has he bereaved me of the Comforts of a Creature? he might
deny me all the Comforts of his Spirit. Does Natural Affection move me to mourn
for my Loss? so Natural Reason teaches me, that God herein has done me no
wrong, because all is his own, in that he is the Maker of all; and the Light of
Nature does instruct me, God might give or take away whatsoever is his own, and
I may not call him to an account; saying to him, What do thou, or why have
thou done so? And whilst my sorrow is not yet ris^n to be tu^bulent, I have
leisure to look what Scripture says, and to see what the light of Grace does
show. That God has a right to mine, because he had redeemed them with his
Blood, and sanctified them by his Grace and Spirit, and thereby set the Mark
and Character of his own upon them; and what had I to do to desire to keep his
own with me, when he had a purpose to call them, and take them home unto
himself? If I had forf^ited the Mercy of their staying with me, God retained
his right to dispose of them at his pleasure; therefore tho I have much to say
against my self, I have nothing to say against God, or his proceedings with me,
in what he has done unto me, or taken from me.

But when our sorrow comes to be turbulent Passion, we mu^mur and think we do
well; we ^ep^^e, and justify our evil Act; and Sorrow, and think we do well to
sorrow on till it break over all Banks and Bounds of Mod^ration, like Jonah,
when God himself did ask him, Do thou well to be angry? Answered yes, I do
well to be angry even to the death? Jon. 4.9. In this case such a one being
asked, do you well to sorrow thus, when you see God has done his holy Will;
And all your sorrow is unprofitable to the dead, and hurtful to your self? in
Excess of passionate sorrow does reply, Yes, I do well to sorrow even unto
death: God has afflicted me, and I am afflicted, and I am sorrowful, and will
be so. Will you? But pray you take he^d what thoughts you have of God the mean
while, for in turbulent sorrow its hard not to have hard and unworthy Thoughts
of God, and to justify him in the midst of vexing sorrows.

Ans. 7. In kindly sorrow for our dead, our Eyes are more clear to see our
Mercies in our Affliction, and what God continues to us, as well as what he
takes away from us. So when Children thus mourn for their dead Mother, they
can see Mercy in a Living Father; or for a Father taken from them by death, can
read (tho with Tears in their Eyes), God's sparing Mercy in continuing their
Mother. Parents mourning for the death of one Child, can take notice of the
goodness of God in preserving the rest from the Jaws of Death, and say, Where
God has taken away one, he might have taken two; where two, he might have
taken all; he has taken away some, and therefore we sorrow under his heavy
hand, but yet he has pleased to leave more with us, than he has removed from
us, and therefore in our Affliction come upon us, we can see God's Mercy to us;
or if he has taken more than he has left; yet we have one still, and in our
sorrow for our dead, we can see much Mercy in one Child that does Live.

But when our sorrow for our dead comes to be turbulent, and the Actings of
corrupt Affections, the sense of the Less of one Relation takes away all
thankfulness for, and content in all the r^st. Parents setting their Hearts
upon one Child more than all the r^st; and the Love they had to that one, did
equal the Love to all the other, they loving that most, and too much; God
singles that out first for a Prisoner of Death, and then the remaining can
scarce be called M^rcies; if moved to mitigate their sorrow for the one that is
dead, by the sight of those that live, say, What tell you us of these, when the
other is gone? What are these, tho with us, when the other is taken away from
us? Thus Jacob could t^ke no comfort from all his Sons and Da^ghters, when he
supposed his Son Joseph was d^ad, Genesis 37.33, 34, 35. But correct your
turbulent ^orro^, which hinders the sig^t of ^^^d'^ Mercy in them tha^ live,
l^st he by death remove them also, and make you groan, and sigh and s^b f^r
them when dead, which yo^ could see no Mercy in, because one did die before.

Ans. 8. In kindly sorrow for our dead, we can better sympathize with others
exercised with the like dealings of God. Many can sorrow for their own dead,
that are not affected with the death of the Relations of others; especially
such as are turbulently sorrowful for their own. Vexing Passion in our selves
is joined with least compassion to others; as we narrow our Love too much to
our selves; and where Self-love is too much, Love to others is the less or
none; so the sorrow for the Evils that befall our selves, when vexatious and
corroding, is less or none, for the Afflictions that come upon others. They
think their Tears are few enough to express their own sorrows, or too precious
to be wasted for the sorrows of others: These are more hard-hearted than Jews,
who wept with Mary and Martha for their d^ceased Brother.

Ans. 9. In kindly sorrow for our dead we shall be more mindful of our own
Death, and stirred up to greater Care to make Holy Preparations for it. As soon
as David did hear his Child was de^d, h^ said, I must go down to it: When you
sorrow rightly, following your dead to their G^^ve, you will have serious
thoughts of your own. My Wife is gone, and I shall shortly follow. My Husband
is dead, and so must I be too. Our Mother is lo^ged in the Dust, and after a
while we must be carried to lie by her; therefore we will so mourn that we may
reserve some Tears of Repentance for our Sin, that as our Bodies must go to her
Body in the Grave, so our Souls may go to her Soul in the highest Heaven.

But turbulent sorrow for the dead is as if they again should never live, and
hinders their thoughts of their own Mortality, as if they should never die.
While they are thinking in how many days they shall Bury their dead, they are
hoping how many years yet they shall live. What turbulent, discomposing,
besotting sorrow is this, that when these Mourners stand and see the Corpse they
mourn over let down into the Grave, cannot see where e're long they themselves
shall be lodged?

Ans. 10. In kindly sorrow for our dead we shall be moved to perform our
Relative Duties with more Tenderness and Kindness, with more Care and Love to
those Relations that yet are with us. When the Mother is dead, the Father must
show more Care than he did before, or did need to do, because their Mother did
much ease him of it. So when the Father is dead, the more the Mother should
take Care accordding to her Capacity. When Father, or Mother, or both are dead,
the natural kindly sorrow for them will dispose their Children as Brothers and
Sisters to discharge their Relative Duties, and live in greater Love than ever.
When Jacob was dead, Joseph mourned, all his Brethren mourned, all went up to
Bury their Father, and at his Burial mourned greatly: After this Joseph and his
Brethren returned into Egypt; they rememb^ing how cruel they had been to
Joseph, said, Now our Father is dead, our Brother will certainly requite us for
all the Evil we did to him; but Jos^ph was but newly come out of the House of
M^urning, and he said, Fear not, I will nourish you and your little ones, and
he comforted them, and spoke kindly to them, Genesis 50.15, 21. Our mourning for
the dead, should end in the mending of our Carriage, and the regulating of our
Affections toward the Living. When we are mou^ning for the loss of one, we
should be seeking the Temporal and Spiritu^l good of the rest that yet are
found with us: When God has made a Breach in our Family, for which we sorrow;
we must be m^king up the Breaches of our Duties, by filling up what before was
wanting. Death has made a br^ach in our Houses, a wide b^each which cannot be
repaired, (for our Dead shall never be restored to us) and Sin has made a
breach in our Comforts by the breach it made in our Duties; the mourning for
the breach by death in those taken from us, should issue in repairing the
breaches in our Duties to those that are continued to us. Do we sorrow much for
them that are dead, whom we loved too much while they did live? Let the
greatness of our sorrow for the one, moderate our Love unto the other. Do we
sorrow for our dead, because we did not Love them with as great a Love as we
should while they were with us; let this sorrow produce due greater Love to
them that do remain: If sorrow for our dead do not mend our faults toward the
Living it is a dead, and fruitless, ineffectual sorrow. The Living should find
some advantage by our sorrow for the dead. Were you froward in your Family
before, and shall not your sorrow meeken your Spirit for time to come? Did not
you take care for the Religious Education of a Child that is dead, and shall
not your sorrow for him, and the neglect of your Duty to him, move you to make
up to the Living what was wanting to the Dead? Did not Children obey their
Father before he died? If they mourn kindly for a dead Father, will they not
yield better Obedience to their Living Mother? And say, Dear and Sorrowful
Mother, we were wanting in our Duty to our Father when he was with us, for
which we are s^rry now he is taken from us, but be not grieved overmuch, and
we will supply the want of our Duty to him, by making up the more to you, as
long as God shall lend yon unto us: We were a grief to him, but we will be a
comfort unto you: We will endeavor to be as good to you as we were bad to him:
On his Dying Bed he did complain of us for our stubborn Carriage toward him,
but, Mother, since you have lost a Loving Husband, and we a tender Father, for
whom you and we do now sorrow, we will carry our selves toward you with that
reverence, obedience and honor to you, that you shall not complain of us on
your Dying Bed as our Father did on his.

CHAP. VI. Resolves this Question; When is our Sorrow for our dead spiritually
defective, tho it be naturally abundant? Or, when is it too little as we are
Christians, be it never so much as we are Men?
USE III. A Caution to the Mourners for their Dead is necessary, because sorrow
as sorrow, or sorrow as great sorrow is not all in this case to be minded, but
how it ought to be regulated, not only as we are Men, but also as we are
Christians. If we sorrow not at all we are unworthy of the name of men, because
without the workings of those natural Affections in the Principle common to all
men. If we sorrow with turbulent Passion, vexatious, fretting Grief, we sorrow
as sinful men; we may sin in our sorrow as well as in the want of it: Which is
worst let the offending judge. If we sorrow as the mere fruit of Natural
Affection, with a kindly sorrow, and not turbulent, we sorrow but as men,
because we do no more than the Human Nature prompts and puts us on to do. But a
greater Task lies upon us as Christians, and to an higher step it becomes us
to ascend in our sorrow, as we have a Principle of Grace higher than all
Principles of Nature; and the Scripture a more perfect Rule to govern our
sorrow by, to purify and refine it, than the Light of Nature is. In the first
Use we spoke to such as for want of sorrow under the Loss of near Relations,
and of sense of God's Afflicting Hand that took them from us, seem not to be
men, while we see them to be men; but below the Rank of men, in the shape of
men. In the second Use we pointed at them that sorrowed as men, with a kindly
sorrow, distinguishing them from those that sorrow as sinful men, with a
turbulent sorrow, vitiated with the Actings of corrupt Nature. In this third
Use we shall speak of sorrow in our present case, not merely as Humane, but as
Christian, and distinguish the one from the other.

Do not think me over-tedious on this Sorrowful Subject, for herein I do not
only consult the helping of my self to bear the Hand of God upon me, and the
searching of my own sorrow, of what kind it is, but the common good of mortal
men, whose case in one House or other, one House or other! In many Houses in
this great City, wherein many Hundreds die every Week, this must be the common
case of many every day. When I sit in my Study, and hear the sound of that
which you call the Passing Bell in the next Parish to us [Cripplegate], Lord,
think I, how many art thou calling to mourn as well as me and mine! And tho you
speak of a Passing Bell in common course of Speech, and have not your H^arts
affected with the hearing of your Ears, yet to me it makes a doleful sound,
while I think it is a Passing Bell; for whither are they passing? their Bodies
from their Houses to their Graves; from the Company of their Friends and
Relations to be Companions of Worms; and their Souls, into Eternity of Joy or
Torment; to God, and Christ, and Holy Angels; or to the Devil and his Angels
for ever; and so pass from us, as no more to return unto us, out of one World
into another, and so pass from this to that, as to find no passage from that to
this any more for ever.

Those that have past from us to the World of Immortal Spirits, out of Time
into Eternity, have left us behind as Mourners not for their Gain, which is
cause of Joy, but for our own Loss, which to us is cause of sorrow; and our
Duty is to enquire further into the Nature of it; which because you must die,
may be useful to your sorrowful Relations, or your Relations must die, and
leave you to mourn for them; and many every day have cause of sorrow by the
death of some or other, the Case being a common Case, but the Question not a
common Question, I shall propound it, and endeavor to resolve it.

When is our Sorrow for our Dead Spiritually defective tho it be naturally
abundant? Or when is it too little, as we are Christians, be it never so much
as we are Men? Ans. 1. When we sorrow for the breach of the Relation made by
death, we sorrow as men, tho in great abundance, for so an Heathen may do; but
do not sorrow for Sin as Sin, committed against God in the neglect of our
Relative Duties while the Relation was continued, for so only Christians can
do. Tho our Natural Sorrow does abound in the first respect, it is spiritually
defective in the latter respect. Two things taken for granted.

1. Here it is taken for granted, That the most Loving Relations may Sin and
fail in their Relative Duties one to another; for as much as we cannot yield
perfect Obedience to any one of the Ten Commandments, among which the Fifth
contains Relative Duties: And who can say, tho I have transgressed all the
rest, yet this I have perfectly fulfilled? I have heard that some have
asserted, that they have lived Twenty or Forty years in a Conjugal Relation
without an angry word, or unkind act betwixt them; if so, might not we say, O
peaceable Spirits that were in these! O rare Example, and seldom found! But be
it so, is there no other Sin in these Relations but anger and angry words?
What! Did they pray also daily together, or as much one for another as they
ought, and as fervently as they should? Did they by all ways and means
appointed by God help each other in their Spiritual Concerns as Duty did
require? Were there never no sinful Thoughts in their Minds one against
another? there is one can tell you, his sinful Thoughts against some Related to
him, has filled his Heart with more sorrow, his Eyes with Tears, and his Mouth
with secret Confessions to God, and cost him more Sighs, and Sobs, and Groans
in pleading for Pardon for the Sin of his Thoughts (tho resisted) than any
angry Words or unkind Actions ever did. For the one might be more easily
prevented than the other, because we have a more absolute government over our
Tongues and Hands than over our Thoughts. What! Can any Persons in any Relation
suppose Husband and Wife, Parents and Children say they did never Love too
much, or at no time too little? never did take too much care, or never too
little for their Relations, but had that just proportion and measure of Love to
them and Care for them, as the perfect Rule requires: So much as God commanded,
and no more than God allowed? For my part, my Prayer shall be, Lord forgive my
Relative Sins, whilst others boast and bless themselves, and say, O God, I
thank thee I am not in this as other Men be, nor as this Man. And, Lord, let
not me be as Blind as that Man, that can see no Relative Sins to confess to
thee, or to be humbled for at thy Throne of Grace, when thou will find some to
judge him for at the Bar of thy Justice.

2. The reigning Sins, or Sins of Infirmities what they were, or are, in their
kinds, degrees, frequency, and all Aggravations committed in our respective
Relations, must be left to the scrutiny of every man's Conscience, or to God,
that was an Eyewitness, if Conscience was fallen asleep; and will be an
Impartial Judge, if Conscience for the present perform not its Office of
Witness, Accuser, and Judge.

These being granted, that your Father or Mother, Husband or Wife, or Child is
dead, you sorrow and grieve, you weep and wall, you lament and mourn; there is
your Humanity and Natural Passion, because your Relation is broke; but where is
your Christianity in this sorrow, when you had not one Tear (amongst so many)
for the Sins against God and them, while you stood in that Relation? And yet do
not you see, while your natural sorrow is abundant, your Spiritual sorrow is
defective, or none at all in this respect? Where are your Tears for your
disobedience to your Father or Mother when alive? Where is the Husband's sorrow
for undue and unjust grieving of his Wife, sadning her Heart, and sending her
by his unkindness to her Knees in secret to open her Case, and pour out her
Tears and Soul before God in Prayer? Did you without cause make her weep when
alive, and shall not this in all your sorrow for her when dead, make you sorrow
for sinning against God and her before she died? According as your Relative
Sins were, more or less, greater or smaller, when the Relation held; it is time,
it is high time to sorrow for them, when by death it is broke; and so show your
self a Christian, as well as a Man in sorrowing for your dead. And do this now,
if you have not hitherto; tho your Father or Mother, Husband or Wife, or Child,
be long since dead and turned into dust, their rotted Flesh and dry Bones, and
bare Skull in the Grave do cry to God against you. Therefore while you sorrow
for their dead Bodies, sorrow also for your own sinful Souls, because you
sinned so much against them in their Lifetime.

2. When you mourn for the loss of that comfort and delight that you had in
loving of them, and in being beloved by them, be your Sorrow never so much, you
sorrow only as Men; for so an Heathen might do; but you sorrow not for the
Displeasure of God, by reason of those Sins which Conscience does justly and
truly charge you with, committed in that Relation; your Sorrow is defective as
you are Christians. You sinned as you were an Husband, and for your sin God was
displeased; you sinned as you were a Father, or a Mother, and God was
displeased for your Sin; you sinned as you were a Son, or a Daughter, and for
your Sin God was displeased; and God has by Death taken away your Wife, your
Child your Father, or Mother; you Sorrow because they are dead, with great
Sorrow, and herein you do no more, than a Man or Woman, as such, might do; but
you do not Sorrow that God is displeased, which is not so much as a Christian
should do. You Sorrow, because you are afflicted; but where is your Sorrow
because God is displeased? You have many Tears for the loss of your
Creature Comforts, but have you dropped one for the loss of that Comfort that
should arise from the sense of the Love of God unto your Soul? You mourn for
the smarting Rod that lies upon you; Nature, Flesh, and Blood, will make you
feel the smart, and cry out, because of it, but you do not grieve; that by the
Sin in your Relation, you grieved the Spirit of God; that Grace must enable you
to do. Are not you herein like unto a Child that is scourged by his Father, he
cries aloud, he weeps, and sobs, he groans, but what is it for? Not because his
Father is displeased, this he is not troubled at, but because of the smart and
pain that the Rod does make him so sensible of. Do not you see, he does not
mourn as he is a Child, and stands in that Relation, but as he has Flesh that
is pained by the strokes? Might not he cry out under the Rod, and yet be a
stubborn Child, a disobedient Child, and not desire his Father's love in the
way of his Duty, nor lay to heart his Father's displeasure for the Evil he has
done? Will you ask me, Sir, Are you sure God is displeased with me, because by
Death he has removed my Relation from me? I will ask you, Are you sure that he
is not? Which does it look most like, Love or Displeasure? And if you are not
sure he is not displeased with you under such a Rod, should not you sorrow lest
he should be displeased? Is the displeasure of God so small a thing in your
Eye, that the fear of it should not be ground of your Sorrow? And say, what if
God should be angry with me in what he has taken from me? What if my Father
should be displeased, and the Death of this Relation be the fruit of it? Is not
here ground to sorrow as a Christian, as well as a Man?

The loss of a good Husband, or Wife, Father, Mother, or Child, is a burden
heavy to be born; but the loss of the favor of God is greater, and his
displeasure presses more hard upon a Soul sensible of it; and therefore prays,
O Lord, if thou rebuke me, let it not be in thine anger; if thou chasten me,
let it not be in thy sore displeasure, Psalm 6.1. The loss of a Relation is a
Rebuke, it is a chastening, and it may be in anger and displeasure; when it is
so, Sorrow for God's displeasure as Christians, as for your own Affliction as
Men.

3. When you Sorrow more for the loss of your Temporal Good by the Death of
your Relation, than for the Spiritual Advantage you might have gained by the
continuance of their Lives; You sorrow too much as Men, but too little as
Christians. You may sorrow for the one, as well as for the other; but you
should not sorrow so much for the one, as for the other, because the one is
better than the other, and the loss of the one a greater loss than the other.
By their Death you sustain the loss of some outward Comforts for your Body, and
loss of some inward Advantages for your Soul; as now they can instruct and
teach you no more, they can pray with you, and for you, no more, they can help
you to answer your doubts about your Spiritual State no more, nor give you
Arguments against your own Corruptions, or Satan's Temptations any more, nor
reprove you for your Sin, nor comfort you under your Afflictions, nor exhort
you to be making holy Preparations for Death, nor direct you therein any more
for ever; nor by their continued Example stir you up to secret Prayer to
maintain Communion with God, all these were great Advantages you had by the
Life of your holy Relations, and by their Death they cease; For this you do not
sorrow, saying, My Godly Father, my Holy Mother made many a Prayer, shed many a
Tear for me; they pleaded with God for Grace, and Mercy, and Pardon for me; but
Death has broken off the continuance of their Prayers, and what a loser am I
thereby: They did observe and watch my Life and Actions; what was Evil, they
reproved me for, what was Good they did inc^urage and countenance me in; but
Death has closed their Eyes, that they can now see neither Good nor Evil in
me, and has tied their Tongue, that they can speak no more to me concerning
the one, nor the other; and who can tell the greatness of my loss for my
Immortal Soul, that I am under by their Death? The like might be said
concerning a Religious Husband, an holy Zealous Wife. Wherefore if you mourn
never so much for your loss by their Death, as to your Bodies and outward
Estate, and not so much as to your loss to your Soul, and spiritual Condition,
it is more like Men than Christians.

4. When you Sorrow more for the want of their Company in Life, than you do for
want of a sanctified improvement of their Death, you sorrow too much as Men,
and too little as Christians: Nature helps you to the one, but it must be Grace
that must enable you to do the other. Your Father or Mother, Husband or Wife,
or Child is dead, and you sit down, and sorrow, and say, I shall never see
these in my house any more, they shall never sit with me at my Table any more,
they shall lodge in my Bed no more, and dwell with me on Earth no more for
ever. I shall see them no more, whom I did love to look upon; when they were
absent from me a Week or two, a Month or two; A Month! a Day or two, how glad
was I at their return? If their absence filled me with Sorrow, their presence
again did drive away my Sorrow, and renewed my Joy. If I parted with them when
to go a Journey, I did it with Tears of Grief; but when they returned, I
received them with Tears of Joy? If I sorrowed that they were gone, yet the
hopes of their safe return did assuage my Sorrow. But now they are gone without
return: They have taken a long Journey, and never to me will come back again:
They were use to take their leave, and say farewell, till I see you again; but
now they took their leave, saying, The Lord be with you, for I shall be with
you no more. Oh, this word no more, does even break my heart; what my Father,
or Mother gone, and shall I see them no more; my Wife, or Husband gone, and
shall I set mine Eyes on him, or her no more? My dear Child gone, looking on
whom did delight my Eyes, and must I see him no more? I look for my Relations
at my Table, but their place is empty, and I cannot see them there; I lock, but
I cannot see them. I go to the Chamber where they did use to sit and Work, or
to the Closet where they did use to Pray, but I cannot see them there. I see
the Work, but them I cannot see; I see their Handwriting, but them I cannot
see; I see their wearing Clothes, but them that did use to wear them, I cannot
see; to see these, and not them, does renew and increase my Sorrow; when I can
see these every day, and no day can see them, the more I multiply my Sorrow,
and methinks this Sorrrow is pleasent Sorrow; and this Grief is delightful
Grief; and when I feel Sorrow added to Sorrow, at the remembrance of them I
must see no more, methinks it pleases me to remember them, tho it grieves me
that I can not, must not see them, nor enjoy their Company, nor my comfort in
their Company any more for ever.

Is this your Sorrow? And have you nothing else to do than to feed your Sorrow?
And please your self with this kind of Sorrow? What do you call it? Natural
Sorrow? Sorrow of Men, as Men? But where is your Christian Sorrow? And the
Sorrow you should have as renewed, sanctified Men? Or should tend by the
spiritual Improvement of the Death of your Relation to make you such? Should
you not say, Is my Child dead, and my Soul not mended by its Death? My Heart as
hard, and as worldly as before? Has God been smiting me, and cannot I feel?
Has God been correcting me for my Sin, and cannot I yet grieve and groan, weep
and sorrow for my Sin? Has Death separated me and my Relation, and do I sorrow
for that? And has not Sin separated God and me, and do not I sorrow for this?
Do I sit and sorrow, because I shall enjoy the company of this Relation no
more, and have I no grief and sorrow, that by my Sin I have forfeited the
enjoyment of God for ever? Is not God better than the Creature, and the
Enjoyment of God better, sweeter than the Enjoyment of the Creature; and the
lose of God a greater, and more bitter loss, than the loss of my Relation? And
yet have I so many Tears for the loss of the lesser, and not one for the loss
of the greater Good? Did I take the Creature for my God, that I sorrow more for
the loss of it, than I do for the real loss of him that is indeed the only
True, Living and Eternal God? Has God been laying Gall and Wormwood on the
Creatures Breast, to wean me from the Love of this present World; and do not I
improve his stroke, to call off my Affections from it? When my Children did
live, I then pretended that my worldly Cares was to make Provisions for them;
has God taken them away, and do my worldly care still remain as much as when I
had them to provide for? May I not see the deceitfulness of my heart, and turn
my sorrow from mourning for my Dead, to mourning for making no better
Improvement of their Death? Did I give that Love to them, which was due to God,
and now I have not them to l^ve, should not God have my love, and more of it?
Did I place so much comfort in their Life, and should not I seek my comforts
now from God, when I find my Creature Comforts thus do fail me? Did I take
delight in conversing with them, and now that delight is ceased and gone,
should not I improve this disappointment, in seeking, and endeavoring after,
and laboring for more Communion with God? And if I cannot find this Affliction
sanctified to me, should not I sorrow less for the loss of my Relation, and
cease mourning so much as I am a Man, and turn my mourning into sorrowing far
want of an holy Improvement of my loss, and at lost begin to sorrow as a
Christian man in this case should sorrow.

5. When you sorrow more for their Death, than that you are yet so much
unprepared for your own. And that you have improved your time, and means of
Grace no more, to get ready for Death, and Judgment after Death, and Heaven
after Judgment? Your Father or Mother, Husband or Wife, died with well-grounded
hopes of Heaven, on their Dying-bed conquered the Fears of Death, and rejoiced
in the hope of the Glory of God; expressed their thankfulness to God, that they
had had that Communion with God, the experience whereof did so much then
delight them, that they would not have been without for all the Riches of the
World. And you are yet under doubts and fears; afraid to think of Death,
because you do not know whether then you shall be damned or saved; because you
cannot tell whether you have believed or repented, and yet you sorrow for them,
as men, go sorrow, because of your own Fears and Dangers you are in.

6. When you sorrow more for your own loss, than you do for your discontent,
and impatient murmuring at the Hand of God because of your loss, and do not
sorrow for your excessive Sorrow. Natural Sorrow, when it is vitiated with the
acting of corrupt Nature, will soon work up to discontent and impatience, to
repining, and harboring of hard thoughts, and sometimes blasphemous Thoughts
against the blessed glorious God. If God did love me, why has he dealt thus
with me? If he had a kindness for me, why has he taken his kindness from me?
If God govern the World by his Wisdom; why does he take away those that are a
comfort to their Relations, and continue those that are a cross, and a curse,
and a plague unto them? Forbear, say no more, think no more these Thoughts; but
if in your Sorrow, you have such things unworthy of God arising in your mind,
cease sorrowing for your Dead, and speedily begin and hold on to lament, and
bitterly bewail such abominable Motions in your hearts, and spare your Tears to
mourn for this great Wickedness, and pray, That these Thoughts of your heart
may be forgiven you: For should God's afflicting hand lay you down at his Foot,
and does your corrupt heart let fly such sinful Actings in his Face? Or will
you mourn for your Affliction by the Instigation of natural Affection, as a
Man, and not at all grieve and groan, sigh and sob, lament and bewail the
Exorbitancy of your Passion, tho it work to so great a Provocation of a Just
and Powerful God, and by such discontent risen to such an height show your self
a corrupt Man, and by not sorrowing for these sinful workings of heart, show
your self to be no Religious Man.

7. When you sorrow more for your outward worldly loss by the Death of your
Relation, than you do for your distrust in the Promises and Providence of God
to provide for you. A Wife had a dependency upon her Husband, and Children on
their Father under God. He dies, and their trust in God dies with him. What
shall we do now for a maintenance? For supply of our wants? Who shall give us
Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on? Is not this to mourn more like an Heathen
than a Christian? Can God provide for you no way but one? By no other means
than by him that was an Husband, or a Father to you? You are short in your
Christian Sorrow, while you are excessive in your Turbulent Sorrow.

8. When you sorrow more for the dead Body of your Relation, than you do for
the want of greater Faith and Hope, and quieting thoughts of a joyful
Resurrection which should be the Fruit of that Faith and Hope. You see the dead
Corpse in the Coffin laid in the Grave, thither your Thoughts run daily (when
you do not) to mourn over them in the Grave, fixing your thoughts how they
putrify and rot, how they consume and moulder away, and this pierces your
heart. But you do not meditate as one that believes they shall live again, and
be glorious Bodies; and in this your sorrow is defective as you are a Christian.

CHAP. VII. The Second Doctrine, and the general Method propounded.
Doct. II. THat Christians ought so to bound their Sorrow for the Dead, that it
be not excessive and immoderate.

Am I the first amongst you, whom God by his Providence has called to regulate
my Sorrow for the Death of a dear Relation? Not by many. Shall I be the last
among you, that shall be thus exercised? Not by many. Many of you have followed
Husbands or Wives, Parents or Children, to their Grave; and more of you shortly
shall; and afrer that, others shall follow you to your long home, and see you
lodged in the Dust. And where there was Love in living together, there will be
Sorrow at your last parting asunder. I understand the Communication of two
Religious and Tender Mothers in this place, since I began this sorrowful
Subject, that had buried some of their Children. The one said, I fear I
sorrowed too much for my Child, and sinned by excess of Sorrow. The other said,
I buried mine, and I doubt I was not sorrowful enough, and I fear I sinned in
being short in my sorrow. To have a due sense of the Death of Relations, and of
the hand of God in taking them from us, and yet to keep our Sorrow in due
Bounds, is an hard Task that lies upon us. Two things I have prayed for in my
Affliction of this kind, That I might not be unsensible of God's hand, nor
excessive in my Sorrow for the outward Comfort of my life removed thereby: And
for the helping of my self in both, my thoughts have been so long working on
this Text, which I might have kept secret in my Study, and not have brought
them unto you, but the Consideration of the common Case of all (being mortal)
that Death will enter into your Houses, and take your Living from you, and that
there are in all, Affections common to Human Nature, which being corrupted,
tend to Sin in over-loving of them, and over-joying in them while they live,
and in over-sorrowing for them when they dye, has moved me to communicate to
you, what I thought for my self, that in the like case it might also be a
Guide, and Direction, and support unto you.

In treating on this Subject of Sorrow, that it might be moderate, as becomes
Christians that have hope, and not like Heathens that have no hope of a joyful
Resurrection of the dead (omitting many things in so copious a Subject,
endeavoring to contract as much as I can), I shall cast my Mattter into this
Method.

1. I shall lay down some Rules concerning the kind and degrees of Sorrow for
the Dead.

2. I shall give you an account, when our Sorrow for the Dead is excessive and
immoderate.

3. I shall show you the Cure, or bring you some Remedy against excess of
Sorrow.

CHAP. VIII. Contains Eight Rules concerning the degrees of Sorrow for the Dead.
First, THe Rules concerning the kinds and degrees of our Sorrow for the dead,
are such as these.

Rule 1. Our Sorrow is not so much for the Death of a Stranger, as for the
Death of a suitable and intimate Acquaintance. At the hearing of the Death of
one, whom we had no Conversation with, we might entertain some Sorrow as he was
one partaker of the same Humane Nature with us; as he was one that became
liable to Death by the Sin of Adam, the common Parent of us all; as Death is a
penal Evil upon Mankind, as Adam's Offspring, and which God would not remit,
nor except us from, when he called Adam to an Account for the Sin he had
committed; and as he had a Rational and Immortal Soul, that is passed into
Eternity, tho we know not to what State in that Eternity.

Rule 2. Our sorrom is not usually so much for an intimate Acquaintance when he
dies, as for the death of Relations, excepr there be some other Circumstances
that might alter the Case. For an intimate Friend that dies, the sweet
Converse, the Affableness of his Carriage, the Comfort in his Company, the
Kindnesses he has done, might oblige me to mourn for an evil (as death is)
that has befallen him; for if it would have been matter of sorrow to me to
hear he was Sick, or cast into Prison, would not the same Principle and Love
bind me to sorrow, when he is lodged in the Grave: But all these and such like
enumerated Circumstances there might be in a Relation; and besides these, some
nearer natural Obligation, as partakers of the same Flesh and Blood, in a more
immediate sense than all Mankind in Adom were; and this might add degrees of
sorrow to what is the sorrow for an intimate Friend when he dies. For being
nearer by Bonds of Nature to us, the greater the sorrow when by death those
Bonds are broke asunder.

Rule 3. The nearer the Relation is, usually the greater is our sorrow for the
breach thereof by death: So sorrow for those that are near us by Consanguinity
ordinarily exceeds the sorrow upon the account of mere Affinity. So also the
sorrow of P^rents for the death of Children, and of Chil^ren for the death of
their Parents, being nearer in Blood, arises to greater degrees, than that for
others more remote. But the Conjugal Relation being the nearest, whereby two
become one Flesh, and breeds the strongest Affection, the dissolving thereof by
death, begets, and feeds, and maintains the greater grief, pierces deeper, and
is more hardly born. For death cannot deprive us of a nearer Mercy than a part
of our selves: As Children are by Multiplication, Husband and Wife (that walk
suitably to their relation) by such an Union that cannot be dissolved but by
death. Therefore that Relation that calls for the strongest Love of all others,
while it holds; the dissolving of it calls for the greatest sorrow, when death
does cause it. If a Man must forsake his most Loving Father, and his most
Tender Mother, to dwell with his Wife, because of greater Love he ought to have
to her, then he should have greater sorrow for the death of this Relation than
for the death of Father or Mother. For proportionable to the Love and Joy in
the Object enjoyed must be our sorrow* when we are totally and finally deprived
of it.

Rule 4. The more persons did answer the obligation of a Conjugal Relation in
mutual, real, constant Love to, and care of each others Temporal, and
Spiritual, and Eternal Welfare, the greater degree of sorrow as to the loss of
the Survivor there may and ought to be: Though these may part at death with
greater Comfort, because they filled up their Relation with Duty in time of
Life. The more Fear and Love to God, the more Love and Care concerning their
Relations, the more Conscientious performance of Relative Duties, the more
meekness of Spirit, the more kind Carriage and Sweetness of Temper and
Disposition, the most suitableness in all respect there was in both, the more
grievous the separation by death to the Survivor must be: And who can forbear
to sorrow for so great a Loss, when he does sit solitary, and ponder deeply how
great it is?

Rule 5. A Wicked Husband that is a constant Curse, and a daily Cross unto his
whole Family, whose Wife is in a worse condition for Body and Soul, than if she
were a Widow, and whose Children by reason of his want of Affection to them,
and Care for them, are more exposed to Ruin, than if they were Fatherless,
leaves little reason behind him, why they should grieve and sorrow for his
Death upon their own accounts. For who can sorrow for a deliverance from a
daily Cross? Who can grieve for being eased of a Burden under which they so
long did groan? Who can sorrow upon their own account that one is gone that did
rather Hate than Love them, and filled their Hearts with daily sorrow, their
Eyes with flowing Tears, and their Mouths with Heart-piercing Complaints? And
why should any dissemble sorrow for such, by whose Wickedness and Sin against
God and the Family, God was dishonored and the Family ruined, when by death he
is taken off from doing so upon Earth any more? Do you ask, who ever taught
this Doctrine before? Job did, Job 27.13. This is the portion of a wicked Man
with God, and the Heritage of Oppressors, which they shall receive of the
Almighty. 15. Those that remain of him shall be buried in death; and his Widows
shall not weep. Were there ^ver any such Widows? Yes, Psalm. 78.64. Their
Priests fell by the Sword, and their Widows made no Lamentation.

Rule 6. In mourning for such Relations that neither did their Duty to God, nor
to their Family, but lived to God's dishonor and their daily grief, and died
without Repentance for both, our sorrow must be for their sakes, and not our
own: For the ungodly and unnatural, as dying impenitently in their Sins, and
for the Loss of their Souls, and Misery in the other World, as David did for
Absalom; for tho our grief for them cannot mitigate their Torments, nor our
Tears quench their Fire, yet it cannot but be a grief to us, that our Relations
should live and die in their Rebellion against God, and neglect of their Duties
toward us, but did dishonor God whom they should have glorified, and
overthrew the Family by their Sin and Wicked Lives which they should have built
up and maintained: And as for their Sin while they lived, so dying impenitent
for their Misery after death. The death of some puts an end to those Troubles,
and Disquiet, and Crosses which they caused in their Families while they lived,
that for their own sakes the Living cannot find a reason why they should mourn
because they are dead. But when they consider their death was the beginning of
their Intolerable and Eternal Misery, for their sakes they cannot but give
place to sorrow: ^or while these Thoughts are working, my Husband is dead, and
his Soul is Damned; it will be hard to keep sorrow from the Heart. And tho such
sorrow does not profit the Damned Soul, yet unaccountable sorrow is not easily
cast off: Nor can we always cease to sorrow, when we cannot give a reason of
any good that is the fruit of our sorrow. But yet a reason will be here
suggested, it was my Husband, or Wife, or Son, or Daughter that lived wickedly,
and died impenitently; and the Soul of one so near is lost, is for ever lost.
And Religion teaching us that the Souls of such are miserable, Nature will be
working in us to lament their Misery; and this is sorrow for their sakes.

Rule 7. In mourning for those that lived holily toward God, and
Conscientiously in their Relative Duties toward us, our sorrow is for our own
sakes more than for theirs: The common saying our Loss is their Gain teaches
that the sorrow is for the Loser, and not for the Gainer: And indeed if we
search to the bottom of our sorrow, to find the reason of our sorrow for those
that lived to the Lord, and died in the Lord, and after death do live
gloriously and happily with the Lord; it will appear we are sorrowing more for
our selves than for them: We call it mourning for the dead, when it is indeed
mourning for our selves yet living; for let us enquire,

1. Do we mourn because their Souls are perfectly Holy and Happy with God and
Christ above? No, this is matter of our Comfort, Delight and Joy. Did not we
earnestly pray for them, sick and well, that when they left Earth they might be
received up to Heaven? And do we sorrow that God heard our Prayers, and has
saved their Souls? Do we thus take on for this? Are our Tears shed because God
has Crowned their Grace with Glory? Are we grieving on Earth because they are
rejoicing in Heaven? Are we groaning here, because they are triumphing there?
For shame we cannot say, this is the reason and ground of our sorrow, and that
in this respect it is plain we do not sorrow for their sakes.

2. Do we mourn because they are fallen asleep in Jesus? Because they are gone
to rest in their Beds? Because their Bodies in that state in which they are,
remain united to Christ? Are these grounds of sorrow? Should we weep, and waste
our Tears because these things are said of them? Or is it not matter of Comfort
and Joy unto us, that it is so well with their very Bodies, as these things
declared by God himself do import unto us? Is it not better to die in Christ
than to live in Sin? Is it not better to sleep in Jesus than to be naturally
awake, and spiritually asleep in Sin? Is it not better for the Body to lie
still, and rest free from Actings of Sin, than to be able to walk in a constant
course of wickedness? Is it not more matter of Comfort to have the Bodies of
our Friends united to Christ in the Grave, than to have our Relations above
ground separated from Christ, and not united to him? If it be, let us cease
over-sorrowing for them with whom it is better, tho in the Grave, and begin to
sorrow for those with whom it is worse, tho they live with us. Which is matter
of greater sorrow, a departed Saint, or a living Sinner? And shall we drop more
Tears for one departed Saint than for twenty living wicked Relations? Why so?
When all these wicked ones are in danger of Hell, but the departed Saint is
past that danger: The ungodly that do live are in danger of Eternal Torments
both as to Body and Soul: The departed Saint is past the danger thereof, both
as to Body and Soul: For when the Soul is once safe in Heaven, the Body is for
ever past all danger of Hell. Is this it that we sorrow for? No verily, we do
give thanks to God, that the Body is in these Circumstances, though in the
Grave.

But you say, you mourn because they are dead, and taken from us. Dead! But are
not we sp^^king to Believers that live, concerning depart^^ ^^liev^rs? And
should not we beli^v^ what God says concerning them? And think and speak of
them in their Graves, as the Scripture sp^aketh. See what the Living God says
concerning their Bodies, and say if you sorrow for their sakes because the
Bodies of your departed Relations are of that number that sleep in Jesus, 1
These. 4.14. And that rest in their Graves as in a Bed, made easy by Christ's
Body lodging there before theirs: Isa. 57.2. Look upon the Circumstances of
their Bodies with a believing Eye, through the Glass of Scripture, and change
the manner of speaking, common to the bad, into Scripture Language peculiar to
the good, they say, He or she is dead; do you say, He or she sleeps in Jesus,
and do you indeed try if you can sorrow for that?

3. If upon Scripture grounds believed and improved we have no reason to sorrow
for the sakes of our holy Relation that are dead; for what do we sorrow, and
for whom? Is it because we have not the Comfort of their Company? Is it because
we are deprived of that good by their falling asleep in Jesus, which we enjoyed
while they lived with u^, either in reference to our own good Temporal or
Spiritual? And is not this sorrowing for our selves more than for them? For can
we say we sorrow because they have not the Enjoyment of our Company, when they
were such that we are groundedly sati^fied that they have the Enjoyment of God
in the Company of innumerable Angels and Saved Souls above? And tho they loved
our Company while they lived, do we, or can we think that they are not better
pleased with that Society where now they are? Or that tho we sorrow for want of
them, that they sorrow for want of us? For want of us! If we want them, they
want not us. And if we sorrow that they continued no longer with us, they
rejoice at what we do sorrow. And shall we sorrow at that for which they do
rejoice? Upon a due debate with our selves in a composed frame of Mind, when
the hurry of passionate sorrow is over, we see we might change the form of
speaking of mourning for such of our dead, and more rationally call it a
mourning for our selves because of the loss we sustain while we live, by their
falling asleep in Jesus.

Rule 8. Our sorrow for the dead, that died in final Impenitency after they had
lived wickedly all their days, should not be such as does deprive us of all our
spiritual Delight and Joy in God, and make us unfit and incapable for the
performance of those great Duties we stand engaged unto to God and Man. It is
indeed an Heart-piercing consideration to sit in our Mourning Chamber, and
think, my Husband, Wife, Son or Daughter is Dead, and Buried, and Damned too:
To think the Body is meat for Worms, and the Soul a prey to Devils: That the
parts of one so near us, being separated, are so disposed of, as that one is
lodged in a dark Grave, and the other cast into outer Darkness and Eternal
Torments, which wounds some so deeply as brings them near unto distraction, and
sit and aggravate their sorrow, saying, The death of my Relation I could bear,
but the Thoughts of his Damnation do press me down; that I have lost him is a
loss under which I could find some Comfort to support me; but that his Soul is
irrecoverably lost, and that it is under the loss of God, and Christ, and all
the Happiness of Heaven, and is fallen into the Company of Devils, and all the
Miseries of Hell; the more I think of it, the more my Soul refuses to be
comforted; the deeper is the Wound, and the greater is my sorrow.

But yet in this sorrowful case take heed of sinning in your sorrow; for by Sin
you deserve to follow him both to Grave and Hell. Take heed of Sin, which does
expose your own Soul, to be cast into the lamented condition of your Dead and
Damned Relation: I say the third time, take heed of sinning in your sorrow, for
such sinful sorrow must be sorrowed for, and when you have by sinful,
excessive, turbulent sorrow, contracted guilt upon your own Soul, you must
bitterly bewail such Sin; and sorrow for your own Sin, added to the sorrow for
his damnation, will make you a Man, a Woman of such sorrow that will be indeed
an heavy load, and a burden that will bow you down.

Because it is a Case too common for godly Parents to have wicked Children, and
so other Relations, to have such as live and die impenitent, upon whose account
they are filled with distracting sorrow; I shall propound these following
Questions to their serious Thoughts, and by that time they have given a sober,
considerate Answer to them upon due deliberation, may see cause of taking heed
tha^ they do not go beyond the due Bounds of sorrow in this case; or if they
have, to go and sorrow for their sorrow, and so restrain it, that their
unquestionable duties might not (by reason of it) be neglected.

CHAP. IX. Eight Questions propounded to such who pierce themselves through
with almost-distracting sorrow for those that lived wickedly, and died
impenitent.
Q. 1. DID you sorrow for their Sin while they lived, as you do for their
Damnation (dying impenitently) now they are dead? Did you shed as many Tears
for the one, as you do for the other? Did the one cause as deep abiding sorrow
in your Heart as the other does? If it were so, your sorrow for their Sin might
assuage your sorrow for their Damnation, because you sorrowed for the cause as
well as for the effect: For that whereby they did dishonor God, as well as for
their Misery that has befallen them: If it were not so, what kind of sorrow is
this, that you sorrow for the hurt of a C^eature, and did not sorrow for that
dishonor which that Creature did to God? What kind of sorrow do you call that,
wherein the Misery of a Creature lies nearer to your Heart, than his Eclipsing
and Clouding the Glory of God by his Sins, and Impenitency under them, ever did
in the time of his Life? Examine by this sorrow for the Creatures Misery, and
not for God's dishonor by his Sin, which was in your Eyes and esteem the
greatest evil, sin against God, or the Creatures suffering for his Sin?

Q. 2. Did you do your Duty while they lived, to recover them from a state of
Sin, that they might have prevented this Damnation, you are now so sorrowful,
that by final impenitence and unbelief they are fallen into? Did you seriously
admonish them of their Duty, reprove them for their Sin? Warn them of the Wrath
to come? Tell them of their danger, the Extremity and Eternity of those
positive Torments, and the greatness of the Loss of God, and all the happiness
of Heaven, their wilful sinning did expose them to? Did you call them to
Repentance, and show them the necessity of forsaking Sin, and turning unto God,
and of Faith in Christ, and sincere Holiness, that they might escape the
Damnation of Hell, and be partakers of Eternal Glory in Heaven? And when you
did not prevail with them, did you go to your Knees and pray to God, Lord
change my Husbands Heart, convert and sanctify his Soul, that when he dies he
might not be Damned? Lord, show my Son his Sin and Danger, convince him, melt
and break his Heart for Sin; awaken his Conscience, make him feel the burden of
his Sin now, that he might not bear the heavy Load of thy powerful Wrath for
ever: Tho he should be Poor, yet let him not be wicked; if thou will not give
him Riches, yet give him thy Grace; or if thou have given him the one, good
Lord deny him not the other: Afflict him in this World rather than Damn him in
the next: Deal as thou please with him in Temporals, but deny not my Prayer
for him, for Special, Spiritual Grace, and for the Eternal Salvation of his
Soul. If you did your Duty, you may have peace on Earth, tho he has no rest in
Hell: And the remembrance of this may be your Comfort in your sorrow. If you
did not, it is safer for you to sorrow that you sinned, than that he is Damned;
while you neglect to sorrow for the neglect of your Duty in endeavoring to
prevent his damnation. Sorrow for his Misery will never help him out; but
penitent sorrow for your own Sin is one appointed means to escape that Misery
you lament that he is in.

Q. 3. Which is most fitting in your Reason and Judgment, That God should be
just in the Damnation of an impenitent Sinner, tho he were your Relation; or
that he should deal with his separated Soul in a way of Mercy, contrary to his
Truth, because he was your Relation? Is it not more sitting that God should
punish him for ever for his sinal^ unbelief, and impenitent hardness of Heart,
tho he were your Husband, or your Son, than that God should viol^^e his own
word in saving him in an unconverted state, because he was your Husband, or
your Son? Do not you know that God is no respecter of Persons? Romans 2.11. And
would not this be a respect o^ a Person, to save him in his Sin, when he died
in his Sin merely because he was while he li^ed so related unto you? Think of
this to quiet your Heart, and make your sorrow less Passionate, but more
Rational, and so more moderate: For is not his damnation more grievous to you,
because he was yours, than the damnation of another never related to you, tho
the Soul of the one is equally Immortal and Miserable as the other? And why
should you have harder Thoughts of God in your sorrow for punishing yours,
because yours, than of punishing of others, when yours were equally sinful in
Life, and equally impenitent at death, as others were?

Q. 4. Is not God and Christ the only Savior of Souls, infinitely more
merciful than you? And yet if the Father of Mercies, and the Savior of Sinners
do approve of the Damnation of your impenitent Husband, or Wise, Father, or
Mother, Son, or Daughter, why should you be filled with turbulent, disquieting
sorrow? Should you appoint to him the measures of his Mercy, or the Persons he
should show it to? Does he owe it to you or them, or any other? Is it not free,
so that he may have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and Compassion on whom he
will have Compassion? Romans 9.15. May not God act as a just God, but you will
sorrow as if he were not a Merciful God? If the most Merciful God, and
Compassionate Savior approve of the Everlasting Punishment of your Impenitent
Relations, as an Act of Justice, and therefore good, and therefore amiable; Why
should you so excessively grieve, as if your Mercy was beyond the Mercy of the
Father and the Son?

Q. 5. Have not you more cause to Joy and Rejoice at, to give Thanks and Praise
to God for your well-grounded Hopes of Heaven, than to disc^mpose your self for
this W^rk by your vexing sorrow, because others are lost without hopes of
finding Mercy? What if the nearest to you in Relation shall for their wilful,
final refusing of Remedying Grace perish for ever, should not you admire and
magnify, praise and celebrate the free distinguishing Grace and differencing
Mercy of God to you, that you shall be for ever saved? And say, Will God show
Eternal Mercy to me, when he will pour out his Eternal Wrath upon my Father or
Mother, Brother or Sister, Husband or Wife, or Child? What was I more than
they, that they should be Damned, and I should be saved, after Death? Was not I
equally involved in the Guilt of Adam 's Sin as they were? Was not I born a
Child of Wrath as well as they? Was not my Heart as bad, my Sin as great, my
Nature as corrupt as theirs was? Was not I as backward to good, as prone to
evil as they were; and it may be more too? Should not I with others cry out and
say, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us, (and me amongst them) with spiritual blessings in heavenly places
in Christ? Should not I give thanks and praise to God for blessing me with such
blessings which tend to Eternal Glory, which Christ has purchased, promised,
prepared and possessed for me, tho others near to me are Cursed with an
Everlasting Curse in Hellish Places, justly inflicted on them for their Sin,
and continuing finally Impenitent under the same? And can you be lifted up in
such high praises of your God for his Mercy to you, when you are so cast down
into depths of sorrow at the Thoughts of God's punishing Justice with others?

Q. 6. Do not the Holy Angels and Blessed Saints above, know as much of the
Torments of Hell, and of the Misery of the Damned as you do, and yet are they
filled with such sorrow because of any being there, as you are? Do saved Souls
above sorrow there because they do not find the Souls of others there whom they
knew on Earth, and were Related to, that died before them? As they do rejoice
to see others there whom they were here acquainted with and Related to? And
will you pretend to be more Compassionate and Merciful than Angels and Saints
in a perfect state of Bliss and Glory?

Q. 7. Shall not you your self, being a Penitent Believer, approve the
Righteous Sentence of Damnation upon those that were your nearest Relations in
this World, but died impenitently in their Sins? Do not you know the Saints
shall judge the World; final-unbelieving Men, and Apostate Angels? 1 Cor. 6.2,
3. And shall you sorrow then, or rejoice at the Condemning Sentence of Jesus
Christ upon all the ungodly, tho many of your Relations should be amongst them?
And if you are to come as near to pleasing of God, and being pleased in what he
does, now as what you shall hereafter be, why should you have so much vexing
sorrow at that now* for which you shall have none in that day, tho others be
condemned? Do you think this Self-tormenting sorrow for the Damned proceeds
from such Mercy in you to them in your imperfect state on Earth, when you shall
have no Mercy to them, nor sorrow for them in your perfect state in Heaven?

Q. 8. Should not your Zeal for, Love to, Desire after, Delight in the Glory of
God, overpower, and overcome all your passionate sorrow at the concernment of
the Creature? Is your own Salvation to be sought in subordination to the Glory
of God? And would you have the salv^tion of yours stand in competition with it,
or be pr^ferred before it? Would you have God lose his Glory in giving ^^ing to
your Relations? If they did not, an^ indeed would not glorify him by p^^^^ent
conf^ssing of their Sin, by serious tu^ning to him, by thankful consenting to a
S^viour free^y and fr^quently offered to them, but went on in Sin, despised his
Grace, and slighted his Mercy, and abused his Patience, and finally refused the
only Savior, and all this to his Dishonor in this World, (while they lived),
would you have God also to lose the Glory of his Justice, Holiness, Power and
Truth in not punishing them for their Sin thus persist^d in (when they died) in
the other World? Should you so sorrow beyond all bounds, when you mourn for
their Death, to mourn so much for their Damnation, when God most righteously
glorifieth himself in most just punishing them for their Sin, who by their Sin
did so wickedly dishonor him?

As for the Eternal state of Infants whom the sorrowful Religious Parents
follow to the Grave, and lodge them in the Dust, I shall not now discourse it;
but think they are to hope well concerning them; and tho they be their Parents,
not to take upon them to be their Judges; and when they have passed a Sentence
upon them according to their [ungrounded] fears, next torment themselves, and
pierce themselves through with self-wracking Sorrows.

CHAP. X. The Ninth and Tenth Rule. Five Reasons for great Sorrow for the Death
of Ministers.
Rule 9. OUR sorrow for such as die full of Days, and full of Grace and Hopes
of Glory, should not be so deep as for such that are holy, but taken from us in
the midst of their Days. When an Holy Person, Converted when Young, has led an
Holy Conversation, filled up his Duties in his General and Particular Calling,
been useful and serviceable in his respective Circumstances, has fought a good
Fight, has kept the Faith, and finished his Course; when the Lease of Man's
Life, [Seventy years] is almost out, is ripe for Heaven, and Nature is worn,
parts of the Body decayed with Age, and with such a Constitution in a Course of
Nature could not live much longer, but with grief and pains, with aches and
groans, like ripe and mellow Fruit without violent shaking fall to the ground,
we have more cause to give thanks to God they lived so long, served him so
much, were useful so many years, and such a long-standing Comfort to Relations,
than to be bowed down with sorrow, to be filled, straightened, and loaded with
grief that they died at last. Wherefore the Survivors of such should reckon up
their Mercies, take an account of their many Comforts, and remember Blessings
old and new, had and received in the long Enjoyment of such a Relation in Life,
and then let thankfulness and sorrow, joy and grief contend for Victory, and
strive which should exceed the other; and when all is laid together, and duly
weighed by a Soul that is desirous that God should have the praise of his
manifold Mercies in a Relative state almost for Forty years, as well as himself
have a sense of his loss, if Nature prompt him to be sorrowful, Grace would
provoke him to be thankful; but yet if the Contest remain, as his Condition is
mixed with Mercy and Affliction, so let his frame of Heart be mixed with a
Tincture of both; and let them take their turns, that one while he may be
sorrowful for his loss, another while be thankful for so many Mercies before
that loss did befall him.

Rule 10. Our sorrow for the Death of Godly and Zealous Men that were in a
Public Station and Capacity admits of greater degrees than sorrow for our own
Relations as private Persons. Tho our sorrow for these may be more sensitive
and passionate, yet the sorrow for the other may exceed in degrees, as more
Judicious and Rational. Sorrow for Godly, Religious, Zealous Magistrates, for
Able, Holy and Laborious Ministers when taken away by Death should be more
extensive and intensive than for others that did only live a private Life; that
is, there should be more Mourners in number, and all these should mourn with
greater degrees (at least) of Rational sorrow for public Persons than for
private. Thus all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah with a very great
mourning, 2 Chronicles. 35.24, 25. When Samuel died, all the Israelites were
gathered together and lamented him, 1 Samuel 25.1. The hearing that a Minister is
Sick, should fill many Hearts with much sorrow. The hearing that he is
recovered is matter of Joy, Phil. 2.26, 27, 28. But the hearing that he is dead
should multiply the sorrow of many. And there are great Reasons of great sorrow
for the death of such.

1. The Death of such public Persons is a public loss. And the more general
the loss is, the more general the sorrow should be. When a private Person dies
that was godly, as he was a Praying Christian many are losers by his death, for
he prayed for many while he lived, yea, for all Mankind in common, and for the
Church of God in special; and therefore such a Man's death should be lamented
by many; but when a Public Preacher dies, many do lose his Preaching Labors,
as well as the benefit of his fervent Prayers, and all that are losers should
be Mourners.

2. The death of such is a Spiritual Loss. Can we sorrow for the Temporal
Losses that befall us by the death of private Persons, and shall we not sorrow
for our loss in Spirituals by the death of such that in their Life were helpers
of our Souls in our way to Heaven? Was he a Spiritual Father to many, and might
have been to more? Is a Spiritual Birth a greater Mercy than our Natural Birth,
And shall our Natural Parents be lamented when they die, and no sorrow for the
other, when they can Preach to us, and Pray with us, and for us no more? How
many Persons may one Minister instruct? What a number might such a one at once,
and from day to day teach and direct in the way to Eternal Salvation? And when
such a one dies, what a loss would it be, if God in M^rcy did not raise up
others when he falls into his Grave?

3. By the Life and Labors of such, the Kingdom of Sin and Satan is battered
and shaken, and the Kingdom of Christ is increased and carried on; therefore
all that are desirous that the Devil's Kingdom should be destroyed, and the
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus should be promoted and propagated, must be mourners,
in Heart, tho not in Habit, at the death of those that God did please to use
for the one, and for the other.

4. Such sorrow argues our selves to be of a public Spirit, and not to have
such little narrow Souls as to be only concerned for our Carnal Self-interest.
You are afflicted in your own Person, or in your own Family; and you sorrow and
mourn, who will thank you for it? What Grace or good Nature is manifested in
your selfish sorrow? Or who will call this good Nature in you, when you are so
selfish to sorrow only for Self-concerns?

5. The Labors of Godly Ministers in their Life, have immediate reference to
your holy Living, to your happy Dying, and to your Well-being to all Eternity.
Is there any thing in this World concerns you more than to lead an holy Life,
to die an happy death, and to be saved when you die? Do they die that should
direct you in all these? And is there no cause of sorrow for the death of such,
which puts an end to all their Labors?

CHAP. IX. Resolves this Question, When is our Sorrow for our Dead, excessive
and immoderate?
THe Second Part of the propounded Method in treating of this sorrowful
Subject, is to show, When our Sorrow for our Dead, is excessive and immoderate?

That in some it is Defective, especially in Spiritual Respects, has been
already showed, and wherein it does come short of what it ought to be; that it
is excessive and immoderate in others, the Practice of many deprived of their
Relations by Death, is a visible Proof, and the Caution and Charge given in the
Text, does suppose that some do exceed the bounds, and that their Tears do
overflow the Banks of Moderation, and make a Landstood in their Families.

So far as it has already been discovered to be turbulent, it is excessive;
which here should be reviewed; to which some more might be added.

The Apostle's Golden Rule should be our Christian Directory, for the
moderating of our Joy and Sorrow, in having or losing the outward Enjoyments of
this Life. 1 Cor. 7.29. But this I say, Brethren, the timt is short; it
remains that both they that have wives, be as though they had none. 33. And
those that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they
rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that
use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this world passes away.
In which Rule we might note these things. (1.) Some have their Wives, Husbands,
Parents, Children yet continuing with them: Others have none, because by death
taken from them. 2. Those that have them, are apt to ^ver-joy in them; those
that have lost them, are prone to over-sorrow for them. (3.) Those that have
them, shall shortly be in the same circumstances as those that are by death
deprived of them: Ours are dead, and yours shortly will be so. Life is so
short, and the end of all so near and sure, that there is little and no long
difference betwixt the state of one and of the other. (4.) Those that have
Wives and other Relations, should sometimes suppose themselves to be in the
Circumstances of those that have none; that the thoughts that shortly they
shall have none, might correct their excessive joy while they have them; for
though you have them, you should he as though you had them not: looking upon
Relations that shortly will not be, as if now already they were not, is a point
of prudence, for the moderating of our joy in them. Those that have them not,
should suppose this will be the case of those that have, for the allaying of
their sorrow; that now this is their present state. (5.) The reasons of this
indifferency of our Spirits, in these different Circumstances of our Life. (1.)
The time is short; those that have Fathers and Mothers, Wife, Husband or
Children, shall have them but for a short time: Why then are your hearts
transported with so much joy, when you might stand and see the end of them?
those that are deprived of them, have themselves but a little time to live: Why
then are you so much cast down for so short a want of them? (2.) All these
things are but as a shadow, or an appearance of good, rather than that good
wherein our happiness does lie, and the solid, spiritual abiding comfort of our
life does consist: it is but the fashion of this world, an accidental and
External Figure without substance, the surface and outside. What is all that is
in this world, that is of the world, but a mere surface, and vain outside? why
then do we joy so much, or sorrow so much, whether we have them, or be without
them? (3.) They are in continual change; like Water in the River, is
continually, every moment passing away. What! are these things neither
substantial, nor continual, and shall we be over-affected with the having, or
the losing of them? Christians should do as to Temporals, as Worldings do in
Spirituals; these pray as if they prayed not; they can confess sin, and neith^r
weep without, nor sorrow within: they are under the loss of the favor of God,
and yet are as contented as if they were not; they can ask for an interest in
Christ, pardon of sin, and eternal Salvation, and yet not be much troubled for
the present, though they go without them for ever: they can sit and hear the
threatenings of God, and never fear nor grieve; can sit and hear the glad
tidings of the Gospel, and never rejoice; hear all as if they heard them not;
or if they have some movings of Affections, they are not deep, they reach not
the heart: they do not break their hearts for sin against God, nor for the loss
of God, so much as some do for the loss of a Creature.

Let such as are immoderately weeping for their dead, stop their Tears that
they may read, compose t^eir minds for a while at first, that they may consider
what is said, and command their Sorrow to give place to Reason and Religion; or
if they have not such command over, it, should earnestly pray to God that has,
that they might at last not sorrow with such excess of sorrow, as if they had
no hope of the blessed present and future state of those they thus do sorrow
for. Let me propound some Questions to you, and let Reason and Conscience in
your Sorrow give in their Answer, if it be not sorrow in excess.

Q. 1. Is your sorrow for your Dead so much, as in the degrees of it, tends to
the shortning of your own Life; and is it not then too much? Is your Relation
dead, and will you therefore kill your self? has death broken the Relation you
had in the Fifth Commandment, and will you go on to transgress the Sixth? has
Death killed one, and will you kill another, and so bring in Death upon Death
into your Family, and invite and call it in, to make Freach upon Breach? Do you
complain of Deaths doings, and will you do as Death has done? do you grieve
and sorrow for the death of another, and by your grief and sorrow will you be
your own death, and yet not yield your sorrow is too much? do you sorrow
because yours are lodged in the Grave, and do you thus hasten to go to them?
though God has put an end to their lives, yet has not he bound you by all
lawful means to preserve your own? and to avoid whatsoever has so great a
tendency to cut it short? or, do not you know that excessive grief often is the
cause of death? Did you never read in the Bills of Mortality, that some, that
many have died with grief, and killed themselves with sorrow? or did you never
mind the difference given by the Apostle, betwixt godly sorrow, and sorrow of
the World, for worldly Losses? and is not your sorrow such in th^s case? 2 Cor.
7.10. for godly sorrow works r^pentance to salvation, not to be repented of;
but the sorrow of the world works death: That sorrow that is for worldly
losses and crosses, proceeding from the overmuch love of these
Creature Comforts, does hu^^ the Body, and hasten death temporal; and does
wrong the Soul, because sinful, and does deserve death eternal; for the wages
of every sin is death temporal and eternal. Romans 6.23. and will you so sorrow
for another dead body, as thereby to deserve the damnation of your own Soul,
and yet not say it is too much? When your Spirit is broken, your heart is
broken, how can you live? and what will break it? Prove. 15.13. By sorrow of the
heart, the spirit is broken. Prove. 17.22. A broken spirit dries the bones.
Psalm. 6.7. My eye is consumed because of grief. Immoderate sorrow dries the
Bones, breaks the Heart, preys upon the Spirits, consumes the Vital Parts, and
by all, hastens death; and therefore not to be cherished, but avoided.

Q. 2. Is not that sorrow that must be sorrowed for, exc^ssive sorrow? See the
strait you bring your self into: You sorrow too much, and because you do so,
you must sorrow more; and so add sorrow to sorrow' when it is, and because it
is too much already; you have more than you ought, and yet you have not so much
as you should: you must have sorrow for your sorrow, and yet you want sorrow
for your sorrow: Your eyes run down with tears for your dead, more than they
should; and when you should weep for your excessive sorrow, you have not a tear
to shed. Why do you waste your tears? for what, and more than you should? and
then want tears for what you ought to shed them for: Excessive sorrow is a sin,
because it is excessive; and sinful sorrow must be sorrowed for, and repented
of, or how will you else get the pardon of that known Sin? What do you mean
then by sorrow, to draw on sorrow? and so to weep that you must weep over your
weeping? and to shed tears over again for the tears that you have shed? if you
cannot bear this sorrow that you are filled with already, why by this sorrow do
you make way for more? and fo depth of sorrow calling for depth of sorrow, you
at last must swim in tears, where you cannot wade through.

Q 3. Is not that sorrow too much, that does hurt, and no good? is sorrow good
in it self as sorrow? Then all sorrow would be good: Whereas much sorrow is
often evil, and too much is always evil; because as such it does hurt, and not
good. Whom does your sorrow do good unto? not to your dead, be it never so
much; not to your Relations that live, for you, grieve them by over grieving,
and makes your company a burden, and unprofitable to them: not to your self,
neither to Body, o^ to Soul, for it is prejudicial unto both, as before was
made manifest.

Q. 4. Is not that sorrow too much for your dead, which would be too much for
your sin? Many are defective in sorrowing, for sin; few sorrow too much for
sin; yet men may be, and some are excessive in their sorrow for sin, insomuch
that their sorrow for sin is turned into sinful sorrow; as when they are so
overwhelmed with sorrow for sin, as unsits them for other Gospel Duties, and
drives them from Christ, and sinks them into despair; which sorrow is
excessive; and God gives caution and charge against such sorrow sor our sin. 2
Cor 2.7. So that cantrariwise, ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him;
lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with ov^rmuch sorrow. When
sorrow for sin does more hurt than good, it is overmuch, and so is our sorrow
for our dead.

Q. 5. Is not that sorrow too much for your dead, which is more than you have
for your sin? Is not sorrow upon the account of some present evil that is upon
us, as joy is for some present good? and should not the degree of our sorrow
bear some proportion to the greatness of the evil that is the cause and reason
of our sorrow? Is not sin against God a greater evil than any (besides sin)
does fall upon us? Is not your own dead heart, and cold affections toward God,
a greater evil than the dead Corpse, and cold Flesh in the Grave, which is the
cause of all this sorrow? Now when your sorrow is more for the lesser evil,
than it is for the greater, judge if your sorrow for the greater is not too
small, and your sorrow for the lesser^, overmuch and excessive?

Q. 6. Is not that sorrow overmuch, which carries our thoughts down into the
Grave, to think of their Dead Corpse, but hinders them from ascending into
Heaven, to meditate upon the the Eternal Ever-living God? What a shame and
reproach is it to us, that a dead Wife, or a dead Child, or a dead Father or
Mother, should have more of our Thoughts, than God, and Christ, and things
above? and that the Bodies of our departed Relations consuming in their Graves,
should have more of our thoughts, than their Souls triumphing in Heaven have?
that it is so, our excessive sorrow does testify to our faces; for we cannot
say, nor do pretend to sorrow for the Soul in Heaven; is it not then for the
Body in the Grave? And why should not the Joy the Immortal part is filled with,
abate our Sorrow for the Corruptible part, though it be consuming, if our
thoughts were as much with the Soul in Heaven, as they are with the Body in the
Grave? Let these Excessive Mourners ingenuously confess, if they have not
twenty thoughts of the Dead Body, for one serious heart affecting Thought they
have of God and Christ, and the living triumphant Soul above? for would not the
one cause Joy, as others do Sorrow; and so our Joy mitigate, be equal to, or
exceed our Sorrow? if it be not so, it is easy to judge your sorrow is
overmuch.

Q. 7. Is not your sorrow overmuch, when it hinders you, and keeps you from
rejoicing in God, from praising of him, and giving thanks unto him, for the
mercies you have mixed with your affliction? Have not you more Mercies left,
than you have lost? have not you greaeter Mercies continued, than are removed?
is your Earthly Father dead? but have not you still a Father in Heaven? is your
Wife dead? but is not your Soul married to Christ? and though the Conjugal
Union be broken by Death, yet does not the Mystical Union betwixt Christ and
you still remain? have not you the pardon of Sin, the favor of God, the sense
of his Love, and Hopes of Heaven? seriously set these over against your Dead,
and say, if you have not more cause to rejoice in God, and give him thanks for
these, than you have to mourn for your Dead; and whether God does not command
you more, and give you a stricter charge sor these to rejoice in him, than to
mourn for your Dead? and consequently is the grand constant Duty you owe to God
all the days of your Life; and are you so much indebted to your dead as you are
to the Living God? Was their Life of so much worth to you, as your Relation to
God is, and your Receivings from him? see your Duty, and cease from that which
hinders your performance of it. Phil. 3.1. Finally, my Brethren, rejoice in the
Lord. Whatsoever state you are in, serve God with joyful hearts. Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again, I say, rejoice: Always rejoice in the
Lord: What? when my Father, or Mother, or Child, Wife, or Husband lies dead in
my House, or is newly lodged in the Grave? Is it not always you are commanded to
rejoice? is there this Exception, when you have any Relation dead, that then
this should be no Duty? Have not Christians always greater cause of rejoicing
in the Lord, than they have of sorrow for Worldly Losses? is not holy joy in
the Lord, and a thankful praising of God, the very Flower of Religion, and
makes us most like the Angels and Saints above? but can you thus rejoice, and
praise, and magnify God, and triumph in his Love and Grace, when you are
overwhelmed with sorrow for the loss of Worldly Comforts? and is not that
sorrow too much, that unfits you for this constant, standing Duty? 1 These.
5.16. Rejoice evermore; 17. Pray without ceasing. 18. In every thing give
thanks; for this is the will of God in Jesus Christ concerning you. Whatever a
true Believer does lose, he should rejoice, because the Grounds, and Reasons,
and Causes of Joy do still remain: and in every Case and Condition of life,
should give thanks to God; for as much as the Good that continues to him, does
exceed the Evils that do befall him: This is God's revealed Will; making it our
Duty, for the great Blessings we receive from him by Christ. Job's sorrow for
the loss of ten Children in one day by a strange unusual death, added to all
his former Losses (making his Case more sorrowful than yours) was kept within
such Bounds, as that he was able, even then to bless and praise the Lord. Job
1.19. -- They are dead -- 21. He said, naked came I out of my mother's womb,
and naked shall I return thither; the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord. In your sorrow, try if you can do so; if not,
judge whether it be not overmuch.

Q. 8. Is not that sorrow for your dead overmuch which does deaden your Heart
toward God in all Holy Duties? You were wont to pray with a lively Heart, and
to hear the Word of God with warm Affections, but now you pray with a dead
Heart, and hear with dull Affections. Your Love, and Desires, and Delights are
become as cold in your Duties, as your Relations Corpse are in the Grave: What
have you done in your sorrow, taken away a lively Heart toward God, and laid a
dead Child, a dead Father, or Wife in the room of it? Like the Woman in
Solomon's Reign, whose Child did die in the Night, and there being another
Woman in the House that had a living Child, rose, and while the living Child's
Mother did sl^ep, took her living Child out of her Bosom, and laid her dead
Child in her Bosom in the room of the living Child: But these two Women
contended before Solomon, one saying, The living Child is mine, but the dead
Child is thine; the other also said, The dead Child is thine, but the living
Child is mine, 1 Kings 3.16 to 24. Solomon commanded a Sword to be brought to
divide the living Child, and to give half to the one, and half to the other.
The true Mothers Bowels yearning toward her Child, said, O my Lord, give her
the living Child, and by no means slay it; the other said, Let it be neither
mine nor thine, but divide it; whereby the King discerned the Natural Mother,
and commanded the living Child to be given to her, ver. 24, 25, 26, 27.

Love filled your Heart to your living Child, Sorrow fills your Heart for your
dead Child. You had a lively frame of Heart, when your Child was living, but
now it is dead through overmuch sorrow, you have laid your dead Child in your
Bosom in the room of that Activity of Soul that before you had toward God, and
you lay claim to the dead Child, this dead Child is my Child: Alas this Child
that is dead is mine! But whose is your Heart and Love, God's, or your Child's?
Take heed, this be not the true answer during this fit of excessive sorrow, it
is not all God's, ^or all the Child's, but you have divided it between both,
and given half to the Living God, and half to the Dead Child. That sorrow that
causes you to make this division is excessive sorrow.

Q. 9. Is not that sorrow for your dead overmuch, when it all runs out to
them, that you are not sensible of, nor concerned for the Calamities of the
Church, nor Afflictions and Sufferings of the People of God? All your sorrow is
contracted, and all your Tears run in this one Channel for your dead Father, or
Mother, Husband, Wife, or Children; are not the Concerns of the Church of God
greater than your Selfish Matters? Are not the Sufferings, and Calamities,
Martyrdom by Burning, and Wracking, and Torturing of many dear to God, greater
Evils than the Natural death of your Relations? Did Christ shed his Blood for
his Church, and amongst all your Tears for your dead, cannot you drop one for
the Suffering Church of God? Are Men shedding their Blood, and for this cannot
you shed a Tear, when you have so many for one dead Child, or Husband, or Wife?
Should not the Concerns of the Glory of God in Public Affairs lie nearer your
Heart than a dead Relation, and wound deeper, and make you sorrow more? You are
ready to die with grief for one Child. I will tell you of one that lost two
Sons in a Battle at once, when also the Ark of God was taken; and when he heard
of the death of his two Sons he bore up, but as soon as mention was made of the
taking of the Ark of God, he fell down and died. This was Eli, 1 Samuel 4.17, 18.
And his Daughter in Law that was with Child near to be Delivered, hearing that
the Ark of God was taken, fell into Travail; the Women about her comforted her,
saying, Thou have born a Son, but she made them no answer, and regarded it not.
She called the Child's Name Ichabod, that is, Where is the Glory? For the Glory
is departed from Israel, because the Ark of the Lord is taken. She sorrowed
indeed for her Husband that was dead, and for her Father-in-law that was dead,
but more for the Ark of the Lord that was taken by the Enemies; for she
mentions this over and over, and gives up the Ghost and dies, 1 Samuel 4.19. to
the end. David when his Child was dead, leaves sorrowing for him, and prays
for the Church, Psalm. 51.18. But you cannot mitigate your sorrow for your dead
so much as to sorrow for the Evils that befall to the Church, nor pray to God
to help her to bear them, or that he would remove them; and while it is so,
your sorrow for your dead is excessive and immoderate sorrow.

Q 10. Is not that sorrow for your dead excessive and immoderate, whereby you
do discredit Religion, become a stumbling block to those that are already too
much prejudiced against the Holy Ways of God. While they see you thus all in
constant Tears, how are they ready to reflect upon and reproach your
Profession, and say, Is this their Hope and Confidence in God, whereof they
spoke when all was well with them? Is this their living by Faith, when
Creature Comforts fail them? Is this their boasting of God as their
All-sufficient Portion; and that they could find satisfying Comfort in one God,
when all outward Enjoyments are taken away? Where is their trusting in the
Promises of God, and their relying upon his Word? Where is their profiting by
so much hearing? And where is the return to all their praying? They said, All
things work together for their good; if they find it so, why do they weep and
mourn as if all things did work together for their hurt? They said, There were
such props and stays in their Religion as to b^ar up their Hearts in the sorest
Affl^ction, why then are they thus disquieted above other Men? And why do their
Hearts sink, and their Spirits fail them more than other Men's? They could speak
comfortable words to others in Affliction, but now it is come upon them, they
find no comfort in their own words, were they any more than words, vain and
empty talk? Are they not ready to retort upon you as Job's Friends upon him,
Job 4.3. Behold thou have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak
hands. 4. Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou have
strengthened the feeble knees. 5. But now it is come upon thee, and thou
faintest; ^t touches thee, and thou art troubled. 6. Is not this thy fear, thy
confidence, thy hope, and the uprightness of thy ways? Do you harden Men's
Hearts by your ex^essive sorrow, and is not that too much by which you render
Religion less Amiable in the Eyes of Men?

Q. 11. Is not that sorrow for your Dead ever-much, whereby your submission to
the Will of God is caused to be suspected? if you submit, why are you not
quieted? If you acquiesce in God's Dealings, why do you carry your self as if
you were discontented at his doings? Do not so many, and so long-continued
Tears look like the Tears of a murmuring, repining, discontented Mourner? Is
not your Carriage more like a Disputer with God, than a patient Bearer of his
Hand? You might have a sense and feeling of his Rod, and yet submit; but what
so^row is inconsistent with submission, is too much.

Q. 12. Is not that sorrow for your dead, whereby you lose much of your little
time to be allowed you, excessive and immoderate? Are not your days few, your
Life short, and hasting away; and have you nothing else to do with your time
but to waste it in such mourning for those that are removed out of time into
Eternity? Have not you much greater, and more necessary work to do for your own
Soul? Have not you the Pardon of Sin to get, which every day you do commit?
Have not you many Corruptions further to subdue? Have not you many Duties to
perform for your self, and toward your Relations that yet do live? Have not
you Children to instruct in the Principles of Religion? Have not you many
Temptations to resist, and many vain and sinful Thoughts to pray against, and
beg that they might not lodge in your Mind, nor find any quiet Entertainment
there? Have not you many Doubt s to be resolved, and many Fears to be expelled?
Have not you Assurance yet to seek, and your own Death to be prepared for; if
all this Work stand still, while your time is passing away in mourning for your
dead, your sorrow is immoderate.

CHAP. XII. The Remedies against Excessive Sorrow for our Dead. The First, That
their Death is a sleeping in Jesus. Four Notes about it: Ten Meditations upon
it.
THE third Work we have to do, is to enquire after an effectual Remedy against
excessive sorrow for our dead. What is easy unto others might be hard to me in
the practical part of this Inquiry. It is less Labor to prescribe the Cure
than to feel the powerful working of it. It is hard to have a due sense of
God's smarting Rod, and yet a patient submission to his Will. Man's Heart is
either stony and stupid under Gods Afflicting Hand, and does not feel it; or in
the sense of it does murmur and repine: Either when God smites we do not grieve
at all, or if we are sensible of the Wound, do mourn too much. Both these
Extremes have been already considered; now Lord direct me to the Golden Mean,
and guide me to the middle way which lies betwixt these two Extremes, that I
might grieve because of thine Hand, and yet might not over-grieve because it is
so heavy.

The Cure of excessive sorrow for our dead will be the better found by finding
out the cause thereof. The cause of it, God by his Apostle acquaints us is
Ignorance concerning the state of Believers after the separation of the Body
and the Soul: Or if we are not wholly ignorant, yet do not well consider what
we know; or if we do consider, yet do not firmly believe what we do consider
of. In opposition to these as the cause of ex^essive sorrowing as those do that
have no hop^; knowledge, due consideration, and an unshaken belief of the state
of departed Believers will come in as a Cure, Help an^ R medy of such
immoderate grief. Tho ma^y things might be had out of the whole Word of God,
which would much enlarge this Discourse, yet I shall (that I may Contract) pick
up the Apostles Arguments in the Text and following Verses of this Chapter, as
Alleviations of sorrow in this Case, because therein he treats designedly upon
this Subject: Concerning which it is as if he had said, Those that are ignorant
of, or do not believe the Resurrection of the D^ad, and a better Life
hereafter, have ever sorrowful Thoughts of those that are taken away by Death,
and mourn for them to excess. But I would not have you to cherish and maintain
such immoderate sorrows by Ignorance of their Case at present and hereafter.

The Helps against Immoderate Sorrow for our dead given in this Chapter might
be reduced to these Four General Heads of Argument.

1. The consideration of the state of the Bodies of departed Believers. They
are fallen asleep; and if they sleep in Jesus (as they do, v. 14.) they shall
do well.

2. The Knowledge and Belief of the state of the separated Soul. Their Souls
are with Christ Triumphant in Heaven, while their Bodies are sleeping in the
Grave; and these Souls he will bring back with him when he comes.

3. The certainty of the Resurrection of the Dead by the Reunion of the same
Souls with the same Bodies, and so Christ will bring the entire Man with him at
the day of Judgment. Thus the Hope in the Text, is the Hope of the Resurrection
of the Dead, and confirmed by the next words.

4. The Antecedent, Concomitant, and consequent Circumstances of the
Resurrection. That is what shall go before, what shall accompany, and what
shall follow after the raising of the dead; and all these are laid down in the
following part of this Chapter, which is a Spring and Fountain of Living,
Lively Comfort against excessive sorrow for the dead: And methinks I feel it
already to begin to work: It warms my Heart, it does begin to burn within my
Breast: My Affections move, and it seems to me that my sorrow is turning into
joy, and my heaviness into rejoicing, and am put to a stand, whether now I
shall call my Tears for my dead, Tears of Sorrow or of Joy. Have we been
sorrowing because she is dead? Methinks I cannot but joy that she sleeps in
Jesus: Have we been mourning because the Body is in the Grave? Oh how
delightful is it to me to think upon such good grounds, that the Precious and
Immortal Soul is above in yonder glorious Heaven, in the presence of the
Father, and Redeemer, and Comforter, and in the innumerable company of Angels
and saved Souls, perfectly Holy and Happy for ever? Have we been so much
troubled because the Body did fall at the parting stroke of death; methinks my
trouble is allayed when I am considering and certainly sure that it shall rise
and fall no more; Is it an aggravating sorrow to look back upon the
Circumstances of the Funeral: The Bearers carrying the Corpse upon their
Shoulders, the Mourning Relations following, and many sorrowful sympathizing
Friends coming after to see the dead Body lodged in its long Home? Methinks
another Affection is ready to take its turn, and to act its part, even Delight
and Joy, when I look forward and foresee the Lord a coming, and all his Holy
Angels with him, calling the dead to rise; they hear and come forth from their
sleeping places, and after Judgment go with their Lord into the highest
Heavens, in Body and Soul, not only to their long, but last, yea, Everlasting
Home, to Live, and Love, and Joy in God to all Eternity. Oh what difference is
there between believing Thoughts of these great and glorious certain things,
and those that have been daily running to the Grave, looking upon a consuming
Body? What wrong have I done my self in hastening to this part no more, and
coming to it no sooner? Why have we been looking so long in the Grave, in which
as such we can see nothing but death, and cry out, as the Men to Elisha
concerning their deadly Pottage, O thou Man of God, there is death in the Pot,
2 Kings 4.40. So we, there is death in the Grave. But when Elisha said, Then
bring Meal, and he cast it into the Pot, and he said, pour out for the people
that they may eat; and there was no harm in the Pot. So we should have looked
upon the Grave as a place where Christ before had been laid, and as a Bed for
the Bodies of Believers to sleep in till the Lord shall come, and we should
have seen no such great harm in the Grave to fill us with excessive sorrow.

Concerning this representation of death by sleeping, four things may be
premised as to this manner of Scripture expression.

1. Tho Beasts do die, yet their death in Scripture (that I know of) is never
called a Sleep; for they die to live no more. Death puts an end to their Life
without a Resurrection to it any more. They are only in this World, and not to
have Life in that World that Men are hastening too. They are not capable here
of Moral Government, of Sin or Grace, and so shall not be raised to undergo
Eternal Punishments, or to receive Eternal Rewards hereafter. Tho they do sleep
while they live, yet their death is not a sleep, because they shall die, but
never wake.

2. The death of ungodly Men is sometimes in Scripture called a sleep, tho more
seldom. The worst as well as the best, all Mankind in general, shall be raised
at the last day. As death is common to all, so shall the Resurrection of the
dead also be: Tho as there is a difference in their death, so shall there also
be in their Resurrection; but because they shall awake, therefore to them death
also is a sleep. Tho they had better to sleep on, than to awake and rise to be
tormented. Dan. 12.2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth
shall awake, some to ^verlasting Life, and some to Shame and Everlasting
Contempt; Expressed by Christ in these words, John 5.28. All that are in their
Graves shall hear his voice. 29. And shall come forth, they that have done good
unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil to the Resurrection
of Damnation.

3. It is most frequently used concerning the death of holy and believing
persons, that they may familiarize it to themsel^es, and get as great a
willingness to die, as to go to Bed and sleep. So God said to Moses, he should
sleep with his Fathers, Deuteronomy. 31.16. So of David, 2 Samuel 7.12. So Mat. 9.24.
When Christ said our Friend Lazarus sleeps; the Disciples thought he spoke of
his taking natural rest in sleep, but after explained his meaning, saying, he
is dead, John 11.11, 12, 13. So Acts 13.36.

4. The Expression of sleeping in Jesus is to be understood peculiarly of the
death of true Believers that shall be awaked to live with him in Eternal Glory,
1 These. 4.15. Impenitent Persons go night after night to their Beds, and sleep
in their Sin, and at last die in their Sin. But it is peculiar to sanctified
Persons to die in the Lord, and sleep in Jesus.

Carnal unbelieving Men might laugh this Doctrine to Scorn, as they did Jesus
that taught it, and say, We know that they are dead. And death is death
whatsoever name you call it by; and what Comfort can we have from Words and
Names against such a real Evil as death is. Luke 8.49. Thy daughter is dead,
trouble not the Master. 52. And all wept and bewailed her, but he said weep
not, she is not dead but sleeps. 53. And they laughed him to scorn, knowing
that she was dead. But since the most Wise and Ever-living God has called
death so often by such a Name, there is some supporting Comfort in it against
the fears of our o^n, and excessive sorrow for the death of ot^ers. Let Us
search and try.

1. Our Dead are sleeping, therefore they are at rest from all Troubles from
men. Those that would not suffer them to rest in Life, cannot hinder their rest
in Death: They that would not let them rest in their Beds in their Houses upon
Earth, will let them rest in the Bed of the Grave, the house appointed for all
the living, in the Bowels of the Earth; or if they should dig up their dry
Bones, yet they cannot hereby disturb their rest, for they are not sensible of
any more trouble. To go to Bed and sleep, and to go to Bed and take our rest,
are words importing the same thing. Isa. 57. 1. -- The Righteous are taken away
from the evil to come. 2. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their
Beds. Job 3.11. Why dyed I not from the Womb? 13. For now should I have lain
still, and been qui^t, I should have slept: then had I been at rest. 17. There
the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest. 18. There the
Prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the Oppressor. 19. The
small and great are there, and the Servant is free from his Master.

2. Death as a Sleep affords us the meditati^n of that freedom that our Dead
have from those pains, and sense of them which they had before they fell
Asleep: Then they did complain of pain in one part, and sometimes in another,
and another while that their pain was all over in every part: Are not the sound
of their words yet in our Ears, You do not know what we do feel. All their
wearisome days are now over, and their tedious nights are past and gone; there
is no more wishing in the Evening, O that it were Morning; nor in the Morning,
O that it were Evening: There is no more complaining, This Night is a long
Night, because it is a painful Night; and this Day is a tedious Day, because it
is a Day of so great and sharp Affliction: Their Life is gone, and all their
Sickness, Pain and bodily Griefs are all gone. As when a Person in his Sickness
has something given him to cause him to sleep, in his sleep he is not sensible
of his Sickness; so those that are fallen asleep, in that sleep are no more
sensible of such Pains that with us they complained of.

3. Death as a Sleep, yields us these Thoughts, that our Dead are freed from
all worldly Cares, and piercing Sorrows those Cares did bring along with them.
If Persons have had their Heads full of worldly Thoughts all the Day, and have
busied them in buying, and selling, and trading, in contriving and projecting
for their worldly Interest and Advantage, yet when fast asleep in their Beds,
they mind none of all these things; they matter not, nor do they regard what
others awake are doing, nor whither they are going; nor the Pleasures they are
taking, nor the Evil they are suffering, nor the Sin they are committing. All
these things that took up their Thoughts when alive, they are freed from when
fallen asleep. 2 Kings 22.20. Behold I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and
thou shall be gathered into thy Grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see
all the Evil that I will bring upon this place: In this Sleep they are so
quiet, that they do not so much as dream of any of these things.

4. Death as a sleep, tho it be a deep sleep, helps us to the Thoughts how
easy it will be for God to awaken them: They sleep so fast, that no created
power can raise them out of their sleep, but it is more easy to Almighty Power
to awaken those that are sleeping in their Graves, than for you to awaken one
that is sleeping in his Bed. Lazarus was sleeping in his Grave, Christ gave a
call, spoke the word, Lazarus come forth, and he that was dead, came forth; and
though he was bound hand and foot with Grave-cloaths, yet he came forth, Joh.
11.43, 44. So Christ with a word, with a call, waked Jairus his Daughter out of
the sleep of Death, Jesus called, saying, Maid arise, and her Spirit came
again, and she arose straightway, Luke 8.54, 55. So also the Son of the Widow
of Naim, dead and carried out to be Buried, Christ did but touch the Bier, or
Coffin, and say, Young man, I say to thee, arise, and he that was dead sat up,
and began to speak. Luk 7.14, 15. If Death be a sleep, this is our Comfort, it
is easy for God to awaken them.

5. Death as a Sleep administers this comfortable matter to our minds, that it
will not be a perpetual sleep: For being but a sleep, they can be awakened, and
because it is a Sleep, they shall be awakened; for if your Child, or Father, or
Mother, or your self at Night go to Bed and sleep, do not you reckon and
suppose you shall wake in the Morning? And you are not troubled to lay your
Child asleep, when you have hopes and expectation it will wake again: When did
you go to sleep, without waking after sleep? This Comfort, this representation
of Death does bring unto us, that as we saw the time when ours fell asleep, so
there will be a Day when they shall awake.

6. Death as a Sleep suggests to our Thoughts, that the Bodies of th^se that
Sleep in Jesus shall be much altered for the best, when they awake out of their
sleep. If you are weary with Working or Traveling all the Day, you go to sleep
at Night, and in the Morning you say, tho you went weary to Bed, yet by Sleep
you are greatly refreshed, and as fit to Work or Travel as you were the Day
before. When your Child complains he is not well, you hasten to have him to
Bed, and say, go to sleep, You will be better after you have slept. Sure I am,
these Bodies that are sick, and weak, and weary, when they fall Asleep in Jesus
will be wonderfully refreshed, and be much better, when after this Sleep they
shall awake.

7. Death as a Sleep teaches us, that it is no trouble to them that are in
their Graves, that they do not know when they shall awake. Is this any trouble
to a living Man fast asleep in his Bed, that he knows not when the day will
dawn, and the Morning-light appear, and he awake? he sleeps on, and concerns
himself with no such Thoughts. We that are alive think, when shall our Dead
arise? how long must they sleep there? That which troubles us is no trouble
unto them.

8. Death it self, as a Sleep, ch^cks our Immoderate Sorrow for those that are
fallen asleep. They sleep, and you take on as if you had no hope that they
would ever wake. What says the Text, they are fallen asleep; do not ye sorrow
as those that have no hope. When did you mourn, because your Relation in due
season went to sleep? If they have been Sick, and could not sleep, it grieve
your Heart, and so it also would, if your nearest Friends lay sick, and full of
pain, tormented day and night, with sighs and groans piercing your Ears and
Hearts, should they long lie thus, and could not recover, nor yet dye, it would
grieve you that they could not dye, insomuch that by such sights and hearings
of the Sick and pained, whom they loved with entire Love, some have gone to
their knees, and begged of God to give them a release by Death; and were better
satisfied when they were fallen asleep, and thereby delivered.

9. Death as a Sleep, tho it be a long sleep, teaches us, that it seems not
long to them that sleep. A M^n that is fast asleep, and sleeps long, he does
not tell the Clock, nor number the Hours, nor thinks it long that he does
sleep, and when he wakes, he thinks the time was not long, but quickly gone;
when to one that watches while he sleeps, it seems to be a tedious time.
When they that live and wake, while others in their Graves do sleep, reckon the
days, then the weeks, next the months, at last the years that our Father, or
Mother, Husband or Wife, or Child has been dead; and say, so long, so many
years they have been sleeping in their Graves: It is long to you but not to
them, they know no Nights or Days, no Weeks, or Months, or Years to reckon by,
a thousand years is no longer to them than an hour seems to you. Adams Body
has been sleeping some thousands of years already, and yet all those years,
and what are yet to come till he shall awake, but like one hour unto him. Why
should we discompose our Minds with the thoughts of their long Sleep, when they
themselves are not concerned at it, nor to them does it seem long?

10. Death as a Sleep, because it is a sleep that is Death, brings us these
tidings of Comfort, that they are sleeping their last Sleep, and when they
awake shall sleep no more: For when they live again, they shall dye no more;
therefore now let us moderate our Sorrow for those that are asleep in Jesus,
for they are at rest from pains and cares, God can easily awaken them, and he
will, after their Sleep they shall be refreshed; tho it be a long Sleep it
seems not so to them: it is indeed their last, but not an everlasting sleep;
they sleep quietly, let not us sorrow excessively, but every Night when we put
off our Clothes, think we must put off this Body, and lie down in our Graves as
we do in our Beds, and shall our selves sleep in the Dust with them that are
gone to sleep before us.

CHAP. XIII. The Second Remedy against excessive Sorrow, is the Glorified State
of the Soul immediately after its separation, proved. The Souls Triumph in its
first entrance into Heaven. The Meditation thereof -- The Survivors Comfort.
THE Second Remedy against Excessive Sorrow for the Death of those that dyed in
the Lord, is the knowledge and belief of the Glorious State of the separated
Soul, while the Body lies sleeping in the Grave.

The Body is the more ignoble part, the Grave a more formidable place; yet from
thence there is something of Support, when both are considered according to
what is s^id of both in the Scripture, as to such as were truly holy when they
lived: But if we call off our Thoughts from the Body and the Grave, that they
may ascend and follow the Soul, the more precious part, into the highest
Heavens, the most Glorious place, what cause of Joy, what matter of Rejoicing,
what reason of changing our Mourning into Garments of Praise, and our Spirit of
heaviness into gladness and lively thankfulness to God, that those that are
gone from us are received by him: That whom we have lost, he has found, and
those whom we must enjoy on Earth no more, are enjoying God in yonder glorious
highest Heavens for evermore.

Controversies are not profitable at this season, nor suitable to the present
temper of our Spirits, in the Circumstances now we are under, nor consistent
with that brevity that I labor for, therefore two things only I shall now
endeavor: First, To select some Texts of Scripture that do assure us what
state of Joy and Happiness the separated Soul of a Child of God does pass into.
Secondly, What ground of Comfort against our Sorrow; this is to us that yet are
left behind.

1. What clearer Evidence, what surer Arguments, what better Proof, what
greater satisfaction can we have in this Point, than what Scripture does
afford? For cannot God that is the Father of Spirits, and the Disposer of
Souls, after their Dissolution, and being separated from the Body, best tell
what does become of them? And will he that is faithful, and Essential Truth
deceive us? Or need he, that is absolute Lord and Sovereign, perfectly happy in
himself, to flatter us, or to gain our Obedience to him, by promises of Eternal
Rewards, and everlasting Joys and Glory, if there were not such a Ssate
prepared for us? Where God speaks, let us believe, and his Veracity is reason
why we should. Then let us hear. Luke 16.22. It came to pass that the Beggar
dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. Luke 23.43. Verily I
say unto thee, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Act. 7.29. And they
stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. 2
Cor. 5.1. For we know, that if our earthly house of this Tabern^cle were
dissolved, we have a Building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens. 2. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon,
with our house which is from Heaven. 4 For we in this Tabernacle do groan,
being burdened: not for that we should be unclothed, but clothed upon, that
mortality might be swallowed up of life. 6. Therefore we are always confident,
knowing that whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord. 8.
We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to
be present with the Lord: Phil. 1.23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having
a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. Heb. 12.23. To
the spirits of just men made perfect.

2. Then why do we Mourn on Earth for those that are Rejoicing in Heaven? Do we
weep for their Joy? Is that our Love unto them, to have such Sorrow for them?
What if there be one, or two, or ten fewer in our Family on Earth, if there be
so many the more in Heaven? What mean these bleared Eyes, this pale and
macerated Face, what means this washing of your Cheeks with Tears, these sighs,
and sobs, and groans? Are they got safe into the place they prayed, hoped,
longed for? and do we grieve they have their Prayers answered, their Hopes
obtained, and their Longing Souls are fully and for ever sa^isfied? What if as
they went to Heaven they took Death in their way? could they have gotten
thither without dying? Is dying a greater Evil, than all the Joys and Happiness
they are possessed of, is good? Would they leave that State above, to choose to
be here below, as they were before? Conceive if it be not beyond all your
Conceptions, what Joy, and Praise, and heavenly Delight and holy Triumph the
separated Soul of your dear holy Relation was filled with at its first
beholding the Lord Jesus Christ in his Majesty and Glory in the other World.
Who can tell its ravishing Pleasures, its transporting Delights, its fullness
of Joy at the first view of its blessed Lord and Savior? Is this the Jesus
that was buf^eted, and scourged, and spit upon, that is thus Beautiful as now I
behold him? Is this that Blessed Lord that was falsely Accused, unjustly
Condemned, and cruelly Crucified, that I now do see sat down upon his Glorious
Throne? Is this he that was vilified more than any Man, that I see thus exalted
above all these Glorious Angels round about? I heard of his Majesty, and
Beauty, and Glory from Ministers in their Sermons, but what they said was not
equal to what I see: O the Love, the Love, the Love that I do feel to him that
dyed for me, that Redeemed me by his Blood to bring me to this glorious ^lace,
this glorious place! I never before was in, I never saw such a glorious place,
such Glorious Company. I heard of it, but before I never saw the like; the like
there is not to be seen. Christ in Heaven, and I with him! all these Angels in
Heaven, and I with them! all these Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and happy, holy
Souls in Heaven, and I with them! I see such things I never saw, I hear such
things I never heard! I feel, I feel such Love and Joy, that does transcend all
the thoughts I had of Heaven before I came into it. O happy day that I came
hither! O joyful hour, I left my Body till it be raised, and partake with me in
what I do enjoy! I am but newly come into this Glorious State, I am but now
entered into this triumphant Society; and what praises are these? What Songs and
Hallelujahs? what divine and heavenly melody do I hear? And what is my delight,
and Love and Joy? it is great, it is great, I never knew the like it is so
exceeding great: Love, and never doubt whether I do love! Be loved, and never
question whether I am beloved! Question and Doubt! here is no room for such
doubtings: Do I enjoy what I enjoy, and can I doubt whether I do enjoy it? it
is so full, I cannot doubt: it is so sweet, I cannot Question it. O blessed
Day, in which I was made thus blessed! O blessed be this God that chose me to
this blessed place! O Blessed Savior, that by thy Blood did Redeem me, and
purchase this Glory for me! O Blessed, Eternal Spirit, that did fit me, and
prepare me for it, and did guide me to it! and being here, I shall be here
for ever. I am where I would be, and do not desire to be but where I am: And
this I know, that where I am, I shall for ever be, and this God I shall ever
love, with perfect love, and the more is my love, the more is my joy, and
because my Love shall be perfect for ever, my Joy shall be complete for ever?

Is this the Soul we are Mourning for, because it is separated from its Body?
Is this the State, and infinitely beyond this, that the Souls of our departed
Friends are gone unto, and do we sit and sob as if we were undone? Do we weep
and wail, and lay their absence from us to Heart so much, that makes us look
more like their Enemies than their Friends? and more like Strangers to that
State above, than Expectants of it? or as if we were rather Unbelievers, than
Believers of Christ, his Word, and of the happiness of Heaven? Think, O think,
but alas it is more than you can think, what departed holy Souls enjoy from
that moment, or day, that you saw them draw their last breath, and rather
desire to be with them, than Mourn that they are gone from you.

CHAP. XIV. The Resurrection of the Dead great ground of Comfort in our Sorrow
for them: As also the Qualities and Endowments of their Bodies, when raised.
THE Third Remedy against Excessive Sorrow for the Dead, is sure knowledge, and
firm belief of the Resurrection unto Life: Death is opposed to Life, as being
the privation of it; the Resurrection is opposed to Death, as being a
restoration to Life: The one is the cause of our Sorrow, the other is a solid
ground of Christian Comfort. It is a Doctrine unknown by the Light of Nature,
it is undeniably proved by the Holy Scripture. The Heathens hearing Paul preach
the Resurrection of the Dead, did deride and mock, Act 17.32. for they did
judge it a thing incredible, that the dead should be raised, Act 26.8. This was
the reason they sorrowed for their de^d so immoderately, because they had no
hope that they should live again; and the Resurrection and Christian Hope are
conjoined, the one being the Foundation of the other. Act. 23.6. Of the hope
and resurrection of the dead, I am called into question. Act. 24.14. And have
hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a
Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. If the Resurrection be
granted, hope must be allowed, and the more hope of this, the more mitigation
of sorrow for the Dead, because they shall live again.

In this copious Subject, I must omit many things, and content my self with so
much as is sufficient for my present design, which may be done in these two
things: (1.) That there is sufficient foundation for our Faith, that the Dead
shall surely live again. (2.) That their Bodies for which we mourn, because
d^ad and buried, shall not only be the same for substance, but in respect of
Qualities, shall far exceed what they were while they lived, or when they dyed:
And the Faith of this wi^^ be as much cause of Joy, as their Death was of
Sorrow, and more abundant.

In the first of these, three things give me full satisfaction. 1. Taken from
God. 2. From Christ. 3. The absurdities that must unavoidably follow the denial
of the Resurrection of the Dead.

First in this Article of our Faith (from whence I check my Sorrow for the
Dead, that it may be kept within bounds) three things in God, (so considered by
us, tho one in him) remove my Doubts, confirm my Hopes in this Case: 1. The
Wisdom. 2. The Power. 3. The Will of God.

1. God being Infinite in Wisdom and Knowledge, I am fully satisfied, that he
knows the number of the dead, and where their Bodies were buried, or
consumed, and which are the bones and Skull, and Dust of one, and which of
another: for this is knowable in it self, and therefore God knows these, and
all other circumstances of the Dead, or else his Knowledge would be limited and
finite Knowledge, and not extended to every thing that may be known, which is
contrary to Natural Reason, to Scripture and Religion, and to the Infinite
Perfection of the Divine Nature; to deny this Knowledge in God, is to Blaspheme
him.

2. God being Infinite in Power, is able to raise all the Dead, all which, and
every particle of all of them being thus known to him; to raise the Dead is an
Act of Power, and not of weakness, and is possible, and not a contradiction.
Cannot the same Power that made all things out of nothing, cause these dead-out
of something to live again? Cannot the same Power that at first formed Man's
Body of the dust of the ground, and caused it to live, make these Bodies to
live again, tho they be turned into dust? Cannot God do what he has done?
Cannot he do all that is possible to be done? Is not that which has been done
to some, possible to be done to others? Are there not many Examples in the
Scripture that this has been done? Have not many Dead been raised to Life? The
Resurrection of the Dead being in the rank of things possible, comes within the
reach of Divine Almighty Power, which to deny is to blaspheme, these two being
manifest; to complete the Argument, add,

3. God has declared his Will and Purpose that the Dead shall live again. We
cannot argue from the Power of God, that a thing shall be, because he is able
to do it, because he does not will to do all that he can do; but we might argue
from his Will, that what he does will to do, shall be done, because he has
Power to do whatsoever he will. Men might have a will to do some things, but
they have not Power answerable to their Will, and they often would, but never
can; but though God be not Omnivolent, to will every thing he can, yet he is
Omnipotent, to do whatsoever he will.

Wherefore our reasoning issues in this, Whether it be the Will of God that
the Dead shall be raised to life? The fundamental Error of the Sadduces denying
the Resurrection of the Dead, Christ shows was in their Ignoronce of these two
Principles, the Power and the Will of God, which is revealed in the Scripture.
Mat. 22.29. Jesus answered, and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God. The Scriptures do abound in this, fully
assuring us that it is his Will, that all the Dead shall be raised, the Wicked
to Damnation, the Righteous to Life everlasting: If you doubt, read these
Texts, Job 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the Earth. 26. And tho after my skin, Worms destroy this
body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God. 27. Whom I shall see for my self, and
mine eyes shall behold, and not another, tho my reins be consumed within me.
Joh. 5.28. The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the Graves shall
hear his voice. 29. And shall come forth, they that have done good unto the
Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the Resurrection of
damnation. Joh. 6.38. For I came down from Heaven, not to do my own will, but
the Will of him that sent me. What Is that? 39. And this is the Fathers will
which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing,
but should raise it up again at the last day. These are comfortable words of
Christ to us: What a strict Charge is here of the Father given to Christ! My
Son, I give you so many men, and charge you with them, that you lose not any
one of them, but that you raise every one of them at the last day, and set them
before me in Body and Soul in my heavenly Kingdom. Do you fear, lest among so
many millions to be raised, any one of yours should be left in the Grave, and
never raised? Would not then such be lost? and is not that contrary to the
Charge given to Christ? and contrary to the Fathers Will? Are not you satisfied
that Christ has, and will do his Father's Will in every Point? Hear his words:
40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one that sees the
Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up
at the last day. Are not you yet satisfied with these words of him that is
able, and can, and faithful, and will, do what he says, reaching to every one,
without the losing of any one? The Father that sent me, has declared his Will
that I should, and so I will raise every one of these at the last day. Believe,
and sorrow for your Dead with no more degrees of Sorrow than becomes one that
does believe that Christ will raise them up at the last day. John 11.24. Martha
said to him, I know that he shall rise again, in the Resurrection at the last
day: 25. Jesus said unto her, I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that
believes in me, tho he were dead, yet shall he live. John 6.44. No man can
come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him: and I will raise
him up at the last day. 54. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has
Eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day, 1 Cor. 15. throughout.
Rev. 20.12. And I saw the Dead small and great stand before God -- 13. And the
Sea gave up the dead which were in it, and Death and Hell [or the Grave]
delivered up the d^ad which were in them. Now the Grave and Death hold your
Relations that are under their Power fast, so fast that now there is no help,
and you therefore sorrow; but the day will come, when Death and the Grave shall
deliver them up, and hold them no longer; here is matter of Hope, therefore do
not sorrow as those that have no Hope.

Secondly, The indissoluble connection betwixt the Resurrection of Christ, and
Believers that sleep in him, may assuredly satisfy us, that such shall also be
raised. Firmly believe the one, and you cannot, or need not doubt of the other,
1 Cor. 15.12. Now if Christ be preached, that he rose from the dead, how say
some among you, that there is no Resurrection of the dead. 13. But if there be
no Resurrection of the dead, then Christ is not risen. 15. -- Whom he raised
not up, if so be the dead rise not. 16. For if the dead rise not, then is not
Christ raised. 1 These. 4.14. For if we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again,
even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.

Thirdly, The gross Absurdities that unavoidably follow the denial of the Deads
being raised, may confirm us that they shall be raised. They are such as these:

1. Then Christ is not risen, 1 Cor. 15.13.

2. If Christ be not risen, and so the Dead shall not be raised, then Ministers
preaching, and Peoples believing is all in vain, v. 14.

3. Then the Apostles were Liars, and false, for they affirmed both, 1 Cor.
15.15. and in other Texts.

4. Then those that are Dead in Christ, are perished, v. 18.

5. Then the best men are the most miserable, v. 19.

6. Then a floodgate is opened to all wickedness, v. 32.

7. Gods People then are weakened for doing or suffering, v. 58.

8. Then Gods Covenant with his People is broke, Mat. 22.39, etc.

Secondly, Besides the certainty of the Resurrection of the Dead, the
consideration of the Properties, Qualities and Endowments of their Bodies which
shall arise, administers more Comfort to us, and consequently will be a further
mitigation of our Sorrow. God has not only assured us that these dry Bones,
consumed Bodies shall live, but also has foretold us what manner of Bodies
they then shall be, far more noble and excellent than when they lived or died.

1. They shall be raised Immortal and Incorruptible Bodies. While they lived
with us they were always mortal, and did admi^ister matter of fe^r unto us,
while we often said, (...) thought, What if my Husband should die? or what i^
my Father or Mother should die? These were fretting fears, and caused many
distr^cting Cares, or troubled us sitting at our Table, or lying in our Beds,
because we knew they were always subject to Death, and li^ble to its stroke,
and we kn^w not how soon (tho in Health) they might be taken from us; and so
the fe^rs of their dying abated our Comfort in th m while they were living,
because we looked upon them as dying Comforts, and going from us, whilst they
were with us. But when the^, live again, they shall die no more, Death shall
have no more dominion over them: Then they shall be above the stroke of death
and the fears thereof, and it shall be no more a King of Terrors unto them: But
as Christ their He^d has said, Rev. 1.18. I am he that lives, and was dead,
and behold I am alive for evermore. Amen; so all these his Members shall say,
We are they that live, and were dead, and behold we are alive for evermore.
Amen. This is truth, so it is. When Death came in by Sin, all mankind became
subject unto Death: When Sin was turned out by death, and these Bodies shall be
raised, no more polluted with it, they shall be as free from Death as they
shall from Sin; before they did die, they were to die: When they were dead, and
shall live again, Death has done its worst, has done its all, and has no
more that it can do. Death did conquer them, and laid and kept them Prisoners
in the Grave; but when they shall be raised to Life, and redeemed from the
Grave, they shall conquer Death, and then this last Enemy shall be destroyed,
and in the morning of the Resurrection these revived Bodies, united to their
Souls, shall sing that triumphant Song, O Death where is thy sting! O Grave
where is thy victory? Death and Grave did swallow us up, but now the Destroyers
are destroyed, the Spoilers are spoiled, and both are swallowed up in victory.
Thus the Bodies that were sown in corruption, shall be raised in incorruption,
1 Cor. 15.42.54, 55. then Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life, 2 Cor. 5.4.

2. They shall be raised powerful and impassible Bodies. While they lived here,
they were weak and suffering Bodies, enduring hunger and cold, and thirst;
crying out of Pains and Sickness, or torments by Chollick, Gout and Stone, and
Rheumatisms, shaken by Agues, and scorched by Feavors, and swelling with
Dropsy, torn with Coughs, overflowed with Catarrhs, and liable to hundreds of
Diseases, insomuch that they died daily, yea died many Deaths before they died,
and many Sicknesses put them to more and greater pains in time of Life, than
Death it self did put some of them to in the point of Death; but when they
shall live again, as they shall die no m^re, so they shall suffer no more, nor
be sick any more, feel hunger and thirst no more, and so shall grieve, nor
groan, weep or sigh, or sob no more for ever; no more aching He^ds, no more
pained Bowels, no more Griefs of any sort whatsoever.

Indeed the Bodies of the Wicked shall be raised Immortal, but subject to
suffering, they shall feel more pains and torments after they are raised, than
ever they did before they died, and their Immortality shall be the aggravation
of their misery; for die again they would, but cannot; return to their Grave
again, where they felt nothing, they would, but must not; because they must
live for ever, they must be tormented for ever. Immortality of Bodies at the
Resurrection, to the Wicked is a Curse and Plague, to the Godly it is a
Blessing and a Favor conferred upon them, for though they were sown in weakness,
they shall be raised in power, 1 Cor. 15.43.

3. They shall be raised Spiritual Bodies, not turned into Spirits, for then
they would not be Bodies; Spirits have not material Eyes, with which Job said
he should see his Redeemer at the last day with those he then had, and not with
others; if it were not the same Bodies in substance, it would not be a
Resurrection, but a new product on. They shall then be Spiritual Bodies, in
this respect, that their manner of Life, shall be like the Life of Spirits,
having no need of Meat, or Drink, or Sleep, or any such things whereby our
Natural Bodies in this Life are supported and maintained. In which respect
Christ asserts that they shall be as the Angels, Mat. 22.30. In the
Resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in Marriage, but are as the
Angels of God in Heaven. This will be a great privilege of Bodies raised from
the dead at the last day, for n^^ we spend a great part of our Life in Sleep,
for the refreshing of our Natural Bodies, ar^ in that time we are not, nor
cannot be taken up with Admirations of God, nor Contemplations of Divine
things, but after the Resurrection there shall be no interruptions nor
intermissions in our praising of God, in our Loving of him, and delighting in
him. Our Natural Bodies now require time to be fed, in sitting at our Tables:
when they are empty, we are pained with hunger, when they are full, we are
indisposed for Holy Work, and Heavenly Praises; but a whole Eternity shall be
filled with constant Hallelujahs, and Spiritual Rejoycings, when our Bodies
shall be raised Spiritual Bodies, and such they shall be, 1 Cor. 15.44. It is
sown a natural Body, it is raised a spiritual Body. There is a Natural Body,
and there is a Spiritual Body.

4. They shall be raised glorious Bodies. Now our bodies are vile Bodies, Phil.
3.21. How full of ill Humors, and loathsome Corruption! Why should any be
proud of a comely Face, when he might think what he is within? Now they are
Cottages of Clay, Tabernacles of Earth, a Mass of breathing, walking Mould. God
did mend the Matter, else our Bodies are as vile as the Earth we tread upon;
for out of it they were taken, and into it they are returning; but this is
wonderderful, that Bodies so vile while they live, and more loathsome when
dead, and rotting in the Grave, should at last be raised as glorious as so many
glittering Stars, Dan. 12.3. Did I say, as glittering Stars? Christ says as so
many shining Suns. Mat. 13.43. Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun
in the Kingdom of their Father. Who can express the difference betwixt a dead
Body in the Grave, and the Sun shining in the Heavens? Yet so much shall be the
difference between the same Body in the Grave, and raised at the last day. 1
Cor. 15.43. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory.

5. They shall be raised perfect and beautiful Bodi^s. If they were maimed
here, they shall be entire then; if blind now, they shall have Sight to see the
Lord Redeemer, and the Glory of the Place above, and of the Company in that
Palace of the King of Glory* if they were any way deformed here, any part
redundant, any part exorbitant o^ defective, this deformity shall be removed,
and Beauty shall be their Clothing all over: for whatsoever came in by sin,
and is the Punishment and Effects of Sin in such respects upon the Body, when
the Cause is removed, such Evils shall ^ot remain.

6. They shall be raised holy and without the least spot or stain of Sin, or
inclinati^n to it. Now the Body is defiled with sin, and the parts of it are
too often the Instruments of Sin: Eyes beholding Vanity, and Windows to let in
wickedness into the Heart and Thoughts; our Tongues too often speak to Gods
dishonor; our Feet too often run into the ways of Sin, our Appetite too often
overrules our Reason, and we have cause to cry out, Who shall deliver us from
this Body of Sin and Death? Who shall? God when he delivers our Bodies from
Death, and raises them out of their Graves, will deliver them from all
filthiness of the Flesh, and Christ shall present them pure and spotless,
without wrinkle, or any such thing, ^ph. 5.27.

7. If I cannot say all, let me say that which comprehends all, they shall be
rais^d like to Christ's glorified Body: Say our Souls in Heaven shall be like
Christ's Soul, and our Bodies raised and taken thither shall be like Christ's
glorious Body. If we cannot utter the Excellency of the heavenly Qualities and
Endowments of the Bodies of those that sleep in Jesus, when they shall be
awaked, say they shall be like to Christ's glorious Body: If you cannot conceive
it in your Minds, think they shall be like Christ's glorious Body; and if you
cannot think how great that is, do not mourn that your holy Friends are gone
before in their Souls to see that glorious Jesus, whose Glory is so great, that
it does transcend all your thoughts; and spend your time in holy preparing, and
earnest Looking for his coming, than in excessive sinful Mourning for their
dead Bodies, that shall be made like his at his coming. Phil. 3.20. For our
conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ. 21. Who sball change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious Body. Lord, how can this be, that such Clods of Earth, and
lumps of Clay, when turned into Dust in the Grave, should be made like to the
Body of the glorious exalted Jesus? How! according to the working whereby he is
able to subdue all things to himself. There must be great ability and power to
make this change, a body so vile to be so glorious, this Power must be Almighty
Power, even such as can do any thing, as can subdue all things; and this Power
so mighty must be working Power, to make such a Body that all the Power of all
the Angels in Heaven is too weak to do.

Now let those that overmuch sorrow for their Dead that sleep in Jesus,
consider if they have any cause or reason so to do. You look upon their dead
Bodies in the Coffin, before they are nailed up; and your Eye is filled with
tears, and your Heart with sorrow. You think of them as they are mouldring and
rotting in the grave, and you can scarce bear these thoughts. Have you not
another Eye? Can you have no other thoughts? Have not you an Eye of Faith to
look beyond the Coffin and the Grave to a joyful glorious Resurrection? and see
what Bodies they shall be when they shall be raised? They are in their Graves,
and you can see them no more: but you can say, Tho their Grave is filled up,
and I cannot set mine Eyes upon them, yet methinks I see how there they lie,
and how they do consume: and if you had an Eye of Faith, which makes things to
come as if they were present, you might say, Methinks I see their Bodies
raised; methinks I see how beautiful, how powerful, how glorious they be;
methinks I see them shining as the Sun; if you did, would not this delight your
thoughts, stop your excessive Tears, and remove your immoderate sorrow? but if
you are purblind and cannot see afar off, your sorrow will be nearer.

CHAP. XV. The Fourth Remedy against excessive Sorrow, the Antecedents,
Concomitants, and Consequ^nts of the Resurrection of those that sleep in Jesus.
The First, Christ Himself will come for their Redemption from the Grave.
THE Fourth Argument for the mitigating of our Sorrow for our Deceased that
sleep in Jesus brought by the Apostle, is the Antecedents, Concomitants and
Consequents, that is, the things that shall go before, accompany, ^^d follow
after their being awaked out of their sleep, and Resurrection from their
Graves: All of them exceeding wonderful and glorious, and when known and
believed firmly will be exceeding comfortable unto us, as they are in
themselves greatly desirable. Oh that God would give us that Faith, that might
enable us to look upon them as sure and near at hand, yea that may presentiate
them unto us, tho yet they are future, that it may be the substance, or
subsistence, or as it were the ready presence of such things hoped for, and the
evidence or convincing demonstration of things not yet seen, as if we did now
behold them with our Eyes, which is the nature, power, and working of a lively
Faith, Heb. 11.1. then should we now wipe tears from our Eyes, in the
fore-believing views thereof, as God will do then, when we shall actually
behold them; then our Sorrow would now be turned into Joy, and our Heaviness
into Rejoicing; now we know, and say, they are dead, and therefore Sorrow
fills our Hearts; but let us believe what is revealed concerning them, that
they shall be raised, and what great and glorious things shall then be done to
them, and for them, and let the Faith of the one make us as joyful, as the
Knowledge of the other at present makes us sorrowful. These Remedies for the
asswaging of our sorrow, may be reduced to these five general Heads: But
remember, it is not the bare Notion of them, nor cursory talking of them, nor
superficial thinking of them, but our serious pondering, and powerful,
practical Believing of them, and the Spirits effectual applying, and laying
them warm to our Hearts, that must he the Cure to those that are deeply
sorrowful for their Dead.

1. The Lord Himself will descend from Heaven, to fetch them out of their
Graves, v. 16.

2. The Solemnity of his Coming, and his Attendants waiting upon him, and the
Call that shall then be given to them to awake, arise, and come forth out of
their Graves. For he shall come with a shout, with the Voice of the Archangel
[and of others,] and with the Trump of God, v. 16.

3. The Prerogative of those that sleep in Jesus above those that then shall be
found alive, the Dead shall have the precedence of the Living, that the Dead
shall be raised, before the [then] Living shall be changed. V. 15. For this we
say unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto
the Coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep. V. 16. -- the
Dead in Christ shall rise first.

4. The Dead in Christ being raised first, and after that the Living changed,
both shall be caught up together in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air. v.
17. Are our Hearts almost dead with sorrow? Where is our Faith? Here is the
Word of the li^ing, faithful God, declaring Wonders that shall be done for the
Dead in Christ, but where is our Faith? Here is our sorrow, but where is our
Faith? Behold, the Lord comes down from Heaven; behold, the Dead come up out of
their Graves, behold, they that long lodged and slept under ground, are caught
up, and carried from off this Earth into the Air, where their Lord and they do
meet: O happy, joyful meeting! not only Bodies and Souls do now meet, after so
long a parting, but which is more, their Lord and they do meet, after so long
sleeping: Lord, here is our Faith, and our sorrow is abated.

5. The eternal Enjoyment of God and Christ in the highest Heavens. V. 17. --
and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Now we see where they that are Lodged in
the Grave, sleeping in Jesus, shall at last be Lodged, rejoicing in Jesus, and
therefore now let us be the less sorrowful. And that our Faith concerning
these may be increased, and thereby our sorrow may be diminished, let us take
them up, and view them again.

I. Is it nothing for the asswaging of our sorrow, that our Lord will come
himself from Heaven, to raise them up out of their Graves? If you say, Who can
cause these dry Bones to live, and cloth them with flesh, and cover them both
with skin, and bring them out of these deep and dark sleeping places? the
Answer is ready, the Lord can: He can, but the Question is, whether he will? he
has declared and promised that he will. He will? While he was on Earth he
raised some, but now he is gone to Heaven, and there he does abide, and except
he come from Heaven, the Dead must abide in their Graves. Say you so? weep not:
for he HIMSELF will come, and he will surely have them forth. Did he at his
first coming die for their Bodies as well as for their Souls, and will he be
content to have their Souls only with him in the Heavens, and their Bodies to
lie always in the Grave? Did he purchase their Bodies as well as their Souls
with the price of his own most precious Blood, and will he for ever lose such a
part of his purchase? Are not the Bodies as well as the Souls of Believers
Christ's own by right of Redemption? 1 Cor. 6.20. and will he lose his own so
dearly bought for want of looking after them? Has he redeemed them from Sin
and Hell, and will not he redeem them from the Grave? And is not the
deliverance out of the Grave called the Redemption of the Body? and do his
People and Redeemed ones while they live wait, believe, and hope, and like a
Woman in Travel groan for Deliverance, and long for the Blessed Inheritance,
and full possession of the Blessed State above both in Body and Soul at the
Resurrection, and will he suffer them to be disappointed? Are they Adopted
hereunto as well in their Bodies as in their Souls, and did they here receive
the Spirit of God as the Pledge and Earnest, and First Fruits of Glory, and
shall he let them be for ever without it? Romans 8.23. Were they Sanctified in
their Bodies as well as in their Souls and Spirits? 1 These. 5.23. and shall not
their sanctified Bodies be glorified Bodies at the coming of Christ? Did their
Bodies partake with their Souls in the serving of their God, in Hearing,
Praying, and Religious Fasting, and shall not they partake with the Souls in
the heavenly and Eternal Reward through the Riches of his Grace? Did they present
their Bodies (when alive) a Living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God,
giving up their Bodies wholly to him, to do and suffer what he did call them
to, though it were to Death? Romans 12.1. and will he suffer them to remain for
ever as Prisoners of Death? and not call them from thence to be partakers of
Eternal Life? Did both parts serve and yield Obedience to him, and shall one
only be saved and rewarded by him? He was the Redeemer and Sanctifier of both,
and he will be the Savior of both: And if Angels sent from Heaven cannot
deliver them out of their Graves, he will come HIMSELF and bring them out. When
he would redeem Israel from the Bondage of Egypt, he sent Moses; but to Ransom,
Redeem, and set the Bodies of those that died in him from the bonds of Death,
with which they are tied hand and foot, it being a Work too great for any mere
Creature, he will come himself, and break these bonds, that though they be dead,
yet they shall live. Christ will not stay, abide, nor rest in Heaven, when the
appointed Day is come, till he has opened their Graves, and brought them
forth. To the moderating of our Sorrow, these things concerning his Coming when
the Dead shall be raised, are the Ingredients whereof this Cordial is
compounded.

1. The Certainty of his Coming. Do you say, if we were sure Christ would come,
for this amongst other ends, it would be some allay unto our Sorrow: why do you
doubt? Is this any new Doctrine? was it not prophesied by Enoch the seventh
from Adam? Jude v. 14. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints.
Have not the best of Men believed it? why else do the Generation of the
Righteous look for it? Phil. 3.20, 21. Tit. 2.13. and wait for it? 1 Cor. 1.7.
and pray for it? Rev. 22.20. and is made the Character of a Christian to Love
and Long for it? 2 Timothy 4.8. Will you believe the Testimony of Angels from
Heaven? you have it, Act. 1.11. Will you believe it if it were spoken with his
own Mouth: then read Joh. 14.2. I do go to prepare a place for you. 3. And if I
go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and take you to my self, that
where I am, there ye might be also. The Souls of Believers being with Christ
immediately after their separation from the Body, this Promise of Christ's
coming, and then taking them to himself, must be understood of the Consummation
of the Happiness both of Body and Soul, and in the Consummation of the whole
Church in one Body, that when he comes again, all his shall be with him, and
all of every one, both Body and Soul. Why then do you sorrow so much, as if you
had no Hope, when it is so sure and certain ground of good Hope?

2. The Nearness of his Coming. You say, and therefore sorrow on, he will come,
but who knows when? How long must the Dead lie there before the day of his
Coming, and their Rising? Small Comfort to tell us of their living after so
many years, and how many, is unknown to Angels, or Men, as we find Mark 13.32.
Say you so, when it may be sooner than you, or any Man, or Angels might think
of? However, tho it may not be in our days, and we are like to be among the
Dead, and not the Living at his Coming, yet he will quickly come, and will not
tarry long before he comes. Heb. 10.37. For yet a little while, and he that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Though to Unbelief and Impatience it
might seem long, yet it is but a very little time till Christ will come, and
raise the Dead, and fulfill our Hopes; and he will not delay, nor tarry at all,
not one day nor hour beyond the due appointed time. We must not measure God's
time by the measures of Men, as days, months and years, for one day with the
Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day, 2 Pet. 3.8. and
it is not tediously long to the Soul in Heaven, nor to the Body in the Grave;
only it seems so to us, but is not really so to God, nor estimatively so to
them. It is the last Promise in all the Scripture, and turned into a Prayer,
Rev. 22.20. He that testifies these things, faith, surely I come quickly.
Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. Believe then, in Gods Account, that Christ will
quickly come, and the Dead in Christ shall be quickly made to Live again, and
do not sorrow as if you had no hope, that this quickly will be done, and all
our sorrow quickly will be over.

3. The Publickness of his Coming. When his Coming shall he seen by all, it
shall be denied by none. Is the Lord come, then shall be no Questi^n, no Doubt,
for all the World shall be Spectators of it, Rev. 1.7. He was seen by some upon
the Tree, but he shall be seen by all upon his Throne, Mat. 26.64. If Faith
were now in the stead of that sight then, as that sight will fill us with Joy,
so this Faith would moderate our Sorrow.

CHAP. XVI. The Shout, the Voice of the Archangel, the sounding of the
Trumpet: The ministration of Angels. The Dead shall be raised, before the
[then] Living shall be changed. Both shall meet the Lord in the Air.
IS it nothing to assuage our Sorrow, believingly to consider the Shout, the
Summons, and Call that shall be given to the Dead, to awake, arise, and come
forth of their Graves, and the Attendance and Ministration of the Glorious
Angels, in reference to the Dead then raised? 1 These. 4.16. The Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven with a Shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the Trump of God. 1 Cor. 15.52. In a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye,
at the last Trump, (for the Trumpet shall sound) and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible. What a potent Call, what a mighty Sound, what Almighty Power
shall that be, which shall quicken all the Dead in a moment, in the twinkling
of an Eye? What is shorter than a moment? what is sooner done than the
twinkling of the Eye? and yet with such quick dispatch the Dead shall be made
to live, they are sleeping in their Graves as before: Christ comes, the Trumpet
sounds; the Lord calls, the Dead arise; they all start up, they all come forth,
and look up, and see the Lord is come, and who it was that made them Live.
Concerning this Trumpet of God, this has been said of old, Tuba ^irum spargens
sonum
P^r Sepulchra R^gionum,
Coget omnes ante Thronum.
At the last Trumpets sound,
The Dead, though under ground,
Shall rise, his Throne surround.


What this Shout, this Voice of the Archangel, and Trumpet of God shall be, is
diversely interpreted. (...) properly signifies such Voices and Cries that
Mariners use one to another, as a sign when all should put sorth their Oars to
row together; or of men heaving at some weighty burden, do use as a sign when
all should heave together, and join their strength together to lift it up: And
then it is spoken after the manner of Men, for though the raising of all the Dead
be a great Work, yet God will do it easily, and needs not the help and
assistance of Angels thereunto; or else to express the Joy that the Dead in
Christ shall rise, and to increase the Terror of the Ungodly at that Day.

The Trumpet at the Last Day that shall be sounded in order to the raising of
the dead, is three ways judged of.

1. Some apprehend it shall be a proper, real and material Trumpet, sounded by
Angels. Mat. 24.31. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a
Trumpet. As when God came down to give the Law, there was Thunderings and
Lightnings, and the Trumpet sounding, Exodus 19.16, 18, 19. So when the Lord
shall come down to raise the Dead, and to judge the impenitent Transgressors of
his Law.

2. Some understand it figuratively, alluding to the manner of Men, who sound a
Trumpet to gather Assemblies together. Number. 10.2. God spoke to Moses saying,
make thee two Trumpets of Silver -- that thou may use them for the calling
of the Assembly, and for the journeying of the Camp. So when the year of
Jubilee came, the Trumpet of the Jubilee was to sound throughout all the Land,
Levit. 25.9. The Day of the coming of Christ, and of the raising of them that
sleep in Jesus, will be to all Believers their Jubilee, and the Trumpet shall
sound throughout all the World.

3. Some conceive this last Trumpet shall be Christ's own audible Voice, Calling
and Commanding the Dead to arise, and come forth of their Graves. And they give
these Reasons:

1. The express Letter of the Word. Joh. 5.28. The Hour is coming, when all
that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth. The Lord
Jesus shall utter his Voice, and the Dead shall hear it, and come at his Call.

2. In raising of particular dead ones, he usually used his Voice. Luke 7.14.
And he said, Young Man, I say unto thee, arise. Joh. 11.43. And he cried with a
loud voice, Lazarus come forth. At the last day, when Christ shall say, Arise
all ye dead, arise, come forth, they shall all hear, and come out of their
Graves.

But others say what the Sound of the Trumpet shall be no man can tell, and so
do not determine whether it shall be the one or the other, but say, The Lord
himself coming down in his visible Humanity from Heaven, shall call the World
together, as men call Assemblies, by shout, by Voice, or by a Trumpet; so shall
Christ by his unknown way, called the Voice of the Archangel, and the Trumpet
of God. But when the Trumpet is sounded, and the dead are raised, the holy
Angels of God shall be employed concerning them: For they do not only come
along with Christ as his Attendants to set forth the Greatness of his Majesty,
as Lords, and Dukes, and Earls waiting upon an Earthly King, but also to
execute Christ's Commands concerning those that shall be raised; for as they did
attend them at their Death, and were the Convoy of their separated Souls into
the place of Rest and Joy, so they shall also be serviceable to them at their
Restoration unto Life.

I. In gathering the Elect of God together. They died and were buried in
distant places, far remote each from other, some in one part of the World, and
some in another, and lie scattered far and near; but God shall use the
Ministration of Angels to gather them together. Mat. 24.31. And he shall send
his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his
Elect from the four Winds, from one end of the World to the other. If you have
one godly Relation dies in England, and another in the East, and another in
the West Indies, trouble not your thoughts hereat, how shall they be brought
together at last; if some die at one end of the World, and some at another, God
by his Angels will find out where they were buried, and bring them together.
Mar. 13.27. And then shall he send his Angels, and shall gather his Elect
together from the four Winds, from the uttermost part of the Earth, to the
uttermost part of Heaven. None shall be lost or left behind; this might be a
stay and support to some that are mourning for their dead Relations, with this
Aggravation, We know not where they died, nor where they were buried: Tho you
do not, God will find them, tho they died in the uttermost parts of the Earth.

II. In separating those that died in the Lord, from those that died in their
sins. W^^^ (...) buried promiscuously in common B^^^-^^ces, where the Bodies of
the Worst a^^ B^^ are laid together? sometimes in one com^^ Grave, and in
succession of time a Wi^^ man's body laid in the same Grave where (...) body of
a Believer before was buried (...) these are raised together, shall not the one
be mistaken for the other? No ground of such Fears, for the Angels shall (...)
^he one from the other. Mat. 13.49. So s^^^ it be at the end of the World, the
Angels sha^^ ^^^e forth, and sever the wicked from among the ^ast. But if
thoughts arise in your Hearts, tho Angels be perfect in Knowledge, yet it is
finite: they are not the Knowers and the Searchers of Hearts, and how can they
distinguish an Hypocrite from one that was sincere? You may be fully answered,
That God has ways that we know not of, to direct them in making this
separation: However, to remove all doubting thoughts, we are assured that
Christ himself, that is God as well as Man, and knows what every Man was, as
surely and as easily as a Shepherd knows a Sheep from a Goat, does he know an
Hypocrite from one sincere; he shall see, and will take care that there be not
one Impenitent person among all the Company of the holy Ones; and that there
shall not be one sanctified Person left among the great multitudes of
Impenitent sinners that stand trembling to hear the Sentence of Condemnation to
be past upon them. Mat. 25.31. When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and
all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory.
32. And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them
one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from his Goats. Weigh all
this, and try what Comfort it will yield you. When you hear the Sound of the
Passing Bell, and what others may ring on the Funeral Day, the hearing of your
Ear fills your Heart with Sorrow; think then that the Sound of the Trumpet
shall be heard for the raising of those that are lodging in the Dust, and let
that moderate your Grief, especially when you consider your Dead hears not
the one, and is not grieved at the sound thereof; but He or She shall hear the
other, and hearing rejoice. When you see the common Bearers letting down their
Corpses in a common Burial-place, remember, tho the Wicked were laid on every
side, yet when they shall be raised they shall be severed, and those that slept
in Jesus shall all be set at his right Hand, without the mixture of one ungodly
Person amongst them all: And is it no Comfort to you, that yours shall be
amongst them?

III. May not the Privilege that those that sleep in Jesus shall have above
those that shall be found alive at the Coming of Christ, be some alleviation of
our Sorrow? Why else does the Apostle allege it as a ground and Reason against
excessive Sorrow, when he designedly treats upon this Subject? and does Preface
so solemnly before he delivers this Doctrine as ground of Comfort? Ver. 15. For
I say unto you by the Word of the Lord; that which I am to say, are not my
words but the Lords: if I had not had it from him, I could have told no such
thing; that we that are alive and remain unto the Coming of the Lord, shall not
prevent them that are asleep. V. 16. The dead in Christ shall rise first. The
like Order and precedence he affirms 1 Cor. 15.52. The dead shall be raised
Incorruptible, and we (those that shall be alive) shall be changed. We think
that those that shall be found alive, will have an advantage above those that
are dead. But they shall have this advantage above the then Living, that they
shall be first raised, and be made immortal, glorious and incorruptible Bodies
sooner and before those that shall be alive: As they put off the mortal and
corruptible Body before them, so they shall put on the Immortal and
Incorruptibble Body, sooner than they. These died a Temporal Death, which the
other shall not; but they shall live an Immortal Life sooner than those that
are not to die a Temporal death. The Living must wait for their Change, till
those that were changed from Life to Death, shall be again changed from Death
to Life. Do you mourn because your holy Relations are dead, and do not Live?
Rejoice also that they shall Live, and have the preeminence before those that
shall not die, but only be changed, because God has told you how mindful and
careful he will be of those that sleep in Jesus: Forgotten by Men, remembered by
God.

IV. Is it nothing to moderate your sorrow that Christ and yours shall surely
meet? Death was a parting you and them, and that parting day was a sorrowful
day: And you record the day of their Death, and your parting, and mention it
with Grief and Tears* Remember a meeting day will come, not only when they and
you shall meet, but when they and Christ shall meet, and let the Thoughts
thereof cause you to rejoice. What tho you and they shall meet no more while
you live, yet Christ and they and you also if you believe shall meet and never
part. But where shall this Meeting be? In the Air. But how shall they get up?
They shall be caught up, by the Power of God; or be such agile and nimble
Bodies, that they shall be as able to move upwards, as now they are prove to
fall downwards. You follow them to the Grave, and see them there let down, and
you are filled with Sorrow: Think again, as if you saw that Body raised again,
and mounting aloft as swiftly as any winged Bird into the Air to meet the Lord;
and let such a Foresight abate your present sorrow.

CHAP. XVII. After their meeting with the Lord, THEY shall be with HIM for
EVER. Comfort from all Recollected.
SHall not a believing Prospect, that those that sleep in Jesus, shall awake
and live with the Lord for ever, make some abatement of our sorrow? or rather
turn it into Joy in the hopes thereof? This is the last, and highest and most
Sovereign Remedy, the Apostle gives in this place against Excessive Sorrow,
saying, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Short words, but matter of
lasting, everlasting Joy: Soon said, but not so soon understood, for indeed
they contain more than we can conceive, and none know so well as they that are
with him: Yet that we may have a relish of this Remedy, and a taste of this
Spiritual Comfort, for the correcting of extravagant Sorrow, let it be enquired,

1. With whom it is that these must be? with the Lord: and what it is to be
with him?

2. Who they are here meant that shall be with the Lord? We.

3. How long? for ever. Blessed shall they be, whoever they be, that thus shall
be with the Lord for ever.

1. It is the Lord himself with whom these shall be: And to be with him is the
sum of all our Hopes, the end of all our Prayers, and the top of all our
Happiness. The Misery of the Ungodly and Impenitent when raised, judged and
condemned, is, that they must depart from the Lord, and be in flaming fire, and
then with Devils. The Happiness of the Godly then acquitted and absolved, will
be to be called to come to the Lord, and to go with him into Glory, and there
abide and remain with him. Mat. 25.34, 41, 46. Then shall the King say to them
on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the World. 41. Then shall he say also to them on
the left hand, Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Some are called to come to him, the others commanded to
depart from him; some to be with Him, the rest to be with Devils, therefore
those are declared to be blessed, the other accursed; for 46. These shall go
away into everlasting Punishment, but the Righteous into Life Eternal. Do we
believe these things, or do we not? All these things are spoken of Men when
raised from the Dead, and judged and sentenced, and the Sentence put into
Execution; and do not you by Faith see with whom they shall have their abode
that now do sleep in Jesus? enjoying the beatisick Vision, living in the
comfortable, glorious and immediate Presence of God the Father, of Christ the
Redeemer, and of the Eternal Spirit their Sanctifier. Now your Thoughts run to
the Grave, look down into it, and you see them with Worms and with Rottenness,
and therefore sorrow: Let your Thoughts run as far as the day of Christ's
coming, and then suppose you look for them in the Graves, you will not find
them. The Voice will be, They are not here, for they are risen, come see the
places where they lay. Where are they? Look up, they are gone to meet the Lord
in the Air, and whither are they next to go? to be with the Lord: And is there
nothing in the belief of all these things, not only to assuage Sorrow, but also
to beget great Joy? but because we are of so little Faith, therefore we are of
so much Sorrow?

2. Who are these that are to be with the Lord? What we does the Apostle mean?
whom does he say this great thing of? of all those that shall be caught up in
the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air. Who are they? those that shall be
alive, and remain, when the Lord shall come: Together with them. Who are they?
the Dead in Christ that did rise first, before the Living were changed; so then
it comprehends those that slept in Jesus, and shall be raised, and those
Believers that shall be found alive, and changed, and caught up together into
the Air to meet Christ, who will adjudge them to Everlasting Life, and so after
that shall be with Christ in Glory. Are these the Dead we Mourn for? and why?
because they are dead in their Gr^ves, and with the dead: but have we no Faith
in this Word of the Lord. If we have, let us set their Resurrection over
against their Death, and Heaven over against their Gr^v^s, and their being with
the Lord hereafter over against their present being with the Dead, and try if a
firm, and lively acting Faith will not bring to us greater Joy, than Sense now
fills us with disquieting Sorrow: Or shall we walk by Sense, and not by Faith?
Sense tells us, they are in the Grave, there our Eyes saw them laid; and does
not God tell us, they shall be with him? and have not we Faith to believe him?
and if we have, cannot we rejoice in the Hope thereof, but sor^ow on, as if we
had no such Hope? Do we sit and ponder upon the loathsomness and darkness of
the Grave, and weep while we ponder, that our Dead are there? and cannot we sit
and meditate upon the holiness, happiness, and the shining Glory of Heaven, and
rejoice that our dead shall live, and dwell in that glorious Place hereafter?
especially when we consider they then shall be with the Lord, so as before they
never were. Admit their Souls are now with Christ, yet their Bodies are not: It
is but one part of them that now is Glorified; but the Day is coming, and it
hasteneth, that all Believers, and all of every one, the Body as well as the
Soul, shall be with the Lord. Did Paul judge it far better to depart, that his
Soul may be with Christ, tho he left his Body to the Grave, and was it the
matter of his Desire? Phil. 1.23. And shall not we judge it to be best, that we
and ours shall be with Christ, both in Body and Soul; and since it shall be so,
make it matter of our Joy, tho for the present it is not so? for tho it be to
come, and so is the Object of Desire and Hope, yet Faith should look upon it as
sure as if it were present, and so make it the ground of our Joy: As sure as
their Bodies are now in the Grave, so sure they shall be with the Lord in
Heaven. What ails us we cannot rejoice in the one, as sorrow for the other,
especially when the one is a greater Good, than the other is an Evil?

3. The Eternity of their abode with the Lord in Body and Soul from the Second
Coming of Christ, should assuage our Sorrow for the short space of time their
Bodies are to remain in the Grave. While Children Live, we think how long is it
since they were born? When Persons in a Conjugal Relation continue together,
sometimes they reckon how many years since they were Married? and these are
pleasant Thoughts: But alas! Death comes and makes a Change, and snatcheth away
the Children, and breaks the bond of Marriage, and then after a while the
Enquiry is, How long has my Child, or Husband, or Wife been dead? and these
are sorrowful Thoughts: But is there no Remedy, no relief against them? What if
you ask, when our Dead that sleep in Jesus shall be raised, how long shall they
be with the Lord? How long! inconceivably longer than they shall be in the
Grave. How long shall they be in the Grave? not for ever: Blessed be God, they
shall not be there for ever. How long shall they be with the Lord? for Ever:
Eternal thanks unto our God, they shall be with him for ever.

But we sit and think, it will be a long, a long, a very long time that they
shall be in their Graves, and no man knows how long, and for this Sorrow fills
our Hearts: Does it? think again when they shall be raised. How long shall they
be with the Lord? a long, a long, a very long, not time, but Eternity, and no
Man can conceive how long it will be. And when you have thought of as many
years as you may imagine they may be in their Graves, all of them will not
amount to so much as one hour, if compared with that Eternity in which they
shall be with the Lord. Concerning their being in the Grave, you may see an
end, for an end of their being there will be: Concerning their being with the
Lord, you can conceive no end, for there is no end to be conceived, for they
are to be with him for ever; in the Grave for a time, and after that with the
Lord of Glory in a State of Glory for ever! For ever! O blessed word! shall
they come forth of their Graves after a while, and be with the Lord for ever? O
happy, happy, for ever happy are their saved Souls above, that shall live in
the presence of their Lord for ever. Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord,
for when they shall live again (which shall surely be) in their Bodies united
to their Souls, they shall be with the Lord for ever: This will be the Joy of
their Joy, that they shall enjoy their Lord for ever: This will be the Life of
their Life, that with their Lord they shall have everlasting Life: This shall
be the Crown of their Crown, that it shall be Incorruptible, as they then shall
be both in Body and Soul: It will be the Hell of Hell, that the Damned must be
there for ever: It will be the Heaven of Heaven, that their being with the Lord
therein shall be for ever; without this their Joy would not be pure Joy, but
mixed with fears of losing of it; without this their Joy would not be full, for
the Thoughts, it would not always last, would diminish their Joy, and if
diminished, it could not be full; without this their Joy would not be constant
Joy, but there would be stops, and gaps, and intermissions in their Joy, and
they would have their fits of Sorrow, and turns of Grief. Now they would
rejoice because they are with the Lord, and anon they would grieve because they
are not to be with him for ever, and so they would be miserably happy, and
sorrowfully joyful, which is not the happiness and Joy of Heaven, which for
degrees is full, for duration everlasting; full, because they are with the
Lord, everlasting, because they shall be with the Lord for ever. Methinks I
hear their triumphant Songs, their Holy Admirations: O what is the difference
betwixt these Bodies now, and what once they were! Behold the Glory of this
Place, how far different it is from those Graves where we did lie, and are now
delivered from! We were in our Graves for a time, that time is out, its past
and gone, and we are with the Lord, for ever, we are with the Lord for ever! O
this is it that is she Crown of all, we are with the Lord for ever! In this
Eternity there is no Nights and Days, no Weeks, and Months, and Years, here is
no Death and Graves, and end, for we shall be with the Lord for ever!

USE. What is the Use of all? what should it be, but what the Apostle makes of
it? v. 18. Wherefore comfort one another with these words: What words? Review
them, and Recollect what has been said upon them.

(1.) As sure as Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, so sur^ly our dead shall
rise; Comfort your selves, and one anoth r with these words.

(2.) Those that shall be found alive, shall not prev^nt them that are asleep,
but the Dead shall be raised before the Living shall be changed; they in their
Graves shall have the precedence and pre-eminence before the Living, and tho
the one are dead, and the other living, yet the Dead shall be made Immortal and
Incorruptible before the Living: Comfort your selves, and one another with
these words.

(3.) Rather than the Dead shall lie in their Graves for ever, Christ as soon
as the appointed time is come, will Himself in his own Person come, and with a
shout, with the Voice of the Archangel, and sounding Trumpet call them out of
their Graves, and they shall hear, and shall come forth: Comfort your selves,
and one another with these words.

(4.) When the Dead in Christ shall be raised, and the Living changed, they
shall all be caught up together in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, and
shall there be acquitted and absolved, and adjudged to everlasting Life;
therefore comfort your selves, and one another with these words.

(5.) After this they shall go into the highest Heavens in Body and Soul, to be
with the Lord for ever; wherefore comfort your selves, and one another with
these words.

Now upon the survey of the whole matter, what have you most cause for, your
Sorrow, or your Joy? What if yours do not live with you? is it not better that
they died in the Lord, than to live [as such] with you? what if they are in the
Grave for a while, and after that shall be with the Lord for ever? Cease
Excessive Sorrowing, and encourage, and comfort your selves, and one another,
(as the Death of any requires) with the lively Belief, the joyful Hopes, and
often mention of this most Blessed Time and State.

CHAP. XVIII. Additional Questions propounded to Mourners, for the Moderating
of Excessive Sorrow.
BUT if your Sorrow be Excessive after all these Remedies alleged, made known
to us by Divine Revelation, does it not argue Want or Weakness of Faith, and
slowness of Heart to Believe? If you do not believe, will you reason the Case
with your self, that we may bring it to this Issue, that your Immoderate Sorrow
is irrational, contrary both to Faith and Reason: Which will appear by that
time you consider the Matter well, and give in a deliberate Answer to these
following Questions briefly offered to you.

1 Quest. If a particular Resurrection now could be, as formerly has been,
would you desire that your Relations that died in the Lord, might now be raised
from the dead, to live and dwell with you in your House upon Earth again? If it
were possible, would you have your holy Father, or Mother, Husband or Wife
raised as Jairus his Daughter, Lazarus, Tabitha, and others were; and come and
sit at your Table, and live with you in the same Circumstances as they did
before? If you would not, how unreasonable is all your excessive Sorrow,
because they are dead, and yet would not have them live with you again, tho you
may? What! will nothing content you? Is their restoration to Life now, no
matter of your desire, and yet is their death such matter of so great abundant
Sorrow? Will you be pleased neither way, concerning them dead or alive again?
If you would desire this, do you consider what it is you do desire, and how
injurious you would be to them, that you may have your will, and as you say the
comfort that before you had in them? Tell me

(1.) Would you indeed have them from the glorious presence of God and Christ,
and the eternal Spirit to live with you? Could they have that Delight and Joy
in your Company, as now they are filled with in the presence of their glorious
God and Redeemer?

(2.) Would you have them leave the Society of Angels and saved Souls above, to
come and dwell among sinful men again?

(3.) Would you indeed have them return from Rest to Trouble? from Joy to
Sorrow? from Praising to Mourning?

(4.) Now they have got out of the reach of Satan's Temptations, would you have
them live here again, to be buffeted again, and tempted and assaulted by that
roaring Lion? And after they have got the Victory, and won and wore the Crown,
would you have them to come into the Field again, and conflict with the Powers
of Darkness again?

(5.) Were you grieved for them on their dying Beds, to see what they endured,
and what cold Sweats the Pangs of Death did put them to? and yet would you have
them live again, that they may die again? Do you sorrow that they have died
once, and will you sorrow on, except you could have them live again, that they
may die twice? would you have them have two deaths for one? Is this your Love
to them?

(6.) Is once mourning for them so grievous, and would you have them live
again, and so die again, and you Mourn again for their Second dying, if you
should out live them, or leave them behind you, for them to Mourn for you;
whereas where they are now, they have done Mourning, and are strangers to it?

(7.) Would not you be more Kind to your self and them, to prepare and desire
to go to them, than to have them return to you, if such a thing could be? Do
not you know which to choose, and yet sorrow in this manner?

2 Q. If you would have them Live again, can your sorrow multiplied ten times
more, help you to your Will? May you not by this sorrow bring your self to the
Grave, sooner than fetch them out? Say what good this excessive sorrow does, or
else moderate it.

3 Q. Who has done this, that you mourn so much for? Was it not by the
Providence of God? And will you quarrel with him, or call him to an account,
why he has done so? Or should not his Hand quiet your Heart? Read Job 33.13. 1 Samuel 3.18. Psalm. 39.9.

4 Q. Do not you hereby contradict your Prayers? Do not you pray his Will might
be done, and submitted to when it is done? Do not you see it was his Will to
have your Relation from you, and is this your submission to it? Is it so done
in Heaven, as you do it upon Earth?

5 Q. Has God herein taken any from you, but what he first gave unto you? Who
gave you your Children, or Husband, or Wife? were they not the Gifts of God?
Did not this quiet Job? Chap. 1.21.

6 Q. Whose was He or She that is dead, that you so Immoderately do Mourn for?
Do you say, it was my Child, my Father, or my Mother, my Husband or my Wife? If
it had not been mine, I should not thus have mourned. But were they not Gods
own, more than your own? When God gave them you, did he give away his own
right? Might not God do what he will with his own, but you must take on, as if
he had taken something he had no right unto? What had you to do to keep his Own
from him, when he would have them with him?

7 Q. Is not God Sovereign Lord, and absolute Disposer of all in the World? Are
not Kingdoms and Nations, Princes, Lords and Nobles at his disposal? And what
are you above all others in the World, that you and yours should be exempted
from the disposing Hand of God?

8 Q. Did your Happiness lie in the Enjoyment of the Creatures you have lost?
In them or in God? If in them, you are miserable; if in God, tho they are dead,
yet he does Live: Why then do you thus mourn, so long as your Happiness remains?

9 Q. Tho your Relations are cut down and withered like Grass, yet does not the
Word of the Lord stand and continue for your Support? Isa. 40.6, 7, 8. And
cannot you find as much Comfort in all the standing Promises of God, as you did
in a withering Creature? Go and try, by reading, believing, applying of them as
your Case requires, and by turning Promises into Prayers.

10 Q. Did not your Relation live out the Time appointed by God? Job 14.5. Or
did he not die, when God did foreknow he would die? And do you thus take on
because Gods Purpose is performed? Would you have a Child tarry in the Womb
beyond its appointed time, or in the World beyond what God intended it should?

11 Q. Did not you know your Relations were mortal, or do you sorrow because
they were so? Is not that to sorrow because they were Men, or Women, or
Children? Would you have had them to have been here Immortal, that they might
not have been subject to Death? Did you ever see any Men, Women or Children
that were not mortal?

12 Q. If so, did not you know a parting time would come? Was there not some
Intimation and mention of Deaths separating you in your conjugal Covenant? And
do you now mourn as if something had befallen you, that you never knew or heard
of? Is it so intolerable to you to see a dying Creature, dead?

13 Q. When would you have been willing to have parted with them? If God had
continued your Child ten years longer, would not you have been more unwilling,
and so more sorrowful than now you are? After Forty years would you be willing?

14 Q. Has any thing befallen you, that has not been the common Case of all
the Generations before you, will shortly be of all this Age, and of following,
except those that shall be found alive at the Coming of Christ? And would you
have your State to be singular? Or if it be not, will you be sullen?

15 Q. Could your Relations Souls have gone to Heaven, if their Bodies had not
died? Or would you have had them never lodged there, except as Enoch and Elias,
without seeing Death? If the Soul could not have been happy above, except the
Body dyed, and took the Grave in its way to Glory, are you excessively troubled
for a dead Body, which must be, for the greater advantage of the Immortal Soul?

16 Q. Would not you have been as loath to leave them behind you, as now you are
sorrowful they are gone before you? And will you be pleased neither way? Would
you have died all together? You are sorrowing now for Wise and Children,
because removed by Death; and if God had laid you upon a dying Bed, then your
trouble would be for them, if alive, because you are like to be taken from
them, and say, What will my small Children do if I die? And what will their
Mother d^ when their Father leaves the one ^ Widow, and the other Fatherless? I
could have been glad if God would have spared my Life, to have seen them well
brought up. It is hard for you to say which would be less trouble to you, to
leave them behind you, or have them go before you. But if you have that which
you had rather have, why do you so sorrow, when you have that which is best for
the rest of your Family.

17 Q. Do not you know that all your Family have sinned; and that therefore
they have all deserved to die? Why then do you sorrow so much for one
captivated by Death, when you should be admiring the Patience of God, and
praising him for his Mercy that so many are continued in Life?

18 Q. Is not this Ingratitude to God, that the loss of one should make you
unsensible of the many Mercies of your own Life? Is all gone in one? Look about
you, and you will see the abundant goodness of God to you, in your outward.
Accommodations in this World, many spiritual Blessings, as Pledges of Eternal
Glory, and will you bury your Thankfulness for these in the Grave of your dead?

19 Q. Do not you provoke God hy your sinful excessive Sorrow to go on to make
more Breaches by Death, that you might have something more to sorrow for? Do
you sorrow thus for one? Might not God say, There is another Child, Death, lay
it dead, and bring it out, and lodge it by the other. There is an Husband, or a
Father yet left, Death go and seize him, and have him away, and if they are
delighted in such discontented Sorrow, let them have more to sorrow for.

20 Q. Have not they lived a long life before they die, they enter into Eternal
glorious life when they die? Do you sit and sorrow, and say, if he had not died
so soon, if he had not died so young. How soon? if he lived to be Converted, to
be sanctified and prepared for Heaven, did he not live longer than a Man at
Sixty, and then dies in Sin, and is Damned at last? Do you reckon length of
Life by multitude of years, or ripeness and fitness for Heaven? When you Sorrow
he died so soon, Bless God he lived so long as to be saved when he died.

21 Q. Will you compare with God in point of Wisdom in governing and disposing
of his Creatures, with all the circumstances of Life and Death? Are you wiser
than he? dare you entertain such a Thought? would you not resist it with
abhorrence? why then do you think it would have been better for you that your
Relation should have lived longer? Is not this to set your Folly against Gods
Wisdom? Does not he best know what is the most fitting time for any to be born,
how long to live, and when to die? If so, why do you oversorrow for that which
is done with highest Wisdom?

22 Q. Why has God implanted such Graces in your Heart as are suitable for a
time of Affliction, but that you should exercise them in their season? As
Faith, and Patience, and Submissiveness of will to his holy Will and Pleasure:
Are not Habits given for Act? and when will you act your Patience and
Submission, but when Trials are upon you? but does your excessive Sorrow look
like Patience under, or fretting against the hand of God?

23 Q. Do you say you did exceedingly desire their Eternal Good in Gods
accepted time, and excessively sorrow for their Death, and can you reconcile
those Desires with this Sorrow? If you did desire it, when God should please to
bestow it, why do you so sorrow now (by death the way of all Believers to it)
they have obtained what you did desire? when without the one they were not to
have the other.

24 Q. Are not you your self being made men for Heaven, near unto that Place
and State where you shall sorrow no more; neither for any thing concerning your
self, nor any other? while you mourn, and say, This Husband, or Wife, Father or
Mother that was mine, now is no longer mine: Seriously meditate, and deeply
consider, and say, Yet God is mine, and Christ is mine, and the Spirit is mine,
the Promises and Privileges are mine, and Heaven is mine, and there I shall
shortly be with God, and Christ, and the Eternal Spirit, with Angels, and saved
Souls above, where I shall love God with perfect Love, and praise him, and my
Redeemer and Sanctifier with Eternal Praises; and see and know, and delight in
the Company of those that are gone before, for whom I am mourning upon Earth,
and joy and join with them in holy Hallelujahs, and triumphant Songs of Praise,
where all sorrow shall be taken from my Heart, and all tears wiped from mine
Eyes, and I and they shall know sorrow and grief, and groans and sighs no no
more; I stand at the door of Eternity every day, waiting, looking, hoping for
Eternal Joys: Therefore blessed Lord, to all these reasonings of thy Ministers,
add the effectual working of thy Spirit, that I might not sorrow as those that
have no Hope. Amen.

THE MOURNERS SOLILOQUY, Concerning his Moderating His Sorrow For His DEAD.

THE Mourners Soliloquy.
CHAP. XIX. Containing the Mourners Soliloquy, or Reasoning with himself
concerning his Sorrow for his Dead, for the moderating of it.
DEad! Alas! woe is me! my Father, Mother dead! my Wife, or Husband, or Child
dead! can I with Comfort live? are not my comfortable days past and gone, when
he or she is dead and gone? Gone! no more to return to live with me on Earth!
Let me look upon the Body in the Coffin, before it be lodged in the Grave, for
after that I shall look upon it no more: mine Eyes shall see it no more. Look!
behold its pale Face, its closed Eyes, its Jaws tied and muffled up; these Eyes
did see me, but now Death bath shut them, that they cannot: This Tongue did use
to talk with me to my great delight, but now Death has tied it, and my Ears
shall hear the sound thereof no more: These Feet did often walk with me, yea,
we went to the Ordinances of God together, but now Death has fettered them,
that they can move no more; and must I follow it to the Grave, and see it
covered with Earth, and there leave it? and when returned home, look for it at
my Table, but it is not there; or in my Chamber, but it is not there? The
Clothes the Body was often dressed with are there, but the Body is not there.
Now it is so many Weeks since it was buried, she is gone, but my Sorrow does
remain: Remain! it comes more and more, and does increase: My Soul is grieved,
my Heart is loaded, and my Spirit fails within me, the more I muse, the more I
Mourn; the more I think of mine thus captivated by Death, and buried out of my
sight, the more my Sorrow is renewed. Alas! I can contradict that Old Proverb,
Out of Sight, out of Mind; for he, or she has been so long out of my sight,
but has not been a a Day, or Night out of my mind; and the more and longer I
remember, the more and longer I do sorrow.

Say thou thus, O my Soul? is it God or a Creature, the loss of whom thou
mournest for? If of God, weep on, and Sorrow and seek him till thou find
him, for he is a living and Gracious God, and may be found: But if of a
Creature, forbear thy Tears, and moderate thy Sorrow, for if thou should
weep thy self blind, and break thine heart with grief, being dead and gone,
cannot be any more found, wherever upon Earth thou seek for it: Will thou
then examine thy Sorrow, whether it be pleasing unto God, or whether it be
turbulent Passion, and mere fruitless Self-vexation? whether thou Mournest like
a Christian, or an Heathen? whether thy sorrow be not sinful, and excessive,
and therefore sinful because excessive? Do not thou know, have not thou read
and learned, that thou should not sorrow as those do that have no Hope? are
thy tears more boundless than the Ocean? for that has bounds, and shall thy
Tears have none? The Waves thereof go so far, and then are stayed; and shall
thy Tears continually drop, and have no limits set unto them? or will thou
suffer them to run waste, and shed enough to wash thy Dead, when thou should
keep them to pour out before God upon thy bended Knees, that by the Blood of
Christ thy Sins might be washed away? Have thy Tears so blear'd thine Eyes, or
thy Sorrow so disturbed thy Reason, that thou can not see thy Sorrow to be
Excessive Sorrow? and thy Grief to pass all bounds of Christian Moderation?
Measure it by Reason and Religion.

And then tell me, O my Soul, if that Sorrow be not Excessive for thy Dead,
whereby thou hastenest the death of thy own Body, and invitest Death to lay it
dead? Tho God by Death has taken away the Life of thy Relation, yet has he
not commanded thee to use all means lawful, and to abstain from all those
things (amongst which Immoderate grief is one) that does endanger thine own
Life? and will thou thereby become guilty of thy own Death? Besides, is not
that Sorrow too much, that must be sorrowed for? and those Tears too many, that
must be wept for? and more follow them, because they are so many? Have thou
Sorrow too much already, and must thou still have more, because thou have too
much? Do thou not see what straits thou bring thy self into, that while
thou do abound in Sorrow, thou want Sorrow, because as yet thou have not
sorrowed for this too much abundant Sorrow?

For give me an answer, O my Soul, if that be not too much abundant Sorrow,
that does more hurt than good? and would be too much if it were for thy Sin,
which for Sin, tho the greatest Evil, would be too much, when it does more hurt
than good? and does it not do so, when it drives to despair, keeps off the
Soul from Christ, and from hoping in his Merits, or God's Mercy: and is it not
too much, when it is more for thy Dead than for thy Sin, for when thy Sorrow
should bear its proportion to the Evil thou sorrowest for, and Sin is a greater
Evil than the Death of thy nearest Relation, be thou thy self the Judge, if
sorrow for the lesser evil be not too much, when it is more than that which
thou have for the greatest Evil?

Moreover, O my Soul, will thou not grant, that Sorrow is excessive, which
causes thy Thoughts to run into the Grave, and hinders them from ascending
into Heaven? and to have many self-piercing and self-tormenting Thoughts of thy
dead, for one serious and Heart-affecting Thought thou have of the Living and
Eternal God? and which makes thy Heart as cold in all thy Duties unto God, as
the Body of thy dead Relation is in its Grave?

Besides, is not thy Sorrow too much, when it hinders thee from Spiritually
rejoicing in God, and giving Thanks to him for all the Mercies, which in thy
Sorrow thou do overlook? Especially when let thy Condition be what it will as
to Temporals, thou have much more cause to bless God for Spiritual and Eternal
Mercies, than to grieve for the loss of Temporals.

Add to this, O my Soul, and then judge, that thou grievest so much for thy
Dead, that thou have left off sorrowing for the Miseries of the Church of God;
and losest much of thy little remaining Time, wherein thou have many Duties to
perform, many Graces to get, and more degrees thereof, many sins to mortify
and subdue, many Temptations to resist, a deceitful Heart to watch and search,
Children and Servants to instruct and teach, and holy preparations to be made
for Death, and another Eternal World, and while thou sorrowest, all these are
neglected. Is it not too much?

By this time, and from these Evidences, O my Soul, art thou not convinced that
thy sorrow for thy dead has been, and still is excessive sorrow? that thou
have and do transgress the bounds of Christian Moderation, and thereby offend
thy holy Lord, wrong thy self, discredit that Religion thou do profess,
discourage the good, and cast a stumbling block in the way of the ungodly, and
will thou still proceed herein? Can not thou sensibly feel the stroke of his
hand, and yet patiently submit unto his will? How long will thou thus be cast
down, how long will thou thus be disquieted within me? Is thy Relation fallen
asleep, and are thy Graces slumbering? Is thy Faith as dead in thy Heart, as
thy Relation is in the Grave? Shall Nature work thus strongly in thee, and
Graces so feebly? If natural Affections be exorbitant, has not God implanted
Grace in thee, that it may correct, moderate and govern them? Art thou only a
Rational, and not a Believing Soul? Yea do thou thus Immoderately grieve, as
if thou wast neither believing, nor rational in thy sorrow? If there be nothing
in the common Book of corrupted Nature that thou can read, but what does add
grief unto thy grief, yet is there not enough in that special Book of sacred
Scripture that might turn thy sorrow into Joy for those of thine that sleep in
Jesus? Or have thou thrown it by, and neglected to look and search into it? Or
if thou read, do thou understand what thou read, or do thou consider
what thou do understand, or believe with an unshaken Faith what thou do
consider, whilst thy sorrow does continue so excessive? Has not God revealed
therein such certain Truths concerning the Bodies of those that dye in the
Lord, such glorious things concerning their separated Souls for the present,
such wonderful work that he will hereafter do, in reuniting the same Souls with
the same Bodies, in raising them from the dead, and Redeeming them from the
Grave, such desirable Glory that their Souls and Bodies thus reunited shall be
jointly partakers of, and be made perfectly and eternally holy and happy in the
enjoyment of the Father, Son, and eternal Spirit, in the innumerable Company of
glorious Angels, and the vast multitudes of such as with them were chosen,
redeemed, sanctified, and shall be for ever saved, singing triumphant
Hallelujahs, when they shall all be gathered together in the Immediate presence
of their Lord and Savior, and be possessed of those Mansions in their Fathers
House, which were prepared for them? Has he made known such things as these,
and are they sure, and infallibly certain, and yet for want of Faith, and Hope,
and Love, do thou sit here and sigh and sob, and grieve and groan, as tho
those thou mournest for, were for ever lost, as if they were so dead, that they
should live no more? or as if they were so fast bound in their Graves, that
they never should come forth, nor be taken from that dark place, to the Palace
of glorious Light above?

Attend then, O my Soul, unto the Expression, wherewith thy Lord does represent
the death of thy holy Relation now deceased, as a sleeping in Jesus. And if
thou mournest because she is dead, yet try if thou can mourn because she
sleeps in the Lord. For this does Sorrow fill thine Heart? or may thou not
rejoice, that being dead she so sleeps? for if she sleep in Jesus, shall she
not do well? and if she shall do well, should thou not rather rejoice, than
thus lament and grieve? When did thou sorrow, when she went to bed, and slept
and took her natural Rest? And now she sleeps in Jesus, is she not at rest in
her Grave, as in her bed, from all troubles from men, from Sickness and Pain,
and from all Sense thereof? from all worldly cares, and piercing Sorrows that
did usually accompany those cares? and if her Death be but a Sleep, how easy
is it for Almighty Power to awaken her out of her Sleep? And if she sleep, she
shall awake; for if in the usual Course of Nature, waking follows after
sleeping, wherefore do thou doubt, or sear that Death being but a Sleep, that
it will be a perpetual Sleep? And if she went sick, and weary, and weak to
sleep, when she shall awake, shall she not be more refreshed, and revived in
the Morning of the Resurrection? If the time of her sleeping seems long to
thee now waking, and not to her now sleeping, why do thou trouble thy self
with that, with which she is not at all concerned about? If in the time of her
Life, thou saw her sick, and could not sleep, this was a grief and trouble
to thee, would it not much more have added to thy sorrow to see her languish,
filled with pain, hear her sigh, and sob, and groan upon a sick bed, and could
neither recover, nor yet fall asleep, and yet do thou take on that when by
all means used, and learned, careful, and pious Physicians consulted, she
could not be recovered, that now she is fallen asleep? Why do thou molest and
trouble thy self at the thoughts of the Length of her Sleep, when it is no more
trouble nor disquiet to her, than the Length of time is to one that is fast
sleeping in his Bed, tho it may be tedious to one that sits by, and waketh
while he sleeps. Remember, O my Soul, and let the remembrance thereof assuage
thy sorrow, that it is her last, but not an everlasting sleep; tho it be long
it shall not always last, and because it is a sleep that is called Death, it
shall be the last that she shall sleep, for when awaked she shall sleep no more
for ever: And yet is this the Body that thou thus bewailest? and for this do
thou thus Night after Night break thy sleep? and when she sleeps quietly in
the Lord, and dreameth not of any of the things that are done in this World,
can not thou rest nor sleep in thy Bed, without dreaming of her that is so
unconcernedly sleeping in the Bed of the Grave? Let her quiet and resting Body
rebuke, O my Soul, thy unquiet and restless thoughts.

Moreover, consider, O my Soul, whose State thou have more reason to lament and
bewail, thine own, or the state of the Soul of thy Relation that was converted
and sanctified, that did repent and believe, before Death made the separation
betwixt thee and her, or betwixt her Body and her Soul? Do thou not believe
that her Soul being absent from her Body, is now present with the Lord? and
being so, is perfectly freed from all sin, sorrow, Temptation, Inclination to
sin, and from a possibility of sinning? and is possessed of all good, filled
with all Joy, perfect in the Knowledge of God and Christ, and in Love to, and
Delight in all the Persons in the (to us) unsearchable Trinity? Whilst thou
thy self art grieving, groaning under the Burden of remaining sins, conflicting
with Satan and the Powers of Darkness, clogged with the Flesh, and ensnared
with the Allurements and Affrightments of this evil and deluding World? Thou in
a state imperfect and Militant, the Soul of thy Relation in a state perfect and
Triumphant? Is it not thy frequent Doubts and Fears whether thou love God,
and whether God loves thee, with a differencing, special and peculiar Love?
Are they not thy often Complaints, that thou have but little Enjoyment of God
and Communion with him in his Ordinances, and sometimes none at all? That thou
seek God but can not see him, and searchest for him but c^nst not find
him? That thou go from Meditation to Prayer, from Praying to Hearing, from
Hearing to attending upon ^im at his Table, and after all, thy sorro^ful saying
is, I sought him whom my Soul loves and longs for, I sought him, but I could
not find him? That thy Sin had interposed betwixt thy God and thee, and caused
him to hide his Face from thee? Were not these the Complaints also of thy
Relation, while with thee, and did not thou endeavor to satisfy her grieved
and disconsolate Spirit, by reason of Gods frequent withdrawings from her Soul,
and labouredst to resolve her Doubts, to remove her Fears, and to answer all
the Objections she did make about the Sincerity of her Love to Christ? And is
her separated, saved, glorified Soul now above all these Doubts, and Fears, and
Jealousies? Is it now above Hope, and Desire, because possessed of what it
hoped for, and desired after? Is it now perfectly Loving, and delightfully
Praising of its Lord and Savior? Is it now constantly beholding of Him, and
rejoicing in Him, and can doubt no more, and question his Love to it, and its
Love to Him no more for ever, because it feels, and is filled with the lively
sense of both? And do thou sit here Mourning, whilst it is eternally
Rejoicing? Cease sorrowing for her whose Soul is perfectly happy and
triumphant, and save thy Tears to bewail thine own Hazards, Dangers, and Sins
in this Imperfect state, and to pour them out before God in fervent Prayer,
that thou when separated from this Body, might be received into that place
of Light, and Life, and Love, into that glorious Kingdom of the Ever-living
God, and all-sufficient Savior, to which her Soul is gone before, and is now
singing, rejoicing, and triumphing in.

But above all, O my Soul, why art thou troubled and disquieted most of all,
for what has befallen the Body of thy dear Relation? Why do thou sit in thy
Chamber, where thou saw her breathe her last Breath, and give up the Ghost,
and ^use how thou saw her pale, and did handle her cold Face, when laid in
her Coffin? And while thou sit here, thy thoughts so often run unto the
Grave, and co^siderest how the Body is mouldring and consuming, and turning
into Rottenness and dust? And while thou say^st, For this here is my sorrow,
let me ask the^, in the mean time where is thy Faith? Have thou an Eye to see
how the Body lies in the Grave, and have thou not another Eye to see how it
shall be raised up? Can thou not look beyond the Coffin and the Grave, to a
joyful, glorious Resurrection?

Wake, O my Faith, awake, that I may firmly and steadfastly believe this great
and comfortable Article of the Resurrection to Life Everlasting, and joy more
that it shall rise again, than be cast down because it is cast into the Grave,
and for a while is lodged there? Have thou not, O my Soul, solid Foundation for
thy Faith in this particular? Does not thy Lord, that is infinite in Wisdom
know where every one is buried, or where the Body does consume? Does not he
know, which Bones, and Skull, and Dust belong to this Body, and which to that?
If this be knowable, does not he know it? Or else is not his Knowledge limited
and finite Knowledge, because not extended to every thing that may be known?
And has he not Almighty Power, and so can do all acts of Power, all things
possible to be done? Cannot he that made this great World, and yonder larger
Heavens out of Nothing, out of something make these dry Bones to live? Cannot
he that formed the Body of Man at first of the Dust of the Ground, and caused
it to live, New-make these Bodies, tho turned into Dust? Or does this seem
incredible to thee, that God should raise the Dead? Cannot he do what he has
done? Did not he raise Lazarus, and the Son of the Widow of Naim? and Jairus
his Daughter? and himself, when he had layn for a time in the Grave? And as he
can, so has he not declared that he will? How often has he spoken it? How
frequently has he promised it? Is not this the Fathers Will that sent his Son,
that of all that he had given him, he should not lose any one, but raise them
up at the last Day? And, O my Soul, do thou not believe that the Son has and
will do the will of his Father in every point, and particularly in this, when
he so often has said, he will raise them up at the last Day? O be not
Faithless but Believing, and so cease thy excessive sorrowing. Blessed Lord!
increase my Faith, that my immoderate sorrow may decrease. I have shown my
Unbelief by my excessive sorrow: Now help me, Lord, to show my Faith by my
abating of my grief for my Dead, because tho Dead, yet shall certainly Live
again.

Lord, confirm my Faith in this, That as sure as Christ is risen from the dead,
so surely shall my dead, and all others be also raised: because I read in thy
holy Word, that if Christ be raised, then those that sl^ep in Jesus shall also
rise, and if these shall not, then Christ is not risen, and if Christ be not
risen, we are all in our sins, and all Preaching, Praying, Believing, and all
Religion is in vain; which being absurd and false, the other must be certain
and sure: And by the belief of this (thanks be to my God) I find, I feel, my
Sorrow is turned into lively Hope, earnest Desire, and comforting Joy.

Besides this, O my Soul, be further satisfied and quieted within me, forasmuch
as thy Lord has not only said that those that sleep in Jesus shall rise again,
but has also foretold what Bodies they shall then be, tho the same for
substance, yet their Properties, Qualities, and Endowments far more excellent,
than when they lived or died. Do thou sorrow because her Body was Mortal and
did die? why do thou not rejoice, because it shall be raised Immortal, and
then shall die no more? Art thou grieved at the remembrance of its weakness,
sickness and pains, why art thou not comforted at the believing Foresight that
it shall be raised a Powerful and Impassible Body, and shall be sick and pained
no more for ever? Or art thou cast down because that Natural Body by Food and
Physic could no longer be supported, nor maintained in Life? Why does not this
raise thy Comfort, that it shall be raised a Spiritual Body, and need Food, and
Physic, and Sleep, no more than the Angels in Heaven? Is it matter of thy
trouble to consider how vile and loathsome Death has made it; why does it not
delight thee to believe, it shall be raised in such Glory, that it shall shine
as a glittering Star, yea as the Sun in the Kingdom of God; and that Beauty
shall be its Clothing all over? Why does so^row daily fill thy Heart, because
the Soul is gone, and left the Body a lifeless piece of Earth, a mass of
breathless Mould, and do not rejoice, that the Soul already is made like to
Christ's Glorious Soul; and the day is coming, and it hastens when the Body
shall be fashioned like to Christ's glorious Body? Like to Christ's Glorious
Body! Lord, who that does believe these words of thine, may not cease to sorrow
in excess, because now the Body is so like the dust in which it lodges, and
begin to joy, that in thine appointed time it shall be like the Glorious Body
of an exalted Jesus.

Holy Lord! how great is the difference betwixt the same Man, as if he were not
the same, when he looks upon his Dead with an Eye of Sense, and Carnal Reason,
and when with an Eye of Faith, according to thy Word? For when I sit and muse,
and say, Methinks I see how the Body of my dead lies in the Grave, and how it
mouldreth and consumes, I am a sad and sorrowful Man, and my Heart is grieved
within me; but when I sit and consider, and believe, and say, Methinks I see it
Redeemed from the Grave, methinks I see it raised an Immortal, Powerful,
Spiritual, Beautiful, Glorious Body, shining as the Sun, and like to Christ's
Glorious Body, I am a cheerful, joyful Man, and Comfort flows abundantly into
my Soul.

Moreover, O my Soul, thy Sorrow might be turned into Joy, when thou do
believingly consider, that rather than the Dead should always be captivated by
Death, and ever held by the bonds thereof, the Lord HIMSELF will come down from
Heaven, and fetch them forth: Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, that when the
appointed day is come, the Lord Jesus will not stay, nor rest in Heaven, till
he has opened their Graves, and delivered them from the Power of death.
Blessed Jesus! Help me to rejoice in thy Mighty Power, and abundant Love, in
that because the raising of the Dead is a work too great for all the Angels in
Heaven, thou will come thy self, and cause them to live again. Methinks I hear
thy Voice, Ye Dead arise; Methinks I hear the mighty Shout, and the Trumpet
sounding; methinks I see the Lord in his Glory coming down from Heaven, and
calling to the Dead, and methinks I see them in great numbers coming up out of
their Graves: He calls, they tho dead do hear, and tho dead, at his Command do
Live. Lord at thy pleasure they fell into the Grave, and at thy Voice they do
come forth. O powerful Voice! Oh joyful glorious sight! Oh the difference
betwixt a Funeral, and the Resurrection day! the one was a sorrowful, the other
will be a joyful day.

Especially, O my Soul, when the day of Death was a parting day, the day of the
Resurrection will be a meeting day. Thou and thine at Death did part, and that
did fill thy Heart with sorrow, but then thou and thine shall meet again, and
never part. Thou and thine! that is not all, thou and thine shall meet the Lord
in the Air. Wond^rful! Bodi^s but now in the bottom of the Grave, anon the same
mounting up into the Air; there to be owned, acknowledged, and openly
acquitted, and from thence to go along with their Lord Redeemer into the
highest Heavens, to be for ever with the Lord. Once in the Grave, and after
that with the Lord! A long time in the Grave, and after that long time is out,
and over, be with the Lord for ever, which never will be out, and over! O
blessed Day! O desirable Day! Lord when shall it be? When shall it come? Dear
Jesus! gather in the chosen of the Father effectually, all the number that is
ordained to be with thee for ever, and then come, yea come quickly, that those
of thine that are sleeping in their Graves may awake, and meet thee, and be
with the Lord for ever.

Thus, O my Soul, have thou followed thy Dead unto the Grave, and do know and
believe that this Body shall rise again, and be an happy and glorious Body,
prepare to follow, cease excessively to sorrow, rejoice in Hope that the Lord
will come, when his shall be with him for ever.

Be with with him for ever! Are they now dead amongst the Dead, and shall live
with him for ever that does live for ever? Is not this it that Christ did
bleed, and sweat, and suffer and die for? Is not this it that Christ did rise
from the dead for, that those that sleep in him might also rise? Is not this it
for which he ascended to Heaven, to prepare a place for them? Is not this it
for which he intercedes, that all those that the Father has given him might be
where he is, that they may behold his Glory? Is not this it for which he will
come again, and take (the Quick and Dead in him) all of them unto himself, that
where he is, there they might be also? Lord, have thou said it, and shall I not
believe it? Lord I believe, help thou my Unbelief.

And do thou indeed believe these sayings of thy Lord, O my Soul, and yet sit
sorrowing with excessive sorrow for thy Dead, that shall so surely live, and be
with him? Does not some other Frame and Temper more become thee? Do thou
believe the future happy State of their Bodies, whose present death thou do
bewail, yet can thou not abate thy sorrow? nor turn it yet into the actings
of some other Affections, nor into the exercises of some Grace? which if thou
do, will it not more tend to the Glory of God, to thine own Comfort, and to
the Encouragement of thine own Relations, which yet do live with thee, and to
the setting off the Power of the Christian Religion, when thou shall believe
the Promises and Principles thereof, and behave thy self as one that is endued
with such Faith, and have such firm Foundation for thy Faith?

Blessed Lord, by thine assistance now I can, and by thy helping Spirit now I
will endeavor that I might no longer sorrow as if I had no hope, when the
sincere dying Christian has hope in his Death, and after he or she is dead,
the Living have such grounds of hope that the Dead by Christ shall conquer
Death, and that the day will come, when if they be looked for in the Grave,
there they shall not be found, but may be said, they are not here, but are
risen, come see the place where they did lie, but are not here, but gone to
meet the Lord, and to be for ever with him in the highest Heavens.

Then Lord, I will no longer droop, but hope. Awake my Hope, and let my Sorrow
give place to thee. Hope! Oh how sweet is this, how pleasant and delightful? If
my Sorrow was as bitter as Gall, this Hope is as sweet as Honey: And this I do
begin to feel, the more lively is my Hope of their joyful glorious
Resurrection, the more my Sorrow does abate, tho now for the present they be
the captives of Death. Indeed had it not been that I had got this Hope, my
Heart would break with Grief, but through Grace I have obtained this good hope,
and by it my Spirit is revived, my Sorrow is more moderate.

And having this Hope, my Sorrow is turned into desire, and longing for the Day
and Coming of my Lord, that all that sleep in Jesus might awake, and their
Immortal Souls be clothed with Immortal, glorious Bodies: Oh how much better
do I find it, to groan with desires that they might live, and come up out of
their Graves, than to groan through grief that they are dead, and cast into them?
O Time, make haste and fly with greater speed, that this day of the Coming of
the Lord, and rising of the Dead may come! It is approaching, it is
approaching, it is nearer by every Day, by every Night, by every Hour that
comes and passes away. As time does wear away, so let my Sorrow, as to its
excess wear off, and that by my desiring instead of sorrowing.

Yet thou must wait patiently, O my Soul, tho thou do so earnestly desire it;
and tho this Morning might not dawn before the night of Death does overtake thy
Body, yet wait while thy Life does last, and leave thy Body, in hope that thine
and theirs that be already dead, shall surely live again in a Glorious, Blessed
and Eternal Life: For does the Husbandman cast his Seed into the Ground, and
know that it shall rot, yet patiently wait till it rise out of the Ground, and
grow until the Harvest, when it shall be gathered in with great advantage; and
can not thou, O my Soul, be patient, and wait for the Redemption of those
Bodies, that are rotting in the Grave, till the Harvest-day shall come, and
they be gathered with so great Advantage into the Kingdom of their God?

And while thou do desire and wait, thou might also, O my Soul, rejoice
and be exceeding glad, because that what thou waitest for, and do desire,
thou have such well-grounded Hopes, that it will surely be: And tho the Object
of Desire and Hope is good, as absent, and the Object of Joy is good as present
and enjoyed, yet let thy Faith make that as present which is yet to come, that
thou may rejoice therein, as if it were already present.

O Lord, notwithstanding all my Sorrow, while my Faith and Hope were sleeping,
yet now by thy good Spirit of Grace they are awake: my Sorrow is turned into
Joy; thou have put off my Sackcloth, thou have turned my Weeping into Hoping,
Desiring and Rejoicing in the firm Belief that my Dead shall rise to Glorious
Life; and being not ignorant of this, Lord pardon my Sin that has been in my
Sorrow, and let me sorrow no more as one that has no hope.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by Thomas Cockeril, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey, over against the Stocks-Market, London.
1. THE Morning Exercise at Cripplegate, or several Cases of Conscience
Resolved by sundry Ministers. In Quarto.

2. The Supplement to the Morning Exercise at Cripplegate, being sundry more
practical Cases of Conscience Resolved. Quarto.

3. Speculum Theologiae in Christo: Or a View of some Divine Truths, which are
either practically Exemplified in Jesus Christ, set forth in the Gospel, or may
be reasonably deduced from thence. Quarto.

4. Christus in Cord: Or the Mystical Union between Christ and Believers.
Octavo.

5. Precious Faith considered in its Nature, Workings and Growth. In Octavo.
These three last by Edward Polhill of Burwash in S^ssex, Esquire.

6. A Discourse of Regeneration, Faith and Repentance. Octavo.

7. A Discourse of Christian Religion, in sundry Points. Octavo.

8. The Incomprehensibleness of Imputed Righteousness, for Justification, by
Humane Reason, till enlightened by the Spirit of God. Twelves. These three last
by Thomas Cole, Minister of the Gospel in London.

9. A succinct and seasonable Discourse of the Occasions, Causes, Nature, Rise,
Growth and Remedies of Mental Errors. Whereunto is added, 1. Vindiciarum
Vindex: Being an Answer to Mr. Carry about Infant Baptism. 2. A Synopsis of
Antinomian Errors. 3. A Sermon about Unity. In Octavo.

10. The Reasonableness of Personal Reformation, and the Necessity of
Conversion. 12o.

11. The Remains of Mr. John Flavel, being Two Sermons, one on the Day of
Coronation of their Majesty's, K. William, and Q. Mary; the other at a Meeting
of Minis^ers: With some Account of his Life. Octavo.

12. An Exposition of the Assembly's Catechism, with Practical Inferences from
each Q^estion. Octavo. These four last by Mr. John Flavel, late Minister of the
Gospel at Dartmout^, Devon.

13. A Practical Discourse of Gods Sover^ignty. In Octavo.

14. Instructions about Heart-work. By Mr. Richard Allein. Octavo.

15. The Evidence of things not seen: A Scriptural and Philosophical Discourse
conce^ning the State of Good men after Death. O^tavo.

16. A Discourse of Closet or Secret Prayer. Twelves.

17. Poems, in Two Parts. Twelves. Both by Samuel Sla^er.

18. Love to Christ Necessary for all. By The. Doolittle, M. A. In Octavo.

19. The Righteous M^n's Hope at Death. By Samuel Doolittle.


