A SERMON Preached before Their MAJESTY'S In Their CHAPEL at St. JAMES's The
25th. Sunday after Pentecost, November 17th. 1686.

By J. D. of the Society of Jesus.

Published by His Majesty's Command.



LONDON, Printed by Not. Thompson at the Entrance into Old Spring Garden near
Charing Cross, MDCLXXXVII.

A SERMON Preached before Their MAJESTY'S The 25th. Sunday after Pentecost.
Math. XIII. ver. 31. Simile est Regnum Coelorum Grano Sinapis.

The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Mustard Seed.


ONe of the greatest, and one of the least of things, Sacred MAJESTY, this
morning Arrest my Thoughts; The Kingdom of Heaven, and a Mustard Seed. Had any
but the Divine Author, devised this Parable, as the World now goes, the
Proposer, with your Pious, not over-wise, would have passed for a disparager of
Heaven, for a Profaner of the Pulpit, and with your Worldlings, not
over-charg'd with Piety, that might have proved the Subject of Railery, which
coming from Christ, is a Sacred Mystery, and ground of Reverence.

Hence we may learn, not to close with first, and therefore often false
appearances; an oversight incident to Spirituals, not too profound, and to
pretenders to Wit, not too Spiritual. Great things have a proportion with
little, and little with great; a bit of Leven, a Mustard Seed, with the Kingdom
of Heaven, witness the present Gospel. Nothing so minute, nothing so remote,
nothing so familiar, which to a well disposed mind, may not prompt Devout, and
Pious Cogitations.

Simile est Regnum Coelorum grano Sinapis; The Kingdom of Heaven (what more
considerable?) is like unto a Mustard Seed; what more despicable? But if the
one so great, the other so little, between so great and little, what similitude
can there be? I crave your patience, whilst in requital, I endeavor to work it
out.

God alone is truly great, and by a reference to God, all other things are
great, and little. He Is truly great, because as the Royal Psalmist pronounces,
Psalm. 144. ver. 3. Magnitudinis ejus non est finis; His greatness has no End:
For greatness where it ends, ceases to be great, so that a property of
greatness is, either to have no end, or to increase.

The Mustard Seed is one of the least of Grains, True; yet consigned to the
Earth, when it seems buried, it revives; it rises above the rest of Herbs,
becomes a Tree, small in its self, great in its increase; The Kingdom of Heaven
is like to its increase, the Kingdom of Heaven ever improves.

For, take the Kingdom of Heaven for the Seat of Eternal Felicity, take it for
Christ, take it for the present State of the Church, take it for Faith, take it
for Charity, take it for the Gospel. This Kingdom, now great, was little; great
in being, little in beginning. Heaven, dis-peopled by the fall of the
rebellious Spirits, grew small. Christ in Bethlehem had his Crib. The Church
was once an Infant; Faith, Charity, and the Gospel, were confined to a few
followers of Christ: Behold the smallness of the Mustardseed. Since the coming
of Christ, Heaven is grown Populous, and Christ Glorious. His Church, Faith,
Charity, and the Gospel, though now and then kept down by opposition, are
evermore vigorously branching forth, a mari usque ad mare, from Sea to Sea,
Psalm. 21. v. 8. Behold the increase, to the verifying Christ's words, Simile
est Regnum Coelorum grano Sinapis; The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a
Mustard Seed.

The Kingdom of Heaven is the Kingdom of God; And the Kingdom of God, as our
Savior tells us, Luke 17. ver. 21. is within our selves; Regnum Dei intra vos.
est. It is not the Place or Region, it is the Subjects, which make the Kingdom.
We are the Kingdom of Heaven, but like the Mustardseed we must increase; And
this increase, grounded on the true measure of great and little, shall be the
Subject of my Discourse; having first implored the Divine Assistance, by the
Intercession of the Glorious Virgin, who little in her own Eye, grew to be so
great, as to be Mother of God, and Queen of Heaven. Ave Maria.

Simile est Regnum Coelorum grano Sinapis, The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a
Mustard Seed.
THE Kingdom of Heaven is within our selves; like the Mustard Seed we must
increase; and to increase, we are to frame a true measure of great and little.
To pass from equal to equal, is no increase; to pass from great to little, is
to decrease; to Increase, is to rise from less to more, from little to great,
from great to greater.

Now in order to this, my first reflection is, That Christ says, The Kingdom of
Heaven is like unto a Mustard Seed; he says not it is equal. Between little and
great, similitude there may be, Equality there can be none. Though our Savior
then likens the Kingdom of Heaven to a Mustard Seed; it follows not that Men
may equal the Mustard Seed of Earthly things to the Kingdom of Heaven. No, it
only ensues, That like the Mustard Seed they must increase.

My second Reflection is, That one of the disorders which reign in this sinful
World, and which obstructs our increase in Virtue, Piety, and Religion, the
Head and Source, from which all our calamities flow, is a false measure of
great and little; This occasions a wrongful estimate of things, so that what to
the partial Eye of depraved sense and humor, appears great, though little, and
little though great, to our abused Reason, is apt to appear the same; and Men,
becoming unjust prizers, in place of increasing by passing from little to
great, decrease by falling from great to little, to the diminishing the Kingdom
of Heaven, and augmenting the Kingdom of Darkness.

Hence it is, that Virtue is forced to retreat, and yield to Vice; True Glory
to a Shadow. Hence it is, that a never-failing Bliss gives way to momentary
content, Heaven to Earth, Eternity to Time. Hence it is, that the Soul goes at
so low a rate, for little, obscure, or nothing. Hence it is that the Body is
proclaimed the subject of courtship, admiration, and Worship, as enormous a
folly, as to prefer the husk before the Seed, or the course and rough Shell to
the rich and noble Pearl which lodges in it. The Soul, the Soul, though
seemingly little is great, and the first step to its increase, is to know its
own greatness.

Dim Antiquity sitting in the Shade of its Native Ignorance, without the light
of Faith, could see no further, than what was gross and material, and
therefore, thought it said enough to enhance the dignity of Man, by entituling
him Microcosmus, the little World. A Title bearing something of glorious, and
flattering many a fancy; yet taking it into due consideration, barely as it
lies, without other construction, I cannot but recede from the common Vogue;
For if we take Man for the Body alone; Man, I cannot deny, may pass for a
little World, keeping a proportion with the greater, which environs it: The
Head and Breast may be resembled to the Heavens; the Heart and Brain, to the so
much influencing Planets, Sun and Moon; his Eyes to the Stars, his waking to
the Day, his Sleep to the Night; the Circulation of his Blood, to the constant
returns of Rivers to the Sea from whence they sprung; the rest of the Body to
the Earth. All well. But can the Body alone, that debasing part of Man, with
Truth and Justice be termed Man? You Will tell me, no; And if not, though the Body
may be styled a little World, Man cannot. It is below his worth and greatness.
Man, if a World, he is a great one; and this World which encompasses his Body,
confronted with Man, is but little. It is not vainly to boast, it is not to
Hyperbolize, it is to raise a just conceit of a Soul so much depressed in our
esteem. I say all this, and I say no more than what reason upholds. Will you
have the proof? I draw it from what is undeniable: For if we speak even of
greatness in extent, in which this World seems to exceed: That is greater,
which contains; that which is contained, is less: on this account the Body is
called a little World, because enclosed; the enclosing World, the greater. Is
it not so? can any deny it? None. I take then for granted what none deny, and
upon this bottom carry on my Discourse.

Does not the mind of Man outreach the narrow limits of the Earth? Does it not
upon the wings of speculation, soar above the Heavens? Does it not survey,
measure, and gather the World in a Thought? This large, this vast, this immense
Universe, does it not bind it within a few lines? does it not imprison it in a
paper? does it not cast it in a Map? The revolutions of the Spheres, and
motions of Stars? does it not confine them, and lay them before your Eyes in a
Globe? In this like unto its Divine Maker, of whom become a new born Infant, to
redeem us, the Church sings: Mundum pugillo continens, in his little fist he
bears a World. And have not I just cause to say, the Soul of Man is greater
than the World? I say nothing of the power of his memory, making things past to
be present; I mention not the force of his Intellect, transcending the
grossness of Bodies, and working upon Spiritual Beings, and Abstracts, walking
in the spaces of Gods Immensity, and questioning possibilities. I let alone the
natural Appetite of the Will, ever bending and aspiring to Eternity, all
evidences of its refined, spiritual, and immortal existency. I contain my self
within the bounds of a palpable way of Reasoning, and am confounded; when I
consider the mean value we frame of a Soul, the high esteem we nourish of this
World, as if our whole rise, and increase, depended on the progress we make in
it. Alas! Alas! its Men that enoble the World, the World cannot enoble Men: If
the Kingdom of Heaven be like unto a Mustard Seed as to increase, this World is
like to a Mustard Seed without increase; For compared with Heaven, this World
is smaller than a Mustard Seed; I wish it had the virtue to quicken our Reason,
that it has to open our Brain. Give me leave once more to reason it thus:

Have you never addressed your self to a Sun-Dyal, to ask the hour of the day;
You have, and that often. Know then, that very shadow, which counts each
minute, in every moment gives light, to this important Truth. Your adored
Earth, what is it think you, O Idolaters of Terrene greatness, compared to
Heaven? Take notice I beseech you, of what the Dyal makes out. This Earth, in
comparison of Heaven, even in bulk and extent, is less than a Mustard Seed; Let
not the proposition I so boldly advance, surprise you; I impose not upon you, I
vent nothing but real Verity. Consult the Learned, they will inform you, it is no
more than the point of a Needle, than the Center of a Circle; they will farther
instruct you, that on this supposal, the whole Art of Dyaling relies. The Art,
as experience makes out, when rightly practiced, never fails, never
deceives; nor can the ground, on which it depends, be fallacious.

Ah Mortals! Mortals! it is not this lower World, it is your deluded Ambition is
great. This Earth on which your Glory builds, this Sea on which your Avarice
Sayls, is but an Attom, is but a Point in paragon of Heaven. Punctum est (says
the moral Philosopher) in quo bella geritis, it is but a point on which you
War, O Romans, it is but a point on which your Martial Forces draw up, March,
and Randezvous; it is but a point on which your Warlike Instruments resound:
It is but a point over which your Victorious Eagles fly. Subdue Countries,
Fetter the Liberty of Nations, Color your Purples in the blood of Dying
Monarchies; Let Europe, Asia, and Africa, draw your Triumphal Chariots: Let
America, (when known) bring up your Glorious Train, you will then be Great, you will
be Masters, you will be Lords of a World, terrarum Domini. You Will have gained your
point; And what is it? what is it? a point, a point; for no more is the World
to Heaven then a point; punctum est, make much of little, since you know not to
make much of what is Great, Heaven, your Soul, God.

But so many Empires are past, the point remains no more theirs: Ecce gentes
quasi stilla situlae, exclaims the Prophet Isa. chap. 40. ver. 12. Behold the
Nations like a drop of a Bucket. A drop, a drop; behold the increase of the
Adorers of the World, the drop is often puffed into a bubble, a pleasant sight
to the Eye, but soon breaks, and vanishes; ecce Gentes, behold your Nations,
your Gentiles, your Heathens, your livers without the fear of God, forgotten of
Heaven, aspiring to nothing but Earthly Promotion; they rise with the
inconstant Bucket of Fortune, to drop and plunge into a deluge of Misery.

Punctum est; and if the main, if the whole, be but a point, what must it is
Divisions and Sub-divisions, Sections and Sub-Sections, prove to be? Your
Cottages, your Rights of Common, your Copy-holds, Free holds, Tenements,
Manors, etc. what are they, but the Fractions of a point, in one removal from
nothing? And yet, and yet, How many! how many! injurious to Themselves,
unmindful of Heaven, ungrateful to God, spend their desires, consume their
loves, and cast away their thoughts on transitory Trifles, and Joys? As if
enslaving themselves to Flesh and World, so far beneath the noble Nature of a
Soul, could add to their greatness. What Suits? what Animosities? what Feuds?
what a living like Canibals, even amongst Christians? what endeavors to
depress and devour each other; and all for the small part of a point? Punctum
est, and that not durable.

I have contained my Discourse within the bounds of Natural Reason; But if
you will have the true value of a Soul, open the Eyes of a lively Faith, see your
Creator become a Redeemer, see your God dying upon a Cross, and remember that
Blood, that Death, of Infinite worth, are the Price and Ransom of your Soul. A
little respit, and I come in my second part to solve an Objection of a
Worldling.

Simile est Regnum Coelorum Grano Sinapis, The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a
Mustard Seed.
IN my first part I have made it my endeavor, to set forth the disparity that
runs between this World, and a Soul; and by consequence, That Man cannot aspire
to an increase, by levelling his thoughts at any thing this World affords, a
world so little, so vain, so unconstant.

But I fear a Melancholy dumpish Fit has seized you, so are you out of humor
with the World; Methinks I hear one of those say, who affect Wit, by a nauseous
drolling at Piety; I apprehend, you Preachers, heat your selves to little
Purpose. We are of a cooler temper, we have not so much of the Mustard Seed, as
to take snuff at the World for every Impression, threat of Hell, or name of
Heaven. Heaven and Hell are things remote.

We live in the World, to rise, and increase: And to this end, we study to foot
sure; Faith and Religion, we know, have a fair stroke for the other World, but
have forfeited many a Loyal Life, Estate, and Fortune in this; we have a Family
to provide for, our selves; We must live according to our Birth and Quality. In
a word, make Piety and Religion, our increase and Interest upon Earth, and we
will soon be Saints for Heaven.

You have spoke like what you are, with much Prophanity, little Wit, and no
Reason; By all which, the coolness of your temper discovers it self. Heaven and
Hell, you tell me, are things afar off; and I would have you know, that Heaven
is no farther off, than you will make it, and Hell perhaps, is nearer than you
think it. You say you live in the World, great news! I thought you had lived
out of it; For those that live in the World like Men, and govern themselves
with Faith and Reason, are sensible they are placed here to serve God, and work
their Salvation. You Will foot sure; and can there be sure footing in the slippery
way of Vice? You are to provide for a Posterity, and are you therefore to
neglect an Eternity? But you must live according to your Birth and Quality: And
at the holy Font of Baptism, were you not regenerated to be the Heirs of
Heaven, and qualified to be the Children of God; You bid me make Piety and
Religion your Interest upon Earth; and is it not the greatest of Interests,
that by the pious Exercises of True Religion, you may purchase the unvaluable
Treasure of Heavenly Bliss? But your meaning is, make Piety and Religion your
way to Riches, Honor, and Greatness upon Earth, and then you will be Saints for
Heaven. I understand you. In place of your buying Heaven, youl'd have Heaven
buy you. But let me tell you, Heaven admits of no such Saints, who will not
venture the few and vain satisfactions of this World, to secure their Soul, the
possession of God, and a happy Eternity.

Quid prodest homini? It Is our Savior expostulates the case, with too rash
Followers of a Sinful World, si totum mundum lucretur, animae vero suae
detrimentum patiatur; What is a man profited, if he gain the whole World, and
lose his own Soul? Mat. 16. ver. 26.
A pressing Instance: quid prodest, where is the profit? where the Income?
where the pretended increase, suppose one gain the World, and lose his Soul?
Answer if you can. The proposal is clear and urging. Where the loss is so much
exceeding, you will tell me, as that of the Soul is, there can be no profit, in
the gain even of a World.

You speak well; it is the current and obvious Exposition, abundantly
confirming the present Truth. Yet spending several reflections upon these words.
Something, methinks, I discover in them more, then at the first sight appears.
For as the case is stated, the same Man is the gainer, the same the loser, a
gainer of the whole World, and a loser of his Soul.

Should you question me: quid prodest, where is the profit? I should incline to
answer, in not being a loser, of both World and Soul; because, as the case
stands, though loser of his Soul, he is gainer of the World. A fallacy, a
fallacy, supported only by the ignorance of what the loss of a Soul is; And
Christ's words furnishes me with this retortion: By the loss of his Soul he
loses himself; now the gainer being the same as the loser, both are lost; and
themselves being lost, they are at a total loss. At the loss of a World, loss
of Soul, loss of God, O what losses! Let World then be forfeited, so it be with
the saving of our Soul, and the gain of Gods favor. It is but just, no loss,
but an increase.

Mis-interpret me not, as if I were for the neglect of Employments and
Concerns; I know the good government of the World, requires Application to
Worldly Affairs. I am not ignorant, that pretensions to increase of Fortune, by
way of Virtue and Merit, are Duties justly challenged by Gods Vicars at your
hands. But then be pleased to remember, your first obligation is to God, your
chief employment to regulate your proceedings, by his Laws; from Him you had
your Being, from Him you must have your increase. Religion is not to be swayed
by Interst, but Interest by Religion; Passion is not to govern Reason, nor
Reason to question Gods Commands; Justice must neither be daunted, nor bribed,
by what this World may propose. In a word, for a point, and less than a point,
be it Earthly Honor, be it Wealth, be it Pleasure, we are not to lose our Soul;
to our everlasting loss, decrease and perdition. Otherwise you will repent when
it is too late, and when your Tears will only water, and not wash away the
Guilt of a Sinful Life.

Too late, too late, the Unrighteous cry out, in the Book of Wisdom; Chap. 6.
ver. 7.
Lassati sumus in via iniquitatis and perditionis, We are tired out in the way
of Iniquity and Perdition; Ambulavimus vias difficiles, We have walked rough
ways; Viam Dei ignoravimus, We knew not the way of the Lord: Too long deferred
a Repentance, forced by Anguish and Torment, but no Remedy. Lassati sumus, We
are tired. And why? If Sin and Iniquity tired you, why were you not tired with
Iniquity and Sinning? Vias difficiles Ambulavimus, You have trod hard ways; And
why did you not foot the easier paths of Righteousness, to the peace of your
Conscience, and quiet of your Souls? Vias Domini ignoravimus, We were ignorant
of the ways of the Lord: And how so? Was not the way of the Lord revealed, and
open to you, as well as to others? Fond Complaints! Fruitless Excuses! Affected
Ignorance! You would not know, what you would not perform; you hated Truth, to
embrace Vanity: Interest was your Religion, Ambition your Guide, and not Piety;
Prophanity your Rule, and not Devotion; you enslaved Faith to Sense, Reason to
Passion, Soul to Body, and by a false Perspective representing unto your
selves, great for little, and little for great, you aspired to settle your
Greatness and Happiness in a Contemptible World, by relinquishing God; And
whereas, like the Mustard Seed, raising your self from little to great, to God,
to Eternal Bliss, by your own increase, you should have increased the Kingdom
of Heaven: Falling from great to little, you have made an accession to the
Princedom of Torment. And now quid prodest, quid prodest? what does it avail
you? what does it avail you, to have mastered a World? The World is where it
was, and you in Hell.

Crucior in hac flamma, exclaims the Rich Man, we commonly call Dives. I am
tormented in this Fire: Where our Savior, bringing in Abraham and Dives
discoursing together, emboldens me to put in a Word to my purpose, and so end.
Good News, O Dives! from the other World. And what, says he, are the Tidings of
the other World to me, who am in pain, but painful? Your Children are jocund.
And I, sighing: They peaceable enjoy the Riches, the Titles, the Honors, with
so much Toil thou entailest upon them. And my Inheritance are gnashing of
Teeth, a never-dying Worm, Reproach and Ignominy. That Palace of which, Wealth
laid the first Stone, by Magnificency the Architect is now completed. And I,
unhappy dwell in a Dungeon of Horror and Darkness: The Gardens you designed are
curiously divided, the Walks laid out, the Flowers breath a constant Spring and
Paradise: And here in stench I am chained, only permitted to walk with my
dismal Fancy from torment to torment. Comfort, O Davies, those little
Cypresses, all thrive and are grown up, to defiance of the scorching Sun. And I
burn; Your Fountains run and sport, your Waterworks Play to admiration within
your shady Groves; and neither Shade, or a drop of Water have I to temper my
excessive Flames. That Wilderness you planted with such exquisit art, is grown
up into a Labyrinth, where pleasure has lost its self, to be found by all that
enter; And I am lost, says he, in the inextricable Labyrinth of Fire, of
Torment, of a woeful Eternity. I burn, I burn, and burn I must for ever. Cruciar
in hac flamma; Such, beloved Brethren, is the apparent increase, and real
decrease of those, who value Interest above Religion, their own Humors, above
Gods Precepts; Body above Soul, Vice above Virtue, and Earth above Heaven; and
so it ends, without ever finding an end of misery. By an opposite way of
living, let us change the decrease into an increase, by a right estimate of
what is Truth, and what Imposture, what Temporal, what Eternal.

The Mustard Seed begins early; no sooner committed to the Earth, but it works
its increase; its perseverant, of a hot nature, that is, as it were resolute.
The like are we to be, we must begin, we must persevere, we must be resolute,
Regnum Coelorum vim patitur and violenti rapiunt illud: The Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and the violent bear it away. We are to be resolute in a
True Faith, of undaunted Hope, and fervent Charity, that so by raising our
thoughts to a true esteem of our Soul, to God, to Life Eternal, we may increase
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of Heaven, like the Mustard Seed, may
increase by us; which God of his Infinite Mercy grant us, In the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.

FINIS.

