The New PLOT OF THE PAPISTS.

To Transform TRAITORS.

Into MARTYRS.

Faithfully Exposed to Public View.

Ex ore tuote Judico. LONDON, Printed 1679.

READER,
THis following Paper will sufficiently show by what Arts and subtlety this
restless, and untamable generation still labors to support their wounded
Choose; whom neither the Judgments of the Bench, nor the Exceptions at Tyburn
can silence, or convince. But to the end all Protestants may the better
understand their ways, and their close proceedings, here is a faithful
Transcript of a Paper newly taken out of the chamber of a notorious Papist;
wherein is manifestly set forth their whole design of Canonizing those men for
Saints, whom the Justice of the Nation has Condemned for Traitors. I suppose I
shall do acceptable service in the Publication, since the best way to avoid
Error is to know it.

EVery Rational Creature loves to be, and loves to be happy: This is so rooted
in the Nature of Mankind, that whosoever acts, or opines contrary to this
Principle, must needs be wholly deprived of the use of Reason. All the
Rhetoric in the world can never persuade a man (knowingly) to make himself
miserable. This being so, I say it is impossible, that a dying man, who is
compos mentis, and does truly believe, there is a God, who is powerful and
just, in rewarding good, and punishing Evil, should at the very point of death
averr his Innocence, and call God (who is immediately to Judge him) to witness
the truth, or to punish the falsehood of what he then say, and yet be guilty
of the Fact by him so denied.

Whoever believes, there is a God, must believe him to be Truth, and Justice it
self; and therefore he must know, there can be no Treason of a higher Nature
committed against his Divine Essence, then Sacrilegiously to abuse, and set his
Holy Name to a Lie; and also he must be convinced, that, since God is
infinitely Just, the punishment he will inflict on such a fact, must bear
proportion with the Enormity of the crime. Since then it is impossible to
humane nature for any man, knowingly and advisedly to make himself miserable,
nay infinitely and eternally miserable; therefore most impossible it is, that
all those dying men upon the score of the Plott (believing there is a God)
should vouch him, as a witness, and Garanty of their innocence, and yet be
culpable both of the fact, by them denied, and of the sacrilegious affront at
the same time offered to His Divine Majesty.

It remains then to consider, whither these dying men did believe, there is a
God: If we believe them to be Papists, the question is at an end, since all
mankind knows, that the Church of Rome believes there is a God, however it may
err in the manner of worshipping him; for if they did not believe there is a
God, they could not err in the manner of worshipping him. So that, if they dyed
^^^ists, they believed in God. Now that they dyed Papists, I think the matter
proves it self, and can not be proved by any thing that is more evident: For
all, that we can possibly know of another man's internal belief, is by his
profession of it; and at what time can such profession be of stronger evidence,
then at the hour of his death?

There is another weighty reason to demonstrate a Posterior, that those
Executed persons did believe in God: For all Atheists (as such) must of
necessity love this present life, as their supreme felicity; for death with
them is an end of all being: and therefore for the preservation of life (their
summum bonum) their is nothing in their power, which they will not do: whence
it must follow, that if those men had been Atheists, they would certainly have
confessed a Plott, and would have impeached others, whereby their own lives might
have been preserved.

Now then the question in short will be, whether more credit ought to be given
to the Oaths of Mr. Oats, Bedlow, Prance and Dugdale, and the rest of that
crew, who live, and are in fair hopes to live long, and are no losers by their
Swearing, or to the Oath, and imprecations of so many dying men, at the very
moment of their deaths; who are so far from gaining by their swearing, that if
they would but confess the contrary, to what they swear, might save their
lives, and perhaps be no less preferred, than Mr. Oats and his fellows; I say
again, so far from gaining by such their swearing (if not true) that either
they must believe, there is no God, or else (as I said before) they are certain
to damn their souls eternally, by making a sacrilegious use of his dreadful
name with their last breath, solemnly to attest, and confirm a Lie.

This seems to me to be a plain demonstration, whither the matter be considered
in order to Christianity, or to humane nature, for neither as Christians, is it
possible for them to do an act (the last of their lives) to affront the
Almighty, who is immediately to judge them, nor as rational creatures, can they
wittingly expose themselves to certain, and continual misery. Therefore most
evident it is born according to Reason, and Christianity (and so it must appear
to all, who are not void of both) that their last words were true; and that Mr.
Fenwick had a great deal of reason to close his Speech in this manner; And I
hope Christian charity will not let you think, that by the last act of my life
I would cast away my soul by sealing up my last breath with a damnable Lie.

It is a prodigious thing to see with what downright Nonsense, and
contradiction the seduced Rabble are imposed upon in this point by those
sticklers, who so eagerly follow the chase of innocent blood; and still search
for the bottom of the Plott, as the Heathens did for good or bad Fortune in
the intrels of living Creatures; but with this difference, that they were only
for the cutting up of beast, but our Zealots are for the imbowelling of men.

First they tell them, that Papists have Dispensations to say and swear any
thing for the advantage of their cause, and yet all the Roman Catholics in the
world, both living and dying, solemnly protest, and declare, that God himself,
much less the Pope, cannot give a dispensation for the doing of an evil thing.
Hear what dying H^ says to this point. I do utterly abhor and detest that
abominable and false doctrine laid to our charge, that we can have License to
commit Perjury, or any sin to advantage our cause, being expressly against the
Doctrine of St. Paul, Non sunt facienda mala, ut eveniant bona, Evil is not to
be done, that good may come thereof. The rest of them speak upon this matter to
the same purpose: Now since inward belief cannot be known, but by outward
profession, who are to be believed in this point, the living calumniators, or
the dying Professors?

In the next place they take upon them to interpret the words of our dying men;
and say, that when they declare themselves innocent, as the child unborn, etc.
The meaning is; they are innocent, because they have had the Priests absolution
for it, although the Fact was committed by them. This piece of subtle Nonsense
does mightily please, both the seducing Commentatours and their seduced party.
But first it is false, that a man is innocent, because he is absolved: One
commits Treason, and has the King's Pardon, is he therefore innocent? clean
contrary; a Pardon is rather an argument of the crime committed, and does no
more, but remit the penalty. For no pardon or absolution can make that thing
not to be done, which is done. Besides no Roman Catholic, according to the
doctrine of his Church, can swear, he is innocent in any sense by reason of his
absolution; because no man can evidently know (without a particular revelation)
that he is reconciled to God, or whither in his sight he be worthy of love, or
hatred; but all men are still bound to work their salvation with fear, and
trembling. Since then no man can swear a thing, which he does not evidently
know; how therefore in this suppositious sense of innocence, which supposes
the Fact committed, is it possible, they could swear they were innocent? whence
it is manifest, that our executed men did with their last breath deny, in the
presence of God, and men, (according to their own words) the very Fact it self,
viz. the composing, and conspiring the death of the King; and did assert their
innocence, not by virtue of an absolution, but by pleading, non est factum.

There is yet another shift (I think a very unchristian one) made use of by
this sort of men to obscure the truth, and evade the force of our argument:
They say, that after our dying men had first lustily forsworn themselves in the
declaration of their innocence, then for the last Act of this Tragical Farce
(as their charity represents it) the Priests laid their heads together, and
absolved each other, and all was right again; and so away they packed for
another world. Deus non irridetur. It is hard to say, whither the impiety or
the impossibility of this Story be greater: it is such a mockery put upon our
merciful, but just God, to abuse, and affront him upon presumption of his
Pardon, that I wonder, how the fiction, and invention of it could enter into
the thoughts of a Christian. As for the impossibility of it, certain it is,
those Jesuits, who were the teachers of others, could not be ignorant of the
Doctrine of their own Church, set forth in every Catechism, and in their
Council of Trent: viz. That no absolution is available to a sinner, which is
not preceded by a sorrow, and detestation of the sin by him committed, and by a
firm purpose of transgressing no more: Now, since it is impossible voluntarily
to do a thing, and at the same time to detest it; and since without a
detestation and abhorrency of their sin, they could not hope for any benefit
from an absolution; how then can those dying men, with any appearency of
reason, be thought to make use of this wretched artifice to cheat the world,
and manifestly to damn their own souls? more-over they could not be ignorant,
that God Almighty is at no time obliged to give a revolted Sinner the grace of
Repentance; much less will he do it, at that very moment, when such sinner
shall pervert the mercy of his Redeemer into a motive, and incentive of
Rebellion against him; and so make a Poison of the Antidote.

All the premises being duly weighed, is there not some reason a litte to
hesitate, and to doubt at least, whether Mr. Oats (overpowered by the two
prevailing Motives, first of revenge against the Jesuits, for not receiving,
and entertaining him any longer, and next of procuring a subsistence, which he
then wanted) may not have invented that voluminous History of his Plott (which
to all people knowing in the world has the perfect air of a Romance; and
whether Mr. Bedlow, Prance and Dugdal (exalted from Goales to the glorious
titles of the Kings Evidence, and saviors of their Country) may not also have
been tempted, by the good success of their Leader Mr. Oats, and by indemnity,
and rewards, to take upon them this gainful Trade of swearing? especially,
since there are no visible, concurring circumstances, nor matters of fact
extant, and appearing to give any solidity to this aicry Plott: but all is made
out purely by the dint of swearing, and only corroberated by the credulity of
the people. Set now against this the Oaths and Protestations of so many dying
men; the reputation of those who are yet living, and accused; of whom many have
been eminent (as in their quality) so for their service, and suffering in
behalf of their King, and Country. And after all this, will it not become
every sober man to pause a little, that their feet may not be too swift in
shedding of blood? let something be left to God's manifestation, and let us not
trust wholly to the Revelation of Oats, Bedlow, Prance and Dugdal, in a case of
blood, and perhaps of innocent blood.

But before I proceed any further upon this Subject, I must warn my Reader,
that I no ways arraign the Justice of the Nation, or the Votes of both Houses
in relation to this Plott: For according to the Informations at first brought
before them of so horrid and bloody a Conspiracy, they acted then like good
Patriots, and like themselves, in their zealous prosecution of it in order to
the bringing the parties accused to a just and legal Trial. But then again, far
be it from any man to believe, that those Honorable Patriots are more desirous
of punishment to be inflicted, and of blood to be shed, then of Truth to be
discovered: and since there is such a sin in the world as Perjury, so
exterminating to mankind, and of so dangerous a Nature, that it has even the
Law, and Justice itself to back and protect it, till such a time as it is
detected, and lifted out by the sagacity and discernment of able Judges; and
since in our present cast there are pregnant symptoms, and indications
superven^^^^ of that Civil Plague; It well may become the prudence and Justice
of all our Magistrates in general, after so much blood as has been already
shed upon the bare testimony of these men, without any real discovery of the
things by them sworn, either by matter of Fact extant and apparent, or by the
confession of any of the persons Executed, soberly to weigh, and examine,
whether this legal way of murdering men (if that be the case) by false Oaths,
ought not to be as narrowly sifted, and as exemplarly punished in the
Perjurers, as the crime of Rebellion (should that be true) in the Trayters.

Now in the last place, to convince all those, whose hearts are not of Pharo's
temper, and whom the violence, of Passion has not totally deprived of all
exercise of reason, I shall only take a short view of what was done in the
Gunpowder-Treason, and compare those passages and the comportments of the
Criminals upon that occasion, with these of our Modern pretended Conspirators.

In the first place there was then visible the overt act of barrels of Powder
laid in the place.

2. There was the slight of some of the Conspirators, and their resistance at
their taking.

3. Those that were executed, did all confess the fact at the time of Execution.

4. All persons indifferently, both Papists and Protestants, Forrainers and
Natives believed the thing: and, although some Pamphlets were at that time
written to extenuate the Fact, and the guilt in reference to some of the
Party's therein concerned, yet no soul living did then deny the thing it self.

How then comes it to pass, that in our present Conspiracy, all things should
rancounter, and Diametrically contrary in every particular to what then
happened; and to what ever did happen in all real Plotts, and Conspiracies
since the Creation of the world?

First as to overt Acts, there is not here any matter of Fact visible, and
apparent, that has any proper tendency or relation to a Conspiracy for
destroying the King, and levying of War; but the whole Machine of this vast,
and hideous Plott is built upon the bare testimony of the swearers.

Let not the death of Sr. Edmund Bury Godfrey be urged, as a matter of Fact, to
prove this pretended Conspiracy, because the unfortunate end of that Gentleman,
as to the true manner of it, is a Mystery yet unreveal'd, and is laid at the
Papists door, just as Antichrist is charged upon the Pope: all that would have
it so, believe it to be so, Quae volumus, facile credimus: But I think, there
are few unbias'd, and discerning men, who are convinced, that those poor
creatures, who suffered death upon that account, were his true Murderers; nor
can they rationally be so, until Mr. Prance, who once disclaimed his Evidence
before King and Council, shall in the same circumstance of dying, declare their
Guilt, in which they so solemnly declared their innocence, especially since
^erry at the same time declared himself both innocent, and a Protestant.

As to the consult of the Jesuits on the 14th. of April, and those Letter of
summons produced in order thereunto I say that, if the meeting of the Jesuits
at that time be an overt Act to prove a Conspiracy of Treason, then every third
year since Jesuits were Jesuits, there has been a Plott; for they have
constantly held (according to the Rule of their Order) those triennial meetings
ever since their first foundation, as all the world abroad can testify.

By all this it appears, that there is no overt Act, not matter of Fact at all,
to ground a Rational belief of this Plott; and that it is only supported by the
breath of the witnesses coined into Oaths.

2. Not one person accused in this pretended Conspiracy did either fly, or
abscond (except only the Priests, who were obnoxious to the Law for their
Priesthood) nay the greatest part of them upon the first rumor of their
accusation, came in and tendered themselves to answer their charge. And here
(pray) let me ask every sober man, whether it be likely or possible, that
amongst so many as are accused of this Treason, not one should be found, whose
guilt, or fear would prevail upon him to fly and secure himself from the
extremest penalty of the Law, since it was universally known many days before
any were apprehended, that Mr. Oats had made a discovery of a Plott the
stoutest man, had he been guilty, would have fled upon such a warning: but the
most timorous of nature did not fly, because he was innocent.

3. Of so many, that have been Executed for this Plott (horrid and bloody
indeed, on one side or the other) all at their deaths have denied the Fact; and
although life be sweet, have resisted all temptations of Pardon, and reward
offered unto them, if they would but confess for themselves; and others what
they were not guilty of.

And here again I must ask another question; and I beg of every one, who reads
this Paper, to make an answer to it within himself, such as may fairly satisfy
his own reason, and conscience. How comes it to pass that in all former
Conspiracies, as that of Babington in the days of Queen Elizabeth, and that of
the Gunpowder-Treason in the Reign of King James, the Conspirators then should
confess the Fact, many of them pleading guilty at their Arraignments, and all
of them at their deaths acknowledging their Treasons and asking God and the
King pardon for them? but in this Plott all to a man plead not guilty,
protesting and declaring their innocence both at their (...), and Executions
they dye praying for the King, praying for their Enemies, asking God and the
world forgiveness for all their other sins and offenses, but as to the Plott,
affirming their innocence with their last breath, and sealing it with their
blood? whence (I say) this vast difference in the comportments of these, and
and of those? are they not all Papists? were there no^ then Jesuits amongst
them, as well as now? was there not a Garnet then confessing, as well as a Whit
thread how denying, and both Provincials of their Order? have they gotten a new
Faith or a new Creed since those days? on is there not the same humane Nature
in both? I challenge all mankind to assign a cause of this difference with the
least color of Reason and humanity, any otherwise, then by saying, what was
said at the death of the just one, vere, hic homo justus erat.

4. As to the present belief of this Plott, I must confess, it does now pass as
current with the Rabble here, as the firing of Rome by the Christians in the
days of Nero, did with the Populate of that City; and both have produced the
like bloody effects. But since the blood of innocent men did never yet do hurt
to themselves, or their party, we are to take such dispensations (according to
God's own words) as marks of his Love, and as an earnest of better things to
come. And such is the power of truth, that I dare affirm (not pretending to the
gift of Prophecy) some years hence this Plott will no more be believed in
England, than now it is believed that the Christians did burn Rome. The eyes of
other Nations are generally opened already to see the imposture: and the
impossibility of the thing, and the circumstances (taking the whole frame, and
System of the Conspiracy, as laid down by Mr. Oats in his Narrative) is so
manifest to all discerning men that few even Protestants in foreign parts take
it to be any other, but a Pollitick engine to carry on farther designs.

I shall conclude with this hearty Prayer, that our merciful God may avert from
our Nation those Judgments, which usually follow the crying sins of Perjury
and blood.

FINIS.

