Earthquakes EXPLAINED AND Practically Improved: OCCASIONED By the late
EARTHQUAKE on Sept. 8. 1692. in LONDON, many other parts in England, and beyond
Sea.

By THOMAS DOOLITTLE M. A.

Jamaica's Miseries show London's Mercies. Both Compared.

LONDON: Printed for John Salusbury at the Rising Sun over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1693.

An Humble WARNING From the Presaging Earthquake Sept. 8. 1692.
PLague, Fire, and Earthquakes are amongst the most terrible Judgments, whereby
the great and holy God does manifest his sore displeasure against a sinful
People, and his indignation and hatred of their heinous and crying Sins. These
three have befallen London. The first in the GREAT DYING Year, 1665. the second
in the GREAT BURNING Year 1666. and the last in the GREAT TREMBLING present
Year 1692. and the Month of September is remarkable in all these. The Plague
(as I remember) being then at the highest, the great Fire began on September. 2.
and the Earthquake was on the Eighth of the same Month; on which day of the
Month Josephus de bell. Jud. lib. 7. cap. 18. writes thus; Jerusalem was taken
the second year of Vespasian 's reign, on the eighth day of September, and
having been already five times before surprised, it was finally again
destroyed. This was London's trembling, but (through the great Power, Patience,
and Mercy of God) not its falling day.

I call Earthquakes presaging for these Reasons; what weight there is in them I
leave to others to judge.

1. Because Christ did assert them to to be such: Luke 21. 5. to 12. as some
spoke of the Temple, how it was adorned with goodly stones, and gifts, he said,
As for these things, which ye behold, the days will come, in which there shall
not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down; they asked,
Master, When shall these things be? and what sign will there be when these
things shall come to pass. Then Christ gave (amongst others) Earthquakes as
foregoing Signs of such future Ruins.

2. Because God has made use of Earthquakes (in former times) as forerunners
of great Calamities to come.So according to Christ's prediction, this Sign went
before the destruction of the Temple. Josephus de bell. Jud. lib. 7. c.
12.Amongst the foregoing Signs of the destruction of Jerusalem, mentions an
Earthquake: Upon the Feast Day of Pentecost, at night the Priests going into
the inner Temple to offer their wonted Sacrifice, at first they felt the place
to move and tremble, and afterward they heard a voice, which said, Let us
depart hence.

3. Because Christ says (as of other Judgments mentioned, so) of Earthquakes,
They are the beginning of Sorrows. If the beginning, must not others follow?
when an Earthquake is the beginning (let not Scorners deride) who knows what
shall be the middle and the ending of those Calamities, that might take their
beginning from an Earthquake, Matthew* 24. 7, 8.

4. Because I judge (if I err, let my mistaking thoughts be excused) that this
late Earthquake was from the immediate hand of God. And yet if it were not, God
can use the alleged Natural Causes of Earthquakes, to give warning, and to
fore-run other following Miseries. But my reason is this, because it did extend
it self so far, to so many places in England, and beyond the Sea (according to
the Account that I have heard) not only on the same day, but at the same time
of the day as in England, at London, Sheerness, Sandwich, Deal, Maidstone,
Portsmouth, and many other places beyond Sea, at Paris, Marli, Versailles, and
in Normandy, at Brussels, Cologne, and in most places of Holland and Flanders.
Now if it did arise from Natural Causes, there must be exceeding great
quantities of such Vapors in the Caves and hollow Places of the Earth, which
striving all along so far to get out, it seems very strange they did no where
with great fury break out, to the opening of the Earth, and overthrow of some
places, where the Earth was weakest. If the quantity was less, taking its
beginning in some certain place, and proceeding forward, seeking to get out,
but could not, it would have required more time to travail under ground to such
distant Towns and Cities, as in England, and so many places beyond Sea, and so
could not have been at all, at the same time.

And if it were from the immediate hand of God, was it not for some great end
that God should do so great a work, which he does more rarely do? Is not the
meaning of it, a warning to all that have been shaken by it, to forsake sin,
and turn to God by repentance and reformation, or else look for some further
stroke? while we go on in a course of great provoking sins, when God has
shaken his Rod over us, might we not fear it will some time fall upon us? But
whether it were Natural or Supernatural, should not all places that trembled by
it, without Reformation, fear and tremble at the Judgments that may follow it?
when God begins to punish, and Men not so much as begin to repent and turn,
does not he threaten he will go on to punish seven times more, and seven to
that? and many times seven more to that, when a People still walk contrary to
him? Lev. 26. 15. to 40.

Some would fain deny the matter of Fact, but that there are so many Witnesses
to testify against them. Some that own it, make light of it, and do not at all
think it portends any more Calamity to come; even as the blinded Jews slighted
all the Indications of more approaching Miseries, as Josephus writes concerning
them; saying, These miserable people were easily persuaded to believe Impostors
who did belly God, yet would they not believe, nor give any ear or regard unto
certain Tokens and Signs (of which an Earthquake was one) of the ruin of their
City: but as it were blinded, neither having Eyes nor Souls, they counterfeited
themselves, not to see what God foreshewed them.

Though I dare not undertake to tell what particular Judgments (which are at
God's ordering) this Earthquake does presage, without Reformation; yet may I
not ask this sober Question, If this late Earthquake have not good effect upon
our Hearts and Lives, may we not fear lest those Judgments may follow, which we
read in Scripture God has sent upon a People for those very sins which do
reign amongst us? as for profaning his Sabbaths, for excessive Pride in
Apparel, for profane Swearing, fullness of Bread, Drunkenness, Whoredoms,
Robberies, Murders, Contempt of Religion, Hatred of Godliness, Divisions, and
hating one another, neglect of Religious Education of Children, banishing the
Worship of God from our Families, Blaspheming, and Cursing instead of Calling
upon God, Lukewarmness, and a general Decay of the Power of Godliness, Leaving
of our first Love, loss of the Spirit of Prayer, yea (ah sinful Age) deriding
of it, Apostacies, and Worldliness, Selfishness, and abuse of God's holy
Ordinances, prostituting them to Carnal Designs and Interests; and many more.
That Scripture (amongst many Isai. 3.) may serve for a Glass to see our sins,
and what Judgments we may fear, if they be continued in; which are sins that
bring Kingdoms and Cities to ruin. Verse 8. For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah
is fallen, because their tongue and their doings are against the Lord, to
provoke the eyes of his glory.

O that Magistrates (Nehemiah like) would not any longer suffer the Sabbath to
be openly profaned, or things exposed to Sale in Londons (late trembling)
Streets, or Parts adjacent, nor in the Land. Where is Nehemiah's Courage? Neh.
13. 15. In those days saw I in Judah, some treading Wine-presses on the
Sabbath, and bringing in Sheaves, and lading Asses: as also Wine, Grapes, Figs
[and now in our Street-trade, Apples, Pears, Plumbs, etc.] on the Sabbath Day:
and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold Victuals. Verse 17.
Then I contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, What evil thing
is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day? Did not your Fathers thus, and
did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this City? yet ye bring
more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath. -- Verse 21. Then I testified
against them, and said unto them, -- if ye do so again, I will lay hands on
you. From that time forth came they no more on the Sabbath day. O that after
such shakings of the City, such things might be done no more on the Sabbath day.

O that no more Oaths on other days might be heard in our Streets, and no more
reelings by Drunkenness there, least the Earth reel under us again. O that
there might be praying to, and praising of God in all Houses that did shake,
and yet do stand. That all Men of all Ranks, Callings, Qualities, Rich and
Poor, Magistrates and Subjects, Ministers and People, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, might search their hearts and ways, see what is amiss,
and mend it, what is good, and continue and grow therein, that God may be no
more provoked, dishonored, incensed against us, but glorified, pleased, feared
by us, that his Anger might be turned away from us, that instead of Judgments
and Wrath, his Blessings and Mercies might be poured upon us. Amen.

THE CONTENTS.
1. The Preface, containing 1 The Suns miraculous 1. Standing still 2. Going
back 3. Eclipse
p. 2. to 8. 2 The Earths motion by Earthquakes The Copernican's Opinion of the
constant motion of the Earth. p. 8. The Testimony of our Senses of its natural
resting. p. 9, 10.

2. The Parts of the Text. 1 The Earthquake. p. 12. 2 The greatness of it. 13.
By 1. Shaking the Foundations of the Prison. ibid. By 2. Immediate opening of
the Doors. 14. By 3. Loosing the Prisoners Bonds. ibid.

3 The Suddenness of it. 15. 3. Doctrines. I. God many times works wonders for
the deliverance of his suffering Saints, in order to the propagating of the
Gospel. 15, 16, 17 II. God needs not length of time to do the most great and
wonderful works. The suddenness of the late Earthquake. 18, 19, 20. III. Though
an Earthquake suddenly come, and quickly go, and nothing is destroyed thereby,
yet it is, and may be truly called a Great Earthquake. 8 Questions to such as
thought the late Earthquake small. 20 to 25 IV Though some Earthquakes have their
natural Causes, yet some do arise from the immediate hand and power of God. 25.
The Method. 26, 27, 28. Earthquakes are, either 1. Metaphorical. 28. to 32. 2.
Literal and Real. These are 1 Supernatural. 9 Instances. An account of that
miraculous Earthquake in the days of Uzziah, and for what sin. 32. to 47. Three
Inferences. 47. to 52.
2 Natural. Their 1 Causes Material Efficient.
52. to 58. 2 Description. 3 Seven sorts. By others reduced to three. 58. to
61. 4 Six antecedent Signs. 62, 63. 5 Effects. 1 Great Consternations. Several
Reasons os it in Earthquakes. 64 to 79. 2 Precipitant flight. 79, 80. 3
Openings of the Earth. ibid. 4 Subversion of houses etc. 81, 82, 83 5 The
change of the Channel of the Sea. ibid. 6 Overthrow and removing of Mountains.
84. 7 Infectious Diseases. 84, 85.
6 Adjuncts. In 8 Conclusions. 86. to 93 7 Inferences 12. for improving this
great work of God. 93. to 119.


Gods sparing Mercy to London, etc in the late Earthquake set forth* 1. By 18
Instances of dreadful devastations made by Earthquakes in several places in
former Ages. p. 119. to 123. 2. By the lamentable Ruins in Jamaica, the Effects
of the late Earthquake there, described by Letters from thence. 123. to 129
A Letter from a Minister in Kent. giving some account of the late Earthquake
there. 129, 130. An Earthquake in England, An. 1580. much like to this so
lately here. 131, 132, 133 The Religious Zeal of Queen Elizabeth moved by that
Earthquake to publish an Order, commanding all Housholdders throughout the
Realm to call together all in their respective Families, and to pray with them
every Evening before they went to bed. 133. to 137. Three Years very remarkable
for God's dealings with London in our days: 1665. for the Plague; 1666. for the
Fire, and 1692. for the Earthquake. 138. to the end.
Earthquakes EXPLAINED AND IMPROVED.
ACTS XVI. 26. And suddenly there was a great Earthquake, so that the
Foundations of the Prison were shaken: and immediately all the Doors were
opened, and every ones Bonds were loosed.


WOnderful, many wonderful things are done by the Lord of Heaven and Earth, by
reason whereof his People may in triumph, and the Wicked in terror, say, Who
is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the gods (or mighty ones) who is like thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, working wonders? sometimes in the
Heavens over our heads; sometimes on and within the Earth under our feet: In
both the works of God have been so amazing, that might fill the Inhabitants of
Heaven above, and of the Earth beneath, with admiration of his Divine
Perfections.

First; God's works have been astonishing in the Heavens over our heads, which
because they are too high, and above our present Theme and Subject, I shall but
briefly mention three of them, and those concerning the Sun, the great
inlightener of this Earth whereof we are to speak.

1. The standing still of the Sun. It is the Doctrine of Aquinas, That Motion
does as much belong to the Nature of Heaven, as Immobility and Rest to the
Nature of the Earth. The Earth is a settled, fixed Body, and therefore it is an
act of mighty power in God to shake it, and to make it move; but the Sun is as
a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, rejoicing as a strong man to run a
race, according to the ordinary Law of Creation and Government in continual
motion, and therefore a mighty work of God alone to cause its motion to cease
and stand still. The making of the Sun to stop, which naturally cannot but
move, and causing the Earth to shake and move, which naturally cannot but stand
still, is an effect of equal power. The command of God does change the Earths
station into motion, and the Suns motion into standing still. Josh. 10. 12.
Than spoke Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up the
Amorites before the Children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel,
Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajelon. Verse
13. And the Sun stood still, and the Moon stayed until the People had avenged
themselves upon their Enemies.

So the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven, and hasted not to go down about
a whole day. Verse 14. And there was no day like that, before it or after, that
the Lord harkened unto the voice of a man, for the Lord fought for Israel.
Where is observable, (1.) That Joshua spoke first to the Lord, and then to the
Sun; for it was not Joshua's voice, but God's power that put a check to the
motion of the Sun. (2.) God hearkened to the voice of Joshua, praying that the
Sun might stop its motion. (3.) Then the Sun hearkened to the voice of Joshua,
so that by God's commanding voice, in answer to Joshua's praying voice, the Sun
stood still: If all the men on Earth with one concurrent voice, should say to
it, Sun stand thou still, it would still go forwards in its motion: so that its
cessation from motion demonstrated the mighty, amazing work of God.

2. The Retrograde motion of the Sun* or its going backward, is no less a
wonderful work of God in the Heaven than its standing still. The motion of the
Sun is naturally progressive, or going forward, and if it should make more
haste by many degrees in its diurnal Motion, it must be by power Divine, and
not Humane; yet in the apprehension of men, it is a greater thing, that it
should go backward, and would cause more their observation of its motion, and
admiration of God's power. Isai. 38. 7. This shall be a sign unto thee from the
Lord, that the Lord will do this that he has spoken. Verse 8. Behold, I will
bring again the shadow of the degrees which is gone down in the Sun-dial of
Ahaz ten degrees backward. So the Sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it
was gone down. Hezekiah prayed, God promised gives him a sign for his assurance
of the performance, and the sign (though miraculous) was effected, and ^^ne mercy
asked, was bestowed: God caused the Sun to go backwards to confirm the faith of
his People in his Promise that his work for their deliverance should go
forwards.

3. That at and from high noonday till three in the afternoon, the Sun should
give no light, but darkness should be at the usual time of its inlightening the
Earth, was the hand and power of God. Ordinary Eclipses are not miraculous, yet
there was one that was not according to the course of Nature. When the Lord of
Glory, the Sun of Righeousness was crucified, the Sun hid its face, and the
Heavens put themselves into mourning at his death. Matthew. 27. 45. Now from the
sixth hour there was darkness over all the Land until the ninth hour. This was
an extraordinary and miraculous work of God, upon the Reasons usually
alleged. (1.) Because it was the full of the Moon, which caused a great
Philosopher to cry out, Either the God of Nature suffers, or the Frame of
Nature dissolves. (2.) Because (as some affirm) it was universal, over all the
World. Or (3.) according to others, because it was only over the Land of Judea,
all other parts of the World having the benefit, and enjoying the light of the
Sun at that time; which some judge to be the more strange: that as when Israel
had light in Goshen, the Egyptians were under the Plague of Darkness; so at the
crucifying of Christ, Israel which dwelt in Judea should be under darkness,
when the World besides enjoyed light. Thus it is manifest that God does great
things in Heaven above, the Sun moves or stands still, goes backwards or
forwards, shines not, to give light at noon day, and for some hours together
unto the Earth at all, or else makes light in one part, when it does not in
another; and all this at the pleasure of the great God. But our present Task is
to observe one extraordinary work of God, on and in the Earth.

Secondly; There is the amazing, mighty work of God on and within the Earth,
which in the Text that suits the occasion, is God's shaking of, and making it
to tremble before him, and under men that dwell upon it.

This moving of the Earth is far different from that constant motion that some
Philosophers ascribe unto it; for amongst the several Systems of the World
which Astronomers have invented, three are more famous, one by Ptolomy, the
other by Copernicus, and the third by Tycho Brache. Copernicus following the
Pythagoreans, asserts the motion of the Earth, and the Sun to be in the Center
of the World, without motion; that the Earth has two motions, one Diurnal,
which is performed about its own Axis in the space of 24 hours, and from this
motion do arise our days and nights: the other Annual, whereby it is carried
about the Sun, from the West toward the East, according to the succession of
Signs of the Zodiac. Where then is the miracle* of the Sun's standing still in
Joshua's days, if it stand still in all Ages? where is the wonder of the Earths
moving, if it whirl about every 24 hours with so swift a motion? why cannot all
People discern this constant motion of the Earth, that do perceive its shaking
for a few minutes, and are so much affrighted at it? Are the Pillars of the
Earth turned into Wheels? Some have denied all motion, some affirm too much:
but as when all motion was denied, a Philosopher to prove it, rose up and
walked; so when the constant, daily, and yearly motion of the Earth is
asserted, we may know by our Senses that it stands still; but these great men
of reason (so they are) will, give you this presently for an Axiom, Sensibus
non est fidendum, you must not believe, nor trust your Senses: which yet for
the sake of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, I should not readily receive;
but knowing that my Senses cannot err about their proper object, when it is
presented at a due distance, through a right disposed, a Papist shall not
persuade me that the Bread after Consecration is not Bread, and that the Wine
is not Wine, nor a Copernican that the Earth does naturally move, when in the
one, by my Senses I discern it to be Bread and Wine, and not real Flesh and
Blood carnally and corporally taken, and in the other, that the Earth stands
fast and still, so much confidence I will put in my Senses: a drunken man that
by excess has disturbed his head, might conceit the Earth turns round, and the
room where he is does move, when the motion and turning is in his Brains, and
when he has slept himself sober will perceive, what he thought before did
move, does then stand still. But it being not proper, nor profitable to this
Assembly to debate Philosophical Controversies, I shall dismiss them, and
retain you with what may be more advantageous for your Souls, in treating of
this amazing work of God which you so lately did discern, and then were so much
astonished at, and affected with, viz. God's shaking of the Earth under your
feet, and the Houses over your heads; that you did think the one did reel under
you, and the other would fall upon you. History is full, and your own
Experience can give an instance of God's terrible shaking of the Earth. Some
you have heard of, and one you have seen and felt. Earthquakes! some you have
read, and have been told you, by which Multitudes have been destroyed.
Earthquakes! one you have seen, and yet are preserved. Earthquakes! in some
God's wrath has been poured out, and in some his grace and mercy has been
shown forth: some ending in destruction, and some in the conversion of sinners.
Oh! that this you have seen with your own eyes might have the like issue and
effect on you, as that you hear of from this Text had upon the Jaylour, stir
you up with fear and trembling, to go to your Ministers, as he did to the
Apostles, saying, asking, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? that by the Word of
God following this mighty work of God, you may be awakened to repent and
believe on the Lord Jesus, you and your House, as the Jaylour did, and all his
House.

In the Text you may observe these parts:

1. The motion or shaking of the Earth. That which according to the course of
Nature stands still, the extraordinary workings of Providence causes it to
quake. The Earth has neither life, nor sense, nor motion in it, yet God can
make it tremble. As the Sun that moves, stands still at God's command; so the
Earth, that stands still, shall move at his voice and pleasure: and yet men
that have life, and sense, and reason, disobey God's commands, and will not
hearken to his voice, and do not tremble at the thoughts of his Sovereign Power
and Infinite Majesty. When sinners upon Earth do not, the Earth under them may
quake and tremble: and if while the Earth trembles under them, they then
tremble upon it, yet when the Earth stands still again, they run as fast to sin
again as they did before: when the Earth cease its trembling, they do not
cease their sinful motions. The great Pillar that supports the Earth, whereby
it stands so fast, is the power of God, for he has hanged it upon nothing, Job
26. 7. Yet sinners supported by the Earth, without fear and trembling, do abuse
the mercy and the patience of God, though if he should remove that supporting
Pillar, the Earth would sink under them: but though he keeps it up, yet sometimes
he makes it shake, There was an Earthquake.

2. The greatness of this motion, or shaking of the Earth: There was a great
Earthquake. Its greatness is set forth by the greatness of its Effects and
Consequents here named: As,

1. The shaking of the foundations of the Prison. The strongest Prisons, the
most impregnable Places, Houses built with brick and stone, being founded on
Earth; when the one does quake, the foundations of the other must needs be
shaken: In exceeding strong winds and tempestuous storms, the tops of Houses
may shake, and rock to and fro, while the foundations stand firm and are not
moved; but when the Earth it self, on which they stand, does quake, their
foundations are also shaken, and though your Houses then stood, yet they stood
trembling, foundations, floors and roofs together.

2. The immediate opening of the doors. Prison doors, especially upon a strict
charge given to the Jaylour for the securing of his Prisoners, are fast locked,
securely barred and chained; but God did cause such an Earthquake, that no
Locks could hold them fast, no Bars nor Chains could keep them shut; for at the
arising of this Earthquake, immediately all the Prison doors were opened.

3. The loosing of the Prisoners bands. Paul and Silas were fast bound, shut up
in a Prison within the Prison, and their feet made fast in the Stocks, so that
they could not stand in the Prison, nor the ground stand still under them, but
the Earthquake came, and was their Goaldelivery. These be the great Effects of
this great Earthquake.

3. In the words are expressed the suddenness of this Earthquake. An Earthquake
is sometimes quickly caused, and quickly ceased at the pleasure and the will of
God. God spoke, and the Earth stood fast, Psalm. 33 9. God speaks, and he makes
it quake and tremble.

Though it is one Doctrine chiefly intended to suit the occasion, yet I will
briefly mention more, which will not be altogether alien from our design.

Doct. I.

God many times works wonders for the deliverance of his suffering Saints in
order to the propagating of the Gospel. Paul and Silas were imprisoned because
they did preach, God by an Earthquake sets open the Prison doors that they may
go forth and preach. They by preaching did make the Devil's Kingdom shake; they
for preaching were fast bound in Prison; the Earth where they did lie so bound,
falls a quaking under them, as being weary of the burden of imprisoned
Preachers; and does not rest, and could not stand still under them, till they
were enlarged and set at liberty.

God can do wonders for the deliverance of his suffering Servants, of this his
Almighty Power is a proof. God can deliver his Sufferers after such a manner,
as none other can, their Enemies being Eyewitnesses and Confessors of it. Dan.
3. 28. Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said, Blessed be the God ofShadrach,
Meshach and Abednego, who has sent his Angel and delivered his Servants that
trusted in him, and have changed the King's word, and yielded their bodies,
that they might not serve, nor worship any God, except their own God. Verse 29.
Therefore I make a decree, that every People, Nation and Language, which speaks
any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach andAbednego, shall be cut
in pieces, and their Houses shall be made a dunghill, because there is no other
God that can deliver after this sort. Darius put the question to Daniel in the
Den; Dan. 6. 20. When he came to the Den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto
Daniel, and the King spoke and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living
God, is thy God whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the
Lions? Verse 22. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut the Lions mouths,
that they have not hurt me. Then follows Darius his Decree, Verse 26. I make a
Decree, that in every Dominion of my Kingdom, men tremble and fear before the
God of Daniel: his reason why; for he is the living God, and steadfast for ever,
and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his Dominion shall be
even to the end.Verse 27. He delivers and rescueth, and he works signs and
wonders in Heaven and in Earth, who has deliveredDaniel from the power of the
Lions. Behold! God can, for he has wonderfully delivered his Servants. Three
in a fiery Furnance, that the fire did not consume, nor singe them. One, in the
Lions Den, that they did not devour nor hurt him. Paul and Silas out of Prison,
that they should be no longer confined there. He can make the fire not burn
combustible matter. He can withhold Lions from what they might else have made
their prey. And he can cause the foundations of a Prison by an Earthquake to be
so shaken, that the doors might open, and his Servants may come forth. He can,
he has, and when he pleases, he still will, he has delivered, he does
deliver, and we may trust to him according to the Promises that he has made,
that he will still deliver us, 2 Cor. 1 10.

Doct. II. God needs not length of time to do the most great and wonderful
works. Suddenly there was an Earthquake. God can make it move in an instant.
When its said God in six days made this World, it is not to be understood that
he did need so many days to make it in. It was his pleasure to take that time
to finish, beautify and complete it. When God did create the Earth, and
brought it out of nothing, it was suddenly done He did but speak, Let it be,
and it suddenly started out of Nothing into Being. Creation is an instantaneous
action: he that did so suddenly and so easily make it, can as suddenly and as
easily make it quake and tremble. How suddenly did God make the Earth to quake
where London stood, and after his shaking of it, through his great mercy yet
does stand!

When men thought of no such thing, not the Student in his Study, nor the
Trader in his Shop, nor the Workman at his Work, nor the Drunkard at his Cups,
when none of these had any apprehension of it. Suddenly, The Student thought
his Desk, on which he was writing, to be removing from him, and when he drew it
toward him, it went back again, several times: the Trader suddenly sees a
motion in his Wares, and the Workman the moving of his Tools without hands, and
the Drunkard thought indeed the Earth did stagger more than he: many suddenly
felt their Chairs to move under them, and could not presently discern the
reason, but thought some living Creature had been under their Seats, and did
disturb them. Suddenly, many, most that I have spoken with, discerned a
dizziness in their Heads, and in the instant thought* the motion was there, not
imagining any thing of the shaking of the Earth: Suddenly they feared the
falling of their Houses; but at first, particular persons thought there was
some defect and fault in their own particular dwellings, till they did perceive
the motion was general, and heard other say of their Houses as they found in
their own: and all this was suddenly done. In a minute, in a moment. God can
cause an unexpectected Earthquake. Men must have time to do the smallest, but
God needs none to do the greatest work.

Doct. III. Though an Earthquake suddenly come, and quickly go, and nothing is
destroyed thereby, yet it is and might be truly called a great Earthquake. It
is expressly said in the Text this Earthquake suddenly came, we do not read it
lasted long, nor that the Prisonhouse, or Persons in it, were destroyed or
hurt thereby, yet we read it was a great Earthquake. When many Houses are
swallowed up, and many Men, Women and Children (as this present year in
Jamaica) are destroyed, and go down alive into the Bowels of the Earth by
opening of its mouth to eat them up as one morsel, then Men will call it a
great Earthquake.

But such a one as was so lately in London, etc. when not one House was
destroyed, nor one Person consumed, seems to be so small (especially now it is
over and all safe) as is not worth their observation, for People now are as
little concerned already, as if it had not been, or they had quite forgotten
that it was. But let such slighters of this la^e work of God, and regardless of
this Judgment, and calling of it a little thing, tell me*

1. Was not this a great Earthquake that made so many Houses as be in such a
great City as this to move, and shake, and tremble, though they stood? Is it not
a great thing to make one of London streets, and the Houses therein so to
quake? much more two or ten, much more all and every one?

2. Was it not a great Earthquake that did reach so far, and extended it self
so many miles at the same instant of the same day to so many places in England,
as we have heard?

3. Yet more, was it not a great Earthquake when it did enlarge it self, and
reached at the same time to so many Cities and Towns beyond the Sea? Did God
stretch out his Arm so far, and do you look upon it as a little thing, not
worthy your observation, remembering, or spiritual improvement of it?

4. If it were so small in your eyes. what made so many to be in so great a
consternation? why did so many run out of their Houses, and such as were
sitting at their Tables hasten from their Dinners with their Napkins in their
hands, to get into the Streets? why did so many run from their Shops? what was
the reason of the sudden, common cry, by so many, one by one, My House is
falling, and my House is falling, and my Children above will be distroyed, and
yet I dare not go up to fetch them down.

5. How little do you know, if this late Earthquake had been a little more, and
had lasted a little longer, a few minutes more, how near you and your Houses
would have been to a subversion and total overthrow? or how near the trembling
Earth might have been to opening, and swallowed up both you and your
Habitations? For all that you know by this Earthquake you were upon the brink
of ruin, a little more might have brought you down; and yet will you slight
this work of God, as if it were a small, a very little thing?

6. As small a thing as you look upon it to be, could any man, or men, could
all the mighty men upon the Earth have caused such a shaking and trembling of
the Earth, and all upon it. Could all the mighty Captains, Lord Generals, Kings
and Emperors, with all their Armies, have had such an Influence upon the
Earth? if they can batter down strong Walls, and Cities, and Castles with their
Instruments of War, yet can any of them, or all of them, cause such a shaking
of the Earth as that so lately was? do you ascribe great things to Men, and
call them so, that are far inferior to this, and yet let this pass by with so
little observation, as if it were a work so small?

7. If men could shake the Earth and your Houses as God did, could they so
securely have preserved them from falling, and you from hurt, as God did? Was
the shaking of your Houses, so much, and the preserving of them so shaken, so
great a mercy, in it self, and yet so little in your eyes? and last no longer
with a due impression in your memories?

8. While you look upon this Earthquake to be so small a thing, can you look
upon your preservation to be so great a mercy as indeed it is? whilst you
lessen the work of God, the more you lessen the mercy of God? did God shake you
and your Houses, and not overturn you and them, and was not this great mercy?
Oh! take heed you do not diminish this work of God's power in your own
apprehensions, and consequently your danger then, and God's mercy now in your
safety. Lord! Let London so tremble at thy Judgment with which thou have so
lately visited it, and account it great, that their Repentance, Reformation may
be great. And though it suddenly came, and quickly ceased, and did no hurt, let
not London account that work a small work, but thy mercy great mercy,
vouchsafed in so great a Judgment, least in thy wrath yet greater, thou cause
the foundations of it to shake and tremble more, and do that execution that
should make all confess and say (that deny this) that suddenly there was a
great Earthquake.

Doct. IV. Though some Earthquakes have their natural causes, yet some do arise
from the immediate hand and power of God without such causes. Paul and Silas
were imprisoned; in Prison they prayed, and sang Praises, in testimony that God
heard their Prayers, he immediately causes this Earthquake under the Prison.
Judicious Expositors assert this Earthquake to be miraculous.

In treating on this I shall take this course:

I. Distinguish between Earthquakes figurative and metaphorical, and such as
are proper and real: because both are spoken of in Scripture, this will be
requisite to remove the ambiguity of the word, that one might not be taken for
the other.

II. Distinguish real Earthquakes into natural and supernatural. In respect of
the Earth it self, whose nature is to rest and stand still, such shakings and
motions may be termed contra-natural, but in respect of the second Causes in
Nature, which sometimes produce such tremblings and quakings in the Earth are
called natural, in contradistinction from those which are caused by God's
immediate hand, without such causes, and are therefore supernatural.

III. I shall give a short account what natural Philosophers assert to be the
Causes of such Earthquakes.

IV. Point at the several sorts or kinds of such Earthquakes, and give the
names which Philosophers, and Divines from them, do call them by.

V. Enumerate several antecedent Signs of Natural Earthquakes, as by
observation Men have taken notice of to go before such ensuing Earthquakes, and
so leave it to others to judge what to think of this late Earthquake in London,
in other parts of England, and in foreign parts beyond the Sea, and all at the
same time, whether they will call it a Natural, or Supernatural Earthquake.

VI. Set down some Effects and Consequents of Earthquakes, whether produced by
such Natural Causes, or by the Immediate Hand and Power of God.

VII. Lay down some Conclusions by way of futher Explication of this mighty
work of the great God, in causing the Earth thus to shake; or show its Adjuncts.

VIII. Show what use we should make of such tremendous works of God* whereby
many might have been buried under ground; when this amazing work of God is
already by many buried in Oblivion, and by few improved according to the
greatness of the danger Men were in, or the greatness of the mercy in escaping
that danger.

Quest. I. What are metaphorical Earthquakes?

Earthquakes and movings of the Earth, are often taken metaphorically for great
Commotions, alterations made in States, Kingdoms and Church, and for sore and
heavy Punishments inflicted by God upon wicked and disobedient People. Isaiah
29. 6. Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with Thunder, and with
Earthquake, and with great Noise, with Storm and Tempest, and the Flame of
devouring Fire. A figurative description of God's Anger against Jerusalem; as
much as to say, Heaven and Earth shall concur to their ruin; yet some
Expositors say, this Earthquake may be understood according to the letter.
Isaiah 24. 18. The foundations of the earth do shake. Verse 19. The earth is
utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved
exceedingly. Verse 20. The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and
shall be removed like a cottage, and the transgression thereof shall be heavy
upon it, and it shall fall and not rise again. By the Earth here so often
mentioned, understand the Inhabitants of the Earth, and properly those
Countries wherein the Jews and their Consederates lived in those times: by the
shaking, moving, removing, breaking down, and dissolving the Earth, understand
the Punishments that should befall that People from an angry and provoked God.
So another expounds it, he does not mean the natural Earth, on which Men tread,
but the People that tread upon the Earth; or that Commonwealth wherein People
are united and governed; these shall be shaken, broken down, and reel to and
fro, and be removed like a Cottage; as if he had said, You thought your State
and Kingdom was settled like a strong Castle, but I will take it down, as a Man
takes down a little Cottage: the strongest Kingdoms and Bulwarks of the Earth
are but as thatcht Cottages, when God takes them in hand. Rev. 11. 19. And the
Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his Temple the Ark of
his Testament, and there were Lightnings, and Voices, and Thundrings, and an
Earthquake, and great Hail Some say, by the opening of the Temple in Heaven, is
most conveniently understood the glorification of the Church it self in Heaven,
and by the Ark of his Covenant, the glorious beholding of Christ our Mediator
in it, whereof the Ark was a Type; and by Thundrings, Lightnings, and
Earthquake, the tokens of his wrath against Unbelievers. Some say, the Vision
of the opened Temple in Heaven, signifies the freedom given to the Gospel
against Persecutors and Corrupters, and the pure preaching and profession of
it, and God's owning his Covenant and Church by his eminent blessing, and the
Lightnings and Earthquake signify the great Manifestation of Christ's Power
for his Church, in the commotions and changes in the World, and his judgments
on their Enemies. Rev. 16. 18. And there were voices, and thundrings, and
lightnings, and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were
upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake and so great. Some understand this
literally, and that it is past, others that it is yet to come before
Antichrist's fall, and say others, before the Day of Judgment; some say, hereby
were represented the great Commotions which went to those great changes and
subversion of the Heathen Powers. By these and such like Texts of Scripture it
appears there are metaphorical Earthquakes to be distinguished from litteral.

Quest. II. Which are Earthquakes supernatural?

Real and proper Earthquakes are either such as are caused by God's immediate
Hand and Power, or such as have their Causes in Nature; though these also are
appointed, and ordered and ruled by the powerful Providence of God, and do not
come (as some call it) by chance. Though the finger of God be in those Natural
Causes, yet such as have been without them must be wholly and only from God.
And I shall gather these out of the Scripture, that we might learn to fear and
tremble before this great God that needs no winds and vapors, nor any kind of
Creature to make the Earth to shake and tremble. And they are these:

1. The shaking of the earth at God's giving of the Law to Moses, and the
Children of Israel. Exodus 19. 18. And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke,
because the Lord descended on it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the
smoke of a furnace, and the whole Mount quaked greatly. That this quaking of
the Mount was litteral and not figurative, Rivet argues, because it is joined
with the smoke, and Thunders and Lightnings properly to be understood, and
says, That the causes of the moving of the Earth, and of the Mountain as it
were leaping at the presence of God, are not to be searched for in Nature, nor
should we dispute concerning Physical Reasons of this Commotion, for when all
things done here are miraculous, the glory of God is obscured, if where he acts
immediately and in an extraordinary manner, and that altogether Divine, we
enquire after second Causes, which in such events are none. Psalm. 68. 7. O God!
when thou wentest forth before thy people; when thou did march through the
wilderness Selah. Verse 8. The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the
presence of God; even Sinai it self was moved at the presence of God, the God
of Israel.

2. Such a Supernatural Commotion of the Earth is also recorded Psalm. 114. per
tot. When Israel went out of Egypt, etc. The Sea saw it and fled; Jordan was
driven back. The Mountains skipped like Rams, and the little Hills like Lambs.
The Sea was divided. Jordan driven back, the Mountains and Hills moved. All
literally understood. This asserted. Then the Question is propounded, What
ailed thee, O thou Sea, that thou fleddest; what ailed thee, O Jordan, that
thou wast driven back? What ailed them? did not God by his mighty power,
without natural causes that could not have such influx upon the Sea and Jordan
to divide them, produce those Miracles in the Sea and Jordan? When again it is
asked, what ailed ye, ye Mountains that ye skipped like Rams, and what ailed
ye, ye little hills, that ye skipped like Lambs; must not the same answer be
returned, as to the former. The same immediate power of God that caused the
division of the Waters, caused also the motion of the Hills and Mountains.

3. A most tremendous miraculous moving of the Earth, caused by the Lord
himself, is largely described, Numb. 16. 23. to 35. Verse 30. If the Lord make
a new thing, and the earth open her mouth and swallow them up, with all that
appertain to them, and they go down quick into the pit, then shall ye
understand that these men have provoked the Lord. Verse 31. And it came to pass
as he had made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground clave
asunder that was under them. Verse 32. And the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that appertained unto
Korah, and all their goods. Verse 33. They, and all that appertained to them,
went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them, and they perished
from among the Congregation. Josephus relating Moses his prayer at large,
records, that whilst he spoke those words, and intermixed them with tears, the
Earth instantly trembled, and shaking began to move (after such a manner, as
when by the violence of the wind a great billow of the Sea floateth and
waltereth) hereat were all the People amazed: but after that, a horrible and
shattering noise was made about their Tents, the Earth opened, and swallowed up
both them, and all that which they esteemed dear, which was after a manner so
exterminate, as nothing remained of theirs to be beheld: whereupon in a moment
the Earth closed again, and the vast gaping was fast shut, so as there appeared
not any sign of that which had happened. Thus perished they all, leaving behind
them an example of Gods Power and Judgments And this Accident was the more
miserable, in that there were none, no not of their Kinsfolks or Allies, that
had compassion of them; so that all the People whatsoever, forgetting those
things that were past, did allow God's Justice with joyful Acclamations,
esteeming them unworthy to be bemoaned, but to be held as the Plague and the
Perverters of the People. -- After this he relates how Two hundred and fifty
were consumed by fire, when suddenly so great a fire shone, as neither the like
was kindled by man's hand, nor usually breaks from the bowels of the burning
Earth, neither was ever quickne^^ in the Woods, split and born down in the
Summer time by a Southern brize, but such a one as seemed to be kindled in
Heaven, most brightsome and flameing, by the force and power whereof those Two
hundred and fifty (together with Core) were so consumed, that there scarce
appeared any relics of their Carcasses. Only Aaron remained untouched, to the
end it might appear that this fire came from Heaven. Surely this might serve
for strong conviction, that as God sent down fire by his own immediate power,
that was not of any Creatures kindling, to the consumeing of one Company; so he
did as immediately shake and open the Earth without second Physical Causes for
the swallowing up of the other. Let Atheists either contradict this History and
Matter of Fact, or believe the existence of a Deity. And all Men fear and
tremble to provoke such a just and terrible God.

4. That there are Earthquakes sometimes caused by the immediate hand of God,
without those Natural Causes asserted by Philosophers, will be clearly
evidenced by the miraculous Victory over the Host of the Philistines obtained
by two Men, Jonathan and his Armor Bearer, related 1 Samuel 14. where to
demonstrate the immediate workings of God might be considered,

1. The great number of the Host of the Philistines.

2. The situation of their Camp or Garrison. Josephus describing it, says,
That the Philistines had pitched their Tents on an high pointed Rock, which
extended it self in length with three Angles, and was each way begirt with a
Bank, as it were a Wall, and Fortification against the Incursion of their
Enemies. The place was fortified by Nature, so that no Man might ascend or
assail them, but with disadvantage. And Sacred Scripture records that Jonathan
climbed up upon his hands and his feet, and his Armor Bearer after him.

3. That there were but these two Men that invaded their Camp, who at first
slew about Twenty of them within (as it were) about half an Acre of Land, which
filled their whole Army with terror and amazedness, who (as Josephus writes)
casting away their Weapons, fled amain: some other being ignorant, which were
either their Friends or Foes, invaded one another as Enemies: for imagining
with themselves that only two Hebrews durst never ascend and enter their Camp,
they addressed themselves to their mutual Murder and Slaughter; so that some of
them were slain, others fled to escape the Sword, and fell headlong down the
Rocks.

4. In this exploit of Jonathan, God did miraculously work, in causing the
tremblings that fell out that day, expressed 1 Samuel 14. 15. And there was
trembling in the Host, in the Field, and among all the People: the Garrison and
the Spoilers they also trembled, and the Earth quaked, so it was a very great
trembling. Who made all the Philistines Host to tremble, the Garrison and the
Spoilers to tremble, only Jonathan and his Armor Bearer? was it not God? and
was it not the same power of God, that then made the Earth to quake, that made
the other tremble? To put all out of doubt, the last words declare the true
cause of all; (...) and it was a trembling of God. The reason why the
Translators rendered it a very great trembling, is, because the word [God] is
added oftentimes to set forth the greatness of things; as great Mountains,
great Ceders, great Fire, in Hebrew are said to be Mountains of God, Cedars of
God, a Fire of God. But this is but the secundary and consequent signification
of it; the Name of God added to any thing primarily and properly denotes that
God is the efficient Cause of that to which it is added. It was a trembling of
God, that is a trembling sent and caused by God; the trembling of the
Philistines, and the trembling of the Earth, was from God: So the Heathens were
wont to attribute that fear and trembling, of which no Cause did appear, nor
could be alleged, to some of their Gods, as to Pan, whence came the expression
of a Panick fear. This trembling then of the Philistines, and this trembling
and quaking of the Earth, was from the immediate hand and mighty power of God.

5. From the immediate hand of God was that terrible Earthquake that was in the
days of Vzziah: Amos 1. 1. The words of Amoz -- which he saw concerning Israel,
in the days of Uzziah King of Judah -- two years before the Earthquake: This is
mentioned Zach. 14 -- The Earthquake in the days of Uzziah King of Judah.
Concerning this amazing Providence, I will take in these Particulars.

1. That Uzziah greatly provoked God by going into the Temple to burn Incense
upon the Altar of Incense.

2. Azariah the Priest, and Fourscore Priests of the Lord (valiant men) went in
after him, and withstood him, saying, It appertains not unto thee, Uzziah, to
burn Incense to the Lord, but to the Priests the Sons of Aaron, that are
consecrated to burn Incense.

3. Uzziah's wrath against the Priests was greatly incensed.

4. While he showed his anger against the Priests, the Lord by his own
immediate hand smote him with a Leprosy, which appeared in his Forehead.

5. Upon this all the Priests thrust him out from thence; yea, he himself
hasted also to go out, because the Lord had smitten him, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. to 22.

6. At the same time, and for the same sin was this Earthquake in the days of
Uzziah. And why may not the Earthquakebe attributed to the immediate hand of
God, as well as his being smitten with Leprosy. That this was at the same
time, and for the same sin, and so from the same hand of God, Josephus in his
History does make plain: who writes thus; Uzziah upon a certain solemn
Feast Day, wherein all the People were assembled together, he attired himself
in the High Priests Vestments, and entered into the Temple to offer Sacrifice
unto God upon the golden Altar, which notwithstanding the High Priest Azariah
(accompanied with fourscore Priests) inhibited him the same, telling him that
it was not lawful for him to Sacrifice, in that it was only allowed in those
that were of the Posterity of the High PriestAaron. Whilst after this manner
Azariah expostulated with him, commanding him to go out of the Temple, and not
to contradict the Ordinances of God; the King waxed wroth, and threatened to
take his Life from him, except he kept himself quiet. Whereupon there fell a
great trembling and Earthquake, and the Temple cleft in twain, and a great
Light of the Sun entered thereunto, and reflected on the King's face in such
manner, that all his Body was instantly covered with a Leprosy, and before the
City (in a place called Eroge) the half of a Mountain (that stood to the
Eastward) brake and fell, and rolled and removed for the space of four Stadia
(or Furlongs) toward the Oriental Mountain, where it rested: so that the
public ways were shut up, and choked, and the King's Gardens of Pleasure were
wholly ruinated and disfigured. When the Priests beheld the King's face covered
with a Leprosy, they told him what inconvenience had happened to him, and
enjoined him to depart out of the Town, according to the custom of Men that
were polluted. Whereupon, he (wholly confused at so grievous an accident, and
having no more audacity to speak) obeyed the Commandment that was given him,
enduring a pitiful and lamentable punishment, for being elate and proud, more
than became humanity; and for that he committed such impiety against God.
Finally, he died through grief and discontent -- and was only buried in his
Garden. This Earthquake came, and this Leprosy was inflicted on him for that
sin; the Leprosy is expressly said in Scripture to be from the Lord; why not
also then the Earthquake?

By the way, let this be observed by many, that in our days, without the way
appointed by God in his Word, in the pride of their hearts and self-conceit,
thrust themselves into Sacred Functions, which is not lawful but for those that
are competently qualified and duly called thereunto, lest for such doings by so
many, God make the Earth to quake under us, as he did for one Uzziah's
intrusion in former time.

6. Amongst the many Miracles at the Death of Christ, an Earthquake must be
acknowledged to be one: all of which were Testimonies, not only of his
Innocence, but also Demonstrations of his Deity. The whole Creation groaned and
travailed in pain, when the God of Nature, (he that was God as well as Man)
though not as God, died a shameful, cursed, and painful Death; Miracles wrought
in Heaven above, in Earth beneath; all Creatures sympathizing with a suffering
Christ, except Man, for whom alone he suffered. The Sun was darkened, the Vail
of the Temple was rent in twain, from the top to the bottom, and the Earth did
quake, and the Rocks rent, and the Graves were opened, and many Bodies of the
Saints which slept, arose, and appeared unto many, Matthew. 27. 45, 51, 52, 53.
Writers do affirm, that by this Earthquake not only Golgotha, but the whole
City, and the Regions near were terribly shaken; and some, that in Bithynia,
and in Thracia, certain Towns were overthrown; but how far this Earthquake was
extended is uncertain.

7. Amongst these also must be ranked the Earthquake at the Resurrection of
Christ; Matthew. 28. 2. And behold there was a great Earthquake.

8. Of the same Nature was that, when the Apostles were praying, the place
where they were, was shaken, God giving them, by this Miracle a Testimony that
their prayers were heard: Acts 4. 31. And when they had prayed, the place was
shaken where they were assembled together. The Greek word properly signifies to
be moved up and down, like the Waves of the Sea, and is the same with that in
the present Text, where it is said, by the Earthquake the foundations of the
Prison were shaken, which also I reckon to be of the number of those that are
caused miraculously and immediately by God, without those Causes that others
are produced by.

What may be inferred and learned from this?

1. May we not learn the certain Existence of the Deity? Does it not follow
there is, and must be a God? if we may argue from an Effect to a Cause, when
there is an Effect that cannot be ascribed to any Creature, must there not be a
Being that is, and is no Creature? when things are done, that are not done by
finite power, must there not be an infinite power by which they are done, when
there is no medium betwixt that which is finite and that which is infinite?
when any thing is effected, of which no natural Cause can be named, must there
not be a supernatural? Aaron at God's command stretched out his hand with his
Rod, and smote the Dust of the Earth, and it became Lice in Man and in Beast;
all the Dust of the Land became Lice throughout all the Land of Egypt; and when
the Magicians did so with their Enchantments to bring forth Lice, and could
not, did not these Magicians themselves say unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of
God? Exodus 8. 17, 18, 19. When there have been such shakings of the Earth that
no Man can say, and prove what he says, that they were done by second Causes,
may not, should not every Man say, in these was the finger of God? If you
cannot gather there is a God by what he does by Creatures, cannot you conclude
there is a God, when things are done, and not by Creatures?

2. May we not learn that this God never wants means to effect whatsoever he
pleases? What he does not do by second Causes, he can do without them.
Jonathan (when one of these Earthquakes happened) said, It is all one with God
to save by few or by many, 1. Sam. 14. 6. So it is all one with God to save by
few or none; and to do what he will with means, or without them. When he does
not shake the Earth by Causes got into its Bowels, he can and has shaken it
without. And indeed, if he brought it out of nothing without any instrumental
Cause (for in Creation there can be none) why may he not, when it is created,
shake it till it tremble without any instrumental Cause? cannot he that does
the greater, do the less?

3. Has God made the Earth to tremble without any Natural Causes, have not
ungodly Men cause to tremble even then, when there is no visible sign, no
reason from any Natural Causes to fear punishment and ruin? Is not their own
sin as meritorious of God's Wrath and sore Displeasure, with the thoughts of
God's infinite hatred of it, and his Almighty Power to punish it, a sufficient
reason why they should fear, and quake and tremble? what though they live in such
places and parts of the World that are not so subject to Earthquakes as some
other places are? Will they say

First, We live upon that part of the Earth that is only stony and hard, and
not soft and tender, and therefore no fear the Earth should quake and tremble
under us?

Secondly, Will they say we dwell upon that part of the Earth that has not
those Caverns, in which those Vapors that cause Earthquakes are generated,
therefore we are in no danger? In the Body of Man winds and vapors are sooner
and more stirred in the bowels and hollow parts thereof, than in the hands, and
bones, and more close and solid Members: In subterraneous Caverns, rather then
in close and rocky places, is the matter of an Earthquake; but such is not that
part of the World where we inhabit.

Thirdly, Will they say we live in Inland Towns, and not near the Sea, which
are most obnoxious to such Earthquakes, because such places are more easily
filled with Vapors, therefore we need not fear?

Fourthly, Will they say, Let them live in fear of Earthquakes where the Earth
they live upon is both soft and full of Caverns, and near the Sea, as most
liable thereunto. Let them quake, when the Earth does not, because it is so
subject in such places to such trembling fits; but our Habitation is on hard
and rocky solid places, without such Concavities, and in the midst of the Land
remote from Sea, and therefore secure enough. Did you speak true before you
were aware, when you said, you were secure? Yes; and let me add, your heart
seems to be more stony, and rocky, and hard than the place you boast you live
upon; as if God's Arm were so short, he could not reach you; as if your
Mountain stood so strong, it could not be moved nor shaken. Do not you know,
have you not heard, that God has shaken the Earth by his own immediate hand,
without those Natural Causes, and Rocks and Mountains too. Fear to sin, cease
to provoke the Eyes of his Glory, for he can reach you with his own hand, and
shake your strongest Tower by his own might, without other Causes.

Quest. III. What are the Natural Causes, material and efficient, of an
Earthquake and how may it be described?

I. Concerning the Material Cause there are diverse Opinions amongst
Philosophers. Seneca in his sixth Book of Natural Questions reckons up many:
Some say the Cause is from Water, some from Fire, some from the Earth it self,
and some from Spirits [not Immaterial] some, in more of these, and some in all
of them. Some of these Seneca does confute, and establishes: his own Opinion
concerning Spirits. That you may not mistake the word [Spirit] in this place,
which is taken otherwise than in Divinity, as the Souls of Men and Angels are
called Spirits; let those that are not acquainted with the Philosophical
Physical acceptance of it; take this Explication of it, according to Regius.
Exhalations [or risings up] are either from water, and then they are called
Vapors; or from the earth, either which has a fat or oiley moisture, and then
are called fumes, or sharp, tart, moisture and volatile Salts, and these they
call Spirits. And then says, That from these Vapors, fat or oily Fumes, and
Spirits, which being shut up in the deep and large Caverns of the Earth, in
great abundance, and by some cause or other, once, or oftener kindled, in one or
more places, arises an Earthquake, once, or often at several times, which
according to the variety of its cause, makes the Earth to tremble, or to open,
whereby sometimes whole Cities and Countries are either overturned or swallowed
up.

Rohault in the third part of his Physics, gives this account: If an hollow
Place or Vault under ground should be filled with Exhalation very gross, not
much unlike to that which arises from a Candle newly put out, and at once take
fire, by the spreading and dilating of it self, it would raise and lift up the
Earth above it, much like to Gunpowder put into dug places, that lifts up
the Earth above it, but afterward, when the Exhalation is scattered, that
which was lifted up, by reason of its own weight, must necessarily fall down:
and hence are these tremblings of the Earth: yea, it might so happen, that many
shakings may follow one foregoing, if there be more hollow places that are near
each other, or any manner of way are so joined as to make the one partake of
what the other has, and the Exhalations filling them, may successively take
fire. Yea, there may be an hollow place under ground so large, and the fall of
the Region above it (being like an Arch or a Vault) so great, that it might
cleave asunder in the midst, and gape, whereby the adjacent parts are
depressed, and made much lower than they were before, whence it appears how
whole Cities by one only Earthquake might be swallowed up.

Aristole Lib. 2. Meteor. proves that Exhalations are the cause of the
Earthquake.

1. From a similitude taken from Men's Bodies, in which there are sometimes such
Convulsions, Shakings and Tremblings, that many Men can scarce hold such a one,
the cause whereof are Spirits hot and dry. In like manner, when the vast Body
of the Earth is moved, it is to be referred to Exhalations, which are hot and
dry.

2. Before an Earthquake there is something discerned, as an ascending Fume,
resembling a long Line, which Fume is the thinner Exhalation, which begins to
get forth: but the rest of the Exhalations, by reason of their greater density
and straightness of the Passages, are restrained within the bowels of the
Earth, from whence an Earthquake does arise.

3. He says in his time there were some Earthquakes in Pontus, before which
the Earth did swell, and at last did burst, or was broke asunder; which was a
certain sign of Exhalations shut up and seeking their way out.

Derodon judges it more probable that Earthquakes do arise from a sudden
inflammation of sulphurous [Brimstone-like] and bituminous [something like
Pitch, or fat Slime] Vapors which are kindled in the Caverns and hollow Places
under ground, not much distant from the Surface of the Earth, which according
as the Caverns are, and as the matter of the Flame is more or less, do
variously operate; for the most part they effect nothing, if the Earth be more
loose, and has breathing holes a^ which they may get out: sometimes they move
it more gently, and make it tremble, if the bulk above it be greater, that this
subterraneous Flame can assay, attempt and do no more against it sometimes they
shake and overturn, by reason of their greatness, and resistance of the parts
of the Earth.

Zanchy, although he embraces Aristotle's Opinion, yet says it cannot be
denied, but that many Earthquakes have been caused by Fire shut up in the
Caverns of the Earth, seeking a passage out, and he instanceth, there was in
the Mountain Vesuvius; and another Mountain, from which in his time fire brake
out, before which, many days there were great and many foregoing Earthquakes.
He denies not, but that also they may arise from Air shut up in the Earth,
seeking a passage out, but cannot find it.

II. The Natural Efficient cause is the vehement striving of such Vapors in
the Caverns of the Earth, that they may get forth, whereby they are carried
upwards and downwards, one while this way, another, that.

Besides, what is said before, an Earthquake is commonly thus described: An
Earthquake is a Meteor arising from abundant Exhalations shut up in the bowels
of the Earth, which while they seek a passage out that they may ascend, but
cannot find it, cause the Earth to shake.

Quest. IV. What are the several sorts or kinds of Earthquakes?

There is difference amongst Philosophers in this point, some making two sorts
or kinds of Earthquakes, as Possidonius and Aristotle; some three, as Seneca
and Zanchy. Some seven, which last they thus distinguish and nominate.

1. An Earthquake of one sort is (...), or an Inclining Earthquake, when the
Earth is caused to incline one way, like a Ship upon the Sea, or a Boat on the
River, when laden more on one side than the other, leans that way only, where
the greater weight and burden is laid. In this kind of Earthquake a Room seems
to be lifted up on one side, and sink down or depressed on the other.

2. (...), An Earthquake lifting the Earth upright, and by and by letting it
down again, after the manner of boiling Water, or waxing hot.

3. (...), Earthquakes causing Chasmes, Chinks, Openings of the Earth, making
Breaches in it, and tearing one part from another.

4. (...), Earthquakes, which by force break their way, and the Vapors and
Winds do get out of the bowels of the Earth, which sometimes take with them
Rocks, or Mud, or open a flowing Fountain, where there was none before.

5. (...), Earthquakes, which by one motion, enforcing, or thrusting,
overthrow, overturn whatsoever they come upon, or rush against.

6. (...), Earthquakes which make the Earth, and things upon it to incline
sometimes one way, and then another back again, without falling any way, like
the rocking of a Cradle, by reciprocal motion or turning.

7. (...), Earthquakes that come with a great noise, roaring, and bellowing,
much like to the lowing of Kine, and sometimes like the vehement and fierce
crying of Women.

Others reduce these to three.

1. There is a trembling Earthquake, when the Earth quivers like a man in a fit
of an Ague. This kind of Earthquake is when the Vapor in the Earth is not much.

2. There is an Earthquake which moves the Earth upwards, and then again
downwards. This by Aristotle's followers is called Pulsus, like the beating of
a man's Pulse.

3. There is an Inclining Earthquake, when the Earth is so shaken, that the
Houses may be discerned sometime to lean one way, and then to return back
again, moving side-long to and fro. Zanchy relates, that this kind he saw at
Ravenna; when the Walls of the Chamber in the upper part of the House were
moved out of their place, and did so lean one way, that they seemed as if they
would fall, but again they returned to their own place. Oh this is (says he)
the great and wonderful Providence of God. Seneca's Remark, that in the
Trembling Earthquake there is not so much danger, as in the shaking or moving
it upwards and letting it down, nor so much danger in this as in the Inclining
Earthquake, because except the motion be speedily made back again from the side
to which it leans to the other, the fall and ruin will necessarily follow. And
these Earthquakes of these different and diverse motions, must proceed from
different and diverse causes.

Quest. V. What are the usual Antecedent Signs os an approaching Earthquake
given by Natural Philosophers, which by Observation and Experience they commend
unto us?

If these signs of Natural Earthquakes be sure and constant, let it be
considered, and let us reflect whether any such were taken notice of by any,
before the late Earthquake in London, and in other places; if not, either these
Philosophers are under a mistake, or we must judge, that this late shaking of
this City was from the more Immediate Hand of God; if there were, yet the
presence and working of second and natural causes, ought not to take us off
from the minding and observing of the first, for as much as all the second are
at the Command, Ordering, and Disposal of the first, and are all under the
Government of the Providence of God, and the Voice and Call of the first and
second Causes is, that we should Repent and turn from those sins that have
provoked him to such sore Displeasure, to so great Wrath and Anger, as to make
the Earth to shake and tremble under us.

1. One foregoing sign of an Earthquake, they teach, is, a certain troubling
of Waters in the deepest Wells, and in Fountains, having then a Tincture of a
Sulphurous taste, and an infected and stinking savor: Because from the
subterraneous commotions the Waters in the Wells must needs be troubled.
Therefore it is reported of Pherecides the Philosopher, that by Water drawn out
of a Well, he fore-discerned and foretold the Lacedaemonians the Ruin of the
City by an Earthquake.

2. When the Sea does suddenly swell, not being caused so to do by Winds and
Waves, when the Air is still and calm, and no blasts of Winds, yet on a sudden
the Sea swells, and the Ships thereon do shake: The reason is, because then the
Earth in the bottom of the Sea is moved.

3. When Birds sit trembling on the ground, forsaking Trees, because they
perceive a certain trembling, shaking the Trees and the Roots thereof.

4. When there are great and terrible sounds in the Earth, and roarings and
noises in the Caverns of the Earth.

5. Dimness of the Sun for some days going before the Earthquake.

6. Long and thin strakes of Clouds, sometimes sooner in the day, but chiefly
after the setting of the Sun, the Weather in other respects being clear.

But of all that I have discoursed with, about the late Earthquake, I have not
met with one, nor heard of any one that has, that spoke any thing of any of
these Signs, before it happened, nor that by recollecting of themselves, do say
since that they remember any such fore going sign, that gave to them the least
intimation of it; and the general surprise of all by it, generally
acknowledging that the moment before they had not a thought of such a shaking
to be so very near. I leave to all to judge, and to their own thoughts, whether
this Earthquake did arise from Causes in Nature, or from the Immediate Power
and Working of God, the Lord of Nature. And if we see the Immediate Mighty
Finger of God in it, to study and pray to know his Mind and Will by it, or be
moved by the moved Earth to conform move unto his Will revealed in his Word.

Quest. VI. What are the Effects and Consequents of Earthquakes, which make
them exceeding dreadful where they come?

Reason may dictate to us what terrible Effects, what dismal Work Earthquakes,
when they have a full Commission from God to execute his Wrath, do make. Our
Ears have heard the Miseries of multitudes of Persons, the overthrow and ruin
of Towns, and Cities, and Countries: But those that have seen them would speak
of them more sensibly, and set them forth more fully. It might make our flesh
to tremble to hear of the woeful devastations that the trembling, shaking, and
opening of the Earth has caused in many Ages, in many places; but such as did
see, and feel, and suffer by them, have contended with the Earth, whether it or
they should tremble most. Oh, the Cries and Shriekings! Oh, the doleful
Lamentations! Oh, what bitter Complaints have been poured out, and wishes in
vain have have been uttered in the time and places of devouring and desolating
Earthquakes! When we shall hear some of these effects (though not written of
according to the fullness of the Terror wherewith they are done) let us
sympathize with the poor miserable People (yet left) in Jamaica, and pray that
their Judgment might not come over to London, nor Travel further to other
places.

First, Earthquakes cause great Consternation in the minds of Men, and fil^
their hearts with fear. When God makes the Earth to shake under them, he makes
their hearts to tremble within them. When the Earth shakes and moves they
cannot stand upon it without sear. One Earthquake causes many thousand
Heart-quakes. Did not many thousand People in London in its late Earthquake
(though through God's great Mercy so short) feel great tremblings within
themselves when they felt the Earth to shake under them, and saw their Houses
move this way and that way over them, and could not te^ whether they would
stand or fall; nay when so many thought and said, them Houses would not stand
but fall? Were you not then under great Consternation when you thought those
Houses yo^ had slept in, you must not only s^ quickly dye in, but be buried in
them too: That the Houses you had buil^ or rented to shelter you from Storms
and Tempests, should bring that Destruction upon you, which many Storms and
Tempests had not done? Have not you of late years heard terrible and roaring
Thunderings, God thundering with a Voice which none can imitate? Have you not
seen great Flashings of Fire and Lightnings, which made the Night like Day,
that you said you could see to take up a small thing from off the ground, and
were not you then glad you had an House over your head? But when this late
Earthquake was, were not you afraid because you had an House over your head,
when you thought it would fall upon your head and whole body? And when this
Earthquake was, did you not make as much have to get out of it, as in Storms
and Tempests you ever did to get into it? Is this already forgotten? What! so
soon! It is hard to express the fears that many then were filled with, and it
is sad to see how little God is feared since by many that then did fear so
much. Besides your own late Experience, Sacred Scripture, as well as Historical
Writers, do Record the fears of Men in times of Earthquakes. 1 Samuel 14. 15.
There was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all the people: the
garrison and the spoilers, they also trembled, and the earth quaked: so it was a
very great trembling. Behold! a quaking Earth, and therefore a trembling
People. Behold! Valiant Men of War, that are not afraid of Swords and Bullets,
but with undaunted Courage assault their Enemies, and when many lie dead on
both sides, fight on with boldness, that fear not so much the shaking of Spears
and Pikes, as the shaking of the Earth; the Host trembled, the Garrison
trembled, and the Spoilers themselves did also tremble. Spoilers tremble! What!
those that had spoiled so many upon the Earth, they tremble lest they should be
spoiled by the quaking Earth. The Host, the People, the Garrison, the Spoilers,
and Earth did tremble, surely it was a very great trembling. Mat. 27. 54. When
the Centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the Earthquake,
they feared greatly. Captains, Men of great Spirits, at the quaking of the
Earth are filled with great fear. Mat. 28. 2. Behold, there was a great
Earthquake. 4. For fear of him (the Angel, whose Ministry God used to cause
that Earthquake) the Keepers did shake, and became as dead men: An Earthquake
is so terrible, causing such frights and fears, that makes Men (as the saying
is) look like Death. Acts 16. 26. And suddenly there was a great Earthquake.
29. He (the Jailer) called for a light, and sprung in, and came trembling. The
Gaol trembled, and the Jaylour trembled. When the Keeper saw he could not keep
the Prison-doors shut, but when he had shut, and locked, and made them fast, the
quaking of the Earth did open, he could not keep himself from trembling. An
Earthquake will make even a Jaylour to tremble.

But why such fear and trembling in Men, when such-shaking and trembling in the
Earth?

1. In some, it may arise from apprehensions of the terrible Wrath of an angry
God. There have been some Earthquakes that were Tokens of God's Grace and
Favor; as the Earthquake shaking the Foundations of the Prison, in favor to
Paul and Silas, testifying that God had heard their Prayers made in Prison, and
that by it he would deliver them, as he did. And that in Acts 4. 31. the
Apostles prayed, and at their Prayers the place was shaken; the shaking of the
place made them stand the faster in their Faith in God, and trusting to him.
But usually Earthquakes are indications of God's Wrath and sore Displeasure.
When Men run on in sin against God, to show his Indignation against it and
them, he sometimes will not suffer the Earth to stand still and quiet under
them. Psalm. 18. 7. The Earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the
Hills moved and were shaken, because he was wroth. When Men apprehend that God
is provoked, and they may apprehend it, when God in such a terrible manner does
show it, knowing they are no more a Match for God, than a Worm is to an Angel,
or a Child to a Giant; it may put them into such amazing Frights and Fears,
saying, God is angry, what shall we do? The Omnipresent God is angry, whither
shall we go? The Just and Holy God is angry, with what can we appease him? He
does show his Anger, and we do see it, and how shall we escape? God is wroth,
and the Earth trembles before him: God is wroth, and is come down in sore
displeasure, and the Earth quaketh at his Presence; our Heads are giddy, but
not with Wine; we reel, but not with strong Drink. O stay your selves, and
wonder; cry ye out, and cry, they are drunken, but not with wine, they stagger,
but not with strong drink, Isa. 29. 9.

2. Consciousness of their own guilt: When the Earth did quake, it did not only
wake the Jaylour out of his natural sleep, but also out of his spiritual
slumber; Conscience was alarmed, as he was affrighted; his Eyes were opened to
see a terrible God above him, Conscience was awakened to see his sins within
him, and that had been committed by him, an angry God above, an accusing
Conscience within, and the quaking Earth under him, filled him with fear and
trembling. When Men do prosper upon Earth, they can swill, and swear, and sin
in all their ways, and Conscience holds its peace, is quiet and still, does not
reprove, accuse, judge or condemn them; but when Judgments come, an hardened
Pharaoh will cry out, I have sinned; a wicked Saul will confess and say, I have
sinned: and when an Earthquake comes, is not he an hardened, seared Wretch,
whose Conscience (though bad yet) is quiet within him, when the Earth is not
quiet under him? and whose Conscience is not moved and troubled for his sin,
when the Earth is moved, as being restless under the burden of such sinners?
but if Conscience then does stir, when the Earth does tremble, the sinner
trembles (for the time) considering God's anger, remembering his sin, that did
provoke him to it.

3. If neither apprehensions of God's wrath against them, nor sense of sin
committed against him, does fill them with fears at the quaking of the Earth,
yet apprehensions of death at that time might make them tremble. Death is the
King of Terrors, Job. 18. 14. Shall not that which is ((...)) the most
terrible, when it is approaching in so terrible a manner, make the stoutest
heart to quake? If they have no thoughts of Hell and Damnation, yet Death by
the trembling of the Earth presents it self unto their thoughts: and though
they would not think of it, yet they must; though they would divert their minds
from it, yet they cannot; they cannot send these thoughts away till another
season: though many go to Hell without fear of Hell, and seldom think of it till
they feel it, yet when Death seems to be coming to them by an Earthquake, it
almost kills them with the terror of it, being ready to die with fear of such
a death.

There are these Circumstances in this Case that fill men with these amazing
fears upon the account of Death.

1. The sudden surprizal. An Earthquake comes suddenly in a minute; many times
without notice and warning, as this in London lately did; and it seems to bring
Death with it, and often does; now an Evil that suddenly comes, does the more
amaze, when in a minutes time, there is not space for Men to recollect their
thoughts, and fortify themselves with actings of Reason, or Grace (which alas!
are not so ready) against advancing Death. In sickness Men have time to prepare
and make ready for it, and to allay the fears thereof; but in a moment to be in
danger of Death, the fears are more raging and predominant, and less help
against them. Fear without a remedy must be great fear.

2. The suddenness of Death, and the apprehended nearness of it. The danger did
not only seize them on a sudden, but threatens to remove them suddenly. What!
die so soon! what, within a minute or two? will Death stay no longer? can it
not a minute more be delayed? what! so soon step into Eternity? so suddenly,
must I hasten into another everlasting World? I never did so suddenly remove
from one House to another, and must I now so suddenly remove from one World
into another? from a temporal into an eternal World? and yet not ready to leave
this, nor to go into that? It is hard to imagine the power and strength of fear
that must invade and fill them in such distress.

3. The unavoidableness of Death apprehended in an overthrowing Earthquake
augments their fears, or torments them with despair of Life. If a Man be sick,
the means he uses keeps up his hope of Life, and the more he hopes he shall
live, the less are his fears of Death. But in a desolating Earthquake, what
hopes can Men have? whither can they in a minute go to escape the ruin? what
present Friend can help them, when they and their Friends are in the same equal
danger? when one must not die without the other? If they stay within doors they
apprehend they may be killed with the fall of their Houses: if they run out,
they know not but they may be destroyed with the downfall of their Neighbors.
Will they hasten into the open Fields? what! in a minute? alas! they have not
time allowed for such an escape, or if they had, there the Earth in an
Earthquake might swallow them up. No where safe, every where in great fear.

4 Apprehensions of sudden, unavoidable Death, and this when they are in health
and strong aggravates their case, and augments their fears. What! am I well,
and yet must die? strong, in health, and yet now must die? has Death forgot
its old way of sending Harbingers before it, before it came it self? did it use
to send its Sergeants to arrest, before it cast Men into the Prison of the
Grave, and must I be haled away without Summons? Some have been weaned from the
love of Life, and made weary of it by long and languishing Sickness, by
wracking and tormenting Pains, and must I in my Youth, or in middle Age, under
no pain, with my strength firm, yield to Death? All this does fill with greater
fear.

5. This unusual way of dying makes it the more terrible. Others, in other
cases, first die and then are buried, first expire and then are carried to
their Graves; but in an Earthquake must I be buried alive? first buried and
then die? others are carried from their house, when dead, unto the grave, and
must mine own house be my grave, and that while I do live? Behold! the Earth
quakes under me, my House trembles over me. Oh! what if my trembling House
should fall, and I in it? what if the Earth should sink under me? what if this
quaking Earth should open its mouth, and eat me up alive? what if it should
cleave asunder (as in its shaking it has sometimes done) and swallow me up as
it has done thousands of others? when others die another way, does this loving
Mother lay their dead Bodies in her bosom, must I die this way, and go down
alive into her bowels? did I live in my Mothers womb before I was born, and
must I live (awhile) in this common Mothers bowels, after I am therein buried?
This being not the common death of all Men, makes it more terrible to those
that apprehend in an Earthquake they must not die as others do. All laid
together, shows that Earthquakes cause great consternation of mind, perplexing*
fretting fears, which is the first Effect thereof.

Secondly; Another Effect of Earthquakes is speedy and precipitant flying, if
possibly Men might hasten from the danger thereof. Though they leave their Gods
behind them in their Houses, they will attempt to fly to save themselves. Numb.
16. 32. The Earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and their houses, and
all the men that appertained to Korah, and all their goods. Verse 34. And all
Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them: for they said, lest
the Earth swallow us up also. Zach. 14* ^5. And ye shall flee to the valley of
the Mountains -- yea, ye shall flee like as ye fled from before the Earthquake
in the days of Uzziah King of Judah. These were particular Earthquakes, and
some by flight escaped from them; but when it shall be more general, or fall
out in the place where you dwell, and some miles about you, when it comes in a
minute, whither will you flee? or to what place will you hasten, or in so
little time how will you get thither? however, Men shall endeavor to fly,
though it should be in vain; when the Earth so moves, they cannot, they will not
stand still to be devoured and swallawed up, if by flight they might escape,
which they will try, though they be overtaken with it. Overtaken! alas! in such a
Judgment, you may sooner run into it, than run from it; you may think to leave
the danger behind you, and still it is before you; you running away from it,
may run to meet it. But the Danger is so dreadful, the Death so formidable, the
Misery so great by Earthquakes, that Men will flee from them if they can, that
they might not perish in them. But better repent, reform, and turn from sin to
God to prevent them, than to continue in the sins that do procure them; for
when they come, you will find it hard to flee from them.

Thirdly; Another Effect is the cleaving asunder of the Earth, and devouring
and swallowing up many Persons in a short time. In other Judgments People die
one after another, in this by multitudes. When Death by sickness puts a period
to Life, each one has his own Grave; in this opening the Earth by Earthquakes,
one great Grave is made for many, Numb. 16. 31, 32, 33.

Fourthly; Another Effect is the subversion of Houses, Towns, and Cities, with
the destruction of their Inhabitants together. History abounds with many sad
and grievous Examples hereof. When Trajan was at Antioch, there happened a most
terrible Earthquake that destroyed many Cities and People, which extended it
self very far. Great and terrible Lightnings were before it, then great and
unusual storms of Winds, then arising a great and sudden Noise, the Sea
wrought, the Waves swelled, the Earth was shaken, Buildings trembled, some did
burst asunder, and others first lifted up, fell down. A great and horrible
Noise was heard, Walls by contrary motions driven sometimes this way, sometimes
that were broken and fell, the Sea with boisterous storms did mount and toss to
and fro; the Earth, where no Buildings were, was greatly moved: such a thick
dust was raised, and so great a darkness upon all, that that they could not see
one another, nor speak, nor hear one the other, and by reason of the violence
of the Wind, and greatness of the dust, could scarcely breathe. Trees plucked up
by the roots were cast down upon the ground, many, very many were covered with
the overthrow of Houses and Walls, many falling upon one another died, if any
hurt by wood or stone, went away thus with their torn and wounded Bodies, they
were more miserable than the rest, forasmuch as they could not live long, nor
yet quickly die: of multitudes of Men scarce any escaped without some hurt. One
might be seen to flee with his Shoulder broke, another with his Arms lost; many
laid dead with their Heads separated from their Bodies; some with their bruised
Breasts vomited Blood. Still the Earth continued to shake both by Night and
Day: in this great Calamity they could find no remedy, nor way of escape: those
that were hurt with the fall of Houses died in many places, and though by the
benefit of Vaults and roofed Places some were preserved, yet, the Earthquake
continuing, they perished by hunger and famine, before any succor could be
brought to them. When the Earthquake ceased, some went upon the Ruins, where
they heard a Woman's voice, and the crying of an Infant; the Ruins had covered
both the Mother and the Child; it was wonderful how the Mother should have Milk
to nourish her Child; but Mother and Child were taken safe out. But whilst the
dead Bodies and fallen Houses were more diligently searched, another Infant was
found sucking the Breast of its dead Mother: But Life was a grief to all that
had escaped Death, when they beheld the lamentable fall of the City, and so
many People destroyed.

Fifthly; The change of the Channel of the Sea. In the time of Valens the
Emperor there happened another terrible Earthquake, whereby an hundred Cities
were destroyed in Crete: then also the Sea leaving its place, so overflowed
certain grounds, which before were plowed, became navigable; and in other
places where Men failed, the Sailers in their Navigation were found upon dry
Land where before they Sea was.

Sixthly; Another Effect of Earthquakes has been the Convulsion of Mountains,
their sinking down, their clashing and transportation or removal to a great
distance from the places where before the stood. Instances of these History do
afford many, but I will only mention one, because more remarkable, how God does
miraculously sometimes preserve praying People, and may mo^e Persons, whose
Houses after shaking by an Earthquake stand, to pray therein. In the Year 1584.
one Mountain by a^ Earthquake violently removed, destroyed a Town consisting of
ninety Families, and threw down all, excepting ha^ of one House, where the
Master of the Family, with his Wife and Children* kneeling upon their Knees,
were prayin^ and calling upon God.

Seventhly; Infectious Diseases, Plage and Pestilence are sometimes the Effect^
of Earthquakes: For the matter (...) Earthquakes is pestilential, because
subterraneous, or under ground, wanting wind and motion to purify it; this
therefore when it does exhale and breath out, or break forth, does infect the
Air, and Men by taking in that infected Air, are insected by it. Seneca showing
the Pestilence to be an Effect and Consequent of an Earthquake, mentions how
that after an Earthquake in Campania, six hundred Sheep died of an Infectious
Disease. Wonder not at this, says he, for after great Earthquakes the
Pestilence does use to follow, the Air being corrupt thereby, and Sheep holding
down their heads so continually so near the ground, and taking in the poisonous
Air that is so near the Earth, are infected with it. This also would have been
hurtful unto Men, if a greater quantity of it had come up out of the Earth, but
the largeness of a more free and purer Air purges that before it rise so high
as to be drawn in by Men. In Scripture Earthquakes and Pestilence are set down
together, as sore and heavy Judgments; God grant that London, England, and all
places that have been shaken by this late Earthquake, might so fear and tremble
before this Great, Almighty God, as to Repent and turn from sin to God, at this
his Call so lately, powerfully, and mercifully given, that after the Earthquake
the Plague and Pestilence might not follow.

Quest. VII. What are the Adjuncts of Earthquakes, which may further inform us
concerning this Mighty Work of God:

What I shall add concerning this, may be laid down in these following
Conclusions.

First Conclus. An Earthquake is not Universal; not of the whole Earth a^ once,
but in part This is the Doctrine of Learned Men, both Philosophers ad^ Divines,
asserting in Universal Earth^ quake yet never has been; but fall out in diverse
places, but not in all universally at the same time Mat. 24. 7. The^ shall be
Earthquakes in diverse pl^^es*The Scripture so speaks of the stability of the
Earth, as that by Natural Causes there cannot be an Universa^ shaking of it. 1 Chronicles. 16. 30. Fear before him all the earth: the world also shall be stable,
that it be not moved. Isa. 45. 18. Thus says the Lord that created the
heavens, God himself that formed the earth and made it, he has established it,
he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited. Psalm. 93. 1. The world
is established, that it cannot be moved. Psalm 96. 10. Say among the heathen,
that the Lord reigns; the world also shall be established, that it shall not
be moved. Psalm. 104. 5. Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should
not be removed for ever. Psalm. 119. 90. Thy faithfulness is unto all
generations, thou have established the earth, and it abides, (...) and it
shall stand.

2. Conclus. Yet such is the greatness of the Power of God, that if he pleased
he could remove the whole Earth out of its place. He that made it all, could
make it all to tremble and quake; yea, he that by his Word brought it into
Being, can by his Power shake it into nothing. What cannot be done by Natural
Causes, might be done by Supernatural Power. This is the meaning of Job's
saying, Job 9. 6. Who shakes the earth out of its place, and the Pillars
thereof tremble. An Earthquake is the shaking of the Earth in its place, and
causes it to tremble upon the Pillars thereof. We have no instance that God
ever yet removed the whole Earth out of its place; but it is a Supposition, if
the Lord will, he is able to do it.

3. Concl. How far an Earthquake may extend it self, cannot be determined. Men,
if they can give an account of the extent of Earthquaks past, yet cannot limit
the space of such as yet may be Though Senecasaith, an Earthquake never reached
above two hundred Miles, yet others give instances of such as have far
exceeded; besides several others, it is recorded of one that was Anno 160^
wherein Asia, Hungary Germany, France, and Italy trembled almost in the same
moment.

4. Concl. Sometimes there may be an Earthquake in some particular place, and
not in others near unto it. The Earthquake, which shaked the Foundations of the
Prison where Paul and Silas lay, did not extend it self to other places. God
that can cause the Rain to fall upon one City, and not upon another, can make
one City shake when he does not another.

5. Concl. The duration and continuance also of an Earthquake is uncertain.
Sometimes it may last but a Minute or two, more or less; sometimes it may
continue Weeks, Months, Years, as some Writers do affirm. So some tremblings of
the Earth continued after the great damage by the Earthquake in Jamaica in June
last past. If the Vapors shut up in the Earth, be more gross, they do more
slowly evaporate or get out, and more difficultly find their passage. If they
be more cold, they are also more slow. If they be in greater quantity, the
Earthquake may be of a longer continuance, for much is not so soon evaporated,
as a little. The Nature of the place also wherein an Earthquake is, may cause
the longer or shorter duration of it; for if the surface of the Earth, in whose
Caverns the matter of the Earthquake is contained and shut up, be more solid,
close and lesser holes, chinks, and pores be in it, the Earthquake lasts the
longer, by reason of the more slow and difficult evaporation of the matter that
causes it.

6. Concl. An Earthquake may in a few Minutes destroy and overturn multitudes
of Houses, and sweep away thousands of People. Thus the Intelligence from
Jamaica runs: On the 7th. of June, 1692. about 12 at Noon happened here
[Port-Royal ] a most terrible Earthquake: It was most violent on the
Harbour-side, where the Houses all sunk down in a Minutes time, from the depth
of three to five Fathom Water; in the Streets next the Wharf, the Earth opened
it self wide and deep, and instantly gushed out an Inundation of Water, so that
many of the Inhabitants were drowned.

Some People being ignorant of the Nature of an Earthquake, and what
Destruction it may make in a few Minutes, set little by the Mercy of being
preserved at such a time* and soon wear off the sense both of the Judgment and
the Mercy, because it lasted so short a space. But though London was some days in
being consumed by Fire, when many Houses were preserved, yet by an Earthquake
in a few Minutes it might have been all destroyed: The preventing whereof was
the wonderful Mercy and Providence of God, never to be forgotten.

7. Concl. Sometimes an Earthquake may be once in some parts of the Earth, and
not return again, sometimes it may repeat its course, and often put the same
places into many trembling fits. When the shaking is over once, the bitterness
of God's Wrath, and our Ruin might not be past; if the shaking of London
should be reiterated, the latter might be more grievous than the former. All
these second Causes are ordered and overruled by the Providence of God: All
the Natural Causes of Earthquakes are subject to God's Power, and are at his
beck, command, and call; therefore though London be safe after its late shaking,
yet let it not be secure, for the same Hand and Power of God that did shake it
once, can again, and throw it down.

8. Concl. As all Places are liable to be shaken by the Mighty Power of God,
immediately, or by Natural Causes at his Command, so all, or any Seasons of the
Year might subserve his Providence, and be the Season of an Earthquake's
coming, whether Spring or Autumn, Winter or Summer, Night or Day, or hour of
the Night or Day. Though Naturalists, that do eye the second Causes, say, they
more usually happen in the Spring and Autumn, but especially in the Autumn; and
in the Night, and at Noonday oftener than at other times. But let the
Inhabitants of this Earth fear and tremble before the great God of Heaven and
Earth, and not dare by their heinous and provoking sins to stir up his wrathful
Indignation against them, who can by Earthquakes make the Earth to tremble,
when and where he pleases.

Quest. VIII. What Inferences may be drawn from this Doctrine, and what Use
should we make of it, and of this great Work of God, which we have lately seen
and felt in shaking London? etc.

Use. I. Earthquakes, when armed with the Wrath of God, and come with his
Commission to destroy, are one of the sorest Judgments whereby he executes his
great Vengeance, and manifests his hot Indignation against sin and sinners
upon Earth. Our Lord Jesus ranks these with the most dreadful and terrible
Judgments and Punishments that befall the World. Luke 21. 10. Then said he unto
them, Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom. II. And
great Earthquakes shall be in diverse places, and Famines, and Pestilences, and
fearful Sights, and great Signs shall there be from Heaven. Is War dreadful?
Ask those People whose Country is made the Seat of War. Is Famine a sore and
heavy Evil? What think you, when at such times, Mothers have boiled their own
Children, and eat them. 2 Kings 6. 26. As the King of Israel was passing by
upon the wall, there cried a woman unto him, saying, Help, my Lord, O King* 28.
And the King said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, This woman said
unto me, Give thy Son, that we may eat him to day, and we will eat my Son to
morrow. 29. So we boiled my Son, and did eat him. Is the Plague a wrathful
Visitation of God? Those that are yet alive, that were in London in 1665. may
remember the Terror of it. Is an Earthquake behind these for dread and horror?
Or does it not in some respects go beyond them? In War, strong Castles,
Fortified places, and firm Walls may keep out a Besieging Enemy, which they
cannot batter and overthrow in many Months, and these overturned by an
Earthquake in a few Minutes. Does the Sea rage, and is tempestuous? Mariners
have their Ships, and Men on Land have their Banks and Ports to secure them:
but an Earthquake tears up their Ports, breaks down their Banks, and makes way
for an overwhelming Inundation, and drowneth many. Does a consuming Fire burn
and turn many Houses into ashes, yet the Inhabitants by flight might save
themselves. But in an Earthquake, whither will you run to escape the danger?
the fire on your House will not follow you into the street or fields, but there
the Earthquake might meet you. Does the Plague go through a City? does it go
from House to House, does it climb up in the Windows? yet you have your
Antidotes against it, and some escape, being not infected, and some infected,
do recover: when it is most severe upon the People, it leaves their dwellings
behind them: when they fall into their Graves, their Houses stand upon their
old foundation. But an Earthquake devours Houses and Inhabitants too: does not
take them by tens, or hundreds in a week, as does the Plague, but sweeps all
clean away in a few moments. Does War make great Devastations, burn Towns and
Cities, throw down Castles? yet it leaves Ruins, as Monuments, that such
Towns, Cities, Castles once were there But Earthquakes sometimes swallow up
all, and hide them in the bowels of the Earth, and leaves no tokens whereby it
may be known, that such places that now are not, once were* Does War destroy
great numbers in the field? yet some escape, and none are buried till they are
Killed: But in Earthquakes, they do not first die, and then are buried, but
first are buried, and then they die. In Famine do People pine and languish?
This is most severe amongst the Poor, whose little Money, when things are
excessive dear, will not last to supply their want of Bread, while the Richer
sort, as long as any thing is to be had for Money, may get so much as to
preserve Life, though not to satisfy them to the full: In Famine, if they die,
they have longer time to think of Death, and to prepare for Eternity: But
Earthquakes make no difference betwixt the Rich and the Poor, but swallows up
all, and their Money too, and this in a few Minutes, and is not so long in
destroying ^s the Famine is, nor gives that time for preparation for another
World, but in a moment many go down into one common Grave.

Use II. Woe then to wicked Men, when God comes and shakes his Rod over them,
whereby he makes the Earth to shake under them, how sorrowful is your case? how
dreadful is your condition? what comfort have you to support you in such
terror? what refuge have you to fly unto, when God shall enter into such a
Judgment with you, and contend with you by shaking the Earth under you, if he
proceed thereby to make the Houses fall upon you, or the Earth to open under
you? which way will you look for help, or hope, or comfort? above you? behold!
there is an angry God, a provoked Lord, a righteous judge. Round about? behold!
your tot^ering Houses, your moving Walls, threatening your Death by their fall.
Will you look downwards? behold! the Earth trembles, its Pillars shake, as
being weary any longer to bear the burden of ungodly Men that walk upon it; and
you fearing when it will cleave asunder and swallow you up. At such a time, had
you an interest in God as your reconciled Father, in Christ as your Lord and
Savior, in the holy Spirit as your Regenerator and Sanctifier, what sedatenes^
of Mind, what composure of Spirit, wha^ stable hopes might you have of Heaven,
when the Earth cannot stand still for trembling? what comfort against your
fears, what joy against your sorrows, what remedy against your misery (against
which their seems to be no remedy) might you have from your special relation to
God as reconciled to you, when he so terribly shows his anger unto others? they
are poor grounds o^ consolation against the danger, fears and terrors because
of an Earthquake, which Seneca prescribes, in comparison of those that the
Scripture to holy Men does give. Psalm. 46. 1. God is our refuge and strength, a
very present help in trouble. What then? Verse 2. Therefore will not we fear,
though the Earth be removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of
the Sea. Verse 3. Though the wa^ers thereof roar, and be troubled, though the
Mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah. Verse 7. The Lord of Hosts is
with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah. Verse 8. Come, behold the works
of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the Earth. Verse 11. The Lord of
Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our re^uge. Selah.

But alas! this comfort in God's shaking of the Earth is none of yours, because
God is none of yours; your shaking Houses are yours, but what comfort have you
in your Houses when you see them shaking? Comfort! they are then a terror to
you. Why? because the Lord of Hosts is against you, the God of Jacob is not
your Refuge (in an Earthquake) Selah.

Use III. Admire and thankfully acknowledge the goodness, greatness and power
of God in the constant standing of the Earth (except in Earthquakes) that it
remains stable and (otherwise) unmovable. If an Earthquake be so terrible, is
not the usual steadfastness of the Earth the more comfortable? if it did for
the most part shake and tremble, and sometimes only stand firm and fixed, its
standing still would be more observed, and God more praised upon that account,
than now he is, when for the most part it stands unmoved, and but sometimes is
shaken. How seldom has this one (though it be a great) thing been in our Minds,
and mentioned in our praises amongst the mercies God vouchsafed to the
Inhabitants of the Earth? when were our admiring thoughts employed about this
subject? and yet if you saw a Ball stand in the Air not supported by, nor hung
upon any thing* would not you stand and gaze and wonder at it? how much more
when this huge and vast Body of the Earth, so weighty and ponderous in it self,
and bearing such heavy burdens that are upon it, as vast quantities of Lead,
Brass, Iron, Stones, etc. hangs upon nothing, Job 26. 7. And the Pillars of the
Earth, spoken of in Scripture, are not to be understood of proper material
Pillars (for what should such Pillars stand upon) but metaphorical; whereas the
true real Pillar of the Earth is the power of God. Psalm. 65. 6. Which by his
strength sets fast the Mountains, being girded with power. So great a thing
is done by his mighty commanding word. Psalm. 33. 9. For he spoke, and it was
done; he commanded and it stood fast. If a Feather (light to a Proverb) be held
up and let loose in the Air, it sinks, and rests not without it fall upon
something to support it; and yet this massy Body of the Earth, without any
other support, than the power of God, is born up, stands fast, and fixed, and
firm, and bears us, our dwellings, without those fears that in an Earthquake do
surprise and fill us. Let this be thought on more, and the power of God admired
in it.

Use IV. Such special and peculiar Earthquakes which God has caused for
special and peculiar ends, improve to the obtaining of those ends. All the
Earthquakes in general do manifest the Glory of the power of God, and God in
them does speak to Men on Earth. They have a voice, and we should have an
hearing ear; let us not be deaf to the Instructions that God is giving of us;
nor dull to take out the Lessons he is teaching us. Particularly some more
observable upon more remarkable occasions, such as these.

1. The Earthquake there was at the Death of Christ. The Jews hearts were stony
and hard, and did not fear no^ tremble to shed the innocent and most precious
Blood of the Son of God, but when it fell upon the ground, the Earth did shake
and tremble to receive it. Abel's blood did cry to Heaven from the ground, and
Cain was cursed, and the Earth was cursed to him for that bloody fact. Genesis
410. And he said what have tho^ done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries
unto me from the ground. Verse 11. And now art thou cursed from the Eart^ which
has opened her mouth to receive thy brothers blood at thine hand. Verse. 12.
When thou tillest the ground, it shall no^ henceforth yield unto thee her
strength. A Fugitive and a Vagabond shall thou be in the Earth. Was not the
Blood of Christ of greater worth and value then Abel's, or of all Men, being
the Blood of him that was God as well as Man, pure and spotless; was not
therefore the shedding of it by Men, a more heinous sin and barbarous fact; and
yet the shedders of it stupid, and not afraid to take away his life? what does
the Earth under their feet, but shake and tremble at what they did not? and
what improvement did some then present make thereof? and what conclusions did
they draw from it? Mat. 27. 51. Behold, the vail of the Temple was rent in
twain, from the top to the bottom, and the Earth did quake, and the Rocks rent.
Verse 54. And when the Centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus,
saw the Earthquake and those things that were done, they feared greatly. And
what did they say? what did they gather and infer from thence? what Conclusion
laid they down as sure and certain? they said, Truly this was the Son of God.
Though you did not see it, as they did, yet you read it recorded by them that
did see it, and do not you believe this matter of fact, and the recor^ of it to
be true? and will not you say* Surely that Christ, at whose Death the very
Earth did quake, and other great Miracles done, was the Son of God, and love
him, desire him, trust him, receive him, and consent to have him for your Lord
and Savior accordingly? was the shaking of the Earth, and the rending or the
Rocks, a testimony against the Impenitent, Unbelieving, and Rocky-hearted Jews,
that neither before, for all the Miracles done by him in his Life, nor after
they saw what was done at his Death, did own him for the Son of God* nor
receive him for their Savior and Lord, but did still reject him, and do you
hear of the same things that they saw, and yet be guilty of the same Unbelie^,
Impenitency, and Rejecting of Christ as they were? shall it not have the same
effect upon you, as it had upon the Centurion, and those that were with him*
The Earth at his Death did quake; do you fear and tremble, lest you be found a
Rejecter of him.

2. The Earthquake at the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, ought to be improved by
us to establish us in the Articles of our Faith of Christ's Resurrection, and
our own, and to rejoice at the thoughts of both. And the more the Earth did
tremble, the more steadfast let our Faith be. Matthew. 28. 2. And behold there was
a great Earthquake. Verse 5. -- Ye seek Jesus. Verse 6. He is not here, for he
is risen. Verse 8. They departed quickly, with fear and great joy, and did run
to bring his Disciples word. The Earth did quake, and they did believe; the
Earth did quake, and they did joy that Christ was risen. As the Earth did quake
to drink up his Blood, so it did quake to detain his Body beyond the appointed
time, and by its motion did congratulate the victory Christ had obtained over
Death in its own Dominions. Improve this also to believe the power of Christ to
raise our Bodies also, for if he give the word, if he utter his voice, Come
forth ye dead, Awake, Arise, he will make the Earth to quake and tremble, to
deliver up its dead. Rev. 20. 11. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that
sat upon it, from whose Presence the Earth and Heaven fled away, and there was
found no place for them. Verse 12. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand
before God, and the Books were opened, and another Book was opened, which is
the Book of Life; and the dead were judged out of those things which were
written in the Books, according to their Works. The Earth did quake when Christ
did die, and when he arose; and so it shall when he shall come to raise the
dead, and judge the World.

3. The Earthquake at the Prayers of the Apostles (when the Gospel was opposed,
and the Preachers of it persecucured) that God would grant unto his Servants
that with all boldness they may speak his Word, and for confirmation of their
Faith, and satisfaction that their Prayers were heard, his Church and Kingdom
should be propagated and preserved, the place was shaken where they were, Acts
4. 24. 31. He that can shake the Earth, can establish his Church; he that can
make Mountains quake, can and has built his Church upon such a Rock, that no
Power shall prevail against it.

Use V. Improve this mighty terrible Work of God in causing this late
Earthquake, by making more have to turn from sin to God by a speedy and sincere
Conversion. Were you not afraid of Death, when your Houses did shake, and you
feared, would fall upon you? Were you prepared to die? Were you fitted for
Judgment and Eternity? What if you had been destroyed then, where had your
Souls been now? Have any of you been more serious and earnest in enquiring
after the way of Salvation? Have you so much as with a concerned mind asked any
Minister, what you must do that you may be saved? How! have you not? What, will
you be more stupid than the Earth under your feet? Did it tremble, and not you?
Or did you then, and are become secure again? Will you be more careless and
hardened than the Jailer? He! did not he, being moved by the motion of the
quaking ground, make have, and run to the Apostles, and on his knees begged,
Sirs, what must I do to be saved? If you know, tell me. I see the greatness and
the power of your God, if he will have mercy on sinners, tell me, and what I
must do, that he might have mercy on me, and save me, tell me; if his Wrath be
so great, how may I escape it? I do not yet know, fain I would, but I do not; O
Sirs, tell me what must I do to be saved? Has this that you have felt and seen
put you on to any greater diligence for your Souls Salvation, than you had
before* Careless before, and so still? Impenitent before, and so still? No
minding of Conversion before, and none yet? Indeed* Shall this amazing
Providence of God, whereby you were in so much danger of Death and Hell, pass
away, and leave you as carnal, careless, and negligent as you were before?
What! after the Earth in its trembling might have opened its mouth and
swallowed you up alive into its bowels, and from thence have gone to Eternal
Torments? From Pit to Pit? From a deep Pit made by the Earthquake in the lower
parts thereof, into a bottomless-Pit, prepared by a just and angry God to take
Vengeance on Impenitent and Unconverted sinners to all Eternity? Turn, sinner,
turn, or this God that can and has by Earthquakes overturned Towns, Cities,
Mountains, will turn thee into Hell; and now if thou will not fear to continue
in a state of sin, there thou shall feel his Wrath and Vengeance for thy sin.

Use VI. Evermore live in the fear of God, and walk with Circumspection, Care,
and Conscience in all the parts and passages of your Life. Why so? Because one
way or other God may Suddenly call you out of one World into another, out of
Time into Eternity. Death many ways might suddenly surprise you. Have not you
seen how suddenly an Earthquake may be? How many, alas! how many at that time
did the trembling Earth bear, and weary of bearing them, trembled under them,
as a Porter under a Load too heavy for him? How many did it find in a way of
sin, Drinking to Excess, Swearing without shame or fear, and spending their
precious time in Sports, and Plays, and Vanity? What if God had commanded those
Winds, or Fires, or Spirits, and Vapors (if it were from such Natural Causes)
that made the Earth to quake, and your Houses tremble, to open the Earth and
break out, where you at that time were sinning against him, and swallowed you
up? Seriously think, in what a woeful case and practice it found you, and be
more wary for time to come. You little thought of such a Work of God, till it
suddenly came: Therefore where ever you are be careful to walk so holily, and
circumspectly, as becomes those that know now how suddenly Danger, Death and
Damnation too, else might come upon you.

Use VII. Let all and every one of us get and evidence our Title to a Kingdom
that cannot be shaken. You see there is no place in this World that is so
stable, but it may be shaken, even those Houses that you do not call moveable
Goods, how moveable God can make them. When you build on Earth, you mind that
your Foundation be good and firm, and not sandy, or unsound; and if you built
your House upon an earthly Rock, though when the Wind blows, and Rain descends
and beat against it, yet it stands; but if an Earthquake come, with a
Commission from God to overturn, or sink it, your best Foundation cannot secure
it. But there is a City above that has [unshaken] Foundations, whose Maker and
Builder is God: Secure an House there, not made with hands, for that will be
eternal. There are Mansions above, which are perpetual: There are no Storms nor
Tempests; there are no terrible Thunderings and Lightnings, there are no
Rendings nor Shakings; all sedate and calm, all at quiet and rest, all secure
and safe. No death, or darkness, no fears or tremblings, no threatening or
amazing motions tending to interrupt the Joys and holy Pleasures, the
Triumphant Songs of the Citizens of that City, of the glorious Subjects of that
abiding Kingdom. Your House on Earth might be destroyed by War, by Fire, by an
Earthquake; but there are Mansions above not subject to be destroyed or spoiled
by these or any other way: Set less by these on Earth, that have, and may be
shaken, and more by that Kingdom, that never has, nor shall, nor can be
shaken. Heb. 12. 27. This word, once more, signifies the removing of those
things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which
cannot be shaken, may remain. 28. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom, which
cannot be moved, let us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with
reverence and godly fear.

Use VIII. Celebrate the Power of God and his infinite Greatness, manifested in
this his Work in shaking of the Earth. Can Man do it? Can Kings and Nobles do
it? With their mighty Armies can they do that, which God by Winds and Vapors
can at his pleasure do? Job alleges this as an evident demonstration of his
Power. Job 9. 4. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength. 5. Which removes
mountains, and they know it not, which overturneth them in his anger. 6. Which
shakes the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble. And yet
these Earthquakes that are so great, the great God does them with a abundance
of ease. Psalm. 104. 32. He looks on the earth, and it trembles; be touches
the hills, and they smoke. O tremble before this God, who if he casts but an
angry look upon the Earth, ^t falls a trembling, if he touch the Mountains,
they smoke; an angry look with his Eye, a displeasing touch with his Finger
causes the one to tremble, and the other to smoke. What shall sinners then do,
when he shall lay upon them ^he heavy strokes of his Wrath and Vengeance to all
Eternity? Does the Earth quake before him, and the very Devils tremble at his
angry Presence, and shall Mortal sinful Men be fearless of him* The day will
come, and it is hastening when fear, and terror, and trembling shall seize upon
them, and they not be able to shake it off.

Use IX. God never wants ways and means to punish the Disobedience and
Rebellion of sinners against him. He ca^ make the Heavens above to punish the^
by withholding Rain from them, o^ by pouring out immoderate Shower* upon them:
He can punish them by the Earth beneath. And if there be nothing visible to
plague and destroy them, yet he has his Armies and his ^^ghty Host under
Ground, and in the bowels of the Earth, which he can Master at his word of
Command, all stand ready to fight against them, which ca^ slay them heaps upon
heaps, and bury them first, and after kill them.

Use X. Make your Peace with God that shows his Anger by these Earthquakes When
he takes such a Rod into h^ hand, you might see displeasure in his face. Let
this late Work of God in shaking London, and so many places in England, and
parts beyond the Sea, be a warning to them all; and oh that all would take this
fair warning! It is his Mercy that he does warn before he strikes, that with
his Rod he does correct, before with his Ax he hews us down. Do you think this
came by chance, and that by chance it did no more harm? Did not God that gave
Commission to it, to shake London, put into its Commission, make it shake, but
not to fall? And if God did send it, is it not a discovery of his Anger? Read
again Psalm. 18. 7. Then the earth shook and trembled, the foundation of the
hills moved and were shaken. Why? Because he was wroth. O labor by Repentance,
and Faith in Christ to turn away his Wrath, lest he overthrow you in his Anger.

Use XI. What may be some Security to a City against one Judgment, might not be
any defense against another. When London had its old Houses built with Timber,
consumed by Fire, to prevent such another desolation by devouring Flames, Men
have built with Brick and Stone, that are not such combustible matter. But as
you have built with other Materials than before, so God has other ways to deal
with you besides consuming Fire. God has shown you, he can make your strongest
Buildings of firmest stone, even your Royal Exchange to shake and tremble, and
Persons leave their Shops, and hasten down, and run crying home, through fears
that it would fall. Let us never by such wilful, great, and heinous sins
provoke God, because we cannot by any means strengthen our selves against him.
For he that can shake Rocks and Mountains, and throw them down, can shake and
cast down your strongest Buildings. Psalm. 68. 8. The earth shook, the heavens
also dropped at the presence of God, even Sinai it self moved at the presence
of God, the God of Jacob. Psalm. 114. 7. Tremble thou earth (and ye sinners) at
the presence of the Lord.

Use XII. Admire the sparing Mercy of God to London, more than to many Places
and Cities in the World. Indeed, by this late Earthquake many Towns and Cities
besides London have been shaken, and are spared; which does not make Londons
deliverance to be less: for God in sparing others, might have brought London
down. But compare your Mercies (for there are many in its preservation) with
the Desolations brought upon many Cities in former Ages, and upon Port Royal in
Jamaica, by Earthquakes, and acknowledge God's mercy and his power in his late
visitation of it, his power in shaking it, his mercy in preserving of it.
Consider this Providence seriously, suffer it not to pass without due
observation, and think whether you may put a greater accent upon his Power or
his Mercy in this Dispensation; upon his Power in making it to tremble, or on
his Mercy, that he did not make it sink or tumble down. Did God by an
Earthquake shake London, and yet does London stand? God did shake it, behold
his Power. It does stand, behold his Mercy. Nay, do not you see his powerful
Mercy, and his merciful Power? his powerful Mercy in shaking it, as a warning
to you, and his merciful Power in keeping it from falling when it was so
shaken. O write upon your Walls, however engraven it on your hearts and
memories, My House was shaken with a^ Earthquake, and yet it stands. London
sorely threatened, and yet is spared. It is by the distinguishing Providence of
God, that you have been visited in the same way as others have, and yet are not
overthrown, nor swallowed up in the same manner as others are. That you may be
the more sensible of, and so more thankful for God's great Mercy in sparing you
in the day of his Power, I will subjoin (out of many) some few Examples o^
God's sore displeasure, and his severe punishing of others by Earthquakes,
(collected out of History) whereby your Mercy might be magnified in your eyes.

Josephus records, That about 29 years before the Birth of Christ there happened
such an Earthquake in the Country of Judea, that never the like was seen in any
other place, so that diverse Beasts were slain thereby, and many Men were
overwhelmed in the ruins of their own Houses, and perished to the number of
ten, (others write thirty) thousand.

In the fifth year of the Emperor Tiberius, there fell out so dreadful an
Earthquake, that thirteen Cities in Asia were destroyed and overthrown thereby.

In the sixty sixth year after Christ there happened such another Earthquake, as
destroyed three other Cities of Asia, viz. Laodicea, Hierapolis and Colossus.

Anno Christo 79. three Cities in Cyprus were overthrown by an Earthquake.

Anno Christi 114. the City of Antioch was much defaced by an Earthquake, in
which time the Emperor Trajan being there, escaped the danger with much
difficulty: and Eusebius mentions another in the seventh year of Trajan,
which destroyed nine several Cities in Asia, Greece and Calabria.

About the year 182. the City of Smyrna came to ruin by an Earthquake, for the
re-edifying whereof the Emperor remitted ten years tribute.

Anno Christi 1456. there perished about Puel and Naples in an Earthquake forty
thousand People.

Anno Christi 1531. in the City of Lisbon about one thousand and four hundred
Houses were overthrown by an Earthquake, and about six hundred more were so
sorely shaken that they were ready to fall, and many of the Churches were cast
to the ground.

Anno Christi 1400. there was such a terrible Earthquake at Lurr in Persia as
overthrew five hundred Houses: and (...) Christ. 1593. there fell out such
another as overthrew three thousand Houses* quashing to death three thousand
Men in their ruins; yea, the Castle, though built upon the top of a solid Rock,
groaned in the like affrighted downfall.

Before the Peloponesian, or Civil Wars amongst the Grecians, one of their
Islands called Delphos (famous for the Temple of Apollo therein) was wholly
ruined by an Earthquake, which foreshewed those wonderful alterations which
presently after befell Greece.

Anno Christi 1618. Pleurs a Town in Rhetia, was in an Earthquake overwhelmed
with an Hill, which with a most swift motion oppressed one thousand five
hundred men.

In the year 1509. there was a great and terrible Earthquake in Constantinople,
and the Countries thereabouts, by the violence whereof a great part of the
Walls of that City, with many stately Buildings, both public and private, were
quite overthrown, and thirteen thousand people overwhelmed and slain therewith,
the terror whereof was so great, that Bajazet himself, the great Turk, and the
People generally forsook their Houses, and lay abroad in the Fields. It endured
for a month together with very little intermission; after which ensued a great
Plague, whereby the City was for the most part unpeopled.

A little before the Wars between the Lacedaemonians and the Ilotae, who were
their Slaves and Bondmen in the Country of Laconia, there happened in the City of
Lacedemon the most wonderful and fearful Earthquake that ever was heard of: for
the Earth in many places of the Country opened and fell in as into a bottomless
pit: the Mountain Taygetum shook so terribly, that parts of Rocks fell down
from it: and all the City of Lacedemon, with the violence of it, was thrown
down to the ground, five hundred Houses only excepted.

An. Christ. 1169. Febr. 4. there was such a vehement Earthquake all over the
Island of Sicily, that it was perceived in Calabria, and the wealthy and
stately City of Catana was so utterly destroyed by it, that there was not one
House left standing; and above fifteen thousand Men, Women and Children
perished in the ruins thereof.

In the year of Christ 1631. not long before the troubles of Naples, there fell
out a terrible Earthquake in and about the City, and the Mountain of Soma,
after many terrible bellowings, vomited out burning streams of fire, which
tumbled into the Adriatic Sea, and cast out an huge deal of Ashes. The like
happened the year following in the month of February, with so great hurt and
loss to the circumjacent places, as well in Houses, Men, Women, Children, and
Cattle, that it cannot be expressed.

All these (and there are many more) are dreadful instances of God's great
powerful wrath by Earthquakes against the sins of Men. But do not Men still
continue in their disobedience and provoking sins, and does not God continue to
manifest his hatred and detestation of them? For all this is his Anger turned
away? is not his Hand stretched out stiil? have not we heard of the sad
destruction of Jamaica by a most terrible Earthquake there this year? Should
not we sympathize with them, and by God's dealing with them tremble at the
remembrance of our own sins, the procuring cause of all Calamities, especially
since God so lately has shaken this City, though it stands? Its no argument the
greatest sufferers are the greatest sinners. Luk 13. 1. There were some present
at that season that told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled
with their sacrifices. Verse. 2. And Jesus answering, said unto them, suppose ye
that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans. because they
suffered these things? How does Christ answer his own Question* Verse. 3. I tell
you, nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Verse. 4. Or those
eighteen on whom the Tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye that they
were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem. Verse. 5. I tell you, nay:
but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. It is confessed by some that
write from Jamaica, that they were a very wicked People; great Swearers,
Drunkards, Unclean, etc. and are there not many such in England, yea, in and
about London? Is it not known? is it not seen? can it be denied? and are there
not such Circumstances that may make the very same sins to be more heinous and
aggravated here, beyond what they be (tho exceeding great) in Jamaica O that
God would set home those words of the Saiour of Souls, upon the Hearts and
Con^ciences of such provoking sinners amongst us, Except ye repent ye shall all
likewise perish Sin is the same, and God's ^wath is the same, and his power is
the same, to punish one People, as well as another, though he is pleased to make
a dif^erence, punishing sometimes some, when ^t the same time he does not
others; yet this ought not to make us the more ^ecure, nor to set our hearts in
us to do evil, because Sentence is not speedily ex^cuted; but that sin may be
hated, God ^eared, we reformed, and be more thankful to God for his sparing
Mercy to London, and other places in England in the late Earthquake, having a
borrowed Extract of a Letter from Jamaica, sent by an Eyewitness to his Friend
in England, for the honor of God, who is known by the Judgments which he
executes, and warning to Men (being told I may) I will annex it in the very
words.

Port Royal in Jamaica, June 20. 1692.
ON the 7th. day at Noon was a most terrible Earthquake: It came from the
North, attacked the Town on the Harbour-side, (...) which side was a Wharf; the
whole length of the place, where stood the King's House, a Bastion of 207 Guns,
Carlisle Battery of 119 Guns, and the Houses of the greatest Merchants; Al those
sunk down in a moment of 3 to 5 Fatho^ Water. In the Street next to the Wharf,
the Earth opened, being wide and deep, and instantly issued out an Inundation
of Water; so that several People were swallowed up alive in the ground, and
were spewed up again: some we^^ funk in their Houses, some were buried under
the Rubbish, some were drowned, some who (...) got into clear Water, and could
swim, we^^ carried away with drifts of Timber, and to^ of Houses, driven by a
steering carrere, (...) there perished: Nothing else was seen, but the dead and
dying; nothing heard but shrieks (...) cries. I my self escaped to a Miracle,
and w^ an Eyewitness to the Destruction of the Tow^* and the Distress of the
miserable People. It ^ impossible for Tongue to speak, or Pen to wri^^ the
sorrows and terrors of that day. The living were covered with Wounds, Bruises,
and Blood Some fled to part of the Town yet standing, b^ the Houses shattered;
some got on pieces of Timber, and others in Canooes and Boats, to sav^ their
Lives. The Shipping rode safe at Anchor just by, and saw this sad Tragedy; the
Boats came out, but slow to our assistance, the Seamen being more diligent to
take up drift-goods than People, by which baseness many were lost, which could
have been saved. In the Afternoon many Seamen, English and Spaniards, contented
themselves with what was floating on the Waters, though some instantly entered and
rifled standing Houses. But the following night and day those Villains were
more savage and cruel than many Indians and Negroes: robbed all Houses, broke
in pieces all Scrutores, Boxes, Trunks, and Chests of Drawers, Cabinets, and
made spoil of all that was of value in the Town; threatening to kill several of
the Inhabitants, if any durst be so bold to say, this House was mine. Our
Enemies could not have treated us worse than the Seamen. The remainder of us
now in the Town building little holes to shelter our selves from the Weather;
for all the Buildings are thrown down in this Island, with the Sugar and Indico
Works. God in Wrath has Mercy, in sending us very seasonable Weather, which we
have not had these three Years -- The Earthquakes several times a day, though not
so terrible, as in the first day; for then the Thunders roared over our heads,
and the Earth trembled under our feet, and the Rocks and Mountains fell, and
Fireballs fell by day and night from Heaven, which my Eyes saw; so that the
most hardened Atheist might have considered that there was a God, who governed
the World.


A Letter, Dated Port Royal, June 28. 1692. says --
We have an Account from several parts of these Islands of the Mischief done by
the Earthquake. From St. Anns we hear of above a thousand Acres of Wood-Land
changed into the Sea, and carried with it whole Plantations; but no place
suffered like Port Royal, where whole Streets were swallowed up by the opening
Earth, and the Houses and Inhabitants went down together; some of them were
driven up again by the Sea, which arose in those Breaches, and wonderfully
escaped. Some were swallowed up to the Neck, and then the Earth shut upon them,
and squeezed them to death, and in that manner several are left buried with
their Heads above ground, only some Heads the Dogs have eaten, others are
covered with Dust and Earth by the People which yet remain in the place, to
avoid the stench. The People tell me, that they hear great bellowings and
noises in the Mountains, which makes some very apprehensive of an Eruption of
Fire; if so, it will, I fear, be more destructive than the Earthquake. --


Has God been so severe with England, with London in the late Earthquake? do
not your standing Houses declare he has not? that you are yet alive, does not
this manifest that in that Judgment God remembered Mercy? I had communicated to
me a Letter sent by a Minister in Kent to his Father in London, from which I
will extract what concerns this late Earthquake, that you may see the different
Dealings of God with diverse People, and the Relation of this not like the
former.

-- You have heard already (perhaps) of the Earthquakes being in Kent, on
Thursday last, as well as at London, and at other places, but this may confirm
you that it is true, that it has been here, as we have been all Eyewitnesses:
and this particular true Account I can give you. It shook Leeds Castle (which
is but half a mile from me) so violently, that all in the Castle, even the Lady
her self, went out of it, and expected its falling. One of my Acquaintance was
out in a Field at that time, the ground shook so under him, that he could not
stand, and being forced to lie down on the ground, was so tossed up and down,
that he received several bruises. It was very much at Maidstone, the People
generally leaving their Houses, fearing they would fall upon their heads; and
it has been in most places of the County, which puts us all into a great
Consternation, but it lasted not above a quarter of a^ hour. -- But here is no
downfall of Houses, not of one. Here is no Persons killed, no, not one. No
openings of the Earth, no breakings in of Waters, turning dry Land into a Sea.
Do not you see your Mercy in the late Judgment? do you say or think, God could
not do to you as he has done with others heretofore, or to Jamaica of late?
instead of praising the Name of God, do not blaspheme it.

God's gracious proceedings with England, and therein with London, should melt
our hearts, whilst his terrible dreadful Strokes beats others to pieces; and
finding one instance of an Earthquake in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth so much
in gentleness like to this in our days, showing from Age to Age his Mercy to
this Land, as if loath to dedestroy it, if Mercy may melt us, mixed with
Judgments to awaken us, I shall add this before I do conclude, in the words and
syllables with which I find it published, thus:

On Easter-Wednesday, being the sixth of Arpil, 1580. somewhat before six of
the clock in the Afternoon, happened this great Earthquake whereof this
Discourse treats. I mean, not great in respect of long continuance of time,
for (God be thanked) it continued little above a minute of an hour, rather
shaking God's rod at us, then smiting us according to our deserts: nor yet in
respect of any great hurt done by it within this Realm; for although it shook all
the Houses, Castles, Churches, and Buildings every where as it went, and put
them in danger of utter ruin, yet within this Realm (praised be our Savior
Christ Jesus for it) it overthrew few, or none, that I have yet heard of,
saving certain Stones, Chimneys, Walls and Pinacles of high Buildings, both in
this City and diverse others places. Neither do I hear of any Christian People
that received bodily hurt by it saving tw^ Children in London, a Boy and a
Girl, being at Sermon among a great number of People in Christ's Church by
Newgate-Market, of whom the Boy named Thomas Gray, was slain out of hand, with
the fall of a Stone shaken down from the Roof of the Church: and the Girl
(whose name was Mabel Everite) being sore hurt there, at the same present by
like casualty, died within few days after. But I term it great, in respect of
the universalness thereof almost at one instant, not only within this Realm,
but also without, where it was much more violent, and did far more harm: and in
respect of the great terror which it then struck into all men's hearts where it
came, and yet still strikes into such as duly consider howjustly God may be
offended with all Men for sin, and especially with this Realm of England, which
has most abundantly tasted of God's Mercy and most unthankfully neglected his
Goodness, which yet still warns us by this terrible wonder, what for more
terrible punishments are like to light upon us e're long* unless we amend our
sinful Conversation betimes. This Earthquake made that Impression on the Minds
of those that then lived, that an Order of Prayer, and a godly Admonition
concerning it, was appointed to be read for the turning of God's Wrath from
them, threatened by that terrible Earthquake, by order given from the Queens
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, to be used in all Churches and
Households throughout the Realm.

Because this might serve for a Conviction of many prayer less Families amongst
us, that were so before the late Earthquake, and are so still; that are more
fearless of God's displeasure, then those that lived in times of lesser Light,
I shall insert so much of it as concerned the Earthquake.

A Prayer to be used of all Householders, with their whole Family, every
evening before they go to bed, that it would please God to turn his Wrath from
us threatued in the last terrible Earthquake.
Set forth by Authority.
-- WE most heartily and humbly beseech thy fatherly Goodness to look down from
the Throne of the Mercy Seat upon us most miserable and sinful Slaves of Satan,
which with fearful and trembling hearts do quake and shake at the strange and
terrible token of thy Wrath and Indignation, appearing most evidently to us, by
thy shaking and moving of the Earth, which is thy Footstool, whereby (if we be
not utterly destitute of Grace) we be warned, that thy coming down amongst us,
to visit our sins in most terrible manner, cannot be far off, seeing thou
treadest so hard upon this thy Footstool the Earth, which we most shamefully
have polluted and defiled with our most wicked, sinful, and rebellious Lives,
notwithstanding thy continual crying and calling upon us by thy Servants, the
Prophets and Preachers, by whom we have learned to know thy will, but have not
followed it: We have heard much, and done little* yea nothing at all; but like
most perverse and unthankful Children, have made a mock of thy Word, derided
thy Ministers, and accounted thy Threatenings trifles, and thy Warnings of no
weight or moment: Wherefore we have justly deserved to taste most deeply of the
bitter Cup of thy Anger and Vengeance by Wars, Famine, Pestilence, yea, and
Eternal Death if thou should not temper the rigor of thy Justice with the
mildness of thy Mercy. -- Turn this Earthquake, O Lord, to the benefit of thine
Elect, as thou did when thou shoo^^edst the Prison, loosedst the Locks,
Fetters and Chains of thy Servants, Paul and S^las, and broughtest them out of
Prison* and convertedst their Keeper; so gracious Lord, strike the hearts of
Tyrants with the terror of this thy Work, that they may know that they are but
Men* and that tho^ art that Sampson that for their mocking and spighting of
thee, and thy Word, can shake the Pillars of their Palaces, and throw them
upon the furious Philistines heads. Turn thy Wrath, O Lord, from thy Children
that call upon thy Name, to the Conversion or Confusion of thine* Enemies that
defy and ab^or thy Name, and deface thy Glory. Thou have knocked long at their
Doors, but they will not open to let thee in: burst open therefore the brazen
Gates of their stony hearts, thou that art able of stones to raise up Children
to Abraham: and finally s^ touch our hearts with the finger of thy Grace, that
we may deeply muse upon our sinful* Lives, to amend the^, and call for thy
Mercy to forgive and pardon them, through Christ our Lord, who lives with thee
and the Holy Ghost, three Persons and one Eternal God, to whom be all Dominion
and Glory with Praise and Thanksgiving for ever and ever. Amen.

Do not you see old Mercies to England in time of Judgment by that Earth^uake
then, as fresh Mercy in the like Judgment mixed in this so lately? nay, this
more mild then that; when by that two were killed, and not one by this (that
yet I hear of.) And should not the terror of the Lord awaken us, as you see it
did others in the like case heretofore? Should not every House that has been
shaken be filled with Cries, Calls, and fervent Prayers unto God to turn away
his Wrath from us, that else after this Earthquake might come upon us? Might
not we ^ear, as they then did, and pray every night before we go to Bed, as
they were appointed and commanded by Authority to do? should not the Judgment,
and the Mercy in it, kindly work upon us? or shall we be more secure, because
God (in Judgment) is so merciful? Shall we despise the Riches of his goodness,
and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God
leads us to repentance? or shall we, after our hardness and impenitent
hearts, treasure up unto our selves wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God? will not he render to every man
according to his deeds? read and answer; Romans 2. 4, 5, 6.

That I may conclude, I shall recommend to the Citizens of London a serious
consideration of three years (amongst others) exceeding remarkable, always to
be remembered and improved by all that have seen them all, and by those that
have been born since the first and second of them, but have been told by others
of God's dealing with this City then

1. Forget not the Dying year in this City in 1665. when God did visit it with
the Plague: Have you forgot, have you not heard how Death raged then? how it
rode triumphant like a mighty Conqueror, that so many durst not meet it in the
Streets as were sufficient to keep the Grass from growing in Cheapside? did it
not slay heaps upon heaps, that the living were put to day-labour to bury their
dead? so many thousand in a week cut off, cut down, and changed time for
eternity: ready or unready, must away. Death was then in such haste, in so
short time to slay so many, that if it did find unprepared persons, it did not,
it could not be prevailed with by sighs and sobs, by tears and groans, to stay
till some made themselves ready for another world. You that lived Then and Now,
have cause to remember Gods Judgment to others (especially if unconverted) that
died, and his Mercy to you that live now.

2. Forget not that dreadful burning year 1666. when the tops of London's
highest Houses were brought down to fill their Cellars: when the devouring
Flames marched without control from Street to Street, drinking up the Water
cast upon them, and scorning all oppositions that could for some days be made
against them, till God that set bounds to the proud Waves of the Sea, set
limits to the insulting Flames, saying, Hitherto shall ye go, and no further.
Let the sight of your new Buildings put you in mind your old were burnt.

3. The trembling year 1692. when your Houses by an Earthquake trembled as if
they would fall; and you in them then trembled for fear they should fall. I
have heard there were tremblings of the Earth in Jamaica some years more then
once, before the great sit of Convulsion came by which it was destroyed. Let us
take warning by one. In the year 65, God by one Judgment swept away the
Inhabitants, and left their Houses: in 66 he destroyed your Houses, and
preserved your Persons: in 92 by an Earthquake he threatened both your Dwellings
and your Persons, but (in mercy) he spared both. Oh give praise unto the Lord
that he spared you and your Houses in this Earthquake, and pray that he would
shake them so no more.

FINIS.
Books printed for John Salusbury in Cornhill.
THE certainty of The Worlds of Spirits, fully evinced by unquestionable
Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts, Operations, Voices, etc. Proving the
Immortality of Souls, the Malice and Miseries of the Devils and the Damned, and
the Blessedness of the Justified.

The End of Doctrinal Controversies which have lately troubled the Churches, by
reconciling Explication without much Disputing. Both by Mr. Richard Baxter.

The Protestant Religion truly stated and justified, by the late Reverend
Divine Mr. Richard Baxter: Whereunto is added by way of an Epistle, some
Account of the Learned Author, never before published. By Mr. Matthew. Sylvester
and Mr. Daniel Williams.

The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the contrivance and accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ. By William Bates D. D.

The Changeabless of this World, with respect to Nations, Families, and
particular Persons; with a practical Application thereof to the various
conditions of this Mortal Life. By Timothy Rogers M. A.

The Christian Lover, or a Discourse opening the Nature of Participation with,
and Demonstrating the Necessity of Purification by Christ. By T. Cruse.

The Duty and Blessing of a Tender Conscience, plainly stated and earnestly
recommended to all that regard acceptance with God, and the Prosperity of their
Souls. By the same Author.

Five Sermons on various Occasions. By the same Author.

The Mirror of Divine Love unvailed, in a Paraphrase on the High and
Mysterious Song of Solomon. By Robert Plemming. V. D. M.

The Mourners Memorial, in two Sermons on the Death of the truly, (...) Mrs.
Susannah Some. With some (...) count of her Life and Death. By (...) Wright and
Robert Fleming. V. D. M.

A new Examination of the Acciden^ and Grammar, in English and Latin wherein
all the Rules of Properiquae ^^^ribus, Quae Genus, As in presenti, Si^t (...)
and Praesodia, are made plain and (...) that the meanest Capacity may speed
(...) learn the Latin Tongue.

The Christian's Converse with God* (...) the Insufficiency and Uncertainty
Human Friendship, and the Improveme^^ of Solitude in Converse, with God wit^
some of the Author's Breathings a^^ him. By Richard Baxter. Recommend^^ to the
Readers serious Thoughts wh^ at the House of Mourning and Reti^^ meant. By Mr.
Matthew Sylvester.

A Rational Defense of Nonconform^^ty, wherein the practice of Nonconfo^mists
in vindicated from the Charge, Dr. Stilling fleet Bp^of Worcester. Also (...)
Case of the present Separation truly u^ted, and the way to Union amongst
Pr^^testants pointed at by Gilbert Rule D. D.


