A Familiar Guide TO THE Right and Profitable Receiving OF THE LORD's SUPPER.
Wherein also the Way and Method of our SALVATION is briefly and plainly
Declared.

By Theophilus Dorrington.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Brab. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, over against
the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1695.

TO THE QUEEN'S MOST Excellent Majesty.
May it please Your Majesty
TO permit me, most Thankfully, to Acknowledge, That it is Your MAJESTY'S very
Gracious Approbation of Another Endeavor to revive the Decayed Piety and
Virtue of the Age; which as it Animates me to proceed in that, and has almost
brought it to Perfection, so it was the great Encouragement of this. In which I
have endeavored to persuade, and direct to the right use of this Blessed
Sacrament; Which is perhaps the best and most Effectual means that our Lord has
left in his Church to promote and maintain in it the Love of God and of our
Neighbor. And may it please Your Sacred MAJESTY to give leave, That I may
Encourage my self from the Favor mentioned, to Implore and Hope for the Honor
of Your MAJESTY'S Patronage to this Small Piece also. I am, and desire to be as
long as I live,

Your MAJESTY'S Most Obedient and Dutiful Subject, Theophilus Dorrington.

AN Advertisement.
I Have in this little Book distinctly stated and represented that Solemn
Covenant with Almighty God, which we all of us enter into in our Baptism:
Because since the Receiving of the Lord's Supper is designed for a Renewal and
Confirmation of that Covenant, the distinct Knowledge of that is necessary to
our Fitness for this Sacrament; And I have further dispersed, through the
whole, many weighty Arguments to Induce Men to keep close to that Covenant; It
being to us the Only Way of Salvation: That so I might at once promote in many
a Religious and Good Life; a Fitness for this Sacrament; and the Attainment of
their Everlasting Salvation.

And having made this the Subject and Scope of this Book, I think it may not be
amiss to suggest, that it is very fit to be recommended and presented by those
who have taken upon them the Charitable Office of being Godfathers or
Godmothers, to such as they have presented to God at the Sacred Font. It is
the Certain Duty of these Spiritual Parents, and the Charge laid upon them by
the Church, to concern themselves afterward, and take all the Care they can,
That the Child may be taught, as soon as it is able to learn, what a Solemn
Vow, Promise, and Profession, it has made by them. This Duty and Charge they
would hereby, in some measure, perform; especially if they would also concern
themselves after a time to know what Use their Spiritual Children have made of
it. Certainly if the Duties and Charge of this most useful Spiritual Relation
were conscientiously minded, and in this and the like ways performed; we should
not see so much deplorable Wickedness among Professors of Christianity as
there is, and we might reasonably hope to see the next Generation, at furthest,
delivered from the Vices and Madness of this.

And since this Covenant is implied in Baptism, when it is not expressed in our
Way: This Book will be useful to be read in all Families, in order to train up
Young People in the Knowledge of their Engagements to God, and in the Way of
their Salvation, and to a Fitness for this Blessed Sacrament, that they may be
confirmed in that Way. To Adapt it the better to such an Use, I have added in
the End a Prayer, which is proper to be used after the reading of any part of
the Book in the Family or Closet.

I think fit to recommend this Book also to the Societies of Religious Young
Men in and about this City; That they may hereby at a cheap Rate, and with
little Labor, gain a right Understanding and a distinct Knowledge of the
Nature and Design of this Blessed Sacrament. To whom (as Young Persons) this
may be necessary and useful Advice; That they do not satisfy themselves with
Ardent and Devout Affections in their coming to the Sacrament, but endeavor to
have their Judgments well informed too. For, as it will be of great Advantage
to them toward a Holy and Good Life to have their Devotion built upon the
Foundation of a solid Knowledge; so, without this, the Adversary of their Souls
will have many Advantages against them. To whom, as the Glory of our Time, I
most heartily wish that Grace, Mercy, and Peace, may be exceedingly multiplied
from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

The CONTENTS of this Book.
Sect. 1. Introduction. p. 1 Sect. 2. The Creation of Man. p. 5 Sect. 3. The
First Covenant. p. 9 Sect. 4. The Sacraments of That. p. 11 Sect. 5. The Sin
and Fall of Man. p. 14 Sect. 6. The New Covenant. p. 17 Sect. 7. On Our Part.
p. 20 Sect. 8. On God's Part. p. 31 Sect. 9. The Sacraments of this Covenant.
p. 37 Sect. 10. The Lord's Supper, a Confirmation of it. p. 42 Sect. 11. An
Earnest Persuasive to the Lord's Supper. p. 51 Sect. 12. Of Fitness to come to
this Sacrament. p. 60 Sect. 13. An Exercise of Thankful Remembrance of the
Death of Jesus Christ. p. 64 Sect. 14. An Exercise of Repentance. p. 89 Sect.
15. An Exercise of Good Resolutions. p. 100 Sect. 16. An Exercise of Faitb. p.
111 Sect. 17. An Exercise of Charity. p. 123 Sect. 18. Prayers for Preparation.
p. 139 Sect. 19. Directions for a Devout Behavior at the Communion. p. 147
Sect. 20. A Meditation on the Communion. p. 164 Sect. 21. Prayers for a
suitable Conversation. p. 179 Sect. 22. A Prayer of Recollection. p. 183

A Familiar Guide TO The Right and Profitable Receiving of the Lord's Supper.
SECT. I. The Introduction.
Christian Reader,
THOU have here represented to thee, in a little room, I think, all that is
necessary to render thee a meet and profitable Receiver of the Holy and most
Comfortable Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ our Lord. And I
suppose it is in such a Manner represented, as is most fit and likely, with the
Blessing of God, to possess thee with all the Qualifications requisite in him
that comes to this Sacrament, if thou will afford this little Book a serious
and frequent perusal. If thou have been so unhappy, and so much mistaken in thy
true Interest, as never to have laid these things to Heart before, and to have
lived in the neglect of this Blessed Ordinance; I would advise, I would entreat
thee often to read and study these things till thou art familiarly acquainted,
and deeply affected with them; that thou may to thy Advantage come well
prepared to this Sacrament. If the things herein contained have already
affected thy Heart, and had a good Influence on thy Life, and thou art a
frequent Attendant upon this Sacrament, it may suffice to read this Book as
often as thou can on the Week before thou come to it, as a good Weeks
preparation for it. And for those who Communicate every Lord's Day (as I wish
all Christians did) it may suffice, commonly, to retire sometime on the Day
before, or get up the sooner on the Sacrament-Day, and seriously Meditate on
the Exercises herein proposed, which are designed to excite him that has an
habitual fitness for this Sacrament into an actual one, and are useful for
that purpose. I say commonly this may be enough for such; but yet even they
also may find it necessary and useful sometimes, when leisure allows, to read
the whole.

To make it as short as I could, and yet as comprehensive too, I have ventured
to leave out what might have been said to justify the Method and Parts of it;
presuming also that this will not be necessary.

Because what is requisite to render a Man a meet Receiver of this Sacrament is
also necessary, and is sufficient to constitute a good Christian, and to bring
him to Heaven: Therefore I have said in the Title, that the whole Method and
Way of our Salvation is herein plainly declared. So that if any Soul be
solicitous about that Grand and most Concerning Question, What must I do to be
saved? he may find it herein resolved. And whether this Holy Sacrament may be
accounted and used as a Means of Conversion to a Good Life or not; yet I hope
that, by the Blessing of God, this little Book may be such a Means to many, if
Men will but think it worth their while to do so much toward their own
Everlasting Happiness, as to read and consider so small a Treatise.

That another Book should be published on this Subject, after so many which
have gone before it, will not seem strange to any one who knows the
Incomparable Pleasure of Devout Thoughts, and the peculiar aptness of this
Subject to afford them, together with the Inclination both of Grace and Nature
to endeavor to possess others with whatever has made a great Impression on
our selves. And I believe, when this Book is well considered, it may appear,
after all the rest, to have its Necessity and Usefulness.

The Prayer.
MAY the God of all Grace, Lover of Souls, to whom the Redemption and Salvation
of Mankind is so very dear; and who invites us to this Sacrament as the way to
Heaven, and that he may herein give us the happy fore-tasts of it: Bless this
my weak Endeavor, and give it a success according to the Greatness of his
Power and Love; to the promoting in many Hearts the Love of this Sacrament, and
their frequent and comfortable Attendance upon it; and to the bringing many
Souls to happiness and glory, for the sake of Jesus Christ our Mediator and
Advocate. Amen.

SECT. II. The Creation of Man.
WHEN it is said in the first Chapter of Genesis, that God saw every thing that
He had made, and behold it was very good: This means, that the Creator, upon
the review of his Works, was pleased and delighted in them; and that He hated
nothing that He had made: For, what we Hate, we wish that it were not,
especially not such as it is. If therefore the Creator had hated any thing
that He had made, He had made it to be such as He would not have it to be;
Which is not to be supposed of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and of such Power
as is able to make every thing what He pleases it shall be. Mankind therefore,
among the other Works of God, were made very good, and were pleasing to our
Maker. Indeed He made Man a very Noble and Excellent sort of Creature, such as
must be peculiarly pleasing to Himself above all things in this lower World: As
we may judge by those words in Genesis 1. 27. God created Man in his Own Image.
This was the peculiar Glory of Man, and that which chiefly advanced Him above
the Creatures about Him: And it did principally consist in these things
following. That as He had Faculties capable of knowing, loving and obeying God,
He was disposed to do so: He knew God to be the most Excellent Being, and did
accordingly Reverence and Esteem Him: He knew Him to be the Fountain Good, and
His chief Good, and did accordingly fix the choice of his Will upon Him; and
valued His Favor and Love, by which we enjoy God, as his greatest and only
Felicity. There was then no Error nor false Reasoning in his Understanding, no
perverse Choice in his Will, no Inordinacy in any of his Appetites, no Motions
in them contrary to His Reason. In nothing was Man inclined to contradict his
Duty to God, or any of the Eternal Laws of Righteousness. Upon this account it
was that Man was very good, and beloved of His Maker. And being so beloved, He
lived in perfect Peace and Happiness: He was not encombred with any Evil; He
wanted nothing that He had occasion for. It appears His kind Creator would not
cease doing for Him, till He had provided for all His Necessities, and Desires;
that so He might be completely Happy. Man then enjoyed the willing and ready
Service of all the Creatures about Him. He enjoyed Himself, and could with
pleasure consider and praise God for the Noble and Excellent Nature which his
Maker had given Him: He had an easy and a quiet Mind, had no conflicts within
himself, had no occasion to rebuke or fall out with himself. He enjoyed then
his God too, being assured of his Favor, and receiving the constant
Communications of it. He could, with great delight, contemplate and praise the
glorious Attributes of God; And the Divine Wisdom, Power, Righteousness,
Goodness and Truth were very pleasant to Him, while he was assured that all
these were friendly, and would be favorable to Him. This was Man's first
Condition; a very Excellent and Happy one; but, alas! through his own default
it did not last long.

SECT. III. The First Covenant between God and Man.
IT is very probable that all the Particular dealings of God with Man, in this
condition, are not told us in that short account which Moses gives us of the
Beginnings of the World. It being enough for us to know in General what is the
Spring and Source of all that Sin and Misery which is now found among Mankind;
The knowledge of which is of some Use and Importance toward our getting free
from both. But what is told us of the Transactions between God and Man in that
state, we may think we shall most truly Understand, and most rightly Interpret,
if we guide our selves herein by the Tenor of his dealing with Mankind since
that. From what is told us, then, of that time, and from what appears since, we
may learn, That it pleased the Creator, when He had made Man, and had so
highly obliged Him, to take upon himself the Relation of a Governor to his
Creature, as He had the undoubted Right of one; and he very justly thought fit
to exercise a Dominion over him for his Good. It was therefore, we may suppose,
promised to Man, that He should enjoy the Favor of his Maker, and a perfect
Happiness both of Body and Soul, upon the Condition that He would continue in
the due Reverence and Love of his Maker, and Obey his Commands. And it was made
known to him that He should fall from the best of his Excellency, from that
wherein He was so pleasing to His Maker; and from all his Happiness, if he did
not continue steadfast in his Duty, and perfectly perform it, as God had
enabled him to do. And this is that which is commonly called the First Covenant.

SECT. IV. The Sacraments of That.
MOreover God having made Man to consist of a Body and a Soul, and knowing that
it is natural to Him, for the Objects of his Senses to make great Impressions,
and to have a mighty Influence upon his Mind: His Wisdom and Goodness ordered
Matters so, as that his Senses might help to admonish him of his Duty, and to
assure him of his Happiness in the performance of it. And this we may suppose
was the Reason and Ground of God's separating two Trees, in the Garden where he
had placed our First Parents, for a peculiar and uncommon Use: The One called
the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil; the Other called the Tree of Life.
These we may reckon to have been the Sacraments of the First Covenant: For in
these were Spiritual things by God's appointment represented by outward and
visible Signs and Actions. Man was assisted to remember his Duty* and
Obligations to his Maker by that Tree, called the Tree of the Knowledge of Good
and Evil. For we may suppose that the Fruit of this Tree was set apart by God
wholly for the following purpose: Man was to take care to cultivate this Tree
as well as others; but he was to offer the Fruit of it at settimes solemnly and
religiously to God, as a visible Acknowledgment that he owned Him the Maker of
all things, and the Supreme Lord and the Proprietour of all. This was reserved,
as we may say, by God, to be a devoted Thing, and Man's Thank-offering to Him
for all the rest of his Gifts. And for this reason Man was forbid to eat of it
himself. For we find in later Times, It was always held a very heinous and
guilty Thing for Men to eat of, or use what God had separated and reserved to
Himself. Now such a sensible, outward Performance, as the solemn offering of
this Fruit to God, and the looking upon it and using it only as a Devoted
Thing, was an excellent and fit Means to admonish Mankind for ever to
acknowledge their Maker and Preserver as the Supreme Lord and Proprietour of
all things: As it was a sensible Declaration that they did make this
Acknowledgment, so it was a sensible Obligation of themselves that they would
continue to do so; and the more a help to them to continue it, and to answer
all the Obligations which naturally result from it in the Course of their Lives.

And then the other Tree was appointed to assure Man, upon his perfect
Obedience, of his Immortality and Everlasting Happiness. So that whilst he
continued steadfast in his Duty, he had right to take and eat the Fruit of this
Tree: And he might take it as God's visible and sensible Pledge, and as an
Instrument of Conveyance of Eternal Life and Happiness to Him. In like manner,
as now we have leave from God to look upon the Rainbow, not only as the
natural Effect of the Sun shining upon a falling shower, but, as God's visible
pledge and assurance to Mankind, that He will never again destroy the World
with a Deluge of Water.

SECT. V. The Sin and Fall of Man.
THIS account shows the exceeding great Guilt and Wickedness of the Sin of our
First Parents. Their Sin was, that they did Eat of that Forbidden Fruit; and so
they used and took to themselves what was reserved and devoted to God. It was
the bringing to a Common use that which was separated by his appointment to a
Religious one, and was the profaning of a Hallowed or Holy Thing. But let it be
considered a little how monstrous and vile this Sin of our First Parents was!
How soon had they forgotten the mighty Obligations which the Creator had so
lately laid upon them! How bountiful had he been to them! How much had he
freely given them! And He withheld and reserved but one Fruit to Himself; and
this, we may say, they grudged and envied Him: They would not be content with
so vast a provision as he had made for them, but would needs have this afforded
too. The poor depending Creature, that derived his Being, and all he had, would
needs be sole Proprietour and absolute Lord of all things on the Earth, and
would acknowledge no Superior! They had no need of this Fruit, were perfectly
happy without it; and might have continued so happy, if they would have
abstained from this; But they most unreasonably despised their Happiness, and
hazarded the losing it for the sake of the Satisfaction and Advantage which
they expected from this single Fruit. The Creator indeed had been so good to
them, they would not believe he would so severely punish their Eating this
Fruit, as he had threatened to do; and so that which should have obliged them to
be steadfast in their Duty, was most perversely turned into an Encouragement of
Sin. Oh vile and shameful Wickedness! Let us consider from what a vile
Original we all spring, and be all humbled and ashamed.

In yielding to this foul Act, they lost that Holiness and Righteousness which
they had been endowed with, and by which especially they had been pleasing to
their Maker. In this also they broke the Condition of the First Covenant, which
required that they should constantly Reverence and Love their Creator, and
obey Him in all things. And the sad Consequence of this was, That they hereby
lost the Favor of God, and forfeited all their own Happiness. They lost all
Right to the good things of this World; to the Obedience, and Serviceableness
of the Creatures which God had made for them. They became liable to the Penalty
which God had threatened to inflict, and immediately upon the Transgression did
deserve to have been put to Death, and to be thrown into the place of
Everlasting Punishment, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

SECT. VI. The New Covenant.
AND the utmost severity of the Threatening had been immediately executed in
that manner upon them, we may believe, according as it was said, In the day
thou attest thereof, thou shall surely die; If the Son of God had not become a
Mediator on their behalf. And He freely undertook to do what ever might be
necessary to render it consistent with the Honor of God to receive his
Rebellious Creatures into Favor again, to release their Obligation to
Everlasting Punishment, and restore them to perfect Happiness. What He then
undertook to do to this purpose, we may learn and conclude from what He did in
the Fullness of Time: And that was; That He would unite Himself to the Humane
Nature, and would become Man. In that Nature He would perform a perfect
Obedience to God the Father, that He might merit, for Mankind, the Happiness
which was settled to be the Reward of perfect Obedience. And, to excuse Man from
the Eternal Death, which He had deserved by his Sin, He undertook to suffer
Death in his stead, and so to make his Death a Sacrifice for the Sins of
Mankind. Thus much did He, very kindly and of his own accord, undertake to do
for us; and he was accepted of the Father, and assured that He should, by doing
thus, obtain the Favor for us which He desired. So He procured for Man that he
should not be utterly cast off and thrown into endless Misery; but have other
terms of Favor appointed him: And this Dispensation or Appointment is that
which is called the New Covenant: And it is called the New Covenant in his
Blood, because it was procured by his Undertaking to shed his Blood in the
Humane Nature as a Sacrifice for Sin. Upon this our First Parents were
permitted to live, to enjoy, in some measure, the Good things of this World for
a while, and had space allowed them to make their Peace with God; to recover
his Favor, and their own Happiness.

We must know, that since it was a settled Law before the Fall of Man, that He
should propagate such as Himself; and his Posterity should be reckoned in the
same state and relation toward God with their Father, who begat them:
Therefore when the First Parents of Mankind thus became polluted by their Sin,
and were fallen into the state of guilty Rebels against God; All their
Posterity must needs come polluted into this World, as unclean things out of
unclean, and must be born Children of Wrath, as the Scripture speaks. We
therefore have the same task upon us which our First Parents had; that is, To
recover the Favor of God and our Everlasting Happiness, by performing now the
Terms and Conditions of this Second Covenant.

Let us see then, what the Tenor of this New Covenant is: What are the Duties
which it requires to be performed on our part: And what are the Promises of it
on God's part; the Blessings which it offers to make us partakers of upon the
Condition of performing those Duties.

SECT. VII. On Our Part.
FIrst let us take notice of our own part of this Covenant, and observe what it
is that God requires of us, to whom the Gospel is preached, which we must do to
be saved. And because all Mankind are now considered by God as guilty and
polluted Creatures; as having sinned, and being disposed to do wickedly; There
is first required of us, That we repent and turn from Sin. In the next place,
because we must return to God; it is required, That we do believe all the
Articles of the Christian Faith: And lastly, That we engage our selves, and
endeavor to keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all
the Days of our Life. But because the Heart of Man is deceitful and wicked,
and we are so backward to do our Duty, that we are unwilling to know it;
Therefore it will be requisite to mention somewhat particularly, the Things
contained under these three General Heads.

The First main Branch of our Duty is, That we repent and turn from Sin: To
which purpose we must stand at a defiance with all the Causes of Sin, and
resolve they shall not govern us. Therefore has the Church been wont to express
this Branch of our Duty thus: We must Renounce the Devil, and all his Works;
the Pomp and Vanities of this wicked World, with all the covetous Desires of
the same: And all the sinful Desires of the Flesh, so as that we will not
follow nor be led by them.

We must Renounce the Devil, and all his Works. It was by the Craft and
Instigation of this Apostate Spirit, the Enemy of our Happiness, that Mankind
were at first drawn into Disobedience against God. We must resolve therefore
never to have any Correspondence with him; to abhor and abstain from all those
guilty ways of consulting him, or seeking his Assistance, which the ungodly
World have ever practiced. We must never, knowingly, or willingly, obey any of
his Commands, nor comply with his Temptations. We must resolve to fight against
all those Spiritual Wickednesses in our selves which he infects the Humane
Nature with; such as Pride, Anger, Envy, Treachery, Lying, Malice and Cruelty.
Must abhor to imitate or follow him in the tempting of others to Wickedness;
or in the Hatred and Persecution of Good Men, for the sake of their Goodness.

We must also Renounce the Pomp and Vanities of this wicked World, and all
covetous Desires of the same: That is, We must resolve and engage, that we will
not let the Love of the World rule in our Hearts, which is opposite to the Love
of God. We will not let our Hearts fix on the Wealth, the Pleasures, or the
Dignities and Honors here below: Nor will make the getting of them the Aim and
Scope of our chief Endeavor and Care; nor let the Enjoyment of them be our
chiefest Delight and Satisfaction. That we will not be guided by the Customs of
the World, nor follow a Multitude to do Evil: That our dearest Relations, or
our most necessary and most useful Friends and Benefactours shall not be able
to Influence us against the Will of God and the Dictates of our Conscience:
That we will be ready to part with all that is dear, all that is necessary to
us, and which we might otherwise lawfully keep and enjoy when they stand in
Competition with our Love and Duty to God. And we will submit to any
Inconveniences in the want even of necessary things, rather than do any thing
to gain them, which is contrary to the Laws of Divine Love.

We must further renounce, mortify, and abandon all sinful Desires of the
Flesh: All the irregular and disobedient Inclinations of our corrupt Nature
must be mortified and subdued. We must chase away those fleshly Lusts which war
against the Soul; the Love of slothful Ease and Idleness, all Intemperance and
Lasciviousness. We must forsake and abstain from all those Sensual Sins, which
abuse and prodigally waste God's good Creatures; which enslave the Thoughts and
Faculties of the Soul to the Appetites of the Body; and which render the Soul
unfit for the due Exercises and Operations of its Faculties; and which tend to
clog and encumber the Body with Diseases. We must renounce all these three
Sources of Evil, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and must resolve we will
not follow nor be led by them. And this is the First main Branch of our Duty
under the New Covenant.

The Second is this: That we must believe all the Articles of the Christian
Faith. And this requires of us to promise and perform the Things following:
That we will seriously apply our selves, as our leisure and opportunity will
allow us, to make the best Improvement that we can of the Means of Divine
Knowledge which the Providence of God affords us; that so we may gain as much
of that inestimable Treasure as we can: That we will not through Negligence or
Hatred of the Truth be ignorant of any important revealed Truth: That whatever
does appear to us to be revealed from God concerning Himself and our Way to
Happiness, we will receive it as certain truth: Because it comes from Him, who
is Infinite Wisdom, and cannot be deceived; and is a God of Truth, and
therefore cannot deceive.

These Articles of our Faith are summarily comprehended in that Form of sound
Doctrine, which is commonly called the Apostle's Creed; among which these are
chief ones. That we believe in God the Father, who has made us and all the
World. That we believe in God the Son, who has redeemed us and all Mankind;
which implies these things: We must believe that all Mankind are guilty before
God, and obnoxious to his Eternal Wrath and Punishment. That Jesus Christ, the
Son of God, died as a Sacrifice for the Sins of Men: That He submitted to an
accursed Death as the Punishment of Sin in our stead, and to excuse us from
suffering it for ever: That his Death is accepted with the Father as an
Atonement for Sin, and shall redound to the advantage of all those who repent
and believe on Him: Who being heartily sorry for their Sins, and fallen out
with them, do forsake them, and turn to God; and do expect and rely upon the
Merit of his Death, to find favor with God. We must believe, that as Jesus
Christ died for our Sins, so He rose again for our Justification: Having made a
full Atonement, He was released from the Bonds of Death; and is ascended into
Heaven; and that He ever lives there to make Intercession for us; that is, to
obtain and bestow upon wretched Mankind all the Blessed Benefits which his
Death has purchased for them. And we must believe in God the Holy Ghost, who
graciously applies all those Blessings to us, and who sanctifies us and all the
Elect People of God.

Further we also are bound and required to make our open profession of the
Religion contained in these Articles; and to own it to the World, that we are
and will be the Worshippers of the one only true and living God, by one
Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. And we must choose rather
to suffer any loss, or to die, than to renounce or deny our Faith. And we are
bound also to lead a Life suitable to these Articles of Faith, to let them
govern our Conversations as they ought to do: And our Faith must work or
operate in the Exercises of Love. This is the Second main Branch of our Duty
under the New Covenant.

The Third is this: That we must Engage and Endeavor to keep God's Holy Will
and Commandments, and to walk in the same all the Days of our Life. And this
obliges us to the Things following. That we will diligently study and learn the
Will of God, as it is expressed in the Laws which He has given us; will not
cavil nor dispute against our Duty, when we should perform it; will endeavor
to know our Duty, that we may do it. That we will love his Law, and it shall be
our constant Aim and Endeavor to conform to it in all things: We absolutely
bind our selves, and are bound to live in no wilful known and presumptuous
Sin. That we will not deliberately and knowingly trespass against any Law of
God. This Covenant indeed does not require of us to perform a perfect
Obedience; for that is a thing now above our Power: But it binds us to
endeavor a perfect Obedience; that is, Not to be willingly guilty of any known
Sin. There is, alas, no mere Man now that can constantly and perfectly keep the
whole Law of God, but in many Things we offend all. And it is one Blessing of
the New Covenant, that it pardons Sins (as we shall see presently) which
supposes defects in our best Obedience. Therefore also our Savior has taught
us to pray as daily for the Pardon of Sin, as for our daily Bread. But this
Covenant bears with none but involuntary Sins; such as we commit through
Ignorance or Surprise, and, for want of Consideration, on a sudden; when our
Ignorance and Inconsideration are not wilful, nor due to the neglect of our
selves. And as for known, wilful and presumptuous Sins, and such as are
deliberately committed; They put us out of this Covenant, and lose us all right
to the Favors and Blessings of it, till they are bitterly repented of, and
utterly forsaken.

Thus much we must heartily and sincerely bind and engage our selves to do; and
this is our part of the New Covenant. This is also called the Covenant of Grace
or Favor; And we may see that it has justly that Name, in that it admits of
Repentance for Sin, and accepts of that poor imperfect Obedience, which is all
that we can now perform: And we shall see that Name further justified, in that
it will appear to be one of the Blessings and Favors of it, that it affords us
strength to perform our Duty.

SECT. VIII. On God's Part.
AND now I come to represent and show what are the Favors and Blessings, or
God's Part, of this New Covenant. What He offers, and promises, and will
bestow, upon our Performance of the Duties and Conditions required of us. And
these may be comprehended under these Three rich and important Heads.

The First is a full and free Pardon of all our Sins. God will blot our
Iniquities, as it were, out of his Remembrance; will forget that we were
Sinners, and will treat us as Righteous: Will lay aside his most just Wrath
against us, and embrace us with Arms of Mercy and Love. He that might most
Righteously have destroyed us with an Everlasting Destruction, will rejoice
over us to do us good. He will pardon our most numerous Sins; will pardon the
greatest Offenses; will pardon even our known, wilful and deliberate Sins, and
our customs of Sinning upon our repentance and forsaking of them. And a general
Repentance and a humble Behavior toward God, will obtain the Pardon of those
Infirmities and Involuntary Sins which we do not observe our selves to be
guilty of, and cannot be perfectly free from. And having thus pardoned our
Sins, the Course of Mercy is free; all Obstruction of it is removed, and we may
address to God with Boldness in the Name of Jesus Christ, as to a reconciled
Father; and believe Him ready to afford us all that is necessary to our
Salvation.

The next Favor and Blessing of this Covenant is, The restoring of the Divine
Image in us in our Sanctification. If upon the proposal of this Covenant to us
we do accept of it, and are willing to yield to the Conditions it requires, and
to give up our selves to a Life of Holiness and Righteousness according to the
Laws of God: He will give us Spiritual strength to perform our Duty so far, as
that we shall be accepted through the Mediation of Jesus Christ. If we will not
undertake, we shall not be able to perform; but if we will undertake, and bind
our selves to do our Duty, He will enable us to perform it. It might seem a
strange thing that God should require of us to bind our selves, and undertake
to do that which we cannot do of our selves, (as we do in obliging our selves
to all those things forementioned,) if it were not that the very binding our
selves to this does entitle us by the Tenor of this Covenant to Grace
sufficient for us. In all the Exhortations of the Gospel to any Instance of
Duty, we may reckon there is comprehended also the Offer of Divine Assistance,
which shall be afforded to. Him who yields, in the purpose, and desire of his
Soul, to comply with those Exhortations. No Man therefore shall have ground to
complain, that he would leave his known Sins, and do the Duties which he knows
he omits, but cannot do so: For if a Man sincerely desires to leave his Sins,
devotes himself to his Duty, and diligently uses the Means that may enable him
to do it: That is, If he waits on God for this Grace in earnest and persevering
Prayer, and a due attendance on the Preaching of the Word and the Sacraments,
that Man shall infallibly come to be able to do what he thus wills and desires.
For, He that hungers and thirsts after Righteousness, shall be filled, as our
Savior says; And God, will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him. It is
the Favor of this New Covenant to help us to do what it requires us to do.

The last Favor and Blessing of this Covenant, is an Everlasting Happiness
both of Body and Soul in Heaven. We are left by it indeed subject to a natural
Death; to mind us of our guilty Rebellion against God: That we may not forget
we are Sinners, and do deserve an Eternal Death: On purpose that the sense of
this might quicken our desire and concern to recover the Divine Favor, and
make us the more ready and willing to submit to the Terms of recovering it. But
Death shall not long have Dominion over us: God will not leave the Soul in
Hell; that is, it shall not be always separated from the Body; nor shall the
Body be always subject to the Ignominy and Punishment of its Dissolution. Since
the Sins are pardoned which did deserve Death, the Creature shall be released
from it: And our Savior's Resurrection from the Dead does especially assure
the Resurrection of those that believe on Him. He has also promised that he
will give them Eternal life, and raise them up again at the last day. The Body,
then, however scattered and dispersed, and lost to all knowledge of Men, shall
be gathered together by the Wisdom of God, and be raised to Life by his
Almighty Power: And it shall be raised with great advantage: It was sown a
Natural Body, it shall be raised a Spiritual Body; It was sown in Corruption,
but it shall be raised Immortal. And the Soul shall be again united to it,
never to be separated more: But both shall be taken up to dwell in a glorious
happy place, where is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore: To live in
the Fellowship and Communion of kind, happy, and glorious Angels: To dwell in
the Presence of God, and contemplate, and praise, and love Him, and rejoice in
his Love for ever.

This is now the whole Tenor of the New Covenant, which was procured for us by
the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, our kind and powerful Advocate.

SECT. IX. The Sacraments of This Covenant.
AND this Covenant also has its Sacraments. God has appointed sensible Actions
and Signs in and by which it is to be made between Him and us. In the use of
these Sacraments we must testify our Consent to this Covenant, and signify,
that we own our selves engaged in it. And in the use of these must we wait for
and expect the Blessings and Favors on God's part to be afforded us. It is by
these that He has determined to convey those Favors which we can at present
receive; which are the Pardon of our Sins, and the Sanctification of our
Natures; and also to assure that which we are to hope for, our Everlasting
Happiness and Glory. These we must necessarily use, then, if Means and
Opportunity be afforded us to do so, that we may be partakers of his Favors:
And in using them, we must sincerely purpose and bind our selves to the
performance of our Duty. The Sacraments appointed to be, as we may say, The
Instruments of this Covenant since the coming of Christ, which are all that
nearly concern us, are Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. These, and these
only are now generally necessary to Salvation.

By Baptism we are admitted into this Covenant, and make our first solemn
acceptance of it. By the Lord's Supper we renew it, if it has been broken on
our part by any wilful Sin committed since we were Baptized: Or else we
therein testify and declare our continuance still in it, and our purpose and
desire to do so; If any of us have lived so happily since we were Baptized, as
never to violate or break this Covenant by any wilful known Sin.

It is true, when we are Baptized in our Infancy, we are not capable expressly
to intend and design the performance of our part in this Covenant; because we
cannot then understand or know it. But this Sacrament is in the purpose of God
designed for the Sacrament of our admission into this Covenant, since the
Appearance of Jesus Christ in the World. And as that which was the Sacrament of
this admission under the Jewish Dispensation was by God's appointment
administered to Children at Eight days old; so the Christian Church has been
wont, even from the Apostles times, to administer Baptism to Infants, from
whence it is not to be doubted but they learnt to do this from the Apostles
themselves: And our Savior gives a plain Encouragement to the practice, when
he says, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of
such is the Kingdom of God. Our Church therefore, as without doubt it ought to
do, administers Baptism to Infants, that they may partake of the Blessings of
the New Covenant to their Salvation.

But because there is an engagement on the part of the Baptized person implied
in his receiving Baptism; the Wisdom and Piety of the Church has thought fit
that it should be expressed too: That so the Baptized person may be the better
convinced afterward, that he did thus engage himself at his Baptism. And
because the Infant it self cannot express this, the Church has provided, that
some Christian Friends should do it for us, who are also Witnesses that the
thing is done: And they are bound to take care, that as we grow up to the Use
of our Reason, we may grow also in the Knowledge of our part in this Covenant,
and may come to Understand what we are bound to.

And that the Baptized person himself may ratify and confirm his Baptismal
Engagement, he must, when he can exercise his Reason, and know his part of this
Covenant, readily choose and consent to it, and solemnly renew it; And so he
must make it his own Act and Deed to devote himself to God. This our Church has
very justly ordered should be solemnly and publicly done in the receiving of
Confirmation. A thing, alas, too much neglected, to the great decay of true
Christian Piety among us: But if this were duly and generally practiced, we
should in all likelihood see more persons live according to their Baptismal
Vow, and as becomes Christians, than commonly do.

But this Discourse is designed chiefly to bring Men prepared to the Lord's
Supper, that they may worthily and profitably Receive that; And therefore it
must not be diverted so as to insist long on any other Subject but what is
necessary and serviceable to that design and end of it.

SECT. X. The Lord's Supper a Confirmation of this Covenant.
I Shall now therefore bring the Discourse more close to this Sacrament, of the
Lord's Supper, which has been all this while leading and aiming toward it. And
I shall begin to discourse particularly of that, by showing, That it is
appointed and designed by God as a Faederal Rite, and is to be used as such by
us; As a Ceremony wherein this New Covenant between God and Man is renewed and
confirmed. This, by a little search, we shall soon find to be very Evident in
Holy Scripture.

Our Savior Himself, when He first instituted this Sacrament, speaks thus of
it, as He was delivering the Cup to his Disciples, This Cup is the New Covenant
in my Blood, Luke 22. 20. For what our Translation renders Testament there, had
been more exactly and properly rendered Covenant. Our Savior's plain meaning
is this: Take this Cup as the Instrument of Conveyance to you of the Divine
Blessings of the Covenant of Grace, which are the inestimable Purchases of my
precious Blood. Again, when our Lord says of the Bread in this Sacrament, This
is my Body which is given for you; and of the Cup, This is my Blood of the New
Covenant which is shed for many for the Remission of their Sins: He plainly
means, That this Sacrament is intended to renew to us the Blessings and
Favors, which are the Purchases of his meritorious Death, and his Sacrifice
which He offered to God in Dying for us. And the Apostle Paul plainly teaches
us to understand our Lord thus; For He says of the Bread in this Sacrament, It
is the Communion of the Body of Christ; and of the Cup, It is the Communion of
the Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16. By Communion, he means the Communication of
these. It is faithfully intended by God, that in the Use of this Sacrament,
those who are fit Receivers, shall partake of the Body and Blood of Christ; and
this Bread and this Cup shall be the Communication of the Body and Blood of
Christ to them: These outward Elements of broken Bread, and Wine poured out,
shall bring with them, to those humble and prepared Souls which receive them,
this Spiritual Grace: Which means they shall be partakers of the Benefits and
Blessings purchased by the breaking or wounding of the Body, and the shedding
of the Blood of our Savior, the Blessings procured by the valuable Sacrifice
of his Death; which are the Blessings of the New Covenant forementioned.

This Sacrament is Ordained of God to be a Pledge and Conveyance of these
Blessings, and shall actually and infallibly be so to meet Receivers: God will
never be wanting to his Sacraments, nor leave them without the Efficacy He
designs them for, if the Receivers of them be not wanting to themselves. He
faithfully intends the Renewal and Confirmation of this Covenant with us in
this Sacrament, and will actually do it if we sincerely intend the same thing.

And that the Renewal of our part of the Covenant at this Sacrament is expected
and required by God, cannot choose but be very easily apprehended. When God
offers good things upon Terms and Conditions, He requires the binding our
selves to perform those Conditions, if we would partake of those Good Things;
and our embracing the Offers He makes, implies, and ought to imply, the
accepting of those Terms, and the engaging our selves to perform those
Conditions. To be sure God never intends we shall be partakers of those Good
Things, without performing those Conditions. When it is said, God gives the Holy
Spirit to them that ask him, it is implied that asking is the necessary
Condition and Means of having; When it is said, God gave his only begotten Son,
that they who believe in Him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life; It Is
required that Men believe as a Condition of their obtaining Everlasting Life.
So when it is said, Jesus Christ is the Author of Salvation to them that obey
Him; and, Repent, that your Sins may be blotted out: These things evidently
imply, that our Sins shall not be forgiven, unless we repent of them; nor will
the Blessed Jesus Himself be a Savior to us, if we do not devote our selves to
his Service, and give up our selves to follow his Example and Conduct. Now this
being the constant Tenor of the Gospel; We must needs conclude, that when we
are offered to be made partakers of these Blessings in this Sacrament, it is
required, that if we desire them, we must bind our selves to perform such
Conditions.

Our receiving therefore of those things which are God's Pledges and
Conveyances of those Blessings upon Conditions, is an outward profession and
declaration that we bind our selves to do what is required of us: And if that
outward Profession be not attended with an inward and sincere Intention, it is
a horrid Hypocrisy, and makes a Man undoubtedly guilty of the Body and Blood
of Christ: He is reckoned to have abused and profaned the Body and Blood of
Christ, as did the wretched Men that slew Him. The receiving these Elements in
the Sacrament is an Outward Profession and Declaration that we accept of God's
Covenant, and then it certainly binds us sincerely to intend our performance of
the Conditions of it

The Apostle plainly gives us this Instruction in 1 Cor. 10 in that he
intimates the partaking of this Sacrament to be a Rite of the same Nature and
Signification with the Eating of the Sacrifices which had been offered to any
God. As the Eating of those Sacrifices therefore signified the Owning Him for
God, to whom the Sacrifice had been made, and so the obliging of themselves to
worship and obey Him; and the reliance upon that Sacrifice to find Favor and
obtain a Blessing from Him; so the Eating of the Lord's Supper must be reckoned
to imply and declare the same Professions and Engagements. This is the Eating
of a Sacrifice made to God, even the great Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of
Christ; and therefore must be attended with Faith or a reliance upon that
Sacrifice to find favor with Him; the Owning Him to be God, and the binding
our selves to Honor, Love and Obey Him. For this reason it is that the Apostle
forbids in that Chapter those who would partake of this Sacrament the eating of
any Feasts upon Sacrifices which had been offered to the Heathen Idols; which
Sacrifices he says were offered to Devils: Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord
and the Cup of Devils; Ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's Table and of the
Table of Devils; says He, v. 21. Ye cannot, may mean it is impossible you should
sincerely intend what is signified by both these things; that is, the owning
the true God as God, and the owning those Devils as Gods, for in owning one,
you do imply the renouncing of the other. To be sure the True God requires, if
you own Him, that you do renounce all other. Or it must mean, You ought not to
do thus. If you partake of the Cup and Table of the Lord, you must sincerely
intend thereby the owning of Him; and then you must not so much as seem to own
those filthy Devils in eating of the Sacrifices which have been offered to
them: Therefore he adds in the 22d. Verse, That in doing thus, they did provoke
the Lord to jealousy; because they made a show and appearance of departing
from, and of renouncing of Him herein. The Apostle then plainly teaches us,
that in receiving this Sacrament, we do make a profession and show of Honoring
and Covenanting with God; and therefore that we ought really and sincerely to
intend it.

I might show that the Name of Sacrament was given to this Ordinance by the
first Christians, because they reckoned the Celebrating this Supper to signify
the Binding our selves to Serve and Honor, Love and Obey, and Trust in God; to
be His faithful Subjects and Servants. And so notorious was it, that they used
it as a Ceremony of Covenanting with God; that even the Heathens knew this, and
therefore one of them speaking of the Christian Assemblies in his time for
Worship (at which they always Celebrated this Sacrament) says; They met
together on a fixed Day before it was light (this was for fear of their
Enemies) and did there bind themselves by an Oath or Sacrament not to commit
any Thefts or Adulteries, not to betray any Trust, or deal deceitfully with
their Neighbor, and the like. They, then, took this Sacrament as an Engagement
to be of the Religion of Jesus, and so to perform the Terms and Conditions of
the New Covenant: We therefore must, when we receive it, sincerely intend the
Confirmation of that Covenant.

SECT. XI. An Earnest Persuasive to come to the Lord's Supper.
I Shall now insist a little upon an Earnest Persuasive to the frequent
attendance upon this Sacrament, which the woeful and deplorable Neglect of
these times, and the sad Consequences of that Neglect, do make but too
necessary.

Let all Men know then, that when they are come to years, and are capable to
know and to renew their Vow and Covenant which they made in Baptism, they are
Commanded by our Lord Jesus Christ in this way to renew and confirm it. They
are indispensably bound to receive this Sacrament in Confirmation of that
Covenant. No Man is left at liberty whether he will receive this Sacrament or
not; but if the Providence of God affords him Means and Opportunity to do so,
he is bound to prepare himself for, and receive it. If a Man at any time
neglects to prepare himself for it, and is therefore unfit, and absents himself
because he is unfit, in that Case he will be judged to have neglected the
Sacrament it self. He that does not endeavor to be prepared, and to receive it
as often as Opportunity is afforded him to do it in that Congregation of
Christians, which the Order of the Church and Obedience to the Governors of it
does oblige him to join with; He does so often neglect and refuse it, as he
thus absents himself from it. But the neglect and refusal of this, we must
know, is the neglect and refusal of the incomparable Blessings of the New
Covenant; of having the Pardon of our Sins renewed and sealed; the Blessed
Influences of the Holy Spirit renewed upon us; and our Title confirmed to
Everlasting Blessedness, and our Hopes of it increased and strengthened; it is to
neglect our own Interest, and to provoke the Displeasure of God, more than by
any other Sins, in neglecting the Offers of his Grace and Mercy.

Let all those who never mind this Sacrament, nor do ever prepare themselves
for it, nor receive it, know, That they do therein intimate the renouncing of
their Covenant with God, and do cut themselves off from all hopes and
expectations of the Favors and Blessings of the Covenant of Grace, till they
repent of this guilty Omission of their Duty, and so come to this Sacrament
prepared for it. Oh wretched Creatures, they choose to remain in a state of
Damnation. To be sure a Man that has contradicted his Covenant, since he was
Baptized, by living in any wilful Sin; if that Man does not resolve to forsake
his Sin, and come to this Sacrament, and hereby bind himself to his Duty, he
will be, in the sight of God, accounted to renounce his Christianity, to deny
the Lord that bought him, to trample upon the Blood of the Covenant; the Blood
of Christ, and to despise his Dying Love: And as such a Man must inevitably
perish, so he will fall under the heaviest and the sorest Perdition.

Whatever pretended Wishes a Man may have to forsake his Sins, whatever
Regret and Remorse for them, and whatever Resolutions he makes to forsake
them, they will not be accepted with God, nor bring him into a Title to the
Favor of this Covenant, if he has opportunity and means to partake of this
Sacrament, and refuses to do it: Because it is in and by this Sacrament that God
expects and requires the renewal of this Covenant after we have broken it: Our
Repentance is not completed according to the Will of God till this is done, if
he affords us means and opportunity to do this. We are not allowed to expect
that He will accept our Resolutions and Vows in any other way presented to Him,
when He has appointed us this way of presenting them.

Besides, Is it not a wonderful thing that Men should forget that this
Sacrament is appointed by God as the means to convey to them the strength to
perform their good Vows and Resolutions? And then he that neglects this
Sacrament, lays himself under the Power and Tyranny of his Sins, and neglects
the mighty Help which Heaven kindly affords Him against it: And He binds upon
Himself the guilt of all his Sins, and as it were seals Himself to Damnation in
refusing and neglecting this Ordinance, whereby He might be sealed to the Day
of Redemption.

Let all Men know, that the wilful neglect and refusal of this Sacrament is a
damnable Sin of Omission, and puts every Man that is guilty of it out of a
state of Grace and Salvation: And they that neglect to come to this Ordinance,
when it is prepared for them, may very justly fear that God will not bless any
other to them* For what ground have they to think he will bless one of his
Ordinances to them, while they neglect another, or let them obtain by Prayer
and Hearing the Word what he has Commanded them to use this Sacrament for, too,
that they might obtain it; And then they that live in neglect of this, are in
great danger never to be saved by any other means of Salvation.

Men may perhaps think themselves very good if they keep their Church, attend
the public Prayers, and sometimes hear, sometimes sleep away a Sermon: But if
they neglect this Sacrament, they must expect God will reject all their other
performances: He that breaks the Law in one point, the Scripture says, is
guilty of all; And then he that neglects his Obedience to any one of God's
Commands knowingly and wilfully, will be looked upon and treated by Almighty God
as if he fulfilled none of them. Oh that Men would seriously lay these things
to Heart, and consider the terrible Danger which they put themselves into by
this Neglect!

Let us be assured, that whatever it is that hinders us from preparing our
selves, and coming to this Sacrament, it is a Snare and Temptation of the
Devil, the great Adversary of our Souls: Who knows the great and saving
Efficacy of this Sacrament, and therefore would not have Men use it: Who knows,
that if we seriously and frequently attend upon this Means of our Salvation, he
must despair of ever accomplishing our Destruction. Oh let us defeat the
malicious design of our Enemy, and resist all Suggestions that would beat us
off from this practice.

Let us consider how kindly and lovingly the Lord Jesus, the great Lover of
Souls, invites us to it: Come unto me, says he, all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. Let us not give him cause to complain of us,
and say, Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have Life. Let us consider
what noble and inviting Entertainment he has provided for us at this Heavenly
Feast: He designs to entertain us with assurances of his Love, with the Divine
Influences of his Holy Spirit, with the joyful pledges and fore-tasts of
Heaven; and is this what is but fit to be despised! Consider at what a costly
rate and price He has provided us this Entertainment! Even at the price of his
own cruel Sufferings, and bitter Death, and of his most precious Blood. If we
love our Souls then, and have any concern for their Salvation, let us prepare
our selves and come to this Sacrament as often as we can: If we have any true
Love to the Lord Jesus, our best Friend, our kind Savior, who loved us and
laid down his Life for us; Let us earnestly desire and seek the Purchases of
his Blood, and seek to be made partakers of them in that way in which he has
appointed us to do so; as we shall certainly do, if we really and sincerely
desire them.

I must not insist too long upon this matter. If what I have said cannot
persuade any unwilling Soul to prepare and come to this Sacrament; I would wish
that I could but obtain so much of such an one, as to read and consider a short
Discourse to this purpose, written by His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury,
called, A Persuasive to frequent Communion. There he should see the most subtle
Insinuations which the Adversary can suggest to withold him from his Interest
and Duty, in this Case utterly baffled and confuted. And, as there is reason to
believe that Discourse has prevailed upon many, so there is reason to expect
both from that success, and from the strength of it, that none can consider it
well, but it must prevail with him.

SECT. XII. Of Fitness to come to this Sacrament.
BUT the common pretense and excuse that hinders Men from coming to this
Sacrament, is, That they are not fit for it: And they are afraid of Eating and
Drinking unworthily, and of incurring their own Damnation thereby. It is
therefore the design of this little Book to show what Fitness is requisite for
a worthy and profitable Receiving of this Sacrament; and to help Men to that
Fitness by the Blessing of God; which they shall not fail to obtain of Him by
Earnest Prayer, and the serious and frequent perusal of what is here presented.

And since in Celebrating this Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, we are to renew and confirm this Covenant which we have been
speaking of between God and us; This will abundantly direct us what Preparation
and Fitness is requisite, that we may be meet Partakers of it to our profit and
comfort. And it is necessary that we know what the Terms and Conditions of it
are which God requires to be performed on our parts, and what it offers and
promises on God's part. This matter therefore has been already for that reason
distinctly and somewhat particularly represented.

In the next place we must unfeignedly and sincerely choose and lay hold on this
Covenant; It must be the hearty desire, the sincere purpose of our Souls to be
engaged in it; To be bound in these happy Bonds which set our Souls at liberty
from the Bonds of Sin and Death: We must desire the Blessings, and seek the
Favors of it, and readily accept and submit to the Terms and Conditions; and
declare, that we will expect our Salvation upon those Terms.

And also we must, certainly, be very thankful to the Son of God at this
Memorial of his Death, since He became the Mediator of this Covenant, and has
by his Death procured the favor of new Terms of Salvation, and the Offer of
Peace and Reconcilement with God upon so gentle and easy terms.

And he who has that Knowledge of this Covenant, and this good disposition of
Mind thereupon, that Man is fit for this Sacrament; and if he comes, he shall
be a welcome Guest at the Lord's Table. Now as I have represented the Knowledge
necessary to this, I shall go on to represent also more particularly the good
Disposition of Mind which we ought to come with. And I shall represent this in
such a way, as will be fit to form it in Men where it is not; or to excite and
actuate it, and set it into Exercise where it is. I shall represent it in the
following Acts or Exercises of it: Which you may take notice are a lively
Description of a very meet Receiver of this Sacrament. So that he who would
become fit for this Sacrament, must read and meditate on those things, till he
finds those Dispositions and Affections raised in him which are therein
expressed. And he that would know or find himself fit for this Sacrament, must
examine himself by them, and see whether they represent the state and
disposition of his Mind or not: And if a Man be habitually possessed with such
a good state of Mind, as these things will be, I believe, very agreeable to
him, so they will be of use to stir up that disposition into Exercise, and to
an actual Fitness for this Sacrament; As Fire is wont to kindle Fire in matter
that is apt, and disposed to receive it. Further, He that would behave himself
rightly and duly at the Sacrament to his Comfort and Benefit, as he must have
his Mind then filled with such Thoughts and Affections as are here represented,
so the reading of these things there, if he has leisure, will be useful to
possess him with such Thoughts and Affections. And lastly, He that would
maintain the good disposition of Mind which he has at the Sacrament, may very
profitably, for that purpose, read and meditate on these things afterward:
Which will be as useful to cherish and maintain, yea, and to improve in us
this disposition of Mind, as they are to form it. All this use, I dare pretend,
may be made of these Exercises following.

SECT. XIII. An Exercise of Thankful Remembrance of the Death of Jesus Christ.
LOrd, I am not worthy to live, if I do not always remember the exceeding great
Love of my Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ in dying for me; and if I do not
most affectionately consider and observe the many incomparable Benefits, which
by his precious Blood shed, he has obtained for Sinners. My Soul; That thou
may know, in some measure, the wondrous height, the breadth, the depth, the
length of the Love of God in Christ Jesus: That thou may entertain the
larger Apprehensions of that Love, which exceeds all finite Knowledge; Thou
must enlarge thy Thoughts, and take in all thou can of these Dimensions of
it. Consider what a Depth of Wretchedness and Misery Jesus rescues poor lost
Mankind from! Consider what a glorious Height of Honor and Happiness he
designs to advance them to! Consider who the Excellent Person is that has done
all this for us! Consider what it cost Him to procure for us such a Redemption!
Behold the most amazing, but the most pleasing Prospect in the World! Redeeming
Love! Dwell in the Contemplation of this; for surely it is good to be here!

As for the Condition into which thou were sunk, It was the vilest and the most
miserable that a Creature could fall into: It was perfectly miserable, for thou
had utterly lost the Favor of thy Maker, the Fountain-Good, and forfeited
all Right, and lost all Hopes of ever being Happy: Thou were become a vile
Sinner, odious to the Pure and Holy God; and were as contemptible as miserable:
Thou were obnoxious to the Eternal Wrath and just Vengeance of the Almighty:
Thou did deserve to be thrown into the deep Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where
is Eternal Woe and Sorrow, Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth; where the Wrath of
God burns for ever, and the Fire will never be quenched: from whence there
shall be no returning. Where wretched Creatures are Furies to themselves, and
more than double all the Torments of Hell with this tormenting Thought, that
they must all endure for ever: They will know no intermission or respite; they
will never come to an End. This is the sad portion of Sinners; And this must
all Mankind, after a few complaining days, spent in this low mortal Life, have
been thrown into; And there was no Creature in Heaven or Earth could possibly
have prevented this Doom; no, it could never have been avoided if Jesus had not
concerned himself to help us. And he has taken away the necessity of our
Destruction; has rendered this Woe and Misery now an avoidable Thing! Is not
this a glorious Benefit?

Look down, my Soul, in serious Thoughts into that horrid Dungeon and Lake of
Fire; Imagine, as thou may well, that many wretched Souls are already
plunged into it, who squandered away the day of Life, the precious time allowed
them of making their peace with God, and to avoid these Miseries; Think thou
see them wallowing in Flames, pierced through with Fire, and in all parts
themselves on a Flame! And be sure, if thou could hear them, thou should
hear the most dismal Howlings, bitter Complaints; some cursing the day that
ever they were born, and all, at times, cursing themselves as causes of their
own ruin. And think now if one of these despairing Souls should have an Angel
sent to it, that should open the Prison-doors and let him out, and send him
into this World again to be in a condition and possibility of avoiding all this
misery, would he not account this a wonderful Favor! Such as he could never
praise enough: Such as could never be worthily requited: It is, in truth, not
less than this that thou art beholden to the Love of Jesus for: It is not a
less favor to be kept from this misery, than to be delivered from it into the
state wherein now thou art.

And thou art kept from this by the tender, compassionate, and most patient
Love of Jesus! Long ago, if thou had suffered thy deserts, thou had been
thrown into this misery: Long ago have thy Sins deserved it: It is of the
Lord's Mercy that thou art not consumed. Jesus has reprieved thee by His
powerful Intercession: He has procured that thou art hitherto spared; yea, he
has procured that thou may, if thou will, be pardoned; and may for ever
be exempted from enduring these intolerable Miseries. Oh, how much art thou
obliged! Say how useful, how necessary, how great is your Redeemer's Love! Oh,
what Love, what Praise can reach it! Oh, compassionate Love, how shall I find
Expressions suitable to thy kindness! Why was my Life so dear to thee! Why have
thou not suffered me to perish! Me, who am as unworthy of thy Favor, as I am
in distress, and the need of it!

And does this engage thy Wonder so much, my Soul? It may indeed well do so;
but this alone must not detain it: There are yet more Occasions for thy
admiration and praise in the Redeemer's Love! And this thou will see, if thou
consider what a glorious Height of Honor and Happiness He designs to advance
poor, vile, contemptible Sinners to. Those that have rendered themselves
unworthy of this Earth, and even of this low, mortal Life, he intends to
advance them to Heaven, and give them an Eternal Life. Those that are unworthy
of any thing that is good and comfortable, He intends to make them perfectly
Happy. Those that deserve the utmost contempt of their Maker; that are fallen
under the Insults and Scorn of the abject Devils, He intends for the Honor of
seeing God, and dwelling in His blissfull Presence for ever. Oh rich and
bounteous Love! Nothing less will serve him, but that where He is, we also
should be. Think, my Soul, if thou can, what Heaven is.

Think of a bright and glorious Place, where this Sun would be ashamed, and
even disappear, as now the Stars do at his rising. Think of an innumerable
Company of glorious Creatures, each of them more bright than He. Think thou
see them all in Joy, all ravished and transported with Pleasure, and thy self
among them partaking of that Joy and Pleasure. Think thou were now in the
Presence of the Fountain-Good, receiving immediately from Himself the
Testimonies and Communications of Infinite Love! That thou were there, where no
Fear or Sorrow can ever come! Where the Joy is pure without allay! Where the
Pleasure is solid and abiding, not likely to leave thee in discontent and
distaste! Where the Joy and Pleasure shall never End! Oh, how glad would thou
be to find thy self there! Thou may believe it is not possible for thy Heart
now to conceive the mighty Joy, which would possess thee: And to this
Happiness, even to this, does the Redeemer's Love design to bring thee. He
would have thee attain this Happiness: He offers it thee on gentle terms: He
offers to guide and help thee thither, if thou will but give up thy self to his
kind and gracious Conduct. And is not this amazing and obliging Love!

All the Joy and Happiness of Heaven may be my Eternal Portion if I will; and
shall be so if I am not wanting to my self. Jesus has not been, nor will be
wanting to do all that in Him lies to bring me to it. He does not grudge me the
highest Bliss that my Nature is capable to attain, or that my own kindest
Wishes to my self can desire. He loves me, then, as much as I can love my self,
and is willing to make me as Happy as I can desire to be; and more Happy than I
can conceive or imagine. Such is the Love of Jesus to a Wretch that deserves
only his Hatred and Contempt.

But do thou know, my Soul? Can thou think who the Person is that has done
these great Things for thee? I am sure, if thou had not been told, thou
could never have imagined it. Infinite Love indeed might be supposed to be
in the Son of God; but He has Infinite Greatness, Majesty and Glory too; He is
exalted so far above us, that it were even Infinite Condescension for him to
regard or concern himself about the Misery which such low things as we had
pulled upon our selves. Besides, He is infinitely pure and Holy too, and has an
Eternal Hatred of all Sin and Wickedness; and we became miserable by our Sin.
And He loves the Father with an Infinite Love; and He made Mankind to Love, and
Honor, and Praise the Father; but they have forsaken the End of their Being,
and turned to Hate, and despise even the Good and Glorious God. And could it be
imagined, that ever such Persons should be Redeemed, then, by the Son of God?

But be astonished, Oh ye Heavens! Sing Praises, Oh ye glorious Hosts of Angels!
Produce your loftiest Hymns, and help! Oh help poor feeble Mortals to praise
the Son of God! For it was He that became our Mediator: He took upon Him the
kind Office of being our Savior: It was the Son of God that did us this
kindness; The Eternal, the Onely-begotten Son of God; Who is the express Image
of the Father's Person, and the brightness of his Glory. This Person, my Soul,
whom thou must own to be the true and eternal God, by whom the Worlds were
made; who sustains all things; who is the Glory of Heaven, and the Stability of
Earth; who is Incomprehensible in his Greatness; and, to be sure, Mighty to
save, is He who regarded us in our vile Misery, and most despicable Condition.

Who pitied us in the Misery which we had madly pulled upon our selves which we
had deeply deserved! Who loved Sinners, the most hateful things that are! Oh
the wonder! that He should retain Kindness, and think Thoughts of Love toward
us after the abuse of great Creating Love! To us who are altogether
unprofitable to Him! Whose Happiness is not at all necessary, nor can make any
addition to his! He had been Eternally happy if all we had been for ever lost
and miserable, yet he would not see us lost. He afforded his Help, when all
other help utterly failed us, and we must have perished, if He had not helped
us.

But go on, my Soul, for the Way is still pleasant, and strow'd with new and
various Delights; and consider too, in what Way and Method this Glorious Person
the Son of God accomplished this great Salvation: What He undertook to do, and
what to suffer, that He might save thee.

Thou must know, then, that this Excellent Person meditated and designed no
less Condescension, when He undertook to save thee, than to become Man for thy
sake. He intended it then, and in the fullness of time submitted to it. The Word
was made Flesh. The Son of God took a Humane Nature, and became the Son of
David: For he was born of a Virgin, who was of the House and Family of David: A
Royal Family indeed; but in this branch of it, at least, sunk into Poverty and
Contempt. He who made the Worlds, condescended to be made of a Woman! He who is
Lord of Life and Glory, became subject to the Law that obliges Creatures! He
whom the Angels account it their Honor to attend and worship, made Himself of
no Reputation, took upon Him the form of a Servant, and exposed Himself to the
Contempt and Scorn of Men. Oh Son of God, how could thou endure to live upon
this Earth so defiled with Sin! To converse with odious Sinners! We must needs
wonder, that when thou were in our guilty World, thou did not show thy
terrible Hatred and Resentment of the Sins of Men in sending Plagues and
Desolations about the Rebellious World. It is an amazement that thou should
here go about doing good! But this was thy constant practice: It was glorious
Love, Oh adorable Son of God, which brought thee down among us; and Love spoke
in every Word of thine; Love attended all thy steps; Love to Mankind was
exercised in all thy Actions. What exceeding Honor, Gracious Lord, have thou
done our mean Nature, in taking it into a Personal Union with thy self! Thus
have thou exalted it above the Angels, and abundantly vindicated it from the
contempt of Devils; Who first defiled, and then utterly despised it! So low and
mean is thy Condescension, and so glorious our Exaltation! Behold, my Soul, the
Son of God become our Brother! And as He is our Brother, He does exalt us to
become Sons of God, together with Him; and his Father becomes our Father. Oh,
what manner of Love is this, that we should be called the Sons of God!

But this is not all the Condescension of the Son of God to save Mankind; That
He took to Himself the Humane Nature: No; though this was much, yet He did
more; much more than this. He undertook to die a Sacrifice for the Sins of Men,
which, as God, he could not do; and therefore He became Man, that He might be
capable of Dying: And in Humbling, He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto
Death, even the Death of the Cross. And here, if ever, my Soul, thou will be
lost in Astonishment; In considering thy Savior's Love to Mankind: Thou will
surely despise all things beside: Thou will, like his Great Apostle and Lover,
be forced to value no Knowledge but that of Christ and Him Crucified; and to
account all things but dross and dung, that thou may gain an Interest in
this Love. That it may thus engage thee, consider now the Death which Jesus
underwent for thee.

Was it the Death of the Cross? Was my Savior crucified? And what a kind of
Death was this? His Enemies, the Unbelieving Jews, chose it for Him, and the
Heathenish Roman Soldiers executed it. And this Death was the vilest and the
most ignominious one in the account of the Romans; such as they put none to but
the most contemptible Abjects, and the bafest Malefactors. And this Death was,
in the account of the Jewish Law, an Accursed one: He was reckoned accursed of
God that was hanged on a Tree. But let me consider the Indignities, the
Contemptuous usage which attended my Savior's Death, and how painful and
afflicting it must needs have been to Him.

As soon as the Blessed Jesus was condemned to die, He was committed to rude
Soldiers, who made it their sport to injure and abuse Him. They stripped Him of
his Clothes, tied Him to a Pillar, and cruelly scourged Him on his naked Back.
Oh Jesu! I love and adore Thee, whom these Wretches thus vilely abused! I
grieve for thy Injuries, and am afflicted with thy Pain! After this, they
platted a Crown of Thorns, and forced it, to make it sit fast, upon his Head;
wounding and tearing thereby his Sacred Temples; And then, my Soul, had I been
there, I might have seen his own Blood running down, and disguising his Blessed
Face. Oh what a disguise of that Majesty and Meekness, of that venerable
sweetness; that awful Goodness which had always dwelt there! They then found
out some contemptible purple Garment, and put it on Him, and put a Reed in his
Hand to imitate a Scepter; and then mocked Him with bowing the Knee before Him,
and crying, Hail King of the Jews. And, to show how little Honor or Reverence
they intended Him in this, they most disdainfully spit in his Face, and
buffeted Him about among them from one to another: And, without doubt, he
thought himself the wittiest of the Company, who could devise the greatest
Affront. Thus was He injured and abused, who came into this World on the kind
design of saving lost Sinners: Thus was the King of Glory, the King, not of the
Jews only, but of Heaven and Earth, mocked and despised, by the vilest of Men.

When they had tired themselves with this Barbarous sport, and how much rather
Him? They put his own Clothes on Him again, and led Him away to Crucify Him.
And on Him they laid the heavy and ignominious Burden of his Cross, and he must
carry, a long way, the Instrument of his Shame and Death to the place of
Execution: But they had used him too ill before, to leave him still able to
carry so heavy a Load; and after He had hardly carried it a little way, He fell
under it I see, O Son of God, in this thy fainting under the Cross, a manifest
proof that thou did really take our Nature upon Thee, with the innocent
Infirmities of it: And I cannot choose but admire and praise so wondrous a
Condescension of the Almighty for our sakes. They who used Him so cruelly
before, I must needs imagine, did not exercise any Compassion to Him upon this
occasion. I abhor to think how inhumanely it is probable they used Him now. But
they laid at last the burden upon other. Shoulders; for now their Malice was in
haste to be rid of Him.

When He was come to the place of Crucifixion, they stripped Him of all his
Clothes, and exposed the fresh Wounds which the rude Scourge had given Him, to
the cold Air. They laid Him upon his Cross, and violently stretched out his
Arms, and then drove a great Nail through each Hand: Thus fastening to the
Transverse Beam of the Cross, those blessed Hands which had been used in the
working many a kind Miracle, but had never done any harm, and certainly
deserved a better Usage. Then they drove one or two great Nails through his
Feet, and fastened them to the Upright Beam of the Cross; Those Feet which had
carried Him diligently about upon his kind business in the World; which was to
seek and to save lost Sinners. This being done, they set the Cross upright,
that He might hang upon those Nails, drove through those very sensible parts of
his Body, in exquisite Pain and Torture, and exposed to the view and scorn of
the Spectatours: And many of these reviled, insulted over him, and derided him
here. It would even wound a Heart that has any tenderness to think that any one
should be used so cruelly: And one could scarce forbear to feel some pity and
trouble at seeing even the most odious Malefactor in such a condition. But
this was not a Malefactor, my Soul, but as thy Sins had made Him one!

This was the Innocent Jesus, who had done no Iniquity, neither was guile found
in his Mouth! This was thy Lover, thy Savior, thy Friend that hung here; and
all this he endured for thee. My Soul, if thou had seen the Loving Jesus thus
hanging upon these Nails, and bleeding from his Head, and from his Hands, and
from his Feet; and heard his Enemies reviling Him there, what Resentments
would thou have felt! Would not so sad an Object have made thy Tears keep
pace at least with the drops of his most precious Blood? Would it not have made
thee also smite thy Breast as some of the Spectatours did? Could thou see
this, and not feel those Wounds, and sympathize with those Pains he endured?
When every Wound might be understood to say; Sinner, behold how I love thee!
All this I endure for thee!

How then should this Sacrament affect thee, which is a lively Memorial of his
Death! What a deep sense of thy Savior's Love and Sufferings should this
create in thee! When he is here as it were evidently set forth Crucified before
thee! I see here his pale, wounded, bloodless, broken Body; I see his Blood
poured out, and separated from it. Can thou see this, and say my Love is
Crucified, and think thou see Him crowned with Thorns, all over daubed with
Dirt, and his Enemies filthy Spittle, and his own Blood, and not be fadly
grieved to think He was put to endure all this by His Love of thee. Oh,
Crucified Jesus, there was never Grief, there was never Love like thine! All
this endured for me! This commands and deserves; Oh let it cause my great Grief
for, and my ardent Love to thee.

But all this which afflicted his Body, was the least part of the Sufferings He
felt; He suffered more, abundantly more, than all this in the Sufferings of his
Soul: For I must consider further, that this Death of His was an Accursed one
in the account of the Jewish Law; that is, in the account of God Himself; for
it was He that had ordered and taught them to account it so; on purpose, that
it might foretell and signify beforehand, That the Redeemer of the World
should bear in his Death the Curse and Punishment which the Divine Law had
justly threatened against the Sins of Men. This then must call to thy Mind the
mighty Sufferings of His Soul, He was made a Curse for us; and God laid on Him
the Iniquities of us all. By Men was He treated as a Malefactor, and by God
too. The Light of his Father's Countenance, and the pleasing Aspects of his
Love, which had been always the Joy of his Soul, and the Reward of all his
Labors in his Service, and till now had been constantly enjoyed, was now, when
He wanted it most, withdrawn; when He was under His sharp outward Sufferings,
and when He was at the point of Death. And in making his Soul an Offering for
Sin, He was afficted and terrified with God's Almighty Wrath and Displeasure.
This made Him cry out, who was silent before, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? He felt the Wrath which our Sins had deserved. Oh terrible thing!
Who can conceive what He endured! We may believe no Torments can exceed those
He felt in his Soul, except it be those of Hell, if they do.

Oh wounding Thought! This stabs and pierces my Soul: This tells me, It was not
so much the Cruel Jew or Barbarous Roman Soldier that tormented, and killed
the loving Jesus, as the vile Sinner: It was I, among the rest of Sinners, that
gave Him his cruellest Wounds, his sharpest Sorrows: It was I that wounded,
that killed my Savior and Friend: I shed his Life's most precious Blood. Was
there ever such a thing known besides this? O Jesu, there was never any Love
like thine; and there is nothing so vile, so base as a Sinner! Greater Love
than this has no Man; that one lay down his Life for his Friend: But thou have
laid down thine for Enemies, for those that hated thee, yea for those that
killed thee: Thou art there on the Cross despised, that I might be honored:
Thou art there in pain, that I might be at ease: Thou art there hungry and
thirsty, that I might be supplied with all good things: Thou art there
accursed, that I might be blessed: Thou art there deserted by the Father's Favor
and Love, that I might enjoy the Everlasting delights of it: Thou art there
dying, that I might live an Everlasting life in Joy, and Glory unspeakable and
Eternal. Oh Jesu! Was I more dear to thee than thine own Life! Was I to be
rather indulged than thine own Ease, and more to be respected than thine own
Honor! What am I, Lord! Oh, what is Man that thou art thus mindful of him!
There was never Love like thine; None but a God could love thus! Oh Adorable
Mystery! Oh Wonder of Wonders! Thy Greatness is unsearchable, thy Love is
incomprehensible, and thy Ways are past finding out! With profoundest Reverence
I Adore thy Incomprehensible Love: I leave off to fathom what I can never
reach, and will give up my self to Praise, and Admire for ever.

SECT. XIV. An Exercise of Repentance.
HAve I indeed given my kind and compassionate Savior so much Grief by my
Sins, and shall they give me none? Oh that my Head were Waters, and my Eyes a
Fountain of Tears to drench my filthy polluted Soul! But, alas! it is not all
the Tears that I am able to shed which could ever make me clean, or wash out
the stain of any, the least of my Sins! Oh, I am become, it seems, so exceeding
foul, and have contracted stains of such a nature, that nothing but this
precious* stream, my Savior's life's Blood, can cleanse me! How am I fallen
from the Dignity and Honor of my Creation! I was made little lower than the
Angels by my Bounteous Creator; but I have made my self more vile than the
Beasts that perish. I was made subject to no Creature, not bound to pay any
Homage or Service toward the Glorious Angels, though made lower than them;
but, alas, I have made my self a slave to the abject Devil. I have refused to
serve God my Maker and Friend, and have drudg'd for my mortal Enemy. Oh
wretched Man that I am! I have sought his Service, while I have declined thine;
and run after his Temptations, while I have endeavored to evade thy Commands.
Oh, I have been forward to do Evil, and backward to all that is Good: I have
combined with my Soul's great Enemy to hasten and increase my Damnation.

Infinite Goodness! How unjustly, how basely art thou requited for all thy
bounteous Love to Mankind! Who can conceive or express the Vileness, the
Enormity of Sin! Which is a Contempt of thy infinite Majesty, a Rebellion
against thy unquestionable Authority, an Abuse of thy free Goodness, a Defiance
of thy Almighty Power, a Denial of thy incomparable Wisdom, and an Affront to
all thy glorious Attributes: Which is contrary to that Honor and Homage which
I owe thee as thy Creature. Woe is me that I should ever offend my Maker! so
liberal and so gracious a Father! Woe is me that I should slight and affront the
Love of Jesus my Redeemer, as I have done it in cherishing those vile Sins that
He came to destroy! O Jesu, at what a costly rate have thou loved me, and
merited my Love! And how loath, how slow am I to entertain the Love of thee:
Thou have Loved, where thy Hatred has been deserved; and I, vile wretch, have
hated Him that has infinitely deserved my Love. Thy Love to me has been a vast
Condescension, and has caused thy Humility and Abasement; yet would thou
love the Unworthy: But my Love to thee would have been my Honor and Glory, my
Everlasting Advancement; yet have I been unwilling to love thee. Woe is me, I
have been obstinate in Wickedness! Oh, how have I grieved the Holy Spirit, in
neglecting, resisting, and opposing his good and kind Motions in my Soul;
turning a deaf Ear to his gentle Admonitions, and refusing to be converted and
healed. Oh my God, in our Sins we despise thy Will, and do our own! We disown
thee, and make Gods of our selves. In our Sins we believe the great Deceiver
before the God of Truth: and follow his delusive Temptations, rather than thy
rich and faithful Promises. In our Sins we prefer Earth before Heaven, the
Creature before the Creator; and reckon there is more Happiness in the
Enjoying some of them, than in the Enjoyment of Thee, the Infinite Fountain of
Good.

Oh how vile, how enormous a thing is Sin! Who can sufficiently hate it! I see,
O Lord, in the terrible Sufferings of my Savior, thy mighty Displeasure
against the Sins of Men, and it terrifies me to think of it. I plainly see how
odious they are to the Divine Purity; In that so worthy and great a Person, He
who is so well and so justly beloved of the Father, was sorely afflicted by the
Father Himself, when He bore the Sins of Mankind. I see thy Hatred, O Lord,
against my Sins; I believe it very just, and I cannot choose but hate them too.
I will henceforth hate every false way, but thy Law will I love. I will love
thy Righteousness and Holiness, and utterly abhor what is so contrary to it,
as my Sins. I will account it my greatest Honor to conform to thee, and will
abandon and be ashamed to be found in the most creditable, or the most
applauded Sins in the World. Henceforth will all Sin have a most deformed and
ugly Visage to my Eye; I shall never think any one charming; I shall never
account any one worthy to be desired.

But when I consider, O Lord, the Course of my past Life; when I look into thy
Commands, and compare with them my Thoughts, and Words, and Actions, Oh what a
mortifying View does this Examination present me! Oh wretched Creature, I am
confounded, I am filled with Indignation against my self, when I see how much I
have had to do with this vile, this odious thing! Woe is me, how many are my
Transgressions! They are, alas, more in number than the Hairs of my Head, and
my Heart even fails me when I review them. I have sinned in every Age of my
Life, ever since I could know or choose my Actions! Oh, wretched Creature, how
early did I begin to sin against thee! How many have been the unheeded Actions
of my Life! the most of which, I must fear, have been wicked, since they have
proceeded from one so prone to do Evil as I. And how many more must the Sins of
my Words in all likelihood have been, especially while I did not set any watch
upon my Tongue, nor keep the door of my Lips. And when I think how easily and
abundantly the light Mind multiplies Thoughts, I tremble to think how much my
vain, foolish, vicious Mind has multiplied Transgressions too. Lord, who can
understand his Errors! I am amazed at the Number of my Sins! I have sinned,
alas, against thee in every Circumstance and Condition of my Life! I have
sinned in every Relation toward Men; Not doing that Honor, not paying that
Justice, not exercising that Charity to my Neighbor which I ought. I can view
none of thy Commands, but it calls to mind many Sins I have been guilty of.
Very often have I repeated the same Sins; returning to them, as the Dog to the
filthiness of his vomit; and, as the Swine wallowing in the mire. I have sinned
against thy Law, and against the Gospel: Oh, how cold a reception have I given
to the Offers of thy Grace and Mercy! How have I neglected the great Salvation!
Trampled upon the Blood of the Covenant, and despised my Savior's dying
redeeming Love! Oh, how many of other men's Sins have I been guilty of! By my
ill Example; by giving them needless and unjust Provocation; by tempting and
alluring them to Sins; by assisting what I ought to have hindered; by conniving
where I ought to have bestowed reproofs; and by countenancing and abetting what
I ought to have corrected and discouraged. I cannot, alas, pretend to have done
any good Action without a mixture of Evil in it: My best Works need the Blood
of Christ to cleanse them, and make them fit to be presented unto thee: and
indeed I want that Blood to wash even the Tears of my Repentance. What a mighty
Charge am I able to draw up against my self! [Here thou may particularly
mention those Sins thou art sensible of.] But thou, O Lord, know me better
than I do my self; And I dread to think how much more thou can add to the
heaviest Charge that I can bring against my self.

I have been so vile as to sin deliberately against thee; to do Evil, knowing
that I did Evil. I have been easily induced to Sin; the slightest Temptations
have prevailed with me! I have been, alas, accustomed to do Evil. O Lord, thou
have Exercised wonderful Patience and Forbearance toward me in a long train
and course of Sinning; and I have been so base and ungrateful as to encourage
my self to transgress by that Patience which should have led me to Repentance.

Oh wretched and vile Creature that I am, I have greatly sinned, I am become
exceeding guilty! What shall I say unto thee, Oh thou preserver of Men. I will
lay my self down in the Dust before thee. I am at thy Mercy, O Lord, and must
own that I have deserved the utmost severity of thy Wrath. In the sad
Sufferings of Jesus I see what my Sins have deserved. I see in his Contempt how
I have deserved to be despised. I see in his Thirst upon the Cross how I have
deserved the want of all things comfortable. I see in his Agony, and by his
Groans under the Divine Wrath, what Displeasure and Punishment I have deserved
to suffer. I see in his accursed Death that I have deserved to die, and be
Eternally accursed and cast out of the Divine Favor. O Lord, I am unworthy,
utterly unworthy to breath in this Air of thine, to inhabit this Earth; to
enjoy this cheerful Light. I am less than the least of all thy Mercies. I must
judge, I must condemn my self, I must own thou were Just, and I should have but
my deserts, if I were now shut up in gloomy darkness; if I were now wrapped in
Everlasting Flames; if I were feeling the Torments of the never-dying Worm, and
of Endless bitter Despair.

Lord, I will punish, I will take vengeance on my self for my Sins. I will lead
a Life of Mortification rather than Indulgence; I will never allow again any
high or admiring Thoughts of my self. It shall always keep me humble to think,
how great disparagement and vileness I have contracted! to consider my self a
Sinner, and that there is Imperfection and Sin mixed with the best of my
Actions.

But, O Lord, I beseech thee do not thou enter into Judgment with thy Servant,
for in thy sight shall no Man living be justified. Oh deal not with me after my
Sins, neither reward me after mine Iniquities. Blessed is the Man whose
Iniquity is forgiven, whose Sin is covered. Spare me, good Lord; spare thy
Creature whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious Blood! Oh spare the
miserable Wretch that confesses his Faults; restore thou Him that is Penitent.
Pity thou Him that is Contrite: Revive the Spirit of the Humble; cheer the
contrite Heart: A broken and a contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise.
Give me, then, the joy of thy Salvation; uphold me with thy free spirit: Then
will I teach Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be converted unto thee.
Open thou my Lips, O Lord, and my Mouth shall show forth thy Praise.

SECT. XV. An Exercise of good Resolutions.
OH Crucified Jesus! Great Martyr of Love! I cannot choose but acknowledge, and
admire and praise the exceeding Greatness of thy dying Love! Much it is, O
Lord, that I reckon my self beholden to thee: And what, Oh what shall I render
unto the Lord for all his Kindness and Benefits! Lord, when I ransack my store,
I am ashamed, I am utterly abasht to find how poor it is. Oh, what can a
Creature return to his Maker? What can I give, that have nothing to give; Who
am nothing but what I have derived from thee? Thy Goodness indeed is such, that
thou requirest no more than we are able to render, and with that thou art
well-pleased: But that, O Lord, is so little, that I cannot be satisfied with
it. Oh let thy Fullness of all Excellent Grace, thy Fullness of Love fill me with
all true Excellency and Love, that I may be the better and the worthier Gift to
thee.

Dearest Jesu! For the Love of thee I readily renounce all the flattering
Vanities of this World, all the most necessary Enjoyments of it, that I may
steadily Honor and Enjoy thee: I account all things but Loss and Dung, and
will not count my Life dear, that I may finish my Course of Duty with joy, and
may win Christ.

But especially, O Lord, for love of thee I do here utterly renounce, abdicate
and abhor all my most darling Sins. And it grieves me exceedingly that I
should ever be so base as to entertain any Rivals of the Loving Jesus in my
Heart. O Lord, I hate them so much the more now, by how much the more I have
formerly loved them. I will utterly cast them out of my Heart; no more shall
they harbor there; no longer will I entertain, no longer cherish those thine
Enemies. What! Can I be kind to the bloody Crucifiers of my Lord! See, my Soul;
see these Murderers all daubed with the Blood of thy Savior. Away from me, ye
hateful Things: We will now instantly part, never, I hope, to meet again,
never to be acquainted more. Begone without delay; I will thrust you out of my
Soul, you have no right to abide here. Jesus alone has right to possess and
rule me. Away vile Envy, I cannot endure the sight of thee: Begone my
Covetousness: My Malice I hate thee: My Sensuality I will starve thee: My Pride
I will humble thee: My Idleness thou have made me so much work to do, that I am
resolved, I see it absolutely necessary, to banish thee for ever from me. All
my Lusts and vile Affections begone; ye shall have no more kind usage here; do
not expect it.

Jesus has all my Love, I have none for you. I am all his, I am no more for ye.
Begone, ye hateful Tyrants of my Soul. Jesus, a kind and gracious Master,
imposes gentle Tasks, but you lay heavy Burdens upon me: His Yoke is easy, and
his Burden light; but your Commands are rigorous and intolerable. Jesus has
shown me great and wondrous Love: Ye promise me much satisfaction and kindness,
but perform nothing. No, ye have cheated and deceived me: Ye have robbed me of
my Peace, robbed me of my Dignity and Glory, and, which is more, ye have robbed
me of the Favor of my God. What can you do for me, if you should do all that
you promise, which is never to be expected, that is comparable with what He can
do for me; what He is willing, and has faithfully promised to do for me, if I
will but hate and forsake you; or with what Jesus has already done to testify
his God-will and Kindness to me. Jesus made Himself of no reputation for my
sake, and that He might advance me to the highest Honor; But ye would expose
me to the utmost Contempt of God, Angels and Devils: Jesus has died for me that
I might live for ever, but ye would kill me; Jesus rules to save, but you to
destroy. His Rewards are Eternal Life and Happiness, but your Wages is Death
and Misery everlasting* When I come to die, what fruit, what comfort can I
expect from you? Alas, all that you could ever gain will leave me then, if it
be not gone before, and I must go a poor, naked friendless Stranger into the
Eternal World; yea, for your sakes I must, if I do not cast you off, appear a
hated guilty Rebel before my Lord and Judge, and be exposed to all the Terrors
of Divine Wrath. But the Love of Jesus will not then forsake me: Neither
Tribulation, Distress, Persecution, nor Death it self shall ever separate me
from the Love of Jesus if I will but be divorced from you. And Jesus is King of
the other World, and will send his kind Angels to receive my departing Soul,
out of the mean Tabernacle of my Body, and to conduct it to a glorious Mansion:
To welcome it from the Miseries of this sinful World, to congratulate my happy
Victory over you my Enemies, and carry me in Triumph to a place of Bliss, and
to be with Christ. Can I then so much abandon my Reason, so much mistake my
Interest, as to have any more to do with you?

O Lord, the Great Redeemer have Mercy upon me, and deliver me from these
tyrannous Masters. Thy Service is perfect Freedom; in keeping thy Commands
there is great Reward. Set my Soul, I pray, at liberty to run the Ways of thy
Commandments. As for these thine Enemies and mine, bring them forth and let
them be slain before thee: Root them perfectly out of my Heart. Let them from
henceforth be in a decaying, languishing Condition, never thrive more, and
quickly die. I will never be satisfied till I see them utterly deprived of all
Motion, Sense and Life. O Jesu, thy Cross, thy Nails, thy Spear are due to
these: Let them from thence receive many mortal Wounds, that thou may never
be displeased, nor I troubled or disparaged with them any more for ever.

O Crucified Love, thou have prevented me by thy Love, and infinitely exceeded
all that I can return; But I will learn of thee to Love, and follow thee as
well as I can. Thou have given thy self for me on the Cross, and give thy
self to me in this Sacrament: Behold, O Lord, I offer my self to thee, my whole
self. I offer and bring thee all the Faculties of my Soul, all the Members of
my Body: I offer my Senses and my Passions: I offer all my Thoughts, my Words,
and my Actions: I offer all my Designs and Endeavors: All the Labors of my
worldly Calling; all the Adoration of my Worship and Devotions. I offer thee
all my Possessions in the World; all the Persons that I can command and
influence to worship, honor and serve thee. I offer thee all the Days of my
Life; I offer thee my Death when thou will please to require it; and both
Living and Dying I desire to be thine. I desire to be entirely thine. Oh how
dearly have thou bought this poor Gift! Never was so great a Price, beside
this, paid for any Creature. I will live to my Love that died for me. I will
henceforth look upon my self as a devoted consecrated Thing, and will ever
endeavor to remain so, and to carry my self as such. I will never be willingly
employed, but as thou command, and as thou allowest. Lord, for thy sake I
will love thy Law, and it shall be my Meditation all the day. I will love thy
Commandments above Gold, and all false ways I will utterly abhor. Dearer shall
thy Commandments be to Me than Thousands of Gold and Silver, and sweeter than
Honey from the Comb. I will love nothing but what thou love, and will hate
whatever is displeasing to thee.

I am heartily grieved, O Lord, that I have ever loved any thing but thee,
while I neglected to love thee. I am heartily ashamed to think that I should
place no Affection where all I could* offer is but due, and bestow all where
little or none was due Especially does it vex and grieve me that I should be so
monstrously ungrateful and mistaken, as to love any thing more than the loving
Jesus. Hereafter, dearest Lord, I purpose to love nothing but far below thee,
and for thy sake whatever I do love: And what is most like thee, or most
serviceable to thy Honor and Glory, shall have the most of my Love.

Henceforth it shall be my Honor that I am a Servant of Jesus; It shall be my
delight and pleasure to be a lover of Jesus; it shall be my most valued Wealth
that He is mine, and I am His. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, O Lord, and
there is none on Earth that I can desire in comparison to thee. And therefore
nothing can be so sweet to me; nothing can afford me so much satisfaction and
joy, as to be able to say of thee, My Beloved is mine, and I am His For me to
be thine, O Jesu, is my Honor, my Security, my Peace and Happiness
everlasting. For thee to be mine is health to my Soul, strength to do thy
Commandments; it is Joy unspeakable and full of Glory; it is Heaven on Earth,
and the Heaven of Heaven; it is Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption to me, O rich and bounteous Love. I am thine, O Lord, with all my
Soul, that thou may be mine. Oh how much shall I gain by giving my self to
thee! I shall gain my self and be saved from Everlasting Perdition, and I shall
gain Everlasting Happiness in the Enjoyment of thee.

I am thine, O Jesu; save me, I have sought thy Precepts. Lord sanctify me
wholly, that in Body, Soul and Spirit I may be thine: Take a full possession of
me for the future; and let not any other Lords have Dominion over me. O Lord, I
have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments. I
purpose to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, as
knowing that my Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. I am thine, dispose of
me as thou please: I will bear thy Yoke, I will not decline thy Cross* I will
not despise thy shame: The reproach of Christ shall be to me greater Riches
than the Prosperity of this World. Let but thy Grace be sufficient for me, and
then call me to what thou please: I can do all things through Christ
strengthening me. Lord, I shall not, I hope, fear or decline to suffer for thy
sake: No, though I should die with thee, I purpose not to deny thee. But, alas,
it troubles me to think how weak and vain all my Resolutions are, and how soon
they will come to nothing without thy continual support and assistance. This
troubles me; but it is my comfort, that thy Grace is easily obtained; it may be
now had for asking of it; O shield me by thy Grace against all Temptations:
Hold up my goings in thy Word, that my footsteps slip not: Guide thou me by thy
Counsel, till thou have brought me to thy Glory.

SECT. XVI. An Exercise of Faith.
I Believe there is only one true and living God; who is the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost: An Infinite, Eternal, Perfect Being; the Maker and
Preserver, Owner and Governor of All things. Who has right to the Homage,
Worship, and Obedience of Mankind: Who has laid upon us his Laws, and takes
notice of our Behavior; That his Eyes behold all the Dwellers upon Earth, and
try the Children of Men; That He is always nigh to every one of us, for it is
in Him that we live, move, and have our Being. I believe, O Lord, that thou art
and art a Rewarder of those that diligently seek thee: Thou have appointed a
Day wherein thou will Judge the World in Righteousness, and render to every Man
according to his Works: That those who are found wicked in that Day, shall go
away into Everlasting Punishment, but the Righteous into Life Eternal.

But I believe also, that to the Lord our God belong Mercies and Forgivenesses,
though we have rebelled against Him, if in the way of his appointment we seek
his Pardoning-Mercy. Thou have, O Lord, Blessed be thy Name, preclaim'd thy
self a God, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin: And declarest, that thou
desire not the Death of a Sinner, but had rather that he should turn from his
Wickedness, and live. O wonderful Condescension and Goodness! Oh how sweet is
thy Mercy! How glorious and great! The exceeding vileness, and the
unreasonableness of our Sins, do magnify thy Mercy beyond all Comprehension
and Praise. Favor and Forgiveness to a base Sinner is that the Sinner could
not expect till thou had declared it should be obtained, and did graciously
offer it.

When we were sunk into the most abject Misery by a vile Rebellion against
thee; had rendered our selves obnoxious to thy Eternal Hatred and Wrath, and
deserved to follow the Apostate Angels in their Fate and Damnation, as we had
followed them in Rebellion: Then did thy Infinite Wisdom contrive how to show
us Favor in a way consistent with thine own Honor: Thou did find out a way
to spare Us, and to punish our Sins; to glorify thy Justice in taking
Vengeance on our Inventions, and thy Mercy in saving the wretched Sinners: And
God so loved the World, that He gave his onely-begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in Him, shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life. Thou gave, O
Father, thine Onely-begotten Son to the Condescension and Meanness of taking
our Nature upon Him; and to die a Sacrifice for our Sins; and on him, thy
well-beloved Son, did thou lay the Iniquities of us all. And in his Death
thou have received a full, perfect and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and
Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World. Thou have laid our Help on one
that is Mighty, and able to save to the uttermost all that come into God by
Him. We adore thy Incomprehensible Goodness and Compassion to Sinners! Thou art
abundant, Oh God, in Goodness and Truth!

Thy Mercy is over all thy Works: In Mercy thou have great delight: We remember
the glorious Exercises of it; We know, O Lord, thou can pardon the greatest
Offenses; For thou have pardoned very great Sinners: David was forgiven his
base Murder and Adultery; Manasseh his horrid Idolatry, and filling Jerusalem
with innocent Blood: The vile Adulteress Mary Magdalen; The Apostle Peter, who
denied and disowned thee with an Oath; The Furious Saul, who blasphemed thee
himself; and being exceedingly mad against thee, compelled others to Blaspheme:
All these are Monuments of thy glorious forgiving Mercy. Oh what comfortable,
what joyful Hopes have we in such Goodness!

We know, that having given us thy Son, thou will not deny us any thing that is
necessary to our Salvation: But if we ask, we shall receive; if we seek, we
shall find; if we knock, it shall be opened to us. On that Ransom which my
Savior has paid for me, and on all thy gracious Promises which for his sake
thou have made, I do wholly and firmly rely. With an humble Confidence, O Lord,
that we may find favor with thee, we remember before thee in this Sacrament
the bleeding Wounds of thy dear Son, and his precious Death, our rich Sacrifice
for Sin. We remember before thee, and present unto thee, Him whom thou have set
forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his Blood. And in his Name, relying
upon the Value and Acceptance of his Sacrifice, I thy poor unworthy Servant
humbly present my self before the Throne of thy Grace to seek thy Favor,
begging leave that I may claim thy gracious Promises, which in Him are Yea, and
in Him Amen; and that I may now entertain and delight my self with the glorious
Hopes which they afford.

I desire, I hope that thou will fully forgive my manifold and great
Transgressions. I desire, I hope thou will give me thy Holy Spirit, which thou
have promised to give to them that ask Him. Oh grant me that Spirit to cleanse
me from all Unrighteousness, to purify my polluted Soul; to take away all the
filthy stains of my Sins; to strengthen my weakness in Temptations; to be my
support and comfort me under Discouragements and Afflictions; to assist me in
all my Duties; to guide my Way, and secure my Perseverance to the End. Thou, O
Lord* who searchest the Hearts, and triest the Reins of Men, well know, I
had almost said too well, wherein my greatest weakness lies; Lord strengthen me
in particular, I beseech thee, against mine own Iniquity. I desire, I hope thou will graciously keep me unspotted from the World: keep me from following any of
the Errors and Vices that shall ever be in vogue with the giddy and wicked
Multitude. I desire* I hope thou will mercifully defend me against the Wiles
and Devices of my Soul's great Adversary the Devil. I humbly commit my self to
thy gracious keeping, Oh faithful Creator.

I desire, I hope, O Lord, that thou will bless me with Health, and with a
competent Provision of what is needful for me of the good things of this
World; and defend me, if it please thee, from Poverty, Dependence and Contempt.
Give me neither Poverty nor Riches, but feed me with Food convenient for me. I
know, O Lord, Man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward; that Sin entering
into this World, has brought Misery and Affliction with it; And that our folly
and perverseness commonly needs such Discipline to make us wise and good. I
desire to submit to whatever it shall please thee to order for me; to say
always after the Example of my Savior, Lord, not my Will, but thine be done. I
hope thou will deal with me according to thy Mercy, and lay upon me no more
than thou will enable me to bear. I believe thou may do me great good by my
Afflictions; I pray thee sanctify them all to the promoting my Soul's Health,
and my Everlasting Happiness: And give me, I pray thee, an humble Resignation,
and an invincible Patience, that I may neither despise the chastening of the
Lord, nor faint when I am rebuked of Him: Let me always encourage my self with
this Assurance, That these light Afflictions, which are but for a moment, if
they be patiently born, shall work for* me a far more exceeding and an eternal
weight of Glory. I desire, I hope thou will direct and enable me so to pass
through things Temporal, as that I may not finally lose the things Eternal.
That by thy Conduct and Guidance I may at last arrive safely to that happy
World where the Weary are at Rest; where the Wicked cease from Troubling; where
Sorrow and Sighing, and Pain and Vexation, and Fear and Care shall all be
banished; all Tears shall be for ever wiped from our Eyes, and we shall enjoy
thee, and all that we can desire in perfect Bliss, and Eternal Safety and Quiet.

This is a true Saying, and worthy of all Men to be received, That Jesus Christ
came into the World to save Sinners. Lord I receive it; Lord I believe, help
thou my unbelief. I believe, O Jesu, thou art Christ the Son of the living God,
that should come into the World. Oh tender and condescending Love, how dear is
that Blessed Name to me! Jesus my Savior! Oh how full of sweetness is it, as a
rich Perfume! Thy Name is as Ointment poured forth! Oh be thou ever Jesus to
me. To thee, O Lord, I fly as a refuge from the just Wrath of God I have
deserved; as able to conquer all my spiritual Enemies; as willing to receive
into thy protection all that come unto thee. Oh Lamb of God, that take away
the Sins of the World, have Mercy upon my poor Soul; grant me thy Peace. Thou
invitest those that are weary and heavy laden to come into thee: Behold, Lord,
I come, let me find Rest to my Soul.

I come to partake of the Happiness of being united to thee in this Sacrament.
I believe, O Lord, the Truth of all thy Promises, and the Virtue and Power of
all thine Ordinances: And that the Bread we break, and the Cup we drink in this
Sacrament, be not bare Signs, but real Instruments of Conveyance, and the
Communications of thy Body and Blood: I come, then, that I may receive thy Body
and Blood; may be interested in the Merits of thy Passion; that I may partake
of the Spirit, and be entitled to the Heavenly Inheritance, which thou have
purchased for poor lost Sinners. I come to make a Thankful Remembrance of thy
Death, which thou did kindly submit to for the Advantage of Mankind: And by
thy Death I hope to have Life everlasting.

I gladly embrace, O Lord, the Offers of thy Gospel. I desire thee to subdue in
me all my rebellious Lusts and vile Affections, and as a King to rule over me.
I will account it my Honor to be thy meannest Subject. I desire thee to afford
me thy Heavenly Instructions; teach me as a Prophet, and make me wise to my
Salvation through Faith that is in thee. I desire thee to intercede for me as
Priest in the Virtue of thy most valuable Sacrifice; and to bestow upon me the
large Blessings which thou have purchased for Sinners. I believe, O Lord, thou
have died for our Sins, and art risen again for our Justification. I desire thy
Death may utterly crucify and till all my Sins; and that thy Resurrection may
revive my Hopes. By thy Resurrection I desire, I hope for mine: By thy
Ascension into Heaven I desire thee to draw my Heart and Affections from this
vain empty World, to the hearty Love and earnest Desire of Heavenly Things: And
I hope thou will raise me up at the Last Day, and bring me to be where thou
art, and give me an Everlasting Life. I take this Sacrament as a Pledge of thy
Everlasting Love; as the Evidence of great Love already shown me, and the
Earnest and Assurance of yet greater Communications to come.

My Soul thirsts for God, even for the Living God: Oh, when shall I come and
appear before God! When shall I see thy Face, O dearest Jesu, without a Veil,
be kissed with the Kisses of thy Mouth, enjoy thy self immediately? When shall
these short and faint Glimpses of thy Glory be exchanged for a full abiding
sight of thee? When shall I have leave not only to visit, but to dwell with
thee; and to receive not transient Tastes, but drink large Draughts of Delight
and Joy from an Infinite Fountain of Bliss and Joy: For in thy presence is
fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. Oh how I long
that this my weary Pilgrimage were done: That I were absent from the Body, that
I might be present with the Lord: That I might have no necessary diversion,
dearest Jesu, from perpetual contemplating, praising, loving and enjoying thee.
For this however I do wait; This I do through thy Merits, and from thy Infinite
Love expect; and that Expectation shall encourage me to labor in thy Service,
to bear thy Cross, and to follow thee whithersoever thou shall call me.

SECT. XVII. An Exercise of Charity.
O Jesu, thou art Infinite Love! I cannot but with great delight and wonder
Contemplate thee; and when I do so, I feel a pleasing Constraint upon me to
Love. I must account this a most excellent and divine Qualification, which is
so eminently in thee: I must reckon it my greatest Honor to be conformed to
the Son of God; and therefore I must utterly dislike and hate my self for any
defect of Love I find in my self. Besides* When I think how much I am loved*
How much thy free and bounteous Love has given, and how much it has forgiven to
me, I am forced to account my self basely and extremely unworthy of this if I
do not love much.

I will put on, then, the most extensive Charity that I can: I will wish well,
and do good to all Men as far as I have power, and as often as I have opportunity
to do it: I will love my Neighbor as my self; and account him my Neighbor,
who has any need of my kindness, and to whom I have it in my power to do any
Office of kindness, whosoever he be. Thou, O Blessed Jesu, have loved the most
unworthy Wretches! I, then, will account none unworthy of my Love and
Good Will. Thou have loved those that were infinitely below thee, and have
mightily condescended to do them kindness. I will never account it below me
therefore to do an Office of Kindness to my meanest Neighbor; but rather the
greater the Condescension is in the doing it, the more I will value the
opportunity, of showing therein the greater Likeness and Gratitude to thee.
Thou, Lord, have loved those that are altogether unprofitable to thee; and from
whom thou can never receive a parallel return of Love: I will be ashamed,
then, as I most justly may, to bestow no Benefits but where I have received, or
expect to receive some.

Thou, O Jesu, have loved even thine Enemies, and prayed for those that
despitefully used and persecuted thee: And this is a glorious Pattern which I
intend, by the Assistance of thy Grace, to imitate. As for all that have
injured me by Word or Deed, O Lord, I forgive them, and I pray thee to forgive
them. I am more sorry for their Error and Sin, than I am for any Loss and
Damage which is come, or may come to me by their Injury: Lord have Mercy upon
their Souls; Forgive my Enemies, Persecutours and Slanderers, and turn their
Hearts. I desire no harm to any that are my Enemies, if any be so: Nor will I
rejoice over them when they fall, but rather grieve to see it; much less will I
ever seek their harm and mischief. And I purpose on the contrary,
notwithstanding all their unkindness, to do them all the good Offices which I
can; consistently with a due care of my own safety, and with other Obligations
and Duties to thee, or to others of my Neighbors. I purpose to study, and seek
to do them good: To return Blessing for Cursing, Respect for Contempt, and Good
for Evil: That I may, if it be possible, overcome Evil with Good.

As it is the Character of Charity not to be forward to think Evil, I will take
care that no uncharitable Jealousies or Suspicions of my Neighbor may
represent him my Enemy who is not so: I will take care not to interpret a
mistake into a malicious design; or that which is intended as a kindness, into
an injury: But will always endeavor to take all his Words and Actions in the
best Sense, and to put the best Interpretation upon them all that I can:
Especially will I do thus by the Magistrate, as being bound to it by the
Obligation to Reverence, and Honor him as well as by the Laws of Charity; and
because it is necessary and useful to the Public Peace and Welfare, and so is
in its Effects a Charity to others of my Neighbors too.

I thank thee, O Lord, for all the kindness of my Friends, and for those that
have done me any good: I pray thee, O bounteous Love, abundantly to requite
them in this World and the next; in Temporal and Eternal. Blessings Continue or
increase their Store and Worldly Prosperity, if it may be good for them; and
especially Bless them with Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Things. I will
endeavor, as far as lies in my power, in what I can do for their outward
Estate, or for their Souls, always to express a most grateful Sense of their
kindness. I will not despise the Love of the meanest person, much rather will I
thankfully resent the condescending Favors of those that are above me.

I make my humble Supplications to thee now, O Lord, at a good time, for all
Mankind: I recommend to thy Infinite Mercy all Jews, Turks and Infidels. Oh let
them that sit in Darkness see thy mavelous Light, and be turned from the
Power of Satan unto God: That the Earth might be filled with Knowledge of the
Lord as Waters cover the Sea. Let thy Gospel of Holiness, Peace and Love, O
Jesu, run and be glorified from the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the
same.

With great Trouble and Concern, O Lord, I consider how much of the wretched
World lies in Wickedness* O how sad a Thought is it, that such a Savior should
be offered to Men, and so few receive Him! How sad is it to think that so many
Thousands of Souls for whom Christ died, are likely to go down into the dismal
Caves of Hell; that so many who might be Eternally happy, and praise thee for
ever, will destroy, and throw themselves into Everlasting Misery. Rivers of
Waters run down mine Eyes, because Men make void thy Law: A Law so rich in
Love, and so condescending in Grace. I am troubled, O Lord, because they do not
love thee, and because they will destroy themselves: Because they affront and
rebel against thy most obliging Goodness, and neglect so great Salvation as it
offers them.

Oh that I could save many precious Souls from their Destruction; Oh that I
could pluck them as Brands out of the Burning. As far as I am able, and as
becomes me to do in my place and station, I will endeavor to cure the
Epidemical Wickedness of the Times I live in. I will earnestly endeavor to
keep those Souls that are under my Authority and Power, and that are of my
Neighborhood and Acquaintance, and whom I can have any influence over from
going down to Everlasting Perdition. I will follow all that I may with Advice
and Counsel; and those that I may not pretend to advise, I will endeavor to
entreat, that they would be saved: And those whom I ought to do this to, I will
reprove and correct for any Wickedness that I observe in them. I will
propagate, as well as I can, the saving Knowledge, and the Love of thee among
the Ignorant and Careless, and those whom their Poverty hinders from providing
for themselves; By giving among them, according to my Ability, such means of
their Instruction and Reformation as thy Favor has afforded the Public.

I am greatly troubled and concerned at the Miseries and Calamities which I
hear of or see in the World: That thy Creatures whom thou did make, that thou
might love them, and that they might be happy, should pull upon themselves
so much Misery from thy just Wrath, and deserved Vengeance. Oh how sad is it to
think of Thousands of People going down alive into the Pit, swallowed up by
sudden Earthquakes; and in a moment snatched hence into Eternity, without any
time to prepare for their Departure. How it grieves me to think of the sad
Effects of Pining Famine in some places; of Infectious and Pestilential
Diseases in others. It wounds my Soul to consider the woeful Calamities and
Desolations that attend Horrid Wars* Oh how deplorable a thing is it that Men
should seek to spill the Blood of Men; and give the Carcasses of their own Kind
for a Prey to Birds and Wild Beasts. Lord, rebuke the proud Disturbers of the
World; abate their Pride, assuage their Malice, and confound their Devices:
Grant that Wars may cease in all Lands, and gentle Love and happy Peace abound!
Prosper, good Lord, those that Endeavor for a just and safe Peace, that they
may attain it; and scatter thou the People that delight in War. Oh that thy
Judgments which are abroad in Earth, might make the Inhabitants of the World to
learn Righteousness, and turn themselves to thee who have smitten them, that
thou may head them.

As a Member of thy Blessed Church, I am particularly concerned for the
Tranquillity and Peace, and the true Spiritual Glory and Prosperity of that. O
Lord, purge out of thy Church whatever does displease thee, and is destructive
to the Souls of Men. Purge out of it whatever is an Offense to those without:
Possess all Christians with this, That they are obliged to Endeavor, that
their Carriage may adorn and recommend their Religion in the sight of the
Infidels; and to take care their Light may so shine before Men, that they
seeing their Good Works* may Glorify their Father which is in Heaven. Purge
thy Church, we pray thee, from all false Doctrines and Heresies; from
Profaneness and Persecution; from Superstition and Cruelty; from Envy, Hatred,
Malice, and all Uncharitableness. Bring into the Way of Truth all such as have
erred, and are deceived: Raise up them that are fallen; confirm, and strengthen
those that stand in Piety and Virtue, and Profession of the Truth. Comfort
those parts of thy Church that mourn, and are oppressed under a Barbarous
Persecution; And let thine own Right Hand, and Holy Arm, in thy due time, give
them a mighty Salvation.

O God of Love, O Prince of Peace, and God of Order, we pray thee let thy
Gospel abundantly promote these good things in thy Church. Grant that there may
be no hurting nor destroying in all thy Holy Mountain: That all the Members of
the Church, as Members of the same Body, and of one another, may have a Cordial
Affection to each other: Carrying themselves with all lowliness and meekness to
each other; and with long-suffering, forbearing one another in Love. Grant that
as there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, whom we all pretend to Love and
Reverence, as there is but one true Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of
us all, so we may all with one Mind and one Mouth glorify thee our God. Grant
that every Member of the Church may so know and keep its preper place, that
there may be no Schism in the Body.

O Jesu, King of Love, fill with thy kind and gentle Spirit all Christian
Kings, Princes and Governors. Let no proud Wrath; no malicious Envy; no greedy
Covetousness; no turbulent Ambition reign in any of them: Grant that they all,
knowing whose Ministers they are, may above all things seek thy Honor and
Glory: And that they may study to preserve the People committed to their Care
in Wealth, Peace, and Godliness: That they may truly and indifferently
administer Justice, to the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and to the
Maintenance of thy true Religion and Virtue.

Especially, O Lord, we entreat thee to regard with pecullar Favor, thy
Servants, WILLIAM and MARY, our most Gracious King and Queen. Let thy Wisdom
direct them in all their Administrations; Thy Almighty Power promote their Good
Designs, that under them we may be Godly and Quietly Governed. Let thy
Bounteous Goodness shower upon them abundantly all Personal Blessings, for
their Bodies and for their Souls, to their long Prosperity in this Life, and
their Everlasting Happiness in the next. Since by their Wisdom and Care, by
their Love to Thee, and Goodness to Us, with thy Blessing upon their
Endeavors, we enjoy the happy Liberty of thy House, and these thy Blessed
Ordinances, to the joy and comfort of our Souls, we will never fail to remember
them in all our Prayers and Supplications unto thee.

Pour down an Abundance of thy Spirit, we pray thee, O Gracious Jesu, upon all
Bishops and Pastors of thy Church. Replenish them all with right and sound
Knowledge, and a true Understanding of thy Word. Oh let not their Hearts be
governed, or their Actions be guided by the Designs of Covetousness or
Ambition: But do thou possess and rule them by a great Zeal for thy Glory, and
for thy great Design the Salvation of Souls: Grant that they may by their Holy
Doctrine, and Answerable Lives, be mightily successful in turning many to
Righteousness; and that they may save Themselves, and many of those that are
committed to their Charge.

Since my Goodness, O Lord, extends not to thee; and thou art above the
receiving of any Advantage by the best Returns that I can make for all thy
Bounty to me: It shall be my Charge and Care to requite thy kindness upon thy
Servants to whom I may be profitable. I will love them, O Lord, that love thee,
and do all the good I can to those especially that are of the Household of
Faith: I will gladly relieve the Necessities of thy Servants which are made
known to me; will Feed the Hungry, Cloth the Naked, Instruct the Ignorant,
Reduce the Wandering, Visit the Sick and Imprisoned, Comfort and Help the
Weak-hearted, and Vindicate and Assist the Fatherless and Widows in their
Distress, according as I have Opportunity and Power to do so. And give me, I
beseech thee, O loving Jesu, a just and large Notion of the Household of Faith,
that I may not confine this my Charity within too narrow Bounds. Let me be
always afraid of restraining it within too narrow Limits, never of extending it
too far among Christians.

I love thee, O Lord Jesus, for making so sweet and pleasant a thing as Charity
my Duty, and do account even this an Instance of thy Charity to me. If there be
any other Exercise of this Divine Virtue, O Lord, which I have not thought of,
I desire Thee, the great Fountain of Love, to admonish me of it, and always to
dispose me to it. Grant that in the pleasing Exercise of Love I may pass the
time of my sojourning here in this Malicious, Miserable World; till I come at
length to that Happy One, where sincere, abundant, and unalterable Love, and
Joy, and Glory dwell for ever.

SECT. XVIII. PRAYERS for Preparation.
I.
O God of Love, Father of all Mercies, and Giver of every good and perfect
Gift. It is thy Command, and I reckon it a kind and a just One, That I should
Celebrate this Sacrament in Remembrance of the Death and Sacrifice of thy dear
Son, our only Savior and Redeemer, the Lord Jesus Christ; To make me
Thankful for his Love, and for the Benefits of his Passion and Death, and that
I might be made a Partaker of those Incomparable Benefits: Thou have Commanded
me in this way to renew my Covenant with Thee; to declare my self thy Creature
and Servant, and bind my self to continue thy Faithful Servant, and to live as
becomes one that had his Being from Thee. O Lord, I must acknowledge it is but
too necessary for me to renew the Obligations which I am so apt to transgress.
I am therefore heartily willing: I desire to strengthen the Bonds of Love, that
they may hold me the faster to my Duty. I would never be exempted from the Yoke
of thy Service; Oh do not thou cast me out of it for the sake of Jesus Christ.
And I am willing to remember my dear Savior's dying Love, to be deeply
Affected with it, and therefore to use so lively a Representation of his Death,
as he has provided in this Sacrament. I must indeed own my self Infinitely
unworthy of so great Good, but yet cannot choose but be earnestly desirous, O
Lord, to partake abundantly in the Merits and Benefits of my Savior's Death;
There is nothing so dear to me as to have all mine Iniquities pardoned; to
recover thy Favor: To enjoy the excellent Graces of the Holy Spirit, and be
consecrated for a Sacred Temple to Him: To receive Earnests and Pledges, yea,
and Fore-tasts of my future Joy and Happiness: All which are the matchless
Blessings He has purchased for me, and which Thou have directed thy Church to
seek and partake of in and by this Sacrament. All this I humbly seek and crave,
through the Merits of Jesus Christ my Lord, to whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, World without End.

Amen.
II.
Almighty and most Merciful God, I bless Thee for this Sacrament, and would
come to it with a hungring and thirsting Soul. But, alas, how shall I, a poor
mean Creature, approach thy Majesty! How shall I, a guilty polluted Sinner,
dare to approach thy Purity and Holiness! O Lord, I am Infinitely unworthy to
come so near Thee: Yet, it seems, thou do not regard my Unworthiness, else
Thou would never have invited me. Thou invitest poor sinful Creatures in
General to this Feast; thy Guests can be none but such: If all therefore that
are unworthy to come, should Absent themselves, none of us would be there; and
thy vast and land Preparations would be in vain; I come therefore, most
Gracious God, in Obedience to thy Command and Invitation: But I will come with
the lowliest Reverence and Humility, for thou have regard unto the Lowly: I
will come as a returning Prodigal, for Thou art willing to receive such: I will
come, hoping in thy Infinite Mercy; for there is Mercy with Thee, through Jesus
Christ. My great Concern, O Lord, is, that I may be in some good measure fit to
approach Thee, though I can never be worthy; and that I may have and exercise
those Qualifications in my attendance on Thee, which are suitable to this
Sacrament, and which Thou requirest. I have therefore earnestly endeavored to
find or form those Qualifications in my self; But, alas, O Lord, I dare not
trust to my own Examinations or Endeavors. Do Thou, the Heart-searching God,
examine and try me; do Thou, I pray Thee, prepare me. I fly to thy Grace and
Blessed Influence: Lord, give me, I pray, what Thou requirest to be in me. It
is my great Encouragement to make this Request, that I know I ask herein what
Thou art willing to give. Thou, Lord, art always more ready to Hear, than we to
Pray; and art wont to give more than either we desire or deserve. Thou know
I cannot have these Qualifications but from Thee: Since therefore Thou have
commanded me to come possessed with Them, I am sure Thou art willing to give
Them. Thou art desirous we should come prepared, and suitable Guests to this
Heavenly Entertainment; art desirous to see thy House filled with such. Fill me
then, good Lord, and many other Souls, with those Graces which it becomes us to
approach Thee with, for the sake of Jesus Christ our Mediator and Advocate.

Amen.
III.
O Lord of Infinite Bounty and Power, I humbly pray Thee, give me a sincere and
unfeigned Repentance for all my Sins: Oh let the Remembrance of them be
grievous unto me, the Burden of their Influence and Power intolerable. Possess
me with a hearty Shame and Sorrow for that I have so basely and unworthily
affronted thy Infinite Majesty, and put my kind Savior to so much grief and
suffering to save me. Possess me with an earnest Hatred of what is so
displeasing to Thee as my Sins justly are; that I may earnestly and steadily
endeavor to cast them from me. Turn Thou my foolish Heart from the Love of all
Sin, to the Love of Thee. Do Thou, O Lord, who best know all the dark
Corners of my Heart, discover to me every lurking secret Evil, which I have not
been able by my Examination to observe; and let it now be brought forth and
slain before Thee.

Increase in me, O good Lord, I humbly pray, a lively Faith in thy Mercy,
through the Merits and Mediation of Jeus Christ. Help me firmly to believe thy
readiness to receive, and pardon Sinners that repent and return to Thee: To
rely with all Assurance on the Sacrifice and Atonement of thy Son's precious
Death: Raise in me the comfortable Hopes of all Mercy and Favor upon that sure
Foundation; and grant me to rejoice in Hopes of seeing thy Glory.

Oh that my Heart may be all on a Flame of Divine Love, even a whole
Burnt-offering, when I remember and consider my Savior's dying Love to
Sinners. Especially when I see him in this Sacrament, as it were evidentiy set
forth Crucified before Me: When I see there his broken Body, and his Blood
poured out; and consider that all this He suffered for Me. Oh let such a sight
affect me, as it ought to do, beyond all Expression. Oh let it transform me
into Love. Let it make such strong and lasting Impressions upon me, that I may
ever afterward be under the sweet and mighty Influences of Love; always be
guided by the Laws, and aiming at the Ends of Love. Let Love and Thankfulness
to Him greatly employ my Soul when I am at this Sacrament, and be from
thenceforth the great Concern and Business, the very form and Character of my
whole Life for ever.

And since my Love cannot redound to his Advantage, make it to flow abundantly
upon those that love Him. Give me a free Heart and Hand, and power to do much
good to them. According to my power I purpose to Exercise my Charity toward
them, and toward all Men, in Thought, Word and Deed at this Sacrament. I pray
that the Memorial of my dear Savior's Love may effectually inspire me to do
so: And I purpose, and desire, and pray, that Thou will be pleased to enable
me, to abound in Love and Good Works toward all Men, through the whole Course
of my Life.

Put, I beseech Thee, O Lord, my Soul in all respects into such a posture as
becomes the Remembrance of a Crucified Savior, that I may be well-pleasing and
accepted with Thee; That thou may delight over me to do me good; That I may
have Communion with Thee to the Joy and Comfort of my Soul; to the Increase of
Spiritual Strength; to the securing of my Perseverance in Holiness and
Righteousness all my days. All which I humbly ask in the Name of Jesus Christ;
and further crave whatever is comprehended in his most Absolute Form of Prayer,
saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Amen.
SECT. XIX. Directions for a Devout Behavior at the Communion.
THanks be to God we have so good provision made by our Church for the
Administration of this Blessed Sacrament; That any good Soul may receive it
with great Devotion and Comfort, who will but seriously attend to what is
appointed to be said and done in that Administration; as indeed many such
Souls, accustomed to it, have found by very comfortable Experience: Upon which
account it were much to be desired, and very advisable, That those who are wont
to attend this way but once in a Year, when they enter into an Office, would
persuade themselves to come more frequently to it; That they might do so with
the more comfort and advantage to their Souls, when that Occasion requires them
to do it: For the whole Business is so ordered, that it is very Apt and Fit to
stir up in us the lively and vigorous Exercise of all those Graces which are
required to Attend it. So that the best Advice which can be given for our due
and profitable Behavior at the Holy Communion is this: That the Communicant do
very closely Attend to what is ordered to be said and done by Him that
Ministers, or by the Communicant Himself, while they are upon this Duty.

But because the Communicants, especially where the Number is great, (as I wish
it were everywhere) will have some Spaces wherein they may employ themselves
in some private Ejaculations and Devotions; I shall not think it contrary to
the proposed Brevity of this Book, to afford them some such Devout Prayers and
Ejaculations as they may use; and I shall put them in their proper Places. But
these must be commonly very short, that they may not be diverted from joining
with the Public Office.

To begin then, where we usually begin this Administration.

When He that Ministers is reading those Sentences of Holy Scripture which are
designed to Exhort and Encourage the making our Offerings to Almighty God:
While you have your Offering in your Hand, or when you have given it, say,

O Lord of Heaven and Earth, Maker and Owner of all Things! All that I have and
am is from Thee, and all is Thine. Thou do give, and Thou have right to take
and use what Thou please of it: I humbly present This according to my
Ability; as an Acknowledgment of thy right in me, and in all that I have; and
of thy Bounty in giving it. I present, and I humbly entreat Thee to accept This
as a Token and Pledge of the Dedication of my self, and all that I have, to
serve and honor Thee. Sprinkle me, O Lord Jesus, and this my Duty with thy
precious Blood, and obtain for me, by thy Merits, a great Increase of all
Spiritual Gifts and Graces, to thy Glory and my Salvation. Amen.

When the Offerings are all received, and set upon the Altar: He that Ministers
proceeds to make Intercessions to God for the Whole State of Christ's Church
Militant here on Earth: In which it becomes every Devout Soul, as a Living
Member of that Church, to join with him, with very hearty Affections.

After this He proceeds to an Exhortation, which is designed to deterr all
those from drawing near to this Holy Ordinance, who are conscious to Themselves
that they have been negligent to prepare for it; and who live in any known Sin.
And then it goes on to Encourage those Humble Penitents, and Faithful Souls,
who have been careful to prepare Themselves; and to excite in them those
Dispositions with which they ought to come. It will be very proper for the
Communicant, while the Minister is reading this, to join with Him, and to turn
it into a Prayer, thus:

O God that searchest the Hearts, and triest the Reins of Men; and who have
commanded us to come to the Holy Communion of the Body and Blood of our Savior
Christ: Thou know I have diligently Examined my self before I would presume
to eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup; and have endeavored, that I might
with a true penitent Heart and lively Faith receive this Holy Sacrament, that
so I may to my great Benefit and Consolation spiritually eat the Flesh of
Christ herein, and drink his Blood; that I may be one with Christ, and Christ
with Me: And that I might not receive the same unworthily, nor, which I dread
to speak, be guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ my Savior, and so eat and
drink my own Damnation, not considering the Lord's Body: That I might not
kindle thy Wrath against me, but find favor in thy sight; That I might not
provoke Thee to plague me with Temporal Afflictions, but obtain the continuance
of such Comforts as I enjoy, and the bestowing of such as Thou see most
convenient for me; That I might not provoke Thee to cut me off by an untimely
Death, I have, according to the direction of thy Apostle, seriously judged my
self. Do not thou enter into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord, for in thy
sight shall no Man living be justified. I have repented my past Sins, and do
repent of them: I have endeavored to be possessed of a lively and steadfast Faith
in Christ my Savior; Lord increase my Faith. I resolve to amend, by the
Assistance of thy Grace, whatever Evil I shall be convinced of in my Life: And
I heartily seek thy Favor upon this just and reasonable Condition of being in
Charity with all Men. O Lord I forgive, let me be forgiven: And after all, I
most humbly pray Thee, who alone can do it to make me a meet partaker of
these Holy Mysteries. Above all, I give most humble and hearty Thanks to God
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for the Redemption of the World, by the Death
and Passion of our Savior Christ, both God and Man; Who did humble Himself
even to the Death upon the Cross for us miserable Sinners; Who lay in Darkness
and the shadow of Death, that He might make us the Children of God, and Exalt
us to Everlasting Life. I desire at this time with all Thankfulness to remember
the Exceeding great Love of our Master and only Savior in his thus Dying for
us; and the Innumerable Benefits which by his precious Bloodshedding He has
obtained to us. I heartily give Him thanks too, for that He has further shown
his Love to wretched Sinners in his Instituting and Ordaining Holy Mysteries
for Pledges of his Love, that we might have the move full Assurance of it, and
for a continual Remembrance of his Death to our Great and Endless Comfort. To
Him therefore with the Father and the Holy Ghost, I gave, as I am most bounden,
continual Thanks, submitting my self wholly to his Holy will and Pleasure, and
purposing that I will study to serve Him in true Holiness and Righteousness all
the Days of my Life.

Amen.

In the next place you are to join with the Minister with all Humility and true
Godly Sorrow in a Confession of Sins, and to receive by Him God's Absolution.

To the Sentences of Holy Scripture which. He next recites to encourage our
Faith and Hope in God, it may be proper to make in your Hearts some such
Answers as these.

To those Words of our Savior, Come unto me, etc.

Answer. Behold, O Lord, I come: Jesus, thou Son of David, have Mercy upon me.

To those Words, God so loved the World, etc.

Answer. O Father of Mercies, have Mercy upon me, and give me that Faith in thy
Son, that I may not Perish, but have Everlasting Life.

To the Words of St. Paul, This is a true Saying, etc.

Answer. Lord, I believe the Truth of this, and thankfully embrace so Important
a Truth: O Christ, save me, one of the chiefest of Sinners.

To the Words of St. John, If any Man sin, etc.

Answer. Be Thou, O Jesus, the Righteous, my Powerful Advocate with the
Father: O Father, accept of his Death as a Propitiation for my Sins.

To what the Minister says next, you are to make the Answers directed, and to
join with Him in the Praises and Prayers following.

After that the Bread and Wine is by the Prayer of Consecration set apart to
represent the Body and Blood of Christ; and while the Ministers are receiving,
you must look upon the Elements with an Holy, Awful Reverence, and sadly call
to Mind the Scourging, the Buffetings, the Crown of Thorns, the cruel Nails and
Spear which wounded and bruised, which tore and killed the Loving Jesus: You
may remember the more terrible Sufferings and sharp Agonies of his Soul; which
He endured especially when He made his Life an Offering for Sin. And you should
call to mind it was your Sins that gave Him all these Sufferings and Griefs;
that yet He endured them for your Advantage; And He was Scourged, that by His
stripes you might be healed; He shed His Blood to ransom you from Hell and
Misery; and died, that He might obtain for you Everlasting Life and Happiness.
And while the rest of the Company are receiving, if they are a good Number; you
will have leisure, and may very profitably entertain your self with reading
over the foregoing Exercises of Thankful Remembrance, Faith, etc. And in
reading them, you may Exercise those Graces as you ought to do. If there will
not be time to repeat them all, you may do well to choose some such a one or
more of them as is most suitable to the present State, and disposition of your
Mind. For the Devout Soul may be at one time more taken up in Admiration and
Praise of the Dying Love of Jesus Christ: At another time it may be especially
possessed with a deep Humiliation and Repentance; at another time it may be
elevated with the Hopes and Joys of Believing; Or engaged in making Earnest
Resolutions of Love, Obedience, and Gratitude to the Great Redeemer: Or in
Exercises of Charity to the miserable and sinful World; And your Entertainment
at this spare time may be chosen accordingly. Only this must be advised, in
relation to this matter, That you should make Observation of your self, whether
you do not too commonly fix your Meditations upon one and the same of these
Exercises, and so neglect the rest: For this must not be allowed; But you must
constrain your self, if need be, to use sometimes one, and sometimes another of
these, that so you may at times Exercise every Grace, and by the Exercise
increase in all.

When you go to Receive, and see the Minister approaching with the Sacred
Bread, which represents the broken Body of our Lord, look on it, and say:

Behold, my Soul, the Lamb of God, which takes away the Sins of the World.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and
Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing. Oh come Lord Jesus, take
possession of my Soul, and dwell Thou for ever with me; that I may be the more
fit for such a Happiness, transform me into thy Likeness, by the renewing of my
Mind. Open ye everlasting Doors of my Heart, that the King of Glory may come in.

When He delivers it to you, join with Him, and say:

The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for me, preserve my Body
and Soul unto Everlasting Life.

And as you are eating it, say within your self:

O Jesu, Thou art the Living, and Life, giving Bread, which comes down from
Heaven; which, whosoever eats, he shall live for ever. Thy Flesh is Meat
indeed, and thy Blood is Drink indeed: On Thee my hungry Soul shall feed, by my
Faith, with hearty Thankfulness. Let me taste and find, that Thou, Lord, art
Gracious; Thou that fillest the Hungry with good things, replenish me
abundantly with thy Grace. Oh let this Divine and Spiritual Food afford me much
Spiritual Strength and Refreshment.

When He delivers the Cup, join with Him, and say:

The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for me, preserve my Body
and Soul unto Everlasting Life.

And when you have drank it, say:

Thy Love, O King of Saints, is better than Wine. As the Apple Tree among the
Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons: We will remember thy Love
more than Wine: The Remembrance of thy wondrous Love shall be the frequent, and
the most pleasant Entertainment of my Life: Thy Love, O Jesu, shall comfort me
in my Sorrows; shall strengthen me in my Weakness; shall quicken and cure my
Sloth, and Backwardness to my Duty: Oh let thy Love even transform me into
Love. Amen.

O Father of Mercies, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom thou have set forth to
be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, behold, I beseech Thee, this
precious Sacrifice of thy Son! Behold it, I pray Thee, and turn away from me,
thy poor feeble Creature, all the Wrath and Vengeance which my Sins have
deserved. This is that on which I firmly and solely rely to find favor with
Thee; and this is that in which I know. Thou art well-pleased: Oh Father of
Mercies, have Mercy upon me. Deal always with thy Servant according to thy
Mercy; And teach me thy Statutes, that I may hereafter serve and please Thee in
Newness of Life: And I humbly hope and desire to be accepted with Thee, through
the Merits and Mediation of thy beloved Son, who died for our Sins, and rose
again for our Justification; is now set down at thy right hand, and ever lives
to make Intercession for us. Amen.

Taking notice of the Sacrament delivered to others, you may thus improve it.

Jesus, the rich and bounteous Lover, has good things in store for as many as
come unto Him: Jesus is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by
Him. Of his Fullness do all we receive, and Grace for Grace. See, my Soul! see
here thy Master's Bounty and Love! See Him here giving even Himself to His
Friends.

My Soul, if Jesus so loved us all, we ought also to love one another. This
Commandment has He left us, that He, who loves God, should love his Brother
also. Study, then, what Offices of Love and Kindness it may lie in thy Power to
do to any of these thy fellow Communicants, and resolve upon it, for the Kind
Jesus will take it as even done to Him. If thou love Him truly, thou must needs
love those whom He loves: Thou must pity them in all their Distresses,
Spiritual and Temporal, whom He has pitied in their Misery at so costly a Rate:
Thou must learn to forgive those whom He forgives: Thou must be liberal
according to thy Power, and their Necessities to those whom thou see the
Objects of his Bounteous Love. And especially thou must charge thy self not to
Hate, not to do any Despite or Injury to any of these; for even that too would
He take as done to Himself: Thou must not despise any of these for their mean
Condition in this World: He may have made the poor of this World rich in Faith:
Thou must not envy nor grudge at any of them whom the Providence of God has
favored more than He has done Thee in the Blessings of this World. Thou must
take heed always that thy Carriage be not a Scandal and Occasion of Sin to any
of these; that thou destroy not Him whom Christ died for. And blessed be thy
Name, O Lord, for these sweet and pleasant Laws. I willingly bind my self, O
Jesu, to Observe these thy Laws of Love. Oh thou great Pattern of Love, learn
me to Love.

O Kindest Jesu, thy Body was broken* and is divided amongst us to unite us to
Thee, and to one another. Let it be amongst us a Common Incentive of Mutual
Charity: Let it be, in its Effects, Unity of Spirit among us, a Bond of Peace,
and all Righteousness of Life in our Carriage one toward another. O Thou the
Great Fountain of Love, pour it abundantly into my Heart, and into the Hearts
of all thy Faithful People; That we may abound in Love one toward another;
and by thus bearing thy Glorious Character and Likeness, in Love, may show to
all Men that we are indeed thy Disciples. Amen.

When all have Communicated, and the Minister begins the Prayers that remain,
you are to leave off all private Devotions, and to join with Him and the
Congregation to the End.

After He has pronounced the Blessing, you may privately say:

To Him that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, and has
made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father: To Him with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be Glory and Dominion for ever, and ever. Amen.

Then rising from your Knees, kindly and courteously salute your Fellow
Communicants at the parting of the Congregation.

Some Private Devotions at Home, after the Communion.
SECT. XX. A Meditation on the Communion.
OH my Soul, seriously consider how thou have been honored, how thou have been
entertained in the House of God this Day! Thou have been a Guest to the King of
Saints, the Lord of Life and Glory: Divine Love has been thy Heavenly
Entertainment, and Man did eat Angel's Food. Thy Savior, thy Friend has
brought* Thee into his Banqueting House, his Banner over Thee was Love. Thou
can not surely very soon forget the Pleasures of this Feast: Has it not left
behind it a very pleasing relish? Has it not put thy Mouth quite out of taste
toward the things of this World? It is very fit that it should do so: It would
become Thee for some time after this to account this World's best Delights to
be but four and infipid; and certainly, if thou meditate upon the good
Entertainment thou have had, it will be so.

Jesus, the Glorious Son of God, was Master of the Feast thou have been at so
lately, and He was Himself the Feast. Jesus prepared it out of Love to Thee.
And because His great Love could not (as we may easily imagine) provide any
thing better, He provided Himself to be thy rich and costly Entertainment. He
has feasted thee with His Body and Blood. He has, in giving thee that Bread and
Wine, which was by the Minister, according to his appointment, consecrated and
set apart to represent His broken Body, and His Blood shed for Mankind, made
thee a partaker of the Spiritual Blessings and Benefits of His Death and
Passion. Oh how great Things has He then bestowed on thee! Where can thou
find again such Entertainment? What Enjoyments of this poor World could afford
it? And if He has given thee never so much of this World, He has herein given
thee that which is of infinitely greater value: And if He has given thee but
little of this World, thou have no reason to complain of Him who has been so
free, so bounteous to thee in so much better things. Say then to Him, Oh how
plenteous, how rich is thy Goodness, Lord, which Thou have in reserve for those
that fear Thee, and that hope in thy Mercy*

He has treated Thee with the Pardon of all thy Sins, however numerous, however
heinous and guilty. Can thou forbear to admire and praise so great a Favor?
Is it not wondrous that so vast a Debt should be so freely forgiven thee? Does
not this Forgiveness restore thee to the Almighty Favor and Love of God? And
give thee leave to ask, and ground to expect, from Reconciled Heaven, all that
is good for thee, and necessary to thy Salvation? Oh say then, Bless the Lord,
O my Soul: All that is within me praise his Holy Name; Who has redeemed my
Life from Destruction, who forgiveth all my Sins: Who crowns me with
Loving Kindness and tender Mercies: Oh, Blessed is the Man whose Transgression
is forgiven, whose Sin is covered: Blessed, O Lord Jesus is the Man that
puts his Trust in Thee.

He has bestowed on thee, my Soul, his Holy Spirit to dwell with, and to
sanctify thee, to fill thee with all Divine Graces: To heal all the Distempers
of thy Soul, thy uneasy, shameful Distempers; to make thee tolerable and
pleasant to thy self, and amiable and well-pleasing to Him. Oh happy Souls,
that are the Temples of this Holy Spirit! Where He dwells, all things shall be
in a beautiful Order; all things composed and calm, and peaceful; all full of
Joy: There is a Peace which the World cannot give, and a Joy unspeakable and
full of Glory. In them Heaven dwells already; They shall be acquainted with its
Incomparable Felicities here on Earth; and they are sealed hereby to the Day of
Redemption.

Thy loving Lord, then, has given thee at this Feast, too, the Pledges and
Earnests of Future Glory and Blessedness. He has even united thee to Himself
after a wonderful manner: He looks on thee as a Member of his own Body; Has
made thee Partaker in his Death, and intends thee to partake in his
Resurrection. He will not leave thy Soul in Hell, nor suffer thy Dead Body to
lie always under Dissolution. He will show thee the Path of Life, and thou
shall dwell at his right hand, where are Pleasures for ever-more: Thou shall
dwell in His presence, where is fullness of Joy.

Oh how like a God has thy glorious and kind Savior entertained thee! None
could ever bestow such things on thee but He. Thou have been treated as a
Favorite of Heaven, who can not choose but acknowledge thy self a poor, vile,
and contemptible Sinner. All these Blessings and Favors He has conferred upon
thee, and given thee in this Sacrament sensible Pledges and Tokens of them;
though thou art unworthy of the very meanest and the commonest of his Gifts to
Mankind. Assure thy self it was not for any Merit or Worthiness in thee that he
has been so Bountiful, but of his own free Motion! There is nothing of Debt in
his Love, but thou must look upon it as altogether Obligation.

And now, my Soul, thou must consider too the mighty Obligation he has laid
upon thee. Thou art able to promise, to do nothing in return for his Love, but
what he has infinitely obliged thee to. Should such a Love as this ever be
forgotten; or rather should thou not resolve that thou will always retain a
grateful Sense of it: And that such a Love shall be the greatest Joy and the
sweetest Delight of thy Life: That such a Love shall make an entire Conquest of
thee; and make thee subject to the pleasant Laws of it, through the whole
Course of thy Life. Thou can not sure, for shame, think of a less return,
than to give up thy self to Him; To live to Him that died for thee; To study
and love what will please Him, and do it in all things. No; thou can not
think of any thing less than of being His Servant, who has bought thee with so
great a Price! Who has ransomed thee from Hell and Everlasting Misery, and that
by his own cruel Sufferings and accursed Death.

And will it ever become thee, think thou, after thou have considered the
cruel Sufferings of Jesus for thy sake, to shrink or murmr at Sufferings, or
guiltily decline them? Will thou pretend to be Follower, a Disciple of Jesus,
and yet not be able to endure any thing grievous or inconvenient? Has he
suffered very grievous things for thee, worse by far than thou art able, or
wilt ever be called to suffer for his sake? And will thou suffer nothing for
Him? Was his way to Heaven encombred with sharp Thorns, and will it become thee
to murmr if thine be not strow'd with Roses? Was the Great and Glorious Jesus
despised in the World, and must thou be mightily respected and honored? Was
Jesus, the Son of David, (a rich and mighty King) mean and poor, and will
nothing serve thee but to be vastly and superfluously rich? For shame, my Soul!
These Desires cannot become thee. It is enough for the Disciple that he be as
his Master; and surely it is an Honor that the Servant be as his Lord. If thou will be a Follower of Jesus, thou must expect, as the World hated Him, saw no
form nor comeliness in Him; so it will hate, and it will scorn thee; It will
not see any thing to admire in thee: Consider the Sufferings of Jesus, and
harden thy self; Learn from Him to despise the Inconveniences of this Life;
learn to despise its Allurements. From his Indifferency toward it, it is thy
Duty and thy Honor to be very Indifferent too. And this, as all thy Duty, thou will find pleasant upon the trial of it, and a reward to it self. This will
give thee an invincible composure and peace of Mind, a happy Command and
Enjoyment of thy self under all the Vicissitudes and Changes of this mutable
uncertain World.

Consider further, my Soul; Has He blessed thee with the Pardon of all thy Sins?
And does not this oblige thee to take the utmost care that thou Sin no more?
Know, he that has had much forgiven him, should love much; and Love will not
let thee do any thing willingly, that is so displeasing and hateful to the
Kind and Holy Jesus, as the least Sin would be. Consider; Thy Sins were
pardoned to oblige thee to forsake them for ever; and this does greatly oblige
thee to it: It were horrid and monstrous Ingratitude, then, if the Pardon of
what is past should encourage thee to begin a new score. Oh, abhor the
Thoughts of this, and reckon thou art obliged to live with great Care of thy
self, to take great Heed to thy Ways, to shun even the Appearances of Evil, to
abhor and avoid, as much as thou can, all Temptations to Wickedness.

Consider, my Soul, the Holy Spirit is come to dwell with Thee; to Consecrate
Thee to be a Sacred Temple to Himself! Oh Divine Guest! Oh how great is thy
Honor and thy Happiness! Will thou not let Him know that thou do account it
both? Will thou not study to be easy to such a Guest? To show him the greatest
respects? Know then, that he must Rule in thy Heart; He must be, not in
Complement only, but, in Reality Master of the House He is Honorable enough,
surely, to have such Respect done Him: And it will be thy Advantage to give it
Him. He will order all things better there than ever thou could do without
Him. And thou must take care that thou never admit thy Lusts or vile Affections
again; He will not dwell with such vile Company; If thou would retain the
Happiness of his Presence, they must be for ever banished from thy Soul: And
sure it should be very easy for thee to see it is not fit that they should be
allowed so much as a Competition with Him.

Consider too how it becomes a Soul to live, that is designed an Inhabitant of
Heaven; that is already made free of the New Jerusalem, which is above. Should
you not now conform your Manners to that bright Company? Should you not
consider what a kind of Life they lived when they were here on Earth; and set
your self to follow Them, as they were Followers of Jesus? The Virtues which
were so eminent in their Lives, must also shine in yours. They were not many of
them Emperors, and Kings, and Queens on Earth, because that Fortune, shall I
say, or rather that Burden, falls to the shares of but few among Mankind:
Neither were they, it may be, many of them vastly rich, and more than they
needed to be; But, which is better, and of more Advantage to themselves than
either of these, They were poor in Spirit; They were humble and meek; They were
temperate and sober; They were very good and merciful; All their Zeal and
Concern was to Advance the Glory of God. These are the steps thou must tread
in; This the Way thou must follow, to follow them to Bliss; Thou can not come
to their End in any contrary Way: Thou must not be conformed to this World, but
be transformed by the Renewing of thy Mind.

Thou must not eagerly hunt after the Pleasures, the Wealth and the Preferments
of this World. It would become thee to be ever very Indifferent toward them,
as having already tasted and enjoyed far better Things than they: What is
capable to afford thee incomparably more pleasure and satisfaction: And
especially would this become thee, as being entitled to far better things: To
more durable and useful Riches, more solid and lasting Pleasures, and to far
higher Dignities and Preferments These, thy Savior and Friend, has given thee
Pledges and Assurances of at this Sacrament; and these He will bestow at the
Last Day to those that Love and Fear Him.

For thou may expect that this Jesus, whose humble Sufferings and Death thou
have now Commemorated, will come again in Glory, with the Hosts of Glorious
Angels attending Him, to Judge both the Quick and the Dead: He will come to
take Vengeance, in Flames of Fire, on them that Obey not his Gospel And will
come to reward all his faithful Servants, to be glorified and admired for his
Bounty and Rewards to all them that Believe. Oh consider well, my Soul, that
Awful, Certain Day; And such as thou would then be found, endeavor now to
be; If this Life be diligently employed in thy Master's Work; the performance
of those Duties which belong to thy Station, and Calling, and Relations; He
will then say to thee, Well done good and faithful Servant, enter thou into
thy Master's joy. It will be more to thy advantage, then, to have denied thy
self now for thy Master's Honor and Service, than to have indulged and pleased
thy self in all things. It will be of greatest advantage to thee, then, to be
found to have been Sober and Temperate, and Good, and Righteous, and Religious:
When all the Honors, and all the Favor and Applause of that Day will be given
to such; And no other Differences among Men shall be regarded, but their
Differences in these things. Be sure, my Soul, it will not then repent thee,
whatever it does now cost to gain the Rewards and Honor of that Day. Resolve
firmly, then, for a Good and Holy Life; Be never a-weary of Well-doing, for
there is an Everlasting Rest which shall receive thee at the End of it, and the
time before thou will reach it is but short. Be not discouraged by any
Difficulties thou may meet with; If thou will boldly strive, thou shall
overcome them all, through Christ strengthening thee: To whom with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, One Ever-blessed God, be all Honor and Glory, World
without End.

Amen.

SECT. XXI. PRAYERS for a Suitable Conversation.
I.
OGod, the Strength of all them that put their Trust in Thee; Mercifully accept
my Prayers; and because through the Weakness of our Mortal Nature, we can do no
good Thing without Thee, grant me the Help of thy Grace, that in keeping thy
Commandments I may please Thee both in Will and Deed, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
II.
OLord, the Fountain of all Power and Might, grant, I beseech Thee, to me thy
Servant, Grace to withstand the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil; And with a pure Heart and Mind to follow and serve Thee the Only true
and living God; And let me be accepted with Thee in all my Service, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

III.
OAlmighty God, who alone can Order the unruly Wills and Affections of
sinful Men, Grant unto me thy Servant, that I may love the Things which Thou
Command, and desire those Glorious Things which Thou do promise; That so
among the sundry and manifold Changes of this World, my Heart may surely there
be fixed, where true Joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

IV.
LOrd of all Power and Might, who art the Author and Giver of all Good Things;
Graft in my Heart the Love of thy Name; Increase in me true Religion; Nourish
me in all Goodness, and of thy Great Mercy keep me in the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

V.
O Lord, who have taught us; that all our Doings, without Charity, are nothing
worth: Send thy Holy Spirit, I beseech Thee, and pour into my Heart that most
Excellent Gift of Charity, the very Bond of Peace, and of all Virtues; without
which, whosoever lives, is Dead before Thee. Grant this for thy Only Son
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

VI.
ALmighty God, who have given thy Only, Son to be unto us both a Sacrifice for
Sin, and also an Example of Godly Life: Give me Grace that I may always most
Thankfully accept that his Inestimable Benefit, and also daily endeavor my
self to follow the Blessed Steps of his most Holy Life, through the same Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

VII.
GRant, I beseech Thee, Almighty God, that like as I do believe thy
Onelybegotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, to have Ascended into the Heavens; so
I may also in Heart and Mind thither ascend, and with Him continually dwell,
who lives and reigns with Thee and the Holy Ghost, One God, World without
End.

Amen.
VIII.
MAy the Peace of God, which passes all Understanding, keep my Heart and Mind
in the Knowledge and Love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; And the
Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be upon me
and remain with me always.

Amen.
IX.
GLory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was in
the Beginning, is, now, and ever shall be, World without End.

Amen.
SECT. XXII. A PRAYER of Recollection.
THIS contains the Sum of this Book, and is made fit to be used after the
reading any parts of it in the Family or Closet.

O Most Great and Glorious God! Lord of Heaven and Earth, Infinite in Majesty
and Glory, and in thy Greatness unsearchable. All things that are, do derive
from Thee, the Fountain of Beings, all their Excellency, and all their Power.
Thou art worthy of the greatest Reverence from the Highest Angels; worthy of
our Godly Fear and most Awful Adorations; art Exalted in thy Greatness above
all our Blessing and Praise. And as thy Greatness is Infinite, so is also thy
Goodness; which Thou have exercised in a manner suitable to thy Excellent
Greatness: For Thou art in all things like thy self, and there is none besides
Thee like unto Thee. In wondrous Wisdom and Goodness have Thou made the World,
bounteously communicating Being and Happiness among thy Creatures. But thy
Goodness has peculiarly shown it self in thy dealing with Mankind, and appeared
in amazing Glories. It appears within us, and in all things that are round
about us. Thou have made Man a Noble Creature, little lower than the Angels.
Thou did Endow Him with thy Glorious Image in Righteousness and true
Holiness. Thou Crowned'st Him with Honor and Dignity, giving Him Dominion over
the Works of thy Hands. Thou have built this Beauteous World for his
Habitation, and plentifully furnished it with all things necessary and
delightful to Him. All our Senses present us with many Instances of thy
Goodness to us, the Earth is full of it; Day unto Day utters Speech, and
Night unto Night shows the Knowledge of This. We cannot without the greatest,
and the most wilful Blindness, fail to see it; nor without the most unworthy
and disingenuous Ingratitude, forget or neglect to Acknowledge it.

But this, O Lord, is that which we must, with Shame and Self-abhorrence,
accuse our selves of. All thy Goodness, and the Obligations of it, were soon
forgotten by our First Parents, and they rebelled against Thee: And we are
their true and vile Offspring, going astray from the Womb, living in Enmity
against Thee, and despising thy Commandments. All the Wickedness of the World,
and the Affronts Thou have received from it, Thou did foresee; and yet of thy
great Patience and Forbearance did spare our First Parents, and permit Them
to propagate their base and corrupt Nature! And this gives us occasion, O Lord,
to reflect upon the greatest and most glorious Exercise of thy Goodness to
Mankind. When we were all guilty before Thee, and Obnoxious to thy Eternal
Wrath; And thy Honor, and thy Justice did require our utter Rejection and
Perdition. Yet even then did thy Wisdom and Goodness contrive and afford us a
Way and Means of Salvation: And thy Infinite Greatness, though so exceedingly
Affronted, did condescend to a Concern to save us; And a way was found out
suitable to thy Greatness, and our Necessity. Even then did God the Father so
love the World, that He gave his Onelybegotten Son, that whosoever Believes in
Him should not Perish, but have Everlasting Life: And then did God the Son, in
his Infinite Compassion to Mankind, offer Himself to be our Mediator; And He
undertook to purchase for us the Divine Favor which we had lost at the Cost of
his own Abasement, in taking our Nature, and of dying a Sacrifice for the Sins
of Men. Oh how unwearied, Lord, has thy Kindness and Mercy been toward us! And
how odious and detestable are all our Transgressions against Thee! When we
consider Thee, O Lord, and the Obligations which Thou have laid upon us, we are
even confounded to think of the exceeding Vileness and Enormity of our Sins. We
are therefore forced, O Lord, to abhor our selves; We humble, we abase our
selves before Thee. We acknowledge thy greatest Displeasure against us to be
Just and Righteous; and must own, that we have deserved Thou should throw us
into the Everlasting Fire which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But,
Blessed be thy Name, there is Mercy with Thee, and Thou art, through the
Undertaking of our Blessed Mediator, a God forgiving Iniquity, Transgression
and Sin. We praise Thee, we magnify Thee, O Lord, for thine Inestimable Love
in the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ. Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, for this wonderful Favor and
Relief in our low and desperate Condition. Encouraged, O Father, by the
Sacrifice of thy Son, and relying upon the Merits of it, we return unto Thee:
We desire to return to our Duty. We gladly and thankfully accept of the new
Offers of Grace and Favor with Thee, which Thou art pleased to make us; We
submit to the gentle and easy Terms thou requirest of us, and we humbly seek
thy Favor upon those Conditions. We were, O Lord, by the kind Dispensation of
thy Providence, in our early Infancy, dedicated to Thee, and engaged in that
Happy Covenant, which Thou affordest us as the Way of our Salvation: But we
must with shame confess, that we have broken this Covenant, and lived in too
great Neglect of it; and have added to the other Heinousness and Wickedness of
our vile Sins, the great Guilt of breaking our Vows and Promises to Thee. As
sensible of our unworthy Behavior, again, O Lord, we desire to renew those
Bonds, and we earnestly desire they may be so confirmed by this renewal of
them, as that they may never be broken any more. We renounce this wicked World,
our own corrupt Nature, and thine Adversary the Devil; We purpose not to suffer
our selves to follow, nor be led by them. We will receive, O Lord, what Thou
requirest us to believe; And we devote our selves to keep and obey thy Holy,
Just and Good Commandments, through the whole Course of our Lives: To be always
under the Influence and Power of Love to Thee, and to our Neighbors: To love
Thee with all our Heart, with all our Soul, and with all our Might; and our
Neighbor as our selves. O Father of Mercies, graciously accept of our
Repentance, and return unto Thee: Look upon the Death of thy Son, and turn from
us all thy Wrath: Justify us freely by thy Grace; Pardon all our Sins upon the
account of it; take us into thy Service, and grant that we may ever hereafter
please Thee in Newness and Holiness of Life.

Jesus, Thou Son of God, have Mercy upon us, O Christ hear us; be Thou our
Advocate with thy Father! By thy Holy Nativity and Circumcision; by thy
Meritorious Cross and Passion; by thy Precious Death and Burial; by thy
Glorious Resurrection and Ascension take us into thy Care and Protection: Thou
that have done all these things for us, have Mercy upon us: O be Thou Jesus to
us, and save us from our Sins: Give us, according to thy promise, to them that
receive Thee, the Glorious Privilege to become the Sons of God: We accept of
Thee, O Lord, as a King to Rule us, and will study to know and endeavor to
Obey thy Commands: We earnestly desire thy Teaching as our Great Prophet; and
will receive and comply with thy Divine Instructions, however contrary they are
to the corrupt Bias of our Nature, and our Love of this World. Lord, we
purpose to conform our selves to them by the Direction of thy Excellent
Example, and not to be conformed to this World. And we will always acknowledge
our utter unworthiness of the least Good, and place all our Hopes in thy Merits
and Intercession as our Great High Priest. O let us find by the good success of
all our Humble Addresses, that Thou have Compassion on our Miseries, and do
ever live to make Intercession for us.

But, alas, we have promised and resolved more than we are able to perform
without the Influence and Assistance of thy Good Spirit. We therefore Address
our selves to Thee, O Blessed Spirit: Come down, we beseech Thee, into our
Hearts; replenish us abundantly with thy Grace; let us become thy Sacred
Consecrated Temples, and do thou evermore dwell in us: Banish and purge out of
us for ever all that is contrary and displeasing to Thee. Teach us, that
denying all ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we may live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present World. Write thy Law in our Hearts, that
we may never depart from it. Increase and maintain our Faith; Increase and
continue our Love; Cherish all Grace in us; and cause us to persevere in
Holiness, and Virtue, and Welldoing, to the End of our Lives. Keep us in the
Knowledge and Love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. We purpose, O
Holy Spirit, duly to wait for thy Blessed saving Influences in a diligent
attendance on thy Sacred Ordinances, the Word and Sacraments: Oh let us be
always in due fitness to attend them, when the happy Opportunities of doing so
are afforded us; and let them be always blessed to us, and be effectual to
promote our Sanctification, and Salvation.

[Insert this when this Prayer is used in the Morning.]

We give Thanks to the God of all Mercies for the safe Protection, the quiet
and comfortable Rest of the last Night: We devote this Day and all our Lives to
thy Service, in the Duties which Thou give us to do; Assist us mercifully, O
Lord, in all, and Accept us in Jesus Christ.

[Insert this when this Prayer is used at Night.]

Enlighten our dark Souls, we beseech Thee, O Lord, with all the Knowledge that
is necessary to our Salvation: Fill us with Devout Affections, and let thy Love
always possess and rule us: Be Thou, we pray, our Protection this Night from
all the Perils and Dangers of it.

May the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God the Father; and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with us all henceforth for evermore.

Amen.
Our Father which, etc.
FINIS.
Books printed for B. Aylmer.
SIX Sermons: One of Stedfastness in Religion; Two of Family Religion; Three of
the Education of Children; and One of the Advantages of an Early Piety.

A Persuasive to Frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
In Octavo. Price 3 d.

Both by his Grace, John, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Four Last Things: viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell: Practically
Considered and Applied, in several Discourses. By William Bates, D. D.
Recommended as proper to be given at Funerals.

Books Published by the Author of this.
Reformed Devotions in Meditations, Hymns and Petitions for Every day in the
Week, and every Holy Day in the Year.

The Excellent Woman, described by her True Characters and their Opposites;
being part of a Translation out of French.

Family Devotions, for Sunday-Evenings throughout the Year; being Practical
Discourses, with Suitable Prayers: Vol. I. II. containing each Thirteen
Sermons: The other Two, intended to make a Set for the whole Year, are almost
finished, and designed to be committed to the Press soon after Christmas, to be
Published together: Printed for John Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard.


