Mr. Tho. Dangerfeilds PARTICULAR NARRATIVE, OF THE LATE Popish DESIGN To
Charge those of the Presbyterian Party WITH A PRETENDED CONSPIRACY AGAINST His
MAJESTY'S PERSON, AND GOVERNMENT.

Written by Himself.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Hills, John Starkey, Thomas Basset, John Wright,
Richard Chiswell, and Samuel Heyrick. 1679.

TO THE READER.
HAving Lately been Engaged, through the Wicked, and Malicious Instigation of
the Countess of Powis, the five Popish Lords in the Tower, and their
Accomplices, in a horrid, and damnable Design of Charging the Presbyterians,
with a Pretended Plot against the Present Government, and Religion by Law
Established; And through God's great Mercy to my Self, and to many Hundreds in
this Kingdom and I hope to the whole Nation in General; coming to have a true
sense of the Guilt that I had thereby contracted, I resolved to make a full,
and perfect Discovery of whatsoever I had been made Privy to, in order to the
same; and accordingly, with my own hand did freely, and voluntarily Write a
True and Faithful Account thereof, without being Allured, or Threatened so to
do, or Prompted in the doing of it, by any person whatsoever: And to prevent
all Suspicion of any such thing; I desired to be (and was accordingly) confined
to an Apartment; and there kept without Conversing with any person, till I had
finished the same; which was on Friday the last of October; at which time I
desired to be brought before; the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of the City
of London, before whom I Exhibited what I had so Written, and in the presence
of his Lordship, the Right Honorable the Earl of Bridge-Water, and other
worthy Magistrates of the City, I did attest the same upon Oath. Since which
time some others have undertaken without my privity, to Publish Relations of
what I then Deposed; In which upon perusal of the same, I find some things
omitted, others mistaken, or not so fully and particularly related as I could
wish. And so, resolving with my self, that since I was the first, and am
hitherto the sole professed Discoverer of the said Design, and Conspiracy; it
would be very Satisfactory to all Protestants, to receive a particular and
exact Relation of the Designs that were Formed against themselves, from my own
hand; I set pen to Paper, and digested what I then Deposed, into this ensuing
Discourse; in which I have not omitted any thing, that is material of what I
was engaged in, or otherwise admitted to the knowledge of; but have given a
faithful Relation of things, as they followed in course of time; to the end
that all such as are concerned for the Welfare and Prosperity of their Religion
and Country, may be the more fully convinced, how much it is for their
interest, to endeavor the disappointing all future Contrivances of that Party,
that is so active and industrious to promote their own interest, under a
pretense of Religion; which is the benefit that I hope will accrue by the
Publishing of this Narrative, to all English men, and Protestants.

In vain is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird.

Thomas Dangerfeild.

The Contents of the ensuing Narrative.
MIstress Cellier undertakes to procure Mr. Dangerfield his Liberty, in order
to the employing him in some matter of great Concern. page 2. 3 Mr. Dangerfield
at the Instigation of Mrs. Cellier, Mr. Munson, and Mr. Kemish, two Priests,
treats with one Stroud a Prisoner in the King's Bench, to overthrow Bedlow 's
Testimony, and lay heinous Crimes to his Charge. p. 3. 4 A device to have Mr.
Dangerfield Examined as a Witness for the King, and in his Depositions to
disclose such matter as should be Evidence for the Lords in the Tower. p. 7 Mr.
Dangerfield is furnished with Money by the Lords in the Tower, to Compound his
Debts and get out of Prison. p. 7 Mr. Dangerfield is sent into Buckinghamshire,
to one Mr. Web 's House, with a Letter to a Priest that lay concealed there,
and went by a Woman's name: and returns with Directions for the Fathering a Plot
upon the Presbyterians. p. 9. 10 A Conspiracy to procure an Indictment of
Perjury against Dr. Oats. p. 14. 15 Mr. Dangerfield and others sent about to
several Coffee-Houses to spread a Rumor of a Plot, carried on by the
Presbyterians, and to disperse Libells. p. 16. 17 Counterfeit Letters framed by
Nevel; and Persons employed to Transcribe and disperse them, in order to the
giving false Allarms of a Presbyterian Plot. p. 17. 18. 19 The manner of Sir
George Wakeman 's making his escape into Flanders. p. 19. 20 Mr. Dangerfield
sent for to the Tower, and there dealt with, by the Lord Arundel, to kill the
King for a Reward of 2000 l. and by the Lord Powis, to kill the Earl of
Shaftsbury for 500 l. The former of which Proposals he rejects, but embraces
the latter. p. 21. 22. 23 The Lord Castlemain Author of the late Book, called
The Compendium. p. 23 Mr. Dangerfield enjoined Penance for refusing to kill the
King. p. 23. 24 Mr. Gadbury assures Mr. Dangerfield, upon the Calculation of
his Nativity, That he might kill the King without any danger to himself. p. 25.
26 Sir Robert Peyton, at Mr. Gadbury 's Persuasion, treats with the Lord
Peterborough, in order to a Reconciliation with the Duke of York, and is by him
introduced to his R. H. p 24. 25. 28. 29. 34. etc The Lady Aburgaveny 's
Project for Mr. Dangerfield to procure access to the Earl of Shaftsbury. p. 28
A summary account of the Book, together with the List of the four Clubs, found
in the Meal-Tub. p. 31. 32 Mr. Dangerfield being introduced by the Lord
Peterborough to the D. of Y. and by him ordered to go to the King, acquaints
them both with a Plot carried on by the Presbyterians to alter the Government.
p. 34. 35 The Countess of Powis gives Mr. Dangerfield Instructions how to
behave himself, and frame his Discourse, when he should be brought to his
Majesty's Presence to give an account of the new Plot. p. 35 Mr. Dangerfield
Confesses, and Receives the Sacrament in order to his Murdering the Earl of
Shaftsbury. p. 37 Mr. Dangerfields first and second Attempt to Murder the Earl
of Shaftsbury at his House in Aldersgate Street. p. 37. 38. 39 The Lord
Peterborough 's Encouragement of Mr. Dangerfield to go on. p. 40. Mr.
Dangerfield by the Countess of Powis 's order lodges treasonable Papers in
Mansell 's Chamber. p. 41. 42 Mr. Dangerfield endeavors twice to obtain a
Warrant from Mr. Secretary Coventry to search Mansell 's Lodgings, which Mr.
Secretary refuses. p. 40. 42. 43 Mansell 's Lodgings are searched by
Customhouse-Officers, and the Papers found. p. 43 Instructions given to Mr.
Dangerfield by the Countess of Powis, how to clear himself from the suspicion
of having lodged the Papers in Mansell 's Room. p. 49. 50. 51 The Examination
of Anne Blake, Servant to Mrs. Cellier. p. 51 The Examination of Mrs. Cellier.
p. 52. 53 The Examination of the Countess of Powis. p. 53. 54 The Lord
Peterborough 's Depositions and Defense at the Council Board. p. 61. 62. 63.
etc Depositions and Examinations of several Persons relating to the New-Plot.
p. 45. 46. and so on to the end of the Book.
THE NARRATIVE OF Mr. Tho. Dangerfield.
ABout the latter end of March, last past, one Mrs. White, who had been a
Prisoner diverse times in Newgate and Convicted, was released out of Prison by
one Mrs. Cellier; And the said Mrs. White, in regard I had been very
instrumental for her Enlargement, came diverse times to Newgate, where I was
Prisoner also, to visit me; where she discovered, That I did profess the Roman
Catholic Faith, and likewise, That some difference had arisen between Captain
Richardson and me, upon which I had sworn a Revenge. From that time I began to
make it my business to inspect his Usage of Prisoners, where I found some
ground for drawing up Articles against him; which accordingly I did, and
acquainted Mrs. White with it, who told me, I did very well, and That she would
bring a Lady to me, who would give me great Encouragement in that Affair. And
about two days after, she brought the said Mrs. Cellier, who was very friendly
to me, and after a strict inquiry into the Cause of my Confinement, as also
concerning my Religion, Parentage, Education, and Travels, demanded, If I were
capable of undertaking Business? I answered, Yes; then says she, For the
present let me see how you can draw up those Articles against Captain
Richardson, and thereupon gave me some Instructions for the same in Writing.

But it is to be supposed, That Mrs. Cellier and Mrs. White, from whom she had
taken the said Instructions, had thoroughly consulted my Condition and Capacity
before Mrs. Cellier came to me; and as I was informed Mrs. White and Mrs.
Cellier, soon after they were acquainted, made diligent enquiry after the
Prisoners in Newgate, and asked, If it were not possible to find a Man of
Courage amongst them, and one who would Reform? and the said Mrs. White, having
such an opinion of me, made this the chief occasion of Mrs. Cellier's Visit.

But I drew up Articles, pursuant to the Directions I had received, which,
together with those which I had drawn from my own Observation, amounted to so
considerable a Charge, as, if the Particulars could have been sufficiently
proved, it must certainly have been very prejudicial to Captain Richardson. The
Articles are too long, and not worth while to be here inserted. So I refer the
Readers, if they desire to satisfy their Curiosity, to the Coffee-houses,
where they are to be seen at all times. At the second time of Mrs. Cellier's
coming, I had finished them, and she perused the Papers, and liked them well,
and expressed much sorrow for my Misfortunes, saying she would use all possible
means for my Enlargement, and told me she had something of far greater moment
for me to undertake than that, but in the mean time advised me to complain to
Mr. Recorder of Captain Richardson, for his hard usage of me in the Prison; and
told me, That she would immediately go to Alderman Jeffreys, and make, by
Alderman Jeffreys his means, such Interest with Mr. Recorder, as Captain
Richardson could not oppose; and that my Request should be granted.

The Sunday following I went to the Recorder, where I found all performed that
Mrs. Cellier had promised; and I no sooner moved for any favor, but it was
granted, especially that of having better usage, whilst I continued in Prison,
which accordingly I found.

The next time Mrs. Cellier sent her Maid to me; who in her Mistresses Name bad
me be of good courage, for I should in a short time be at Liberty; about two
days after, her Mistress came, and told me, Mr. Williams the Solicitor was
employed, to get me Let out upon Bail, but in the mean time, that I should want
for nothing; and bad me as often as I had occasion for Money or other
necessaries, to send to her House in Arundel-Street, and I should be Furnished,
as I often did do and was supplied accordingly.

About two days after, Mrs. Cellier sent her Maid to me with a Message, that
her Mistress was gone to Peterley in Buckingham-shire, about extraordinary
business, but would return in a day or two, which business, might if I were
willing, be much to my advantage: the said Maid came to me every day after
that, either to bring me Money, or to enquire of my health and condition.

When Mrs. Cellier returned to Town, she came to see me (I being still in
Newgate) and said, within a day or two I should be enlarged; and at the same
time at my entreaty, she gave one Godfrey a Roman Catholic and a Prisoner,
Money to relieve him, and has ever since allowed him a weekly Pension; the next
day, she sent her Maid with my Discharge under Mr. Recorders hand, who had
taken Bail for me, and desired to know what the Charge of the House came to;
which I cast up and sent her; and immediately after, the Maid returned with the
Money, I paid the Charges of the Prison, and was absolutely Discharged from
thence, but immediately, or before I was well out of those rude limits, I was
Arrested and carried to the Counter, which Mrs. Cellier was much troubled to
hear of; and the next day sent her Maid to me to know the cause of it, which I
told her, and how much Money would purchase my Liberty, with this the Maid went
to her Mistress, and immediately returned with Money and this Answer,

That her Mistress had ordered business for me to do within two days, of great
consequence, and if I could get out by that time, she would purchase my
enlargement at any rate; but if not, her Mistress could not tell whether ever I
should be freed by her or no.

Now upon these words, I being as desirous of the fresh Air, as any person
could be who had suffered a years Imprisonment, as I had done, sent for a
Solicitor, and (it being within the Term) gave order for a Habe as Corpus,
which was prosecuted with such expedition, by one Mr. Scarlet, that the next,
being Monday morning, it was allowed, and I brought to the Kings Bench Bar, and
from thence turned over (according to the course of that Court) to the Kings
Bench, from whence I sent Mrs. Cellier this following Letter:

Madam,
I Am now in a greater Labyrinth than ever; and am heartily sorry I have
exposed you to so much Charge, that I am not capable either of congratulation,
or restitution, wherefore I refer all to your good and charitable
consideration, etc.

Willoughby.


Her Answer by her Maid the same day, was as follows:
Sir,
I Suppose your expensive business has drein'd your Pockets; I here send you 20
s. and promise, since I have undertaken the thing, I will see you at Liberty;
and not only so, but make your Fortune if you will be ruled, and in order to it
I will be with you tomorrow. I am

E. C.


By the Maid she obliged me to return this Letter again, and all others which I
should at any time receive from her, during the time of my Confinement there;
which I did, and was much satisfied with the Contents of Mrs. Cellier's
Letters. The next day Mrs. Cellier came in disguise to the King's Bench, and
told me, I should be well provided for; and gave me 20 s. and promised me every
Week as much, and that if that were not enough, I should have more. This, as I
understood by the Maid, was about the time, when, by reason of Sir William
Waller's making Search after Mrs. Cellier, she was forced to quit her own
House, and retire to Powis-House in Lincolns-Inn-fields; and, I suppose, her
putting her self into that Disguise in which she came to me, was upon the same
occasion. Then Mrs. Cellier promised before Mr. Bannester, to provide Clothes
and such other Necessaries as I should want, against I came abroad; and that I
should not lie long there; but however, that I could do as much good there as
if I were abroad, and she walked with me in the Garden, and discoursed to this
purpose:

We are informed, said she, that one Stroud, a Prisoner here, has been a
Conversant formerly of Bedlow's, and that Bedlow now writes several Letters to
him, and sends him Money, which Letters he brags much of when he is drunk, and
often has sworn to Mr. Munson and Mr. Kemesh, That Bedlow was fearful of him;
and that to prevent the coming to light of something that Stroud could disclose
against him, he sent him so much Money per Week; but Stroud swears, If ever he
gets abroad, and that he may have any to support him, he will quickly bring
Matter enough to hang Bedlow; nay, and that he has it in his Pocket, and will
frequently pull out a Packet of Letters, and sometimes pretend, in passion,
the Lords in the Tower were much to blame, to suffer such a Villain to give
Testimony against them, saying, If they would be ruled by him, Bedlow should do
them no hurt. This, she told me, was very material, and that Stroud knew much
of Bedlow's Life and Conversation; and that my business was, to observe Stroud
and get acquainted with him; and that it would much conduce to the making my
Fortune, if I could by any means know the bottom of Stroud, or if I could bring
him over to be a Witness for the Lords, or by any means persuade him to show me
any, or all the Letters and Papers he had in his Pocket which concerned Bedlow;
which I promised I would endeavor to accomplish, and forthwith make the
Attempt, telling her withal, that the thing was already half done, for I had
been familiarly acquainted with Stroud some years since, and therefore had the
greater hopes of Succeeding. Then Mrs. Cellier recommended to me the Advice of
one Mr. Munson and Kemish, both Priests and Prisoners there, very good
religious Men, as she said, who would not only advise me how to proceed, but
give me an account more at large of the whole Design, and also give me good
Instructions in matters of Religion, if I desired it; which advice I promised
to follow: then she left me, saying, She would give Mr. Munson notice to speak
to me; and about two days after, I being in the Garden, Mr. Munson spoke to me
privately, and bid me follow him into his Chamber, which I did, where I found
Mr. Kemish also. They told me what a good Character they had received of me,
and that I had suffered much in Newgate for the sake of my Religion, and many
such like stories; and that Mrs. Cellier had given them an account by Letter,
That I was acquainted with the said Stroud, and upon that account the more fit
to manage the business. Then they told me, Stroud had diverse Letters about him,
that concerned Bedlow, and some which Stroud had received from him since the
time of his Imprisonment, and desired me to drink with Stroud; but first asked
me, If my Head would bear Drink? to which I answered, Yes; If not, said Munson,
I will give you a Preparative that shall enable you; but I did not stand in
need of any such thing, but treated with Stroud, to very good purpose, of which
I will shortly give you a full Account, for whatever he said at any time, that
was material, I put into Writing. Then I again went to Munson and Kemish, and
told them what progress I had made in the business with Stroud; they seemed to
be well pleased with it, and highly commended my diligence, and withal, the
better to encourage me, said, They had that day received a Letter from the
Countess of Powis, which concerned me, but it was committed to the flames, (for
they were cunning enough to keep no Papers by them of any Importance, as being
liable to Searches that were likely to be made there on the least suspicion)
but promised to show me the next that should come; which they accordingly did,
for there came one from the Countess about two days after, and then Mr. Munson
gave me a private Sign to go to his Chamber, which I did; and there he and
Kemish read the Letter, the Contents whereof were (in part) as follows:

Sir,
You must persuade Mr. Willoughby, to scour his Kettle and Receive (which is to
Confess, and receive the Sacrament) to be true to the Cause. The residue of the
Letter I cannot remember.


Soon after I went to Confession to Mr. Munson, and went into Kemeshes Room,
where he was reading Mass, and of him I received the Sacrament, and from that
time was admitted into their Church (though I had for some years before
professed the same Religion) then I went into Munson's Chamber, where I had
some little Discourse not worth mentioning here, after which he gave me free
Toleration to drink with Stroud, but I scrupled whether it were safe for me,
who had that day received the Sacrament to drink, and perhaps be Drunk, with
Stroud or any other; to which he replied, that inasmuch as he had given me
leave, I should not sin in so doing, especially since it was for the Good of
the Cause. And farther told me, if Stroud were forward in discourse, I should
offer him a hundred or two hundred pounds; then I ask't what the consequence of
it would be, if he should accept of the proposal and I not be able to make it
good? I said I was afraid it might spoil the whole Design, nay said he, let me
alone for that, if he can but be induced to comply with us, I am sure the Lords
in the Tower will perform the conditions; and as convenicy offered for my next
Attempt upon Stroud, I took that course, but to little or no effect. In a day
or two after this (I having first given an account to Mrs Cellier of the bad
success I had with Stroud, and that I could gain nothing upon him worth the
time and the money I spent with him;) one Mr. Henry Nevel alias Pain, was
removed by Habeas Corpus from the Fleet-Prison to the Kings Bench, (which as
Mrs. Cellier afterward told me was on purpose to have him try some experiment
on Stroud) who often was visited by the Countess of Powis and Mrs. Cellier; but
at last, after they had well consulted the business of Stroud, Nevel writes a
Letter to me, to put me upon a new Method of Pumping Stroud, or getting the
Papers from him, the Contents of which Letter were as follows:

Sir,
You must by some means, get some six grains of Opium dissolved, and put it
privately into his Drink; and in a small time you will find, the operation
thereof will lay him in such a Frensy, that in every part you may search him
with great safety to your self; but be sure to advise with Mr. Munson, and Mr.
Kemesh about the action, before you venture.


At the same time he sent me, written by his own hand, the Danby reflections,
desiring me to write out some Copies of them at my leisure; which I did, and
sent some to him; and others, by the Countess of Powis's servant, to Mistress
Cellier, and sometimes the Countess used to send her servant to me for them;
and once by the same servant she sentme five Guineys to encourage me.

Soon after, the Countess, Mrs. Cellier, Mr. Nevel, Mr. Fitton, Mr. Munson, and
Mr. Kemesh consulted about business, of which, I was made privy to that part
only that concerned Stroud, and that very day Munson and Kemesh ordered me, the
next time Mrs. Celliers Maid should come to me) to send to one Mr. Blaredale an
Apothecary in Arundel-Street, and one that had newly Married Mrs. Celliers
Daughter, (who Munson said was a very honest man, and a Catholic, and much
devoted to the Good of the Catholic Cause) and desire him to send me six
grains of Opium, dissolved by himself in some Syrup of Gillyflowers; which he
did; and sent me the same the next day, by Mrs. Cellier's Maid; but I suppose
either Munson, or Kemesh, or both, had sent to Blaredale before, otherwise he
would not have sent the Potion to me, being an absolute stranger to him, but
when the Maid brought it in a small Phial, I left her in my Chamber, and went
and showed it to Mr. Munson, who together with Mr. Kemesh did again direct me
how to use it; They bid me take him (meaning Stroud) into the Cellar, and drink
him stoutly with Burnt-Brandy, and when I found him merry, take my opportunity
to put the Opium into his Cup; which I did; but it only made him somewhat
drousie the next day, and did not operate according to expectation; then Munson
and Kemesh sent to the Countess of Powis, to let her know what I had done; and
as Mrs. Celliers Maid told me, her Ladyship gave order to Blaredale, to send me
another Dose; and Munson told me for the Color of the thing, I must send the
Maid my self to Blaredale for it, which I did; and he sent by the same
Messenger about as much more: then, by all their advice, I made the second
Attempt, and invited Stroud to Dine with me that day; and there being a Tankard
of small bitter Beer, fit for the purpose, I put the Opium into it; but when
Stroud tasted it, he suspected it was not fit to drink, and threw it away,
saying, or swearing, He believed he should be poisoned before he should be set
at liberty: of this I sent Mrs. Cellier an Account by her Maid, (who expected
another Story) and, as I understood since, she was very angry with Blaredale,
the Apothecary, for not ordering the Compound aright. This Project not taking
effect, they bethought themselves of another Device; which was, That I should
drink him on the square, and observe well his Discourse, and put it immediately
into Writing; so that if he should come to be made use of, as a Witness for the
King, what he had then said might be given in evidence to invalidate his
Testimony. This way pleased me better than the other; and I proceeded as I had
opportunity, insomuch, that I had gotten from Stroud's mouth some things that
were material, but spoken carelessly by him, who suspected not my Design, nor
heeded what he said. These Writings I took Copies of, and sent the Originals to
Mrs. Cellier; she carried them to the Tower, to the Lords, who liked them very
well, as she told me; but all this was thought no very considerable step. By
the way I will give a summary Account of Stroud's Discourse, which was as
follows; (viz.)

May the 16th. 1679. he told me, That about fifteen years since, he knew
Bedloe, who was then in a mean condition; That when Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe
came to view the Prisoners in the King's Bench, he spoke to Mr. Bedloe, and
told him of some former Passages; and that from that time he sent him Money
every week.

May the 17th. Stroud told me his Wife, in the Country, had in a Cabinet diverse
Papers that concerned Mr. Bedlow.

The same day Stroud told me, his Allowance from Mr. Bedloe was the larger,
because he was to observe the Motions of several Priests which were Prisoners
there and their Correspondence.

Now, according to the usual improvement which the Papists make of anything,
though never so inconsiderable, that does but in the least appear to be for their
advantage, I will show you what Use they would have made of these Passages.
They would have engaged me to Swear to some Paragraphs which Mr. Munson framed
out of those Papers, and dictated to me; which were as follows: (viz.)

That Stroud told me his Enlargement was at hand; and if ever he had it, some
in the World should soon feel the Effects of his Fury. I demanded, who he meant
by that? he answered, Bedloe.

Stroud also told me, That one Mr. Johnson, then a Servant of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury, had been with him diverse times, to persuade
him to become a Witness for the King, against the Lords in the Tower; and in
order to it, offered him a considerable Sum of Money; but that he demanded,
What he must Swear, and who it was must Instruct him? Mr. Johnson replied, You
shall not want for that; and I am very glad to find you so ingenious: But hold,
says Stroud, I will not Perjure my self for the World, etc.

These two last were additional Paragraphs to the former, but such as were to
be Deposed upon Oath. But Stroud not being able to give any account of the then
Popish Plot, this Design fell; which was no sooner laid aside, but another was
taken up; which was thus laid by the five Popish Lords in the Tower: (viz.)
That Stroud and I should Write a Letter to Bedloe to this effect; Here is a
Person (meaning my self) whose Travels in Flanders, France, Spain, Italy, and
diverse other parts, have given him the opportunity of Inspecting the Actions of
the Popish Gang, by whom you may be informed of somethings that may be of great
Importance; therefore you will do well to take Care he may be Examined. This I
wrote with my own Hand, by Munson's order (but did not send the Letter) who was
as urgent as the Lords to have me do some Service to the Cause; For, indeed, I
was not very forward to be concerned on that manner with Mr. Bedloe; and asked
Mr. Munson and Kemesh, What Service I should do the Lords by it? They told me,
The Service I should the Lords, would be by Declaring some things that they
would tell me before I should be Examined; which would make for them. For I was
first to be Sworn a Witness for the King, and then to Swear such other Matter
as they should direct me: but this did not take, in regard they could not
contrive any secure Story, or such as I (who was to be the Actor) could approve
of.

Then Mr. Nevel sent me a Letter, and advised me, to use all the Care and
Diligence I could, to Compound my Debts, and get out of Prison; and to let me
know how easy it was for me so to do, told me, The Lord Powis, Lord Petre,
Lord Arundel, Lord Bellasis, and Lord Stafford, had allowed Mrs. Cellier Money
for that purpose; and did particularly desire, when I was out, That I should be
forthwith brought to them in the Tower, as I afterward was.

Then, the same day I received a Letter from Mrs. Cellier, by the hand of one
Gifford, one of the St. Omers Witnesses; which Letter was much to the same
effect with that which I had before received from Nevel.

Then I went for all, or most of my Creditors, whose Actions amounted to near
700 Pound, and in a short time I brought them to Compound with me for their
Debts, and paid them the Composition agreed on, being furnished with Money by
Mrs. Cellier: then I immediately obtained my Liberty, and went to Mrs.
Cellier's House, in Arundel-street, as I was directed; but not finding her
there, the Maid directed me to Powis-house, (and to make sure, sent Gifford
with me) where, with much ado, I found Mrs. Cellier, for she was still forced
to abscond from Sir William Waller. I having present occasion for Money, as not
having paid the Fees of the Prison, I prayed Mrs. Cellier to let me have 5 l.
she went into a withdrawing Room, and talked with a person, whom I afterward
discovered by Mrs. Cellier, to be the Lady Powis, who gave her the Money I
desired; saying, Here, do you give it him; 'twill be better from your hand than
mine. Then I went and discharged the House, and returned, according to Mrs.
Cellier's Order, to Powis-house again; where, being by one of the Servants
brought into the Gallery, I found Mrs. Cellier, who left me, and promised to
come presently, as she did; and told me, I must see the Countess of Powis; then
she left me again, to divert my self with the sight of some Pictures, and
returned, bringing with her the Countess, who very joyfully thanked me for my
diligence in the King's Bench; and there promised on her Honor, for that I had
acted so faithfully there, it should make my Fortune, provided I would
undertake the Management of other Business; which I promised to do; and after a
long and strict Charge given me by her Ladyship, First, To be steadfast in the
Principles of my Religion. Secondly, To go once a Week to Mr. Munson to
Confession; which I also promised to do, we parted for that time: (this was
about the 6th. of June, 1679.) But in the Afternoon of the same day, the
Countess met me again in the Gallery, where her Ladyship told me, That for me
to be entertained there (that is to say, in Powis-house) would not be
convenient, in regard of the business I was to be employed about; For, said
she, some of Captain Richardson's People may watch you to my House, and by that
means you would give an Obstruction to our Business, and become incapable of
Appearing therein; for prevention whereof, she proposed a Lodging in Drurylane,
at the Sign of the Goat; And, says the Lady, when I have any Business, I will
send some of my Servants in Disguise to you: but your opposite Neighbor (says
the Lady) is one Mrs. Prince, a Roman Catholic, and a good Woman, and one that
always has good People in her House, (meaning by that, as I suppose, Priests:)
the Countess advised me to Visit her, the said Mrs. Prince, sometimes; which I
did; but I understand since, she never knew any more of me, (from that time, to
the time of my Discovery) but that I was employed in the business of the Lords
in the Tower, she having been told so by Mrs. Cellier and others; but
notwithstanding my Lodging was at the Goat, yet I was often sent for to
Powis-house, to be employed in Business; first, as a Solicitor, I was to
endeavor to get out some of the Catholic Party from their Imprisonments, upon
Bail; but the Countess told me this would only be present Business, and during
the Term; but there were other Affairs cut out for me: from that time I went
about the Enlargement of five or six Priests in the Gate House, and got two or
three out, one of which was Mackarthey, who is since committed for a new, but
worse Matter. All this time I was every day, from six or seven a Clock in the
Morning till ten or eleven at Night, absent from my Lodging; which made the
People not a little wonder at my constant absence. By this time the Countess
had writ a Letter to the Lord Castlemain, and I was ordered to carry it;
whereupon I went to the Lord Castlemain's Lodging at Charing Cross, and
delivered him the Letter; who, after his Lordship had perused it, received me
very kindly, and then and there promised to make my Fortune, if I would use my
Endeavors to support the Catholic Cause, as I should be directed: I promised
I would. (Now it is to be supposed, his Lordship was no stranger to the
Transactions in the King's Bench.) Then I waited till his Lordship had writ a
Letter in Answer to that which I brought: which being done, I returned with it
to the Countess, who called to her Mrs. Cellier, and opened and read it in my
Hearing; the Contents, as I remember, were thus: viz.

Madam,
Just now I received Yours, and will meet you at the Tower to Morrow, at Ten a
Clock; but this Person I like well, and though he be no Scholar, yet he may
serve to Instruct the Youths according as he shall be directed; and in so doing
I shall be eased of much Suspicion, etc.


By the Youths is meant the St. Omers Witnesses, who were lodged at Mrs.
Cellier's House, and were Instructed once in two days by the said Lord
Castlemain, all the time of their being in Town; nay some of them wanted their
Lessons even at the time of the first Trial of the five Jesuits at the
Old-Bayly, and were there again Instructed; but it is apparently known how
weakly they behaved themselves.

At the time when I returned from the Lord Castlemain with the Letter to the
Countess, she advised me to burn all Papers whatsoever, after I had perused
them; which Rule I always, even to the last, observed, otherwise I could have
been able to have proved the whole Matter upon them, by their own Hand-writings.

Shortly after, I was suspicious of Mrs. Celliers Maid, that she took more
notice of Affairs than was necessary, and told the Countess I did not like her;
so her Ladyship advised Mrs. Cellier to put her away, and take a Boy in her
room, who would be more convenient for carrying Letters from place to place;
this was done; and about a day or two after, the Countess told me I must go
into Buckinghamshire, to one Mr. Webs, at a place called Peterley, with a
Letter to one Mrs. Jeane, and that I must also advise with her in some business
of weight; Mr. Web, the Gentleman of the House where I was to go, was himself
present, when the Countess put me upon going the Journey, and advised me, lest
the cause of my going should be discovered, to bring his son-in-Law with me
when I came back; for said he, I have designed to send him to France long
since, and this will not only be a good Excuse for you, but very convenient for
his journey also: Then the Lady Powis advised me to go forthwith, and order one
of the Grooms to hire a Horse for me, not that her Ladyship wanted Horses, but
lest it should be known that she sent me, and so I be discovered; then Mr. Web,
who was present likewise when the Countess gave me the Packet (for I was to
carry a Packet with me) advised me to put it in the Saddle-Skirts to secure
it, so that if I were taken, the Horse being a Hackney, I might come off, by
denying the thing; his giving me such advice, made me suspect he was privy to
the business contained in the Letters; but I followed his advice, and that day
took my Journey, and when I arrived at Peterley, which was that night late, I
delivered a Letter to Mrs. Web from her Husband; the Contents whereof, as I
suppose, were, to have her make ready the Child against the next morning, and
to entertain me kindly, and to bring me to that Mrs. Jeane, which she did, as
soon as she had read the Letter; for she desired me to follow her (as I did)
through diverse Rooms, and up and down several pair of Stairs, till at last, she
brought me into a Chamber, and bid me sit down, saying, I will presently send
the Lady to you; then she left me, and sent in a man into the Room, which did
not a little surprise me; but after some usual Greetings, he told me, that for
security of his person these dangerous times, he was forced to retire there;
and use the name of Mrs. Jeane, for the Superscribing, and Subscribing of
Letters, in some ordinary kinds or cases; but in short, when he had read the
Letters, he proved to be a Priest, for immediately after, he would have me
confess, and receive the Sacrament, to be true to the Cause. I told him I had
been drinking on the Road, and was not in a condition then, and prayed it might
be deferred till the morrow; but he told me, that must not be, I was well
enough, and must do it then; for I must be gone early in the morning, whereupon
I did as he bid me, and took my leave till the morrow; then Mr. Web, when I was
ready to come away, took me up to Mrs. Jeane again, and left us together the
second time.

Then he told me, that he had sat up all night to answer those Letters; and
that he would now consider by what Method to proceed in the Plot against the
Presbyterians; and that the groundwork of the whole thing was amongst those
Papers which I was to bring to London, but he did not offer to show it me,
neither did I express any desire to see it; but he told me withal, that it must
be enlarged on, and drawn into several parts, by the five Lords in the Tower,
and Mr. Nevel; and so after some little admonitions, I came away with the
Packet, the Child, and Mr. Cellier, who is his Grandfather: When I came to
Powis-house, I found the Countess and Mrs. Cellier together, they both told me
they were not in a little Fear for me, lest some misfortune should have
befallen, not me, but the Papers; but since I was so well returned, they asked
what answer I had brought, and how I was entertained? I told them; and
delivered the Papers to the Countess, who opened and overlookt them all, but
took up one, and read it to me, which was to this Effect, (viz.)

Good store of Pamphlets must be Writ, and spread about the Town against the
Presbyterians; persons must be employed to go to Coffee-houses, and rail
against the Presbyterian Party, and if they meet with any that offer to
contend, matter of Treason or some such thing may easily be laid to their
Charge, to have them secured; but there must be many persons so employed, and
it will be great prudence not to let them know one another, nor to let any one
know more than his own part; and in the same Letter, he blamed them for letting
me know so much as I did; but said he, I have bound him fast enough, and
besides that, I have a better opinion of him than I had of the other (who was
Mr. Gifford the Priest, as Mrs. Jeane told me) These are the people that must
do the work, and you let them lie in Prisons and starve, which makes me wonder
at your great negligence in so considerable Affairs, etc.

These were all the Contents, that I was then made privy to: they were soon
carried to the Lords in the Tower, and afterward sent to Nevel to peruse as he
thought fit, for he was the chief Penman, and did all that sort of drudgery
for a long time, till I came in to relieve him, First by Transcribing diverse
Papers after him: Secondly by setting up for my self, in Scribbling of
Pamphlets, and such little things as I was capable of, to further the Cause.

By this time the Trials of the five Jesuits came on, and I had not time, as it
was designed I should, to instruct the Witnesses; but the Lord Castlemain still
continued in that employment himself, and gave, to some that had short
Memories, Breviates or Lessons; others he advised with, sometimes at his own
Lodgings, other times at Powis-house, or at Mrs. Celliers; this was as common
amongst the Youth as going to School, for sometimes when they had been scanning
over their parts, and mistook, then would they presently cry, oh I am out, I
must go to my Lord Castlemain to be advised, or instructed again. Then I was
ordered by the Countess to attend on the Lord Castlemain, at the Sessions held
at the Old-Bayly the 13th. and 14th. of June; which I did accordingly, and the
Lord Castlemain desired me to take Care of the Youths, and keep them together,
lest the Rabble, out of inveterate hatred should offer them any injury; this I
did, and secured them, so that not above one received any hurt

Then I was ordered to get into Court, and take some Notes of the Trials; which
I did till they were over; the Lady Powis read them, and sent me to the Tower
to her Lord with them, to whom I showed the little imperfect Remarques I had
taken, he seemed to like them well; and, to encourage me to be industrious in
other business, commended me highly for this, though I deserved it not; and
gave me far better encouragement than I ever had, either from his Lady or any
body else, promising on his Honor to make my fortune if I would be ruled: then
his Lordship sent me to show them, or rather to show my self to my Lord
Bellasis, and the other Three Lords; but I being a stranger, and not well
knowing where to find their several Lodgings, took with me one John Porter, the
Lord Powis's Butler, who went with me to each of the other Lords Lodgings, to
whom I privately showed the Remarques; they all desired they might be Printed,
and gave money toward it, one a Guiney, another Fifty Shillings, one half a
Guiney, another fifteen or sixteen shillings; and when I returned to my Lord
Powis, I told him what the other Lords had done, and he also contributed, and
told me the Lord Castlemain should do so too; and at the same time his Lordship
told me, some person employed by them had taken the whole Trials, and they were
at one Turners a Bookseller (but a Catholic) to be Printed, and ordered my
Notes to be compared with his, and one entire Relation to be composed out of
both, as was afterward done; then was the Lord Arundel come to Lord Powis's
Lodging, and the Lord Peter's desired his Lordship to come into his Bedchamber
where I was, and as soon as Lord Arundel espied me, he did me the Honor to lay
his hand on my head, and promised I should be well rewarded for all my
diligence; and at the same time Lord Powis asked me whether I had a faculty of
Writing abusively, and like a Satyrist, and was Master of such a Style as would
look well in Print; for, said his Lordship, that Sot Nevel is so very delatory,
it is not to be endured, therefore if you dare undertake the Writing of some
sound Pamphlets, it might be of very great Use to us; to which I replied, that
I was not a competent judge of my own abilities, but would do my best.

Then Lord Powis told me Mrs. Cellier should be allowed Ten shillings per week
to Diet me, and his Lordship would allow me three pound per week for my
expenses in business; and what ever happened to be beyond that, I should put into
a Bill, and bring or send it to his Lordship, and I should forthwith have it
paid; the said Three pound ten shillings per week was constantly paid me,
whilst I served them.

Then I was advised by both the Lords to lodge at Powis-house, which advice
came very seasonably; for I knew very well, that I had given my Landlord just
occasion to harbor strange thoughts of me, and conceive suspicions to my
disadvantage.

About the eighteenth of June, the Countess, who knew that I was then lodged in
Powis-house, and by her Lords order, sent me with a Letter to the Lady Tukes
Lodgings in Scotland-yard; which Lady seemed to take particular notice of me,
and was pleased to say she liked me very well, and gave me two Guineys, and
demanded if I durst undertake a desperate Enterprise? I answered yes; then she
went into her Closet, and wrote a Letter for the Countess of Powis, and gave it
me to carry her, and so I took my leave.

In my Return, I went to wait on my Lord Castlemain, who asked where I had
been? I answered, at the Lady Tukes, and so told his Lordship how she received
me; at which he seemed to be wellpleased, and smiled; and demanded if the
Countess of Powis had not delivered to me her self, or caused to be delivered
some Papers relating to a business of Oats, for which one Knox and Lane were
in Prison in the Gate House. To which I answered no; Then said he, I will write
to the Countess about it, and order you Money, and give you directions how to
proceed in it: There I waited till his Lordship writ a Letter, which I carried
to Lady Powis; but first being sent for up, I gave her Ladyship the Letter,
who, before she opened it told me, Mrs. Cellier would give me Money to get Knox
and Lane out of Prison. I then asked what they were in Custody for? The Lady
modestly answered, 'twas by Oates's means; but if I could get them out he
should not reign long in his Roguery. From thenceforth I undertook it, and had
all the business, and Papers delivered me, by one Lawson an Attorney of
Clement's-Inn, who had been endeavoring two Terms to remove them by Habeas
Corpus, but could not: I forthwith went to the Gate House, and found means to
supply them both with Money, though they were close confined; and, by a course
that I took upon advice with the Priests, there they had Pen, Ink, and Paper
conveyed to them both; but especially Lane, who writ the first Letter, which
was to this effect,

I will die, before I will comply with that Villain Oats, and if any good
people will work my Liberty, I will do the Catholics the greatest Service
imaginable, by Discovering what I know of Oats; This is from the bottom of my
heart, and what I will die with,

So help me God.

This Letter was taken from Lanes hand under the door, by one Tempest, then a
Prisoner in the Gate House; and by him given to one Mrs. Ayry, who brought it
to me at Powis-house, and I showed it the Countess, who was more transported
with joy than I can express; and breaking out as it were into a Rapture, Has
God given us this unexpected help said she? Well, we will (God-willing) employ
it to the best advantage, charging me to use all expedition to get them both
out; and then I withdrew. But as I understood the next day, the good Countess,
was the greater part of that day on her knees, to render thanks to Almighty
God, for this new occasion of strength, that she supposed he had been pleased
to bless their Cause with.

From that time I was very industrious in this business; and had several
Motions in the Kings Bench, before I could get either of them to the Bar; but
at last I brought Lane out upon Bail, to the great satisfaction of the whole
Catholic Party, but Knox I could not get out; but have since been informed by
himself, that Nevel told some Friends of his, that he did it; and had Money
from the Lords in the Tower for that purpose.

Now when I had got Lane out, the Countess ordered me to bring him to
Powis-house; and lodge him there for the present, and she would allow Mrs.
Cellier Ten shillings per week for His Diet also, as she did for mine; then
came Mr. Wood, the Countesses Gentleman, one day, and said his Lord had ordered
that Lane should go by the name of Johnson, as he did afterward, during the
time he continued there, which was about three weeks; and Lady Powis in my
Hearing gave order to the Porter, that he should bid the rest of the servants
take care that Mr. Johnson went not abroad, for they were in a thousand fears,
and Jealousies concerning him.

First, lest Mr. Oats should find him, and clap him again in Prison.

Secondly, lest he should run away of his own accord to Mr. Oats, and be
prevailed with to give some Testimony against the Lords, and

Thirdly, lest the whole Design of this Plot should miscarry thereby; for they
thought it concerned them as much, to invalidate the King's Evidence, and
render the persons of his Witnesses infamous; as to act any other part
whatsoever.

At the same time that Mr. Wood gave order for the altering of Lanes name, I
gave him a Bill of Lanes Charges to carry to the Lords in the Tower, which
amounted to near twenty pound, about fourteen days after, the Lords had other
occasions for raising a contribution; and amongst other Money, this was then
collected, and paid to Mrs. Cellier; for she had furnished me with Money for
Lane, as she did for my own business, to the value of near one hundred pound;
and that very night that Wood paid Mrs. Cellier the twenty pound, (for that was
the Sum he brought) he smiled on me; and told me, it would not be long ere the
worst was finished; for, said he, the Lords have consulted, that before Oats
is indicted there must a rumor be spread abroad of a Plot amongst the
Presbyterians; and something of it must be made appear, to beget a belief in
the people of it; the management of it he told me, or at least a great part of
it, would be for me in a little time.

But after Lane came from the Gate House, and before Knox could get out, one
Mrs. Ayry, who went to Lane before, went then to Knox, or rather to the
Priests; for they were so close confined, that 'twas very difficult, and
dangerous to speak with either of them themselves, but some of the Priests
there conveyed Pen, Ink, and Paper to him under the door, with which he also
wrote; and as he has told me since, he had that convenience of writing the
Papers against Mr. Oats, which he said, were all Penned by himself.

Now when Knox was released out of Prison, he came also to Powishouse by the
direction of Mrs. Ayry, where by the Countesses order he treated with Mrs.
Cellier about the Indicting of Oats; and Knox did by Mrs. Celliers Request
enter into a correspondence with me; and a while after delivered me the Papers,
which Lane, and Osborn had given the said Knox at first, before either of them
were committed: those Papers I sent to the Tower, from thence they were sent to
Nevel in the Kings Bench, who made what alterations in them, he thought fit;
and sent a Letter to me by Mrs. Cellier's Boy (who used to carry Letters
between his Mrs, and me, and Nevel, and the Tower, etc.) with directions to
draw up an Affidavit, for Lane to Swear (which I did accordingly) before Sir
James Butler.

A little after this, Nevel sent Knox his Papers to Lord Castlemain to peruse,
and make what additions, or alterations his Lordship should think fit; He sent
them to Mrs. Cellier, who gave them me to deliver to Knox, which I did; and he
has since out of those Papers, drawn an Affidavit, and persuaded one Osborn,
lately a servant to Mr. Oats, to swear the same before Sir William Dolbin
Knight, and these are the Papers, out of which an Indictment was to be framed
against Mr. Oats, the Contents of the said Paper I cannot remember, farther
than the bare matter of Fact, which was,

That Mr. Oats was to be Indicted, first for Perjury; and if he were nor
Convicted upon that, then a second Indictment was to be preferred against him
for a Buggery pretended to have been attempted on the person of John Lane, who
I suppose now offers to Swear the same: though the Indictment was drawn by the
most venomous Pens of Lord Castlemain, and his true Second, Nevel; and what he
should Swear, was by them, and others put into his Mouth.

When Knox had prevailed with Osborn to Swear the said Affidavit, he came to
show it me; and offered to let me take a Copy, but I being employed in other
Affairs of greater importance, had not then time to Transcribe it, only I told
the Countess what Knox had done, who was very glad of it; and then believed
what I said to be truth, (though now her Ladyships opinion of me is much
altered) and the Countess at the same time asked, if Knox were in a Condition
to defend his Trial. I told her I supposed not, for that he had diverse times
desired me to lend him Money, then the Countess promised he should have Money;
and bid me tell him so, to encourage him, (which I did) and the Countesses
farther Command was, that if Knox did at any time want Money, I should furnish
him; and place it to account, and that all the Money, which should be Collected
for him should pass through my name, and as Money lent him by me, lest any
thing should be discovered.

About the Fourteenth of July, I went to the Tower; for their Lordships had
sent for me, where I received orders to have Lane sent out of the way from
Powis-house; for, said the Lord Powis, I am informed that Oats is making
enquiry after him, which if it be true, and he should be found at my house,
'twould ruin us all; but I being employed in other business could not send him
away immediately, according to his Lordships Order.

About a day or two after, the Countess, amongst other things, earnestly
desired me to send Lane into the Country; for said she Oats is bustling about
after him. The next day Mr. Wood brought me Money, which I gave to Lane; and
such necessaries as he had occasion for, and I sent him down to Greys in Essex;
and promised to send him ten shillings every week (for that was his constant
allowance.) Soon after, he sent me word, that Oats had by some means or other
heard where he was; and therefore he desired to be removed to some other place;
then by the Countesses order I took horse, and went to him, and sent him to
Town again to Powis-house, where he continued two or three days longer. Then
when I was at leisure, I sent him to the White-Hart at Tottenham, where he
stayed; whilst he was there, the Countess sent me with a Letter, to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal, who was then at Kensington,
whither I rod on one of Lord Powis's horses, and a Groom with me, and there had
admittance to his Lordship; and according to the Countesses Command, I first
delivered the Letter, and then showed his Lordship Strouds Papers, and some
other little things of the same nature; the Contents of the Letter, as I
suppose by the slight Answer I had from his Lordship, was to beg some favor on
the behalf of Munson the Priest, but when I returned, and told the Countess his
Lordships Answer, she seemed to be very much troubled, and What have we no
friends, said she, has God wholly left us to our selves? I thought verily I
should have gooten Mr. Munson out of Prison; but since we can do no better than
we can, you are the person that must do all our Business, meaning me: by this I
find Munson was to be the chief Agent in managing the New Plot, if they could
have got him out of Prison, and I only to have been his Instrument. But, if I
mistake not, he has taken as ready, and as sure a Course to come to the
Gallows, notwithstanding his Confinement, as he could possibly have taken, had
he been at large, as we were.

Now from that night, by the Lords order (brought me by Mrs. Cellier) I began
to go to Coffee-houses, and had from Nevel an account which to go to, and which
were most factious, as she called them: (viz.)

Farr's Coffee-house, the Rainbow near the Temple. Procter's Coffee-house.
Man's Coffee-house, at Charing Cross. Garraway's Coffee-house, near the Old
Exchange. Ford's Coffee-house, in Essex-Buildings. Jonathan's Coffee-house,
near the Old Exchange. Combe's Coffee-house, in Bartholomew-lane, and diverse
others.
I chose Farr's Coffee-house, (for there were other persons employed for the
rest) whither I went every Night, till there happened a Quarrel betwixt one Mr.
Kenestone and my self, about the Subject of my Discourse, which was to be (as
was ordered by the Countess, when she came from the Tower) of Sir Edmondbury
Godfry's Death: I was to insinuate, That my Lord Danby was privy to it; That he
took part with the Presbyterians, and was confederate with them, to ruin the
Roman Catholics; and such like stuff.

At another time the Countess sent a very great number of Pamphlets, among
which was that, called, The Danby Reflections, and many other Seditious Books,
to Powis-house, and ordered, That I should take care for the dispersing them
into all parts; which I did: for some I put under Covers, and directed into the
Country, to the Gentry there; others I sent to little petty Coffee-houses about
the Town; and some I would venture to drop in the Streets, and in all Houses
where I could, insomuch that I had like to have dropped into Newgate again, for
doing such a Trick in an eminent Citizen's House, which made me more cautious,
and less eager of practicing in that kind for the future. The said Danby
Reflections, and diverse other scandalous Books were written by Nevel, now a
Prisoner in the King's Bench.

About two days after this, Sir George Wakeman was brought to his Trial; that
being on the 18th of July; where I was ordered, by the Countess, to attend, and
take what Notes I could, which I did, and sent them to the Tower, by Mrs.
Cellier; who, at her return, told me, The Lords liked them well; and ordered her
to send me to them the next day: accordingly I went; where I received Lord
Powis's Command, To send for Lane out of the Country, and leave him to shift in
Town on 10 s. per Week, which should be constantly paid him by me; for from the
time that Lane was enlarged, they were very fearful, lest he should do them a
Mischief himself, or be made use of by Mr. Oats, to their disadvantage.

Then the Lord Powis ordered me to attend one Mr. Dormer, a reputed Priest, who
was one that Wrote Pamphlets; as The transforming Trayters into Martyrs, and
diverse others: and frequented the Coffeehouses for the same end that I did:
'twas also his Lordships farther order, That I should converse with one Turner,
his Lordships Priest, (who, I suppose, is in the Tower to this day) and one Mr.
Sharp, a Priest, at Wild-house, Mr. Munson, Mr. Kemesh, and Nevel, and to
follow their Orders in all Matters whatsoever, which I did: but first began
with Nevel, who sent me diverse Papers, Pamphlets, and Letters, to Transcribe;
amongst which were 40 Lists of Names, each List containing about 800 Names.

At another time I went into Southwark, with one Mr. Dowdwell, and Mrs. Ayry,
having received a Letter from Nevel to that purpose, but I knowing him to be
very cautious, lest any notice should be taken that he and I corresponded, I
forbore going to him my self, and desired these persons to enquire what
Business he had with me; and withal I told Mr. Dowdwell, I would stay at a
Coffee-house in the Mint for him, which I did; and when he returned, he brought
with him twenty seven Letters, most of them Writ by Nevel's own Hand, and under
one Cover. These were to be Transcribed with all speed: at the same time Nevel
sent, as many by Mrs. Ayry to the Tower as I suppose; the Contents of those I
know not, nor much of the twenty seven he sent me, for I had not time to read
them all, but what I did read I will here give you an account, to the best of
my remembrance.

LETTER I.
London. Sir,
Our Business here goes on very well, and I hope Yours does the same in the
Country; I am informed, That Commissions will speedily be Issued out: and it is
said, there is some alteration amongst our People, etc.


LETTER II.
Gentlemen,
MY Heart is good, but the Body is not of strength enough to do you Service,
but I doubt not but my Prayers, for your good Success, may be as serviceable
and prevalent as my Person could, were it again in its prime, etc.


The Third only mentioned the Names of some Persons of Honor, of whom it is
not convenient for me to give an Account here. These pretended Letters were the
Falsefies they intended to Alarm the Pretestants with.

When the 27 Letters were Transcribed, I sent them by one of the Lord Powis's
Servants to the Tower; and when the Servant returned, he acquainted me, That he
had delivered them to the Countess.

Then I attended Mr. Turner, his Lordships Priest, who was then at Powis-house;
and desired Mrs. Cellier, at the same time, to find out some that were
Catholics, to write out several Copies of some Papers that he then had by him,
that required an immediate dispatch: then I asked him, If he had any thing of
moment for me to do? he answered, Not yet.

By this time had Mrs. Cellier provided one Sing, a Writer, and a
Schoolmaster, (whose Name I know not) to proceed in this scribbling Affair,
which they did; and the said Turner found them and himself (and sometimes Mrs.
Celliers and my self, when we were at leisure) business for at least a Week.
The Contents of any of those Papers I cannot remember, only that in general,
they were in order to the carrying on of the New Plot.

But at that time I my self was so employed with giving an Account to Mrs.
Jeane, at Peterly, of the present posture of Affairs, advising with Munson,
Kemesh, Sharp, Knowls, and others, (and amongst the rest, the Lord Castlemain)
that I could not spare much time to write.

'Twas about this time that Mrs. Ayry and Mr Dowdwel used to carry such Papers
and Letters as concerned the Design in hand, to the Gate House, and other
Prisons about Town, to have the advice and consent of the Priests and Roman
Catholics there; for, as Mrs. Cellier told me, the Lord Powis refused to
meddle in the thing, unless it were generally approved of, as it was soon
after; for all that either saw or heard of it, agreed in opinion, that it was a
very sound thing, and, if well managed, would turn to very good account in a
little time.

Persons were to be employed to carry these into all parts of England, and some
means or other used to Lodge them in the Houses of such as were the most
eminent of the Presbyterian Party: Then others were to obtain Warrants upon
other pretenses, to make Search in those Houses, and to get the persons
committed, in whose Houses they were found; this they hoped would occasion so
much confusion throughout the whole Kingdom, that at last every body would be
glad to save himself, and the Papists come off upon the same terms that others
did; but God would not suffer that, as you may perceive by the bad Success all
their Designs and Attempts had.

Whilst this was in agitation, there was a Rumor, That Sir George Wakeman was
sought after upon some new Matters (which proved, as I suppose, to be more his
fear, than any thing else) but for his better security, he was conveyed by
night to Mr. Stamford's Lodgings, in the Hay-Market (who is the Duke of
Newburg's Resident) and himself, as soon as he had received Sir George Wakeman
into his House, came to Powis-house to seek for Mrs. Cellier, but being
informed we were both in Lincoln's-Inn-Gardens, he came thither, and after some
discourse about Sir George Wakeman's Business, told me, There had been fastened
on the Door of Sir George's House, in St. Martins-lane, a Paper, importing a
Menace; which was to this effect:

Wakeman, Though you have escaped at your Trial, think not your self beyond the
reach of Justice, etc. or to this effect.

Then Mr. Stamford took Mrs. Cellier with him, to advise with Sir George
Wakeman about his being conveyed into Flanders; but which way was not agreed
on; but Mrs. Cellier came home, and told me, I must go early the next Morning
to Mr. Stamford; which I did, and he brought me to Sir George Wakeman, with
whom I consulted about his Passage to Flanders; I proposed diverse ways, but he
did not approve of them; then Sir George, going into another Rome, Mr. Stamford
and I contrived another way, which he afterward refused; but then Mr. Stamford
told me, the Queen's Majesty had furnished Sir George Wakeman with 500 l. in
order to his departure from England; And, said he to me, you shall be at
neither Charge nor Trouble in this Affair, but what you shall be gratified for:
then I parted; and the next time that I came to Sir George, I advised him to go
down to Rumney-Marsh; For, I said, it was like he might meet with some French
Shallop or Boat there, that might run him over to that Coast; but this Advice
he did not then approve of: though he bethought himself afterward, and went
the next day out of Town, in order to it; yet when he was gone, he desired, by
Letter, That some other way might be consulted; which Letter Mr. Stamford
showed me, and desired my advice; which was, That Sir George should send a
person in the Pacquet-Boat from Dover to Calice; which person should hire a
Boat there, to come back to the English Coast with him, and take Sir George in:
this course was taken, and some four Miles to the West of Dover, Sir George
Wakeman took Boat, and sailed for Flanders; where, in nineteen hours, (as I was
since informed, by one of his Letters) he arrived safe at Newport.

By this time I had received by one of the Countesses servants an order to go
to the Tower the next day, which I did, and after some discourse with Lord
Powis about Sir G. W. his Lordship told me that one Mr. Doyley had seen or
heard of me, the last time I was with his Lordship; and had said in the hearing
of one of his Lordships servants, if ever he should see me there again, he
would have me secured, whereupon, Lord Powis desired me, to come thither no
more; but return to Powis-house, and be careful of my business, and not go much
abroad; and farther told me, that when any thing was ready, I should hear of
him by his Lady, who should give me directions how to manage Affairs; and then
he commanded me to go to Mr. Turner his Lordships Priest, and take directions
from him, how to send Letters to Brussels, to one Mr. Holder his R. H. Auditor;
the Letters contained an account of the whole Design; and were writ by the
Countesses own hand, most earnestly desiring his good advice in an Affair of
that weight, as being unwilling to do any thing without it; and prayed his
speedy Answer; this Packet was made up by Mr. Turner, and I Superscribed it
(by his direction) thus; For Tho. Holder Esquire, at Mounsieur Keneydays,
Secretary to the English Resident in Brussells. This I sent by Mrs. Cellier's
Boy, to Mrs. Catherine Holder living at St. James's; and desired the same
might. be sent with all care, and speed to her Uncle, which was done.

I also remember I read part of one Letter, in which Mr. Holder was desired to
employ some ingenuous person there, to Cut, and Ingrave the impressions of
diverse Coats of Arms; the Patterns had been taken in Wax, from the Seals of the
persons to whom the Cotes belonged; as I believe, and were sent over enclosed
in the same Letter, being fastened with other Wax to the Margent of it.

Some time after, the Countess having received Answers to the Packet I caused
to be sent away, she being then at Powis-house, pulled a Letter out of her
Pocket; and desired me to hearken, in which as I remember, she read as follows.

If you had taken this Course sooner, much Innocent Blood might have been
saved, but I doubt it is now too late; and fear the St. Omers Witnesses being so
Baffled as I hear they were, has much blasted our Endeavors, but yet to my
power I will assist; and do advise you to go on.

Letters to the same purpose with those, came the same time to Mrs. Cellier,
who showed them to me; and would highly applaud this Gentleman, for his great
Wit and Courage in all their business, saying once, that if he had not been
very careful, the Lords in the Tower had not been now alive.

Then the Lady Powis, about the end of July, or the beginning of August, did
advise Mrs. Cellier to go home to her own house; and as she told me, the Lords
gave her the same advice; and for these reasons, (viz.)

First, They expected Powis-house would be searched by an Order of Council, and
if any person more than their own Family should be found there, it might be
very prejudicial to the Lords.

Secondly, That now Sir William Waller was better advised, and they did believe
he would be more mild for the future, in his prosecutions against the
Catholics.

Thirdly, The Current of Affairs, they said, was now in a manner stopped; and the
people began to speak favorably of their Party, (but in that his Lordship was
much mistaken, or misinformed at least, for in all my business I could not meet
with any Protestants that did so.)

Then I also removed my Lodging; and a little after, went to Lodge at Mrs.
Cellier's house, where I had been about four days; where there came an express
Order to Mrs. Cellier, for me to disguise my self as well as I could; and come
forthwith to the Tower, I wondered at this, having been cautioned by the Lord
Powis the last time I was there, to the contrary; but when I considered of it,
I did not believe it was about a matter of small consequence; and thereupon
changed my Habit (as I often used to do on other occasions) and went that day
to the Tower; and the better to avoid suspicion, took my Boy with me, this
being the first time of his going there.

I went up stairs to Lord Powis by his Order; and after much discourse (about
the Opinions I met with in Coffee-Houses) with his Lordship in the Dining Room,
he bid me follow him; which I did, into his Lordships Bedchamber, where his
Lordship also Discoursed me, about my thoughts of the times; and asked if I had
any hope of alteration. I Answered yes, if the Design took such effect as I
wished it might; then from the Window, at the farther side of the Bed, came the
Lord Arundel, who, as I suppose, had been reading a Pamphlet there, or some
such Book; they both discoursed me above half an hour, and asked, If I had seen
the five good men (meaning the five Jesuits) and Mr. Langhorn Executed? I
answered, Yes; and told them, They all Died with so much constancy and courage,
as much amazed the Spectators in general, and my self in particular: who had
been commanded by the Countess, to go and see them die, that from their
Sufferings, I might take the more resolution, and become better settled in
Matters of Religion. Their Design in this was, to make me espouse the Cause
with the greater Zeal: and certainly, had I followed their Lordships Orders, I
had run a great hazard of suffering Martyrdom, as well as they; But I thank God
for having by his Providence delivered me from that Destruction, and, I hope,
preserved me for better Work than I had foolishly engaged my self in.

Then the Lord Arundel began to discourse of Business more closely, and
demanded, If I would do any thing to make my Fortune? I answered, Yes; (though I
thought I had done enough for that already, but it seems his Lordship was of
another mind) I would do any thing: Well then, said he, Will you venture to
Kill the King, for a good Reward? At that I stood amazed, and my Countenance
altered, insomuch that his Lordship took notice of it, and (after I was gone)
told my Lord Powis, I had a great deal of Grace, in regard of my Blushing;
which seemed strange to his Lordship: who used to converse, I suppose, with
persons that could both talk of and contrive ways how to Murder Kings (without
Blushing.) My Lord, said I, I suppose your Lordship is but in jest. No, said
he, I am in earnest; and repeated his Question: I was amazed still, and knew
not what to say; For I began to be afraid of my own Life, if I should utterly
reject the Proposal; and, at last, made answer, That to serve them, I was
willing to be the death of any person whosoever, but the King and his Royal
Highness. When he pressed it upon me the third time, I desired time to
consider: then said Lord Powis (who was present all the time) No, no, come;
Lord Arundel only does this to try you: -- And pray, my Lord Arundel, said he,
what is it worth, or what would you give him for doing it? It Is worth, said
Lord Arundel, 2000 l. No more said Lord Powis? Pish, away; if he will kill my
Lord Shaftsbury, he shall have 500 l. for his Reward. All this while I stood
mute, not knowing what to say, finding their Designs so bloody; but at length I
enquired, Why they desired the Lord Shaftsbury's Life; and how he might be
dispatched? they both replied, The thing would be easy enough: For said Lord
Powis, my Man Wood was there two Nights since, upon pretense of an Errand; but
his business was, to view the House, and observe what convenience there was for
making an Escape, after the Fact done: he said moreover, That Wood found the
thing so feasible, that after he came back, he said, he was very sorry he had
not been provided to have done it then: And the reason, said he, why we should
be glad to have him out of the way, is, because we take for granted, if we were
rid of him, (as they were of Sir Edm. Godfrey) we should find it no hard
matter, to bear down all the rest of our Opposers. After this, with much
persuasion, I promised to undertake the Murdering of the Earl of Shaftsbury,
(then Lord President of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council;) and
immediately, to perfect the Bargain, Lord Powis took me by the hand, and gave
me Ten Guineys in earnest, and wished me good Success, but expressly commanded
me not to stir in it, till farther order, but told me, (one Mr. Reagaut,) a
Virginia Merchant, of Mrs. Cellier's acquaintance, should come the Sunday
following to Mrs. Cellier's House, to advise with me about the most dextrous
way of putting the Design in Execution, and to secure the Payment of the 500 l.
Upon which I took my leave, and went thither no more, (as I remember) leaving
the two Lords together; who, I believe, were more concerned at my rejecting my
Lord Arundel's Proposal of killing the King, than pleased with my embracing the
Overture made by them both, of Murdering the Earl of Shaftsbury: and, I
believe, some persons were employed to watch which way, and whither I went from
the Tower; for they could not choose but be jealous of me, in regard my Color
went and came so often.

The next day I went to wait on the Lord Castlemain, whom I found in his Study,
writing the Compendium; and I had time to read some part of a Paragraph, as it
lay before him, on the Table, before he spoke to me: at last, rising in a hasty
posture, and casting an angry look upon me, Why were you so unwilling, said he,
to do what you were taken out of Prison for? whereupon, not knowing what his
Passion might transport him to, I laid my hand upon my Sword, His Lordship made
no Approach toward me; but his Passion seeming to continue, I thought it best,
to retire, and accordingly went down stairs; and, in a rude manner, left him,
and went home; and told Mrs. Cellier, the Lord Castlemain was very angry with
me; and that I would never come at him more. Oh, said she, it is his manner to
be angry one hour, and reconciled the next: and Men of that Temper are
generally the best, and most fit for Business.

Then Mrs. Cellier advised me, to go to Mr. Sharp, the Priest, at Wild-house,
and Confess, and Receive, (for then my Kettle wanted scouring more than ever,
in regard of my late Promise in the Tower) I went to him accordingly the next
Morning, where I Confessed, and received the Sacrament: but, as I was coming
away, the said Mr. Sharp, who (it seems) had been informed how I behaved my
self to the said Lord Powis and Lord Arundel, and had heard of my refusing to
kill the King, would scarce suffer me to depart on those terms, but told me, I
ought to do Penance, for refusing to serve God in what the Scriptures taught me
was my Duty: whereupon I desired to be informed, Whether or no they taught me
any such thing as to kill my King? He answered, Yes, if he were first
Excommunicated and Condemned by the Church: Then he made me kneel down the 2d.
time, where he gave me an Admonition of half an hour long, and enjoined me for
my Penance, that every Night twice, for 5 Nights following, I should walk
barefooted (at a certain time of night fit for the purpose) from Powishouse in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, to Lincoln's-Inn-Back-Gate, and back again; which I did
accordingly; and that every Morning, for five Mornings, I should discipline my
naked Shoulders with some Franciscan-Cords, which he then gave me, and bid me
be sure to follow his direction, if I were minded to escape Damnation: then I
took my leave of him, being extremely confounded in my thoughts, and at a loss
how to behave my self in this Affair, (for now I saw through all their Designs,
and found both their Principles and Practice to agree with the Account which
Protestants give of them:) I was then about to go directly to his Majesty, and
discover all I knew, or had been privy to; but when I debated the Matter within
my self, the Devil prevailed, and I went home, where I found the Countess of
Powis, and Mrs. Cellier; when the Lady saw me, she sent for me in, and laughed;
but I being then more serious than I had been for some years before, told the
Countess, 'twas not a laughing Matter: Why, said she, do you know what I laugh
at? I told her, I supposed I did; then her Ladyship entered into some Discourse
not worth the rehearsing; but, e're long, turning her face toward Mrs.
Cellier, Well, well, said she, Mr. Willoughby will be honest, and do us no
hurt, I am sure. By this I found I was liable to some suspicion; for the
clearing of which, I was forced to make a small Apology for my self: we entered
into other Discourse, the Lady bidding me sit down; and, amongst other things,
her Ladyship told me, His Royal Highness would be in Town speedily, which would
help to qualify the Rage of the Presbyterians, and produce another face of
things; And, said she, there is one Sir Robert Payton, who intends to come over
to the Duke's Interest; and asked me, If I knew him? I answered, No: then the
Countess told Mrs. Cellier, she must take some care to provide a place for Sir
Robert Peyton, to treat with the Lord Peterborough, about his coming over: (for
so they termed it) Mrs. Cellier answered, That no place was so fit as Mr.
Gadbury's House; because he was the person who had first proposed the matter to
Sir Robert Peyton; and did from time to time use all his Endeavors to effect
it; So that, said she, we seem, for ought appears as yet, to owe Sir Robert
Peyton's coming over, chiefly to Mr. Gadbury's Persuasions and Solicitations.
The Countess was well pleased with Mrs. Cellier's Proposal; and ordered me to
go the next day to the Lord Peterborough, and acquaint his Lordship with this
business of Sir Robert Peyton. I replied, His Lordship knew me not; and so
perhaps might not be apt to give credit to what I should say: To make sure, the
Countess replied, she would go home, and write a Letter to the Lord
Peterborough, and send it by one of her Servants; (for the Lord Peterborough
was returned from Brussels, and was then in London, or at lest aboutthe Town)
then the Countess took Coach, and left us.

Now in the Afternoon of the next Day, I went to Mill-Bank at Westminster,
where the Lord Peterborough's House is, to wait on his Lordship: but being
informed by the Servants, that his Lordship Dined that Day either at Lockets or
Lambs, which are both Eating-Houses at Chearing-Cross, I went thither, and
found his Lordship; having first sent up word by his Page, that there was one
to wait on his Lordship from the Lady Powis. Then I was brought into the Room,
and there gave his Lordship an account of my Business; and also told him, that
Sir Robert Payton would meet his Lordship at Mr. Gadbury's House on Tuesday
next, at Five a Clock in the Evening.

His Lordship was very well pleased, and promised to be there at the time and
place appointed: And he farther told me, One of the Countesses Servants had
just before I come, brought his Lordship a Letter, to the same effect, of which
his Lordship showed me the Superscription.

So I took my leave, and went directly to Mr. Gadbury, at his House in
Westminster, (for so Mrs. Cellier advised me to do) that he might also have
Notice of this Meeting, and let Sir Robert Payton know that the Lord
Peterborough would not fail to be there according to appointment. Which Mr.
Gadbury did, and seemed to be very well pleased.

Then he and I entering into discourse, I perceived his Countenance change; and
looking very angerly on me, he told me, That he wondered I would offer to
displease the Lords in the Tower, and especially the Lord Castlemaine, (who was
then out upon Bail) who designed to advance me in the World, and help me to
make my Fortune.

I was not a little surpised to hear such Words from him, and asked him, If he
knew the ground of their displeasure?

He replied, Yes, yes, he did: And falling into a great passion, said,

'Twas because I would not Kill the KING. -- I admire (said Gadbury) at your
Ingratitude, that when you could not propose to your self any possible way of
getting out of Prison, and were like to have continued there as long as you
lived, (had not the Charity of good People relieved ye) you should
notwithstanding offer to refuse it: (Telling me withal, 'Twas to engage me to
make that Attempt that I was helped out of Prison.) Nay, (said he) you might
have done it with all the Security in the World; for no manner of Hurt could
have befallen you.

Why, said I, Mr. Gadbury, would not Death unavoidably have been the
Consequence of it?

No, said he, not if you undertook it: For before you were Released out of the
Kings Bench Prison, I had an exact account from Mrs. Cellier, what Year, Month,
Week, Day, and Hour, you were born in; and the Countess of Powis ordered me to
Calculate your Nativity.

(Now I do remember that when I was in the Kings Bench, I received by the Hands
of Mrs. Cellier's Maid a Letter, in which her Mistress desired me to give an
exact account of the time of my Birth; which I did in my next Letter to her:
But wondering what her meaning might be in desiring it, I read the Letter to
the Maid, thinking that she might possibly be able to give me some light into
it: But she pretended she knew nothing of the matter; so I sent her away.)

And what I have told ye, said he, appeared to be so clear and demonstrable,
that you were by all (meaning, I suppose, the Lords in the Tower) adjudged, A
Person designed by Heaven for that bold and daring Enterprise.

But I was soon weary of his Discourse, and as soon as conveniently I could, I
took my leave of him, and returned home to Mrs. Celliers House, where I then
lodged; and after some Discourse of the Lord Peterborough, I told what
Discourse had passed betwixt Gadbury and me, and how he had entertained me with
Frowns; at which she fell into a great Laughter, and said,

Mr. Gadbury was in his Heart a good Catholic. This Gadbury was the Author of
the Ballad of the Popish Plot, which was pretended to be writ by a Woman; and
many other Seditious Pamphlets.

Now you must understand, that after Gadbury had first Chastised me for not
undertaking what the Lords in the Tower proposed to me, I found him to smile in
another occasion, which made me believe that Gadbury knew of the Design to Kill
the Lord Shaftsbury.

The next day, being Sunday, came Mr. Regaut the Virginia Merchant, that the
Lord Powis promised should Treat with me about Murdering the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and Dined at Mrs. Celliers that Day: Before Dinner we had no
Discourse upon the Business; but afterward he told me of the whole matter, and
what I had promised at the Tower to the Lord Powis and the Lord Arundel; which
I wondered at, not thinking him to have been the Person: For I had diverse times
seen him at Powis house, with Mrs. Cellier, but never thought or heard, that he
was privy to any of our Business: (but now there is reason to suspect his
knowledge of the whole) There he opened the manner of the thing to me,
demanding how I would order the Money to be paid, when I had accomplished that
(bloody) Design, or if it should be brought in Guineys, and left with Mrs.
Cellier for me? I answered, No, not so, for diverse reasons, but desired when he
heard of the Lord Shaftsbury's death, and should receive a Note from me, that
the Money might be immediately paid for my use, which he promised should be
done; and desired Mrs. Cellier to let me know where he lived when I should have
occasion to send to him. Then he told me I must advise with one Mr. Dormer, Mr
Sharp, Mr. Knowls, Mr. Munson, Mr. Remese, and some others, about the manner
of doing the Business, which I promised to do; that was all the Discourse I had
with him then; so I having business in the City that night, I took my leave,
leaving Mrs. Cellier and him together.

On Monday morning I went to Mr. Dormer at Madam Dormers in St. John's, where I
told him my Resolution about my Lord Shaftsbury, and he embraced me very
kindly; but said, he could wish that might be suspended for a time: For said
he, there are some Priests that are falling (that is to say) troubled with
remorse of Conscience, and were upon the point of discovering the Designs they
were engaged in) their names were one Southern, and Mr. Clay; the latter is
now lodged at Mr. Blazedale's house the Apothecary in Arundol Street.

These persons being thought dangerous, he demanded if I would venture to hire
a small Vessel, and endeavor to transport them to any part of France or
Flanders? I promised I would, and he told me he would furnish me with Money for
it at his own Charge.

Then I came away, and the next time I saw him, he had conceived some better
way: For, said he, Mr. Southern I have sent to a secure place in
Buckinghamshire, and Mr. Clay is placed at Mr. Blazedale's, who will be very
careful of him.

Then we discoursed of putting in execution the Design against the Lord
Shaftsbury.

He spoke a great deal upon the Subject, but little to the purpose in my
opinion: at last finding that I gave but little heed to what he said, he took
his leave; but on the Monday morning I went again to him to St. John's.

After which I went according to order to Mr. Knowles the Priest to Confession.

He lodged then at a Coffee-house in White-Fryers that has a Backdoor into
Water-lane. Of him I received the Sacrament; and had his advice about Murdering
the Lord Shaftsbury, which was so silly and weak, that I shall not mention any
part of it here.

Knowles sent me to the Lady Abergaveney, telling me she was a witty Lady, and
held a great Correspondence with the Lord Shaftsbury, and therefore was the
more fit to give me advice.

So I left him, and went to that Lady, who then lodged at one Mrs. Griffins
house in Holborn-Row in upper Lincoln's Inn Fields.

I was admitted into her Chamber, and let her Ladyship know who I was, and
whence I came. She told me she had heard much of me, and gave me thanks for my
diligence in the Cause; but coming to treat about the main Business with her,
she told me 'twas as easy to Kill the Lord Shaftsbury as a Bird on a Tree. I
asked her how? then she proposed several ways, but this amongst the rest, viz.

That I should pretend to have skill in Curing the Gout, and be recommended by
her to my Lord Shaftsbury, and having access to him for that purpose, should
watch my opportunity.

She said she had advised with Mr. Knowles, and Mr. Sharp, and they had agreed
upon that way as the best and most secure that could be.

Then I went to Powis house, where the Countess was, to whom I repeated where I
had been, and what discourse I had with every of the aforesaid persons, but
particularly that Project of the Lady Abergaveneys. Which her Ladyship thought
but a very weak Contrivance, but said that perhaps it might do. So I parted
without any orders to proceed as yet.

On Tuesday in the evening Mrs. Cellier went to Gadbury's a little before the
time appointed, to discourse with the Lord Peterborough and Gadbury about Sir
Robert Peyton, as I suppose; and when she went from home, desired me to call at
Gadbury's for her, that we might go together to Mr. Stamfords.

Accordingly I went to Mr. Gadbury's, where I found her, and from thence we
went to the place beforementioned; where Mr. Stamford told us he had been
informed from very good hands, that Dr. Tongue had at that time employed a
considerable number of Writers to describe the whole manner of the Plot; but,
said he* I will acquaint the King with it, and tell His Majesty my thoughts,
which are, That the design of it is to direct Oats and Bedloe, and the rest,
how to proceed, and carry on the present Plot, (meaning* I believe, their own)
against the poor Catholics; but I do not know whether he informed his Majesty
of it or not.

From thence Mrs. Cellier and I went home, and the next morning she sent me to
Gadbury's, to enquire how the Lord Peterborough and Sir Robert Peyton
entertained each other.

At their meeting, Gadbury told me they agreed very well, and stayed there
several hours; but what they treated on he did not yet know, for he withdrew,
and left them together.

Then I returned and told Mrs. Cellier what he said, who was very well pleased
that their endeavors seemed to succeed so well.

Soon* after I met the Countess at Mrs. Celliers house, who acquainted me that
the Lord Peterborough had given her Ladyship an account of all that had passed
between him and Sir Robert Peyton, and also told me there were great hopes of
him; but at the same time she said I must go forwards with all speed to set
some Intrigue on foot against the Presbyterians; for his Royal Highness either
was already come to Town, or would be here the next day; and something must be
done to make his Royal Highness believe the Presbyterians were carrying on a
Design against the King and Government.

Then we considered what course to take in order thereunto; but could not agree
without better Judgments (or at least then mine was.)

So the Countess went away, and the next day sent for Mrs. Cellier to the
Tower; who, when she returned, told me the Lords had ordered that I should use
all the speed I could to find out some idle persons that appeared well in
apparel, and give them Money to go to the Coffee-houses, and make enquiry of
all the Clubs and Meetings that were about the Town, and get the names of such
as frequented them, and endeavor to learn how things went in all parts of the
Town. This I promised to do; but not being acquainted with many such persons,
whom I durst trust in such an Affair, I employed only two or three, of whom I
had a better opinion then of the rest, viz.

One Bedford, by some called Captain, though he never was in Commission, to him
I gave 40 s. in Cliffords-Inn Garden, and endeavored to make him sensible what
it was for, and he was to proceed. He entered into a solemn Promise to use his
utmost endeavors to give me satisfaction.

Soon after I employed one Curtice, and gave him Ten Shillings Earnest, and
told him his business; who also promised to use his utmost Endeavor.

Then was I my self very busy in visiting most Coffee-Houses about Town; where
I found all things very suitable to our Interests and Designs, and many Persons
very hot against the Presbyterians, some saying, The Plot was now most
apparently discovered to be theirs.

This Rumor was very industriously spread about by all our Accomplices, as
Wood, Dormer, the Virginia Merchant, my self, and many others, perhaps unknown
to me.

By this time his Royal Highness was returned from Flanders, and the Lord
Peterborough sent for me to give the Duke an account of this New Plot; by which
it appears that his Lordship had heard something of it before: And his Lordship
has since declared to the King and Council, That Mrs. Cellier had given him an
account of one Willoughby, as also of his behavior in Flanders, and some part
of a Presbyterian Design that was then on foot.

But at that time when his Lordship sent for me, I was unprovided, and sent the
Countess word of it; who appointed me to wait on her at Powis House that Night,
at Four a Clock: which I did, and found her Ladyship there; who bid me sit down
and write: which having done, she dictated, and I writ: and this which follows
is the Abbreviation of that which was found by Sir William Waller in the
Meal-Tub, for that was the Original, and what the Countess dictated.

REMARKS, etc.
Four Clubs or Meetings, viz.
Sir Robert Peyton at the Kings Head Tavern. Mr. Bennet's at the Green Dragon.
Sir Francis Clark's at the Sun Tavern. Colonel Blood's at Westminster Market.
The three first being the Council Meetings, and the last the Messengers for
the Countries at present, but when occasion shall require, they are to be
Field-Officers.

Mr. Gooding's promise to support D. M. if Banished. Major Alsop's promise to
me for a Commission. Friday, the 12th of September, M. went to Sir Thomas
Player. The manner of sending Messengers to all parts of England. The Manner of
all their several Meetings, and how the Converse with one another for the
concurrence of matters. The manner of their Contributing, and to what purpose
money is raised. The posture they were in for a Rising if His Majesty had died,
and how they had a considerable Army posted in and about the Town for that
purpose. The Contrivance of the Bill against -- The Design to rise in the
North, in order to join with an Army of Scots commanded by -- Goodine's, and
others Accounts about their Government. Lord Hallifax Lord Shaftsbury Lord
Radnor Lord Essex Lord Wharton Duke of Buckingham, and others, for Counsel.
Duke of Monmouth to be General. Lord Gray of Warke Lieutenant General. Lord
Gerrard and his Son Lieutenant-Generals. Sir Thomas Armstrong.
Lieutenant General. Colonel Blood Sir William Waller, and others, to be
Major-Generals. Colonel Mansel, Quartermaster General. Most of the
Field-Officers meet at Bloood's Club, and others at Cities and great Towns in
the Countries. The Detachment to be made from His Majesty's Guards, etc. and
also from the Trained-Bands and Militia both in City and Country. Alsop's
promise to bring me to my Lord Shaftsbury, to be employed for an Intelligencer,
and to have his promise for a Commission.
Now I must obsrve to the Reader, That though most of these Particulars were
Dictated by the Countess, yet I had them not all of her, but some from Bedford,
Curtice, Woods, etc. the which being by me afterward abbreviated, and the
Lists of the persons named (who, I was informed, met at the aforesaid Clubs)
being added to it.

Each of these Clubs consist of at least 200 persons, all of good Estates and
Substance.

These that follow are Lists of particular persons, viz.

At the Kings Head Tavern in Fleetstreet.
LOrd Howard. Sir Robert Peyton. Sir John Duke. Sir Philip Matthews. Sir Henry
Blount. Mr. John Gibson. Mr. Charles Umphreville. Mr. John Freake Sen. Mr.
Richard Goodenough. Mr. John Trenchard. Mr. Henry Trenchard. Mr. William
Trenchard. Mr. Claypole. Mr. Griffith. Mr. Joseph Clarke. Mr. Richard Spicer.
Mr. Freake Jun. Dr. Harrington. Mr. John Aylif. Mr. Percival. Mr. Overton. Mr.
Hutchinson. Mr. Starkey. Mr. Bugdel. Mr. Howard. Mr. Thompson. Mr. Gibson. Mr.
Waller. Mr. Comb. Mr. Ireton. Mr. Whitlock Sen. Mr. Rey. Mr. Coxlow. Mr.
Whitlock Jun. Mr. Merry. Mr. Chettwyn. Mr. Bethal. Mr. Speak Sen. Mr. Speak
Jun. Mr. Trinder. Mr. Littleton. Mr. West. Mr. Smith. Mr. Harbert. Mr. Aron
Smith. Mr. Blount. Mr. Washenden. Mr. Potter.
And others whose Names I know not.

At the Green Dragon Tavern in Fleetstreet.
MR. Bennet. Mr. Chair. Mr. Baker. Mr. Chumley. Mr. Young. Sir William Hartop
and his Son. Mr. Hartop. Mr. William Campion. Mr. Appesley. Mr. Bowls. Mr.
Roger Pope. Mr. Kent. Captain Fitz-Williams. Mr. Robert Reeves. Mr. Hodges. Mr.
Minns. Mr. Barrel. Mr. Isted. Mr. Mazemore. Sir Edm. Bacon. Mr. Jennings. Lord
Lovelace. Mr. Bainton. Sir John Wild Mr. Robert Creswel. Sir Richard Atkins.
Mr. George Long. Mr. Holeman. Mr. Villers. Mr. Ashburnham. Mr. George Pit. Mr.
Barth. Ashburnham. Mr. Daniel Osborne. Captain Bennet. Mr. Henry Harris. Mr.
Blithe. Mr. Henry Win. Mr. Natchpole. Mr. Edw. Dering. Mr. Sands. Mr.
Hubbert.
Besides many others whose Names I know not.

At the Sun Tavern behind the Royal Exchange.
ALderman Bence. Alderman Booth. Sir Francis Clarke. Mr. Saunders. Mr. Twisdel.
Mr. Stavely. Mr. Cowel. Mr. Parker. Captain Collier. Mr. Phelps. Mr. Davis,
etc.
In Westminster-Market, at a Chandlers House.
COlonel Blood. Sir William Waller. Colonel Mansel. Colonel Brown. Colonel
Barrington. Colonel Heart. Colonel Jenks. Major Coult.
Then the Lady Powis the next Day by Mrs. Cellier, recommended me to the Lord
Peterborough, and desired him (by a Letter that Mrs. Cellier carried then, as
she told me) to take me to his Royal Highness.

In order whereunto, Mrs. Cellier and my self were commanded to go directly to
his Lordships Lodgings in the Stone-Galery at Whitehal, where we were told he
would come to us, as he did, and told me I should presently see the Duke: But
in the mean time, asked me, What I would say to his Royal Highness? Or if the
Lady Powis, or any Person else, had instructed me what to say?

We were carried then into his Lordships Closet, where I showed him my Business
in Writing, and told him what I had to acquaint his Royal Highness with by word
of mouth; which his Lordship well approved of, and highly commended me. Which
gave me great encouragement to proceed: For had his Lordship not been too
Credulous of the said Story, it must certainly have been discovered long before
it was; for, as I suppose, his Credit and good Character of me to his Royal
Highness, brought me to the Honor of Communicating the whole matter to His
Majesty, to whom I did deliver it as a Real thing, though indeed it was an
absolute falsehood, and only a Story contrived and consented to in general, by
the Popish Party, and intended for a Mask, hoping whilst the King, (if His
Majesty should believe it) was preparing for the safety of His Sacred Person
and the Government, against the pretended Conspiracy of the Presbyterian Party,
that they might have the more time to move on with their own Plot, which was
still to possess the the King with the real belief of the said Sham-Plot.

There we waited till his Royal Highness came from Supper, (for 'twas that time
of Night) then the Lord Peterborough bid us follow him, where we were brought
into his Royal Highness's Closet, and immediately the Duke came in, and had
some discourse with Mrs. Cellier, whose Business was to acquaint his Royal
Highness about Sir Robert Payton; then turning to me, I fell on my Knee, and
had the Honor to Kiss his Royal Highness's Hand.

I presented the Duke with the Paper of my Business; and to the Questions which
his Royal Highness asked me, I returned such Answers as I was directed.

Then the Duke told Mrs. Cellier he would stay there till Sir Robert Payton
came: whereupon we both withdrew, and returned to the Lord Peterborough's
Lodging, where we waited till his Lordship came, which was not till above an
hour after.

When we left his Royal Highness, the Lord Peterborough introduced Sir Robert
Payton to the Duke, where, as his Lordship told us afterward, Sir Robert
Payton did behave himself much to the Duke's satisfaction.

He told me likewise, That his Royal Highness liked me well, and had promised
his Lordship I should be Encouraged; and then he told Mrs. Cellier, Sir Robert
Payton had promised upon his Troath to employ all his Interest for the Duke's
Service: And that his Lordship had moved her Business to his Royal Highness,
(which was, That his Royal Highness would grant an Order for the Payment of
some Money due to her Husband, which Order soon after was granted, and at Sir
Allen Apselyes, Mrs. Cellier and her Husband received One hundred Pounds, part
of the said Debt.)

Then turning again to me, his Lordship also promised to assist me in the
making my Fortune for the good Service I had done, and was still like to do;
and he bid me proceed in the said Discovery; and from that time his Lordship
called me Captain Willoughby: And as Mrs. Cellier and I were coming away, his
Lordship called in some of his Servants, and ordered that at what time soever
either of us should come to enquire for his Lordship, they should be sure to
let him know it forthwith; which they promised to do, and we returned home;
where Mrs. Cellier could not rest till she had seen the Countess, to let her
know what had happened, and how we were received.

And in order to it, the next morning early she went to the Tower, and related
the whole matter to the Lords, (as at her return she told me) who were
extremely satisfied, and some of them were pleased to say, They hoped to find
me an honest and an active Person.

Soon after this, the Lord Peterborough told me, I must go again to the Duke;
to whom I was again brought by his Lordships means, and his Royal Highness told
me I must wait on the King, (to whom he had delivered the Paper I had before
presented him with) and gave His Majesty an account more at large of the
Contents thereof; and his Royal Highness then told me the King would order me
money to proceed in the said Discovery (of that new Plot) and then with his own
hand gave me twenty Guineys to encourage me, and also promised (provided I
could produce a clear proof to make good the account I had given of it) to make
my Fortune. And I did really think that his Royal Highness did believe there
was truth in this Sham-Plot.

Then I returned home, and told Mrs. Cellier, I had been with the Duke;
wereupon she persuaded me forthwith to send the Lord Powis word of it, for
'twould be great satisfaction to him and the rest of the Lords.

Accordingly I dispatched my Boy to the Tower with a Letter that contained the
whole Relation, and likewise desired that since I was to wait upon His Majesty
the next day, their Lordships would be pleased to give me some Directions how
to behave my self there.

That night I received no other answer then that the Lady Powis would be with
me the next day at three a Clock in the afternoon. So she was, at Mrs. Celliers
house, where I received from her these following Directions, viz.

That I should be sure to lay all the burden I could upon the Presby terians
but particularly upon the Lord Gray, Lord Howard of Eserick, Duke of Monmouth,
Duke of Buckingham, Sir William Waller, Colonel Blood, and some others, and
that I should explain to His Majesty the meaning of the several contents of the
Paper I had before presented to the Duke and how the Presby terians were
resolved to use their utmost endeavors for the reducing the present Government
and setting up a Commonwealth once more, and settling the Duke of Monmouth in
it; and that the Lord Shaftsbury, and other Persons of Quality were issuing out
Commissions to that purpose, and had promised some to diverse persons.

This was the Story I was to tell the King, as I did, and then I thought His
Majesty believed the same to be true; but His Majesty has since been pleased to
declare in Council he did not give Credit to it, for that it was so impossible
a thing; but yet to show that he would not wholly slight it, till better
satisfaction, was pleased to order me money by Mr. Secretary Coventry, to
encourage me in the farther discovery thereof; and soon after I received from
Colonel Halsel 40 l. but when he paid it me, he told me I must endeavor to make
things a little more plain, or the King would not be well pleased; which I
promised to do, and took my leave.

Then I came home and told Mrs. Cellier, what had passed, who went immediately
to the Tower to let the Lords know, I had not only given His Majesty a
satisfactory Account, but had likewise received 40 l. by His Order to encourage
me, which they were glad to hear, and then, I suppose thought fit to prepare
something that might induce a stronger belief, and gain more credit to the
discovery but desired me to go no more to Colonel Halsel; for it should seem
they had some reason to be afraid of him, lest he might trace the Business till
he had discovered it.

This Order I followed, for I went no more to Colonel Halsel, though I had been
commanded by the King, as often as I made any new progress in the Business, to
give Colonel Halsel an account of it.

When His Majesty was at Newmarket, I was advised to send an account of some
new Discovery made since the former; and this I was to deliver to Colonel
Halsel to be sent; for it was before I had received the 40 l. from him, and an
Order from the Lords to apply my self to him no more.

The Paper I sent was to this Effect. viz.

SIR, May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
I Have discovered a great Correspondence between the Presbyterians and the
Dutch, and believe at your Majesty's return, to give a good Account of the same
by God's help; till which time I shall use my utmost endeavor to approve my self

Your MAJESTY'S Most Faithful, and Obedient Subject, WILLOUGHBY.


Soon after the King returned from New Market, which when the Lords heard of,
they ordered me to wait on His Majesty with a supplemental Story, but much to
the same effect with my former, and to apply my self to Master Cheffinch to be
brought to His Majesty's presence, (Col. Halsel being the person that had
brought me to him before) which I did, and His Majesty ordered Mr. Cheffinch to
bring me to Him, where I related my business, and withdrew; then I met the
Countess again at Mrs. Celliers* house, and gave her an account of my having
been with His Majesty: To which She answered, The next time I should carry
something of greater moment; but that in the mean time she ordered me to make
diligent enquiry after one Colonel Mansfield (for so she said his Name was)
which I did, and with some difficulty found by Curtice where he lodged, and
sent word by Mrs. Cellier of it to the Tower; who when she came back told me,
The Countess ordered I should be at home in the Afternoon, and her Ladyship
would come to me; but in the mean time that I should go to Mr. Sharp to
Confession, and receive the Sacrament, (which is a custom the Roman Catholics
constantly practice, either before the undertaking or after the effecting some
damnable enterprise, and sometimes both, that their Father Confessor may
palliate the thing to them under a color of Religion, so as to make it appear
meritorious, be it never so criminal) for the next Orders I should receive
would be for the putting in execution what had been resolved on with relation
to the Lord Shaftsbury; on this I took some time to pause, but at last did go
to Father Sharp and Confess, and Receive; after which according to his usual
custom, he conjured me by all that was good, to use all the possible speed to
stabb the said Lord; after I had received Orders from the Lords so to do, I
promised I would, and so left him. About three days after that, Mrs. Cellier
had received a Letter from the Lady Powis, which made mention, that that very
night I should make my self ready and go to Lord Shaftsbury's house in
Aldersgate street, and desire to speak with him privately; but from Mrs.
Cellier her self I received a particular charge not to enter into any discourse
with my Lord, when I had him alone, but after a little Apology for my coming to
his Lordship, (though an absolute stranger to him, and neither sent nor
introduced by any other person, and desiring to know whether if it should fall
out to be in my power to serve him, I might have his Lordships favor, etc.) to
do my business and come away. Then she gave me a short French Dagger, as I
suppose 'twas by the make, I asked whence she had it, she answered, that on
Sunday last the Virginia Merchant had brought her three or four such, and out
of a Cubbord in the same room took the rest, and bid me choose which I liked
best, but I kept that which I had already, and made no further choice, and went
directly to Lord Shaftsbury's house, where I was admitted, but there being
diverse persons in the Room where his Lordship was, I desired privacy lest some
of them might know me, and I be discovered; then his Lordship sent me with one
of his Gentlemen up stairs, whither his Lordship came to me in a little time; I
repeated my story to him, and his Lordship seemed desirous to have entered into
some farther discourse, but I was not willing to engage my self in any, neither
had I opportunity to do what I went for, for there were some persons at the
other end of the Room; but if they had been away, it pleased God to strike me
with a sudden fear and horror of mind, insomuch that I was utterly disabled to
have done him any mischief, and the apprehension of being discovered was so
terrible to me, that I was in torment to be gone: So that I took leave, and
came home, putting on the best countenance I could, lest my face should
discover to Mistress Cellier the great dread and terror I was possessed with;
then she was very earnest to know what progress I had made, I answered I had
been at Lord Shaftsburys, and discoursed with him, but there being more persons
in the Room, I thought it not safe to attempt any thing at that time; but
withal pretended 'twas easy enough to be done, and promised to do it the next
time I went.

The next morning early she sent my Boy to the Tower with a Letter, to give an
account to the Lords, that I had entered my self at Lord Shaftsburies, and
promised not to fail the second time. The Countess her self wrote an Answer to
that Letter, and Ordered me to go to the King, and acquaint His Majesty, that I
had been with Lord Shaftsbury in order to some farther Discovery of the New
Plot, and tell His Majesty verbatim what I had said to the Lord Shaftsbury; and
I was also to tell the Kings Majesty, that his Lordship had promised me an
Employ, and that he would take care of me: whereupon I went the next Morning to
Whitehall to Mr. Cheffinch, and he brought me to the King, to whom I repeated
my Lesson; and the King bid me proceed.

About two days after, I met the Countess at Mrs. Celliers House, whom I told I
had been with the King, and done according to order, then she told me, I must
repair to Lord Shaftsbury that night to make the second attempt, and frame a
discourse to him to this or the like effect, viz. That I was now come with
something that very nearly concerned both his Lordships Honor and Person, to
wit, that if his Lordship should be sent for before the King and Council, and
there have several Accusations of High Treason brought in against him, and
thereupon be committed to the Tower, and that the Evidence to maintain those
Accusations should prove to be Letters written by his Lordships own hand, that
then I hoped his Lordship would believe I was his faithful servant. This I
promised to do, and in the dusk of the Evening (Mrs. Cellier having delivered
me a Dagger) I went the second time, and sent for Mr. Shepherd one of his
Lordships Gentlemen to the door, and desired to speak privately with his Lord;
he went in and returned, desiring me to come in, which I did, and he took me
into a Room, which I supposed to have been his Lords Closet, and desired me to
stay there, and said his Lord would come to me presently; but as soon as the
Gentleman was gone, I looked about the Room and found another door, besides
that at which I came in; and open^^g it I found that it led into the Room where
I had been with his Lordship before; then I concluded, if his Lordship had come
into the Closet, that my way would have been to have Stabbed him, and having my
chocie of two ways out, to have put out the Candle, and pretended to go some
where to light it; and if any of the Servants should have seen me with the
Candle unlighted, to give it him or them, and tell them their Lord was in the
dark, and they must make have up with a Candle, by which means I might have
opportunity to make my escape. But as providence had better ordered both for
his Lordship and my self, he came not into that Room, but sent for me into the
next: but before I saw him I had waited near two hours in the Closet, where in
a Table-drawer I found many Papers and Letters, some of which I put into my
Pocket; which when they came to be perused proved to be Letters from Sir
Richard Bulstrode, His Majesty's Agent now at Brussels, but the Contents
imported no more than the present posture of Affairs in that Country. When I
was sent for into the next Room to his Lordship I was feiz'd with the same
trouble and confusion of mind that I had upon me the first time I came: then I
began to consider with my self which of these two courses it would be most
advisable for me to take, whether to yield obedience to the laws of an infinite
God, who had power to save or damn my Soul, or to the commands of my Lords and
Masters in the Tower, who treated me as the Devil does his Vassals, putting me
daily into new methods of Destruction, and incurring Everlasting Damnation: But
through the grace of God, I then made a wise choice, and resolved to obey God
rather than them. I was about to hint something of danger his Lordship might be
in, but other Discourse arising it went out of my memory. So I left his
Lordship to meditate on this confused story which I had repeated, and returned
home with such a cheerful countenance, that Mrs. Cellier laughed and said he
has done the business; but when I answered I had not, but would take some other
time, she seemed not a little concerned, and the next morning sent my Boy with
a Letter to the Tower, to relate the story I had told her, and in the Letter
enclosed Sir Richard Bulstrodes Letters which I brought from the Lord
Shaftsbury's with me the night before: I suppose the Lords were no less
concerned than Mrs. Cellier was, for they assured themselves that the thing
would be done as certainly as that of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey's was already
done. But soon after my Boy came back, who returned without any answer, came
Mr. Wood, and told me, his Lord admired that I of all people should be so great
a Coward, etc. but it was his Lords pleasure to try me once more; and in the
mean time that I must make have and go to Whitehal, and tell the King all the
discourse I had with Lord Shaftsbury, and show His Majesty these Letters of Sir
Richard Bulstrode's that he might give the more credit to me, and lest Lord
Shaftsbury should suspect me, and be with the King before me, which he said
might be more prejudicial to me perhaps than I was aware of, etc. and that I
must tell the King that a great quantity of Papers very dangerous, and relating
to the design of the Presbyterians were in the Lodgings of one Mr. Mansfield,
and pray a Warrant to search the said Lodgings. Presently after I went to Mr.
Cheffinch, who placed me in a Room which his Majesty was to pass through: the
King seeing me asked what I had to say to him? whereupon I repeated what I was
bid to say, and humbly prayed a Warrant; his Majesty commanded me to go, and
acquaint Mr. Secretary Coventry with the thing, and said he would make me out a
Warrant; so I went to Mr. Secretary Coventry and acquainted him with it, and
told him 'twas the Kings pleasure that I should wait on him for a Warrant, but
Mr. Secretary refused to grant one, unless I would make Affidavit that there
were such Papers, and wha^ the Contents of them were, which I could not do, for
I knew not of any Papers in his Chamber then; for I suppose they were to have
been put there after the Warrant granted; and if the Papers had been there at
that time and I had been able to swear the Contents, it would have been plain
that they were of my putting there, for else how was it possible for me to know
the Contents of Letters in a Gentleman's Chamber whom I never exchanged two
words with in all my life? so that I concluded the safest way for me was to let
it alone.

Then I returned home, where I found Mrs. Cellier, who sent me to the Lord
Peterborough's, to let him know what had happened, and how I had been twice at
Lord Shaftsbury's, who had received me kindly, and told me he would take some
care of me. I went accordingly to his Lordship, and acquainted him; who seemed
to be well pleased that I had been with Lord Shaftsbury; and his Lordship told
me, When any Forces were raised, he would put in for a Regiment of Horse, and
would give me a Troop in the same, but withal his Lordship bid me be sure to do
his business the third time (meaning the Lord Shaftsbury's:) Whereupon I went
home, and just as I came in, Mrs. Cellier came from the Tower, and told me,
Some Persons had been with the Duke, to destroy my credit with him, by giving
him an Account of my Life; but said she, That storm is over; for the good Lady
Powis, and Lord Peterborough have both waited upon the Duke, and not only
persuaded his R. H. not to believe it, but prevailed with him not to speak of
it to the King, which, Mrs. Cellier told me, his R. H. had promised not to do.

By this time Lord Peterborough had been diverse times with Sir R. P. at
Gadbury's, and once at least (if not oftener) at Mrs. Cellier's; and Sir R. P.
had seen and spoke with his Royal Highness the second time: and Lord
Peterborough told me the Duke had promised Sir R. P. to treat with the King
about putting Sir R. P. and some others into the Commissions for the Peace
again, which they had been formerly put out of by His Majesty's Order.

Then the Countess of Powis came to Mrs. Cellier's, and desired to speak with
me, which I hearing of, came down out of my Chamber, expecting to be chid
severely; but the Lady was very mild, and only enquired how His Majesty
resented my going a second time to the Lord Shaftsbury's, and of bringing the
Letters from thence, and if I had gotten a Warrant. I told her, The King, I
thought, was well pleased with me; but I could not by any means get a Warrant,
unless I would make Affidavit that I had seen the Papers in Mansfield's
Lodging, and knew the Contents of them; which I said I could not do. Then the
Countess and Mrs. Cellier were both very angry with me, for refusing to make
oath that there were Papersthere, and the Contents of them such, as that the
Secretary might think fit to issue a Warrant to search for them: And began to
argue the case with me according to the usual equivocating way of that Party;
First telling me that I might have saved my Oath, for that I had formerly seen
and been at the writing of some of them. Secondly, It could be no Perjury, if
Oath were not made in'Court of Record. And lastly, That I was by my Religion
obliged to part with my life for the good of the Cause, and much more to swear
a thing that was not inconsistent with truth.

Then the Countess endeavored to persuade me to go the third time to the Lord
Shaftsbury, which I refused, telling her, that I had such a discomposure in my
mind, for having been there twice already, that I should not be easy in a
little time: then, Mrs. Cellier being present, the Countess struck me gently
over the hand with her Fann, and said: Away, cowhearted Fellow, I my self will
go -- No, Madam, (said Mrs. Cellier) that shall not be, for I will go, and let
the World know that some of our Sex are brave and more daring than the men; and
promised to do the Work the first time, or dye upon the Spot. At the same time
the Countess complained that all their Men of Courage were sent out of the
World, or secured in order to be so.

Then the Countess asked me, If I knew where Mr. Mansfield's Lodging was? I
answered, Yes; and that I had been much troubled to find it out; then said She,
You timorous Person, here, will you take these Papers, and convey them
privately into some part of his Clothes, or into his Coat Pockets, or into any
part of his Room, or his Trunks? I answered, 'Twas impossible for me to do
that, because I knew him not. The Countess told me, I must find some way to be
acquainted with him, and take him to a Tavern, and drink smartly, and then take
an opportunity to lodge the Papers in some part of his Clothes, and
immediately, upon pretense of his having spoke Treason, or some such thing,
call a Constable, and have him apprehended and searched, and carry the Papers
to the King and Council, and so have him committed. For this was to be the
Introduction to their real Plot.

If this had been done, the whole Plot had gone on, and I was to have moved the
King and Council to have empowered me to make Search in many other Gentlemen's
Lodgings and Houses, both in City and Country. Then the Countess advised me to
go and take a Lodging some where, near his, and endeavor to insinuate my self
into his acquaintance; and take my own way for the management of the business.

Then 'twas that her Ladyship gave me fifteen Letters, and a List of Names, one
of which Letters, and the List, being writ by her own hand. She desired they
might be transcribed, which I offered to do; But She told me that must not be,
for the King had some Remarks already under my hand, and would know it again,
and so we might be discovered, for these must be brought to the King and
Council. Then She gave me order to go to a Scrivener over against
Somerset House, (because I had no person that I durst make privy to such a
Secret) and bid me to leave them with him, and pay the person for writing them;
then She went away, and I went to the Scrivener, and got the Papers
transcribed, and brought them back, and finding Mrs. Cellier and Mr. Webb
together by the fire, I took the Letters out of my pocket, and showed 'em them,
telling them those were the papers I had that day of the Lady Powis; they both
perused some, if not all of them, and wished me good success, and warranted me
I should be well rewarded for what I did in that business. Now the next Day
being Wednesday, October the 15th 1679, I went into Ax-Yard in Kingsstreet,
Westminster, and enquired for Lodgings, and being met by some that lived
thereabout, I was directed to Mr. Alexander Harris's House, which was the place
where the said Mansfield lodged, where, under the feigned Name of Thomas, I
enquired for Lodgings; the people readily took me into the house, to show me
what Rooms they had, but none would please me, but the two Rooms on a floor one
pair of Stairs high, one of which being disposed of, the Gentleman could not be
dispossessed without his consent; which could not then be obtained, because he
was out of the way: So that for that time I departed.

I had then many Irons in the fire, and some of them, if I were not very
nimble, would cool, for I was not to take a step without directions from my
great Masters in the Tower, which having received, I went again on Friday,
October. 17, and agreed for those two Rooms, giving the Gentlewoman of the house
her price: for a little money, I thought, must not break squares in an Affair of
that weight, and Colonel Mansel (for that is his true name) was willing to
remove one pair of Stairs higher, that he might not hinder the house of so
beneficial a Lodger as I appeared likely to be. When I came that Day, the
Gentlewoman of the House being abroad, I was conducted by a Woman into the room
whither Mansel was to remove, and there I was left alone for about half an
hour; at which time (as appears by my own Confession) I lodged the treasonable
papers behind the Beds head. I promised to come that Night, with my Friend for
whom I pretended to have taken one of the rooms; but having an opportunity to
let the Lords in the Tower know what I had done, and how I proceeded, they
ordered me, by Mrs. Cellier, to go again to the King, and desire a Warrant to
search; whereupon I went to Mr. Cheffinch, and was brought to His Majesty, whom
I earnestly entreated to let me have a Warrant: His Majesty sent me again to
Mr. Secretary Coventry: But no Warrant could be obtained; of which I sent the
Lords word: Then they Ordered Mrs. Cellier to direct me to some of the
Custom-house Officers, who had power to search the house; that I might pretend
to inform them where a considerable quantity of prohibited Goods that had been
imported were concealed: The next day being Saturday October. 18. I went to the
Lodging, and enquired if my Trunks were come, but they heard of none; after
some discourse I departed, promising to come and take possession the next
Night, (for that Night I could not, my Friend being out of Town) but I failed
then also. On Monday 20. I visited them again, and enquired whether my Trunks
were yet come, and being answered in the Negative, I vanished again. On Tuesday
Night, (having by that time got full Instructions how to proceed) about ten of
the Clock at Night I went again with one Bedford, (who I told the House was
that Friend, for whom I had taken the other Lodging;) but that Night we both
lay together in one Bed in the Room one pair of stairs forward.

On Wednesday between seven or eight a Clock in the morning, Mansel being gone
out about his Occasions, came two Officers of the Custom-house, with a
Constable, according to my appointment, to search for prohibited or uncustomed
Goods: They first went into the Chamber where I and my Friend lay, and from
thence were conducted by me into Mansels Chamber, where they made a through
search, breaking open the Trunks and Boxes, examining the Bedclothes, and at
last, after intimation given by my self, they proceeded to remove the Bed,
which they did three foot from the wall, or more, but could find nothing till I
went behind it, and there espied a packet of Papers, (he that hides can find)
and presently asked, What Is that there? The Officer having first taken them
down, I with great have snatched a Paper out of his hand, and cried out, Here Is
Treason! It was a List of Names, some at length, others only the two first
Letters. The Searcher opening another paper, and beginning to read, I again
cried out, There Is Treason against his Majesty, (and not only the Papers, but
the Person in whose Room they were found if he were present, ought to be
secured:) The Officers knowing better what belongs to their own Office, than
that of a Justice of Peace, took the Papers, and carried them not to a
Secretary of State, (as I directed them) but to their own Masters at the
Custom-house; then I left the House and returned to Mrs. Celliers, and sent
word by my Boy to the Lord Powis, that the Papers were seized by two of the
Custom-house Officers; then the Lords fearing lest there might be some trick
played, Ordered me to go forthwith and tell the King the manner how I caused
the Papers to be seized; which I did: And His Majesty sent me for Mr. Secretary
Coventry to give some Order in it. After that I returned to Mrs. Cellier, and
told her, I had the honor to be in a Room with His Majesty alone; Oh! said
she, What an opportunity have you let slip! And soon after the Countess of
Powys came, to whom I related the same thing, Mrs. Cellier being then present,
the Lady looked on her, and said, How bravely might he have killed the King if
he had been provided.

By this time Mrs. Harris being in great perplexity at this unexpected and
surprising seizure, sends her Brother, and presently follows her self to find
out Mansel at the sign of the Cat in St. Paul's Churchyard, where he left word
when he went out he might be spoke with at Eleven of the Clock; she met him
just going to the place, as I am informed by his own Pen, she relates to him in
a great astonishment, the History of this Affair, and out of her tender care
for his safety, advised him to take lodgings in the City, promising to send him
the rest of his Goods; but he rejected her well intended, but in it self
pernicious Counsel; for his withdrawing would have been interpreted a flight,
which would have argued guilt, and his personal guilt would have involved
hundreds of Innocent Persons in the same Condemnation: He told her therefore,
that he was not conscious to himself of any crime, and that he would go to the
Custom-house to know by what Authority his Box was seized, and learn what was
become of these pretended Papers; accordingly he went thither, where he met
with one Mr. Bostock who was one of those that had searched his Chamber. He told
him, That one Mr. Willoughby, the Monday before, came and informed them of two
thousand pounds worth of Flanders Silver and Gold Lace that had been imported,
and was stowed in such a place. But here Mansel understood that his Papers were
all returned, and more than his own, for the Treasonable Papers were returned
with them; and accordingly when he was come back to his Lodging he found the
Box restored, and the Papers lying on the Dresser, suprescribed by the Master
of the House, For Colonel Mansel. These Papers he opened in the presence of Mr.
Harris, desiring him to take notice of them, and how many there were; and
desired Mr. Harris to set a mark on them that he might be the better able to
swear they were the same when they should come to be examined before Authority,
which he resolved they should presently be: In order to which he carried them
with him to advise with a Friend what to do in the Case, who persuaded him to
go forthwith to a Secretary of State, which he endeavored to have done, but
not finding my Lord sunderland, or any of his Clerks at the Office, the Earl of
Essex, and Sir Henry Capel being also from home, he addressed himself to a Worthy
Gentleman, Mr. Justice Warcup, to whom he laid open the whole Affair; and
having got together the Officers of the Custom-house, the Master and Mistress
of the Lodgings, and whatever other Evidence they then had, Mr. Justice Warcup
was pleased to take their Depositions: Upon the whole matter it appeared to
have been a Malicious Design of mine, and thereupon he made out a Warrant to
apprehend me, which having delivered to a Constable, they went along with him
to Mr. Celliers, who is a French Merchant, and a Papist, where I did then, and
the St. Omers Boys formerly had lodged; there the Justice, Constable and
Warrant found me.

As soon as I understood their errand, I pretended that this was Mr. (...)
What, said I, has he cried Whore first? but I have been this day with the King
my self, and with Mr. Secretary Coventry, and have acquainted them with the
business; so that I suppose there will be some enquiry made for him at his
Lodging, before he get back. Col. Warcup answered me, That if I would find
sureties to appear at the Council Board next Morning by Nine of the Clock, he
should give me no further trouble at present: And accordingly Mr. Cellier the
French Merchant, and Mr. Blasedale the Apothecary entering into Recognizance
for my appearance, I was Bailed.

On Thursday October 23. in the Forenoon when the persons concerned attended
the Council in the Lobby, I met with a very unhappy Rencounter, for as I was
going down the Stairs of the Lobby, I met with one Mr. D'oiley an Officer
belonging to the Mint, who had formerly known, and prosecuted me for uttering
false Guinies. Espying him, and being conscious to my self of my former Crimes,
I began to Curse without any provocation, and demanded, what D'oiley had to say
to me, threatening if I had him out of the Court to cut his Croune; and that
whenever I should meet him in a convenient place, I would be revenged on him;
at which, I suppose, D'oiley was surprised.

But my Lord Chief Justice North passing by toward the Council, and
overhearing what words passed betwixt us, Mr. D'oiley made his application to
his Lordship, and presently Mr. Justice Warcup was sent for in, and ordered to
take Mr. D'oiley's information against me, and a Messenger was likewise ordered
to take me into Custody. Mr. Justice Warcup directed the Messenger to take me
to the King's Head Tavern, whither he promised to come himself as soon as the
Council was up: during our stay there I writ a Note to Mrs. Cellier to go to
the Lord and Lady Powis, and acquaint them that I was apprehended for they knew
what: This Note the Messenger would not suffer the Boy to carry till himself
had read the Contents of it, and then he dismissed him, who carried it according
to direction.

That Morning the Council had before them the affair of Mr. Dugdale, so that
when Colonel Warcup had delivered in the Examinations that he had taken the day
before about me, we were all commanded to appear in the Afternoon at Four of
the Clock.

Thursday October. 23th Afternoon when the Council was sitting,
I was called in first, and presently after me Mansel was called, whom the Lord
Chancellor asked What Correspondencies these were that he held? Here are
Papers, says he, of dangerous consequence, such as import the Levying Men, and
Raising Rebellion against His Majesty: Here is also a Catalogue of men's Names
whom you have Listed. Mr. Mansel replied, That he knew nothing of these Letters
and Papers, That he neither had held, nor ever would hold any Treasonable
Correspondence with any person living. He humbly prayed the favor of the
Honorable Board, That he might be permitted to give an Account how he came by
the sight of these Papers, and he did not question but to make it appear, that
these Papers were brought into his Chamber out of some malicious design or
other by me.

Then he gave to their Lordships a full and clear account of what he knew, or
had been informed of by those of the Family where he lodged, and the Officers
of the Custom-House; and being commanded to call in his Witnesses, he did so.

Mr. Alexander Harris was first Sworn, who Witnessed, That the Papers before
that Honorable Board, were the same that had been left at his House for
Colonel Mansel by an Officer of the Custom-House. Mr. Stretch and Mr. Bostock
were Sworn next, who deposed among other matters, That I having informed them
of certain prohibited Goods, concealed in Ax Yard, appointed them to come to me
at Mr. Celliers House in Arundel Buildings the last Monday; whither being come
in order to the Search and Seizure, I told them I was not yet ready, having not
yet Lodged at my new Quarters; but would not fail to be there that Night, and
therefore appointed them to come thither on Wednesday Morning; That at that
time they came, and found me with my Friend in the Chamber; that then I took
them aside, lest Bedford should hear what I said, and whispered to them that
the Goods were in the Room above Stairs, and desired them to charge me to
assist. That after a narrow search finding no such Goods as they were informed
of, I pointed toward the Bed which they drew from the wall, and searched very
narrowly; but still the Papers not appearing, that I pointed again to the
Beds-head, whereupon Stretch went once more behind the Bed with a Candle, but
with the like ill success: At last I went behind the Beds-head, and called to
the Officers, What Is that hangs there? showing them a Packet of Papers pinned
to the Beds-head, the Officer taking them down, I snatched one of them out of
his hand, and cried out, Here is Treason. (The Officer taking another Paper,
and reading it.) In the Paper that I read were words to this purpose, I wonder
at your delay, and that the Four Lords have left us, for now the Tyrant has
declared himself a Papist: At which words, I cried out, Did not I tell you
these were Treasonable Papers? They ought to be secured, and the person whose
Chamber this is, if he had been here, and carried either before the Council or
a Secretary of State. Stretch also Swore these to be the same Papers, that were
taken from behind the Beds-head, and that he did verily believe they were put
there by me.

It being late, and the Council rising, Mr. Justice Warcup took Bail for me to
appear the next day at Four in the Afternoon.

Friday October 24 Afternoon, at the Council Board.
The Council being met, Mr. Mansel put in his Petition, That the rest of his
Witnesses might be heard; upon which His Majesty was pleased to Order the Cause
to be heard the next Council-Day.

Then I moved, that till then I might be Bailed; the King in Council Ordered,
that I should be taken into the Messengers Custody, with which Order the
Messenger acquainted me. I stormed and said I was confident there was no such
Order, for I knew there were those persons that would not suffer me to be so
treated. But the Messenger insisted upon his Order, and demanded my Sword,
which I refused to deliver, but to another Messenger; then I was conducted to
the Messengers House. But before my departure thence, I did endeavor to
prevail with Col. Warcup, by offer of a reward to Bail me a third time,
desponding of my success in that ill affair; but Mr. Justice refused my
impertinent offer.

The Council that Night after a short Recess sat again; And His Majesty was
graciously pleased to appoint the business to be heard on Monday following at
Four a Clock in the Afternoon: And then I moved that Mansel might be Committed
likewise; but the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor opposed the motion, and
so it fell.

Monday October 27. 1679. At the Council Board.
About Five or Six of the Clock in the Afternoon, Mr. Mansel and I were called
in, where after a short Repetition of the Charge against Mansel, which was
grounded upon those Papers, I prepared to make my defense, having received
fresh instructions how to manage it, and addressed my self to His Majesty,
affirming, That there were in all Sixteen Papers found in his Chamber, and
desired to know what was become of all the rest besides those Nine? And
likewise what was done with the Box of Treasonable printed Pamphlets, and two
or three hundred Letters? Adding that Mansel had got together a Company of
Witnesses to disparage the Kings Evidence, and to palliate his own Treasonable
practices; then I desired I might have leave to ask him some Questions, which
being granted, I proceeded thus,

First, Whether he did not frequent a Club held at one Streets House, a
Chandler in Westminster Market?

Secondly, Whether he did not know one Disney, Grange, England, Lisle, and one
Captain Brown?

Thirdly, Whether he did not bring into that Club one Night, a Scandalous
Pamphlet, called A Word without Doors, and there publicly read it?

And Fourthly, Whether after he had read it, he did not utter Seditious words
against his Royal Highness?

Mansel owned that he knew many of the Gentlemen that I had named, but that
they were all very honest Gentlemen, and good Subjects, and all of them
Inhabitants in Westminster, saving only Captain Brown, who had been Lieutenant
to Major Russel's Troop of Horse, in his Royal Highnesses Regiment; But all
Treasonable Discourse with them or any other he did utterly disavow, and was
thereupon commanded to call the rest of his Witnesses.

Mr. Harris and Mrs. Harris first appeared, who Witnessed as before, that there
were not Sixteen Papers, but Nine only.

Bostock testified the same thing, and further, That these Papers, then before
the Honorable Board, were the same Papers found behind the Beds-head, and that
he did verily believe I had placed them there.

Stretch being sick, did not appear, but his Depositions were read, tending to
the same effect.

Then Bedford was called in, who gave a full relation how I came to him on
Tuesday Night before, to desire him to Lodge with me at some new Lodgings that
I had lately taken. He confirmed the Evidence of Mrs. Harris, and the rest, as
to the manner of searching the Chamber, and finding the Papers: Adding further,
That he went to Mr. Celliers House to speak with me, and told me what an ill
thing I had done, and how I had not only injured Mr. Mansel, but himself, by
engaging him in so vile a business, which now was so clearly laid open: And
therefore desired me to discover the whole truth to him, and who had put me
upon it: To which I replied, (not caring to enter into discourse with one who I
knew had given Testimony against me) That I doubted not but to come off; for
the Greatest man in England had engaged me in it; That he asked me whom I
meant? whether I meant the King? To which I made no answer: That he further
told me, he understood I held Correspondence with the Lord Powis in the Tower,
and that he had seen the Lady Powis her Coach the Saturday before, standing
before my Lodgings.

D'oiley was the next Witness that was called in, who Deposed, That he had
prosecuted me at two several Sessions held in the Old Bailey, for uttering false
Guineys. I was asked what I could say to that? and answered, That indeed I had
been twice prosecuted there by D'oiley, but all was out of pure malice. I
confessed that I had been Fined fifty pounds for the first offense, and had
obtained His Majesty's Gracious Pardon, but was acquitted the second time; so
that I hoped those matters would not be remembered against me now. The Right
Honorable the Earl of Essex demanding of me, Who had solicited His Majesty
for my Pardon, I answered, Captain Richardson.

Afterward John Cook, my Boy, was examined, who testified, That he was sent
with a Message, and a Note from me when I was in the Messengers hand, to Mrs.
Cellier, desiring her to acquaint the said Lord Powis, that I was taken in
Custody for the old business that he knew of. That two Months since, I had
lodged in the Lord Powis his house in Queen Street. That he had several times
waited on me to the Lord Powis his Lodgings in the Tower, which he described to
be in the Mint. That he had rode behind the Coach to attend me thither. That he
had several times carried Letters or Papers from me to the said Lord Powis, and
brought me Answers back. And lastly That the Lady Powis had several times been
at Mrs. Cellier's, and that particularly on Saturday was sevennight, the said
Lady had been alone with me in a lower Room, in private Discourse above half an
hour.

The Lord Chancellor was then pleased to ask me, Whether I had been at the Lord
Shaftsbury 's? To which I answered, That I had been several times with him, and
had discoursed with his Lordship: And I there repeated part of what passed
betwixt us: To which the Lord Chancellor replied, That I was a fine Fellow, to
come first to His Majesty, and tell him one Story; then to the Lord Powis, and
from thence to my Lord Shaftsbury 's, and discover to one what Discourse I had
had with the other: and bring one Story to the Earl of Shaftsbury, and another
to the Council. Then all were commanded to withdraw, there being no need of the
rest of Mr. Mansel's Witnesses in a matter so plain and clear: And presently a
Warrant issued from the Board to commit me to Newgate; and Order was given to
Mr. Attorney General for my prosecution. Here follows the Council Warrant for
my Commitment to Newgate.

THese are in His Majesty's Name to require You to take into your Custody the
Person of Thomas Willoughby herewith sent You, for forging of Letters importing
High Treason, and fixing the same privately at Mr. Mansel 's Chamber, to render
him guilty thereof without cause; and You are to keep him safe till he shall be
delivered by due course of Law; for which this shall be your Warrant. Council
Chamber, Whitehall, October the 27th. 1679.
To the Keeper of Newgate, or His Deputy.
Worcester, J. Bridgwater, Fauconbridge, Fran. North, H. Coventry, Henry
Capell, H. Powle, John Nicholas.
The Instructions which the Lady Powis delivered to me in the Stone-Gallery in
Whitehall, were as follows. (viz.)

First, I am suspected to have put the Letters behind the Bed when I went to
take the Rooms, I can easily make that to appear improbable; For I neither knew
what Room Mansel would lie in, nor that I my self should lie there at all: And
when I was told which Rooms were to be let, it appears I did not desire Mansel
should quit his Lodging to give me place. And after I had taken the Lodgings,
there is no proof that I was any more in Mansel's Lodgings till the search was
made.

Secondly, Stretch swears, That whilst he was searching, I went round the Bed,
and he believes I then put them there, because I espied them first. But it is
strange that the Mistresses Brother, one Messenger more, and others that were
then in the Room should not take notice of any suspicious behavior in me, as
well as Stretch. I am likewise suspected, because he swears I declared the
Letters to be treasonable Papers before I saw the inside of any one of them,
and that none of them was ever read to me. Which that it is false, Mr. Bedford
can witness for me. I desired them to seize all the rest of his Letters and
Pamphlets, which were of great consequence, and a considerable number of both,
and bring them immediately to the Council; whither I went, expecting to find
them, but it seems they were carried to the Lord Shaftsbury, and afterward
sent to Justice Warcup; and five or six of the Letters found behind the Bed
taken out, and all the Pamphlets, and two or three hundred Letters more, and a
Parchment or two with great Seals, returned to Mr. Mansel again, and only such
as were thought fit produced here.

I desire also to know when and where the Writings were delivered to him again,
and why they are not all produced as well as some?

And why they were not forthwith carried to some Secretary of State to peruse?

And by what authority he had examined the Boy?

And why he gave him Wine?

And why the Boy was threatened to be sent to Bridewel, or delivered to a
Constable?

And why he was afterward encouraged, and spoke kindly to, and commended for
the prettiest Boy they eversaw?

Now if the Boy (who if asked can declare I never fore instructed him in the
least) would not tell the truth (as they call it) without threats and caresses,
I humbly conceive little credit will be given to what he says, but if it were
truth and had come freely from him (as it did not) he is not of age to
understand an Oath.

Let Mr. Bedford be asked, If this Mansel did not use to go to a Factious Club
in Westminster Market? And if he did not bring a Scandalous Pamphlet thither,
called The Word out of Doors, and read the same there, and applauded it?

I desire to know whether he is not acquainted with Captain Brown, Mr. Disney,
Mr. Hamey, Mr. Alsop, Mr. Kenniston, Mr. Phillips, Mr. Wray, Mr. Murray, Mr.
Pemberton, Mr. Whittaker, and others of the same Faction about the Town? And if
he has not frequented their Meetings? If he has, he may justly be suspected;
for these are most notoriously Factious Persons, and disaffected to that
degree, that they cannot endure to hear any speak well of His Majesty, or the
present Government.

Now I would fain know how D'oiley could be so well acquainted with me, as to
know my Name to be any other than Willoughby, and what Authority he had to
Examine the Boy, and when he saw me at the Tower, and how often? And how long
he has had the Counterfeit Guiney, and from whom? And how he came to attend the
Council just that morning I was there? And if I mistake not, he has since
declared, if I had not spoke to him he would have said nothing to me; why then
should Mr. D'oiley now pretend to produce the Counterfeit Guiney against me? Or
why not when he saw me in the Tower, or since? for he has met me diverse times
in the streets: Can this appear to be any other than mere malice, or some
mercenary act procured by Mansel, or some of his party to invalidate my
Testimony, and color their own design?

Now my Lords, I humbly conceive, that to counterfeit Guinies is Treason, and
if Mr. D'oiley knew me the Author of it, it must be misprision of Treason at
least in him to conceal it thus long.

He also went diverse times to one William Leigh a prisoner in Newgate, (whom
himself had apprehended for Clipping and Coining) and offered for sixscore
pounds to procure him a Pardon, and that he should be discharged without so
much as being Indicted for the Crime, which had been done, had not others
prevented it; and the like proposals he made to diverse others that were to be
tried in Yorkshire. By all which Circumstances it seems to be very plain and
clear, that they have used all possible means to destroy me. But I know I am
before a Just and Wise King, whom I humbly desire to consider my
honest-endeavours to do Your Majesty Service.

The 29th of October Sir William Waller made a search in the House of Mrs.
Cellier, where in a Meal Tubb he found that Book which contained the Model of
the designed Plot against the Protestants, which has been already mentioned.

The Examination of Anne Blake Servant to Mrs. Cellier, taken upon Oath before
Sir William Waller, the 29th of October, 1679.
This Examinant says, that Mrs. Cellier delivered into her Custody two parcels
of Papers, desiring her to lay them up for her, so as they might not be
discovered, or words to that effect; and that in Obedience to her Mistress's
Commands, this Examinant hid one parcel of Papers behind the Pewter in the
Kitchen, and the other parcel wrapped up in a sheet of white paper, amongst which
was a little Paper Book tied with red Ribbonds, which for the better security
was hid in a Tub of Meal, both which parcels were seized by Sir William Waller:
This Examinant further says, That one Lane went this day to Mrs. Celliers
House to speak with her: And further this Examinant says not at present.

The Mark of Anne Blake.


Capt. and jurat. coram William Waller.



Saturday Nov. 1. 1679. at the Council Chamber in White Hall.
This day the Right Honorable, the present Lord Mayor, came to White Hall, and
delivered to His Majesty, or to the Right Honorable His Privy Council, the
Information of me Thomas Dangerfield, given upon Oath before his Lordship.

This day also several other persons were Examined before the Lords of the
Council; as follows:

Susan Edwards Servant-maid to Mrs. Cellier, who lives in Arundel-street, being
sworn, says,

That she carried two little Papers which were showed her to Mr. Willoughby in
Newgate, with twenty shillings in Silver and a Guiny, and two Books of
Accounts, that he might be perfect in them, and that he looked on the one and
not on the other; and that on Tuesday Night last she carried a Message to the
said Mr. Willoughby from her said Mistress, That her life was in his hands: And
that the Lady Powis had been thrice at Mrs. Celliers house in five weeks time
that she had lived there; And that once the said Lady Powis had there spoken
with the said Mr. Willoughby.

The Mark of the said Susan Edwards.

Note that the little Papers mentioned in this Information, are these. PAPER 1.
I have said you were taken into my house to get in desperate debts. They bring
me to L. S. they will ask me, who encouraged me to go to him, I will say it was
you, it cannot worst you.



Here follows the other little Paper, (viz.) I never change.



The same day Afternoon, Mrs. Cellier being sent for out of the Gatehouse and
Examined upon my Information:

She said, I had for some time lain at her House, and that she having money to
distribute at the Prisons, I begged of her for my Enlargement, and she collected
three pounds ten shillings, and got me released: That her Husband having great
Debts due to him which looked desperate, I was employed in the recovery of the
same, and was to have six shillings in the pound for what I could get in; and
that besides, she employed to bail out two or three Prisoners, and that was all
that I ever did for her, as she says, and denies she paid either twenty pound
or five pound to get me out of Prison; that she never sent me to the Tower:
That being troubled in her house with Sir William Waller's searches, she
obtained leave to be at the Lady Powis's House, and my Lodgings at the Goat
being troublesome also, I was desired to go and be at this Examinants house
with her Husband: That she never saw me and the Lady Powis at her house
speaking together but once: That she did not write to me when I was lately in
Newgate; but when the Note was shown her with a Seal thereon and some Crosses
on the Paper, and these words, I never change; she confessed the same.

She pretended Ignorance also of another paper importing what excuse I should
make, but that also being produced, she could not deny but that it was her hand.

She said she knew not of any design to Kill the Lord Shaftsbury, but that
being told her House was to be searched, she did go to the said Earl on Monday
was sevennight, and he gave her a kind answer.

She says she never employed me to draw Articles against Captain Richardson,
but yet confessed she had seen some I had drawn.

Then I was called into make a repetition of my whole Information, wherein Mrs.
Cellier was concerned, to which she answers by denial of all, falling down on
her Knees, beseeching his Majesty she might not be tortured, for what ever she
might be brought to say by torture, other than what she then said, would be
false.

Mrs. Cellier Confessed at last that she hid the Papers in the Meal Tub, but
said it was at my desire; she acknowledged she gave me caution to call the King
Lady Mary, and the Duke Lady Anne.

Mrs. Cellier acknowledges the business of Calculating my Nativity, but said
that according to Gadburies papers I was to be hanged.

Then was the Lady Powis called in and examined upon my Information, who
generally denied all, either that she sent any Letter to Mounson in the Kings
Bench, or that Margaret ever carried any Letter from her to get the Papers out
of Strode's hands, or that she gave me thanks for my diligence therein: she
denied that she had seen me above three times in her life, or that she had any
Letter from Mr. Jean at Peterley, yet she acknowledged she paid Mrs. Cellier
ten shillings per week for my diet.

She said, That my Lodging at Powis's house was without her knowledge.

She owns that about a fortnight since she called at Mrs. Celliers, and that I
came into the Room where she was, which was the only time she conversed with me
there, and then I told her of some Treasonable Letters hid at Westminster, and
that the Secretary had refused me a Warrant to search for them, without making
an Affidavit, and that then Mrs. Cellier had advised me to make use of the
Custom-house Officers to search for them.

She knows nothing of Mr. Mansell, or of any Papers put by me into his Chamber,
or that she ever gave me fifteen papers and a List of Names, or mentioned any
Scrivener to me to copy any papers, she knew not of any occasion that she had
to advise me to burn any papers.

She denied giving me any Instructions, and knew nothing of my going to the
Earl of Shaftsbury, but owned that she saw me in the Stone Gallery, but said
she was not within distance of speaking to me: she said she never heard of any
proposition of killing the King, that she abominated the thoughts, or mention
of any such wickedness; and denied that she ever spoke of my neglecting any
opportunity of killing the King, or the Lord Shaftsbury; and denied that I ever
told her, I had been in a Room with the King alone.

Mr. Wood being examined said, he knew me, and had seen me at Mrs. Celliers and
other places, but never at the Tower. When I dined there he was from home. He
owned that he paid Mrs. Cellier twenty pounds for the Prisoners, but denied
that he brought me any money for Lane.

Sunday November. 2. 1679. at the Council Board Mr. John Gadbury being Examined,
said, he has seen me once or twice at his house with Mrs. Cellier, and that he
believed he might have cast my Nativity by the name of Thomas at the desire of
Mrs. Cellier, and two more Nativities for her two Daughters; he says that
looking upon my Horoscope, it Prognosticated a bold and Adventurous man, but
does not remember that he said to Mrs. Cellier that I would be hanged, but that
it was possible I might. That he cast likewise the Lord Powis his Nativity, as
he used to do of all persons of Quality the certain time of whose Birth he
could be assured of.

2. Matthew Hopkinson a Scrivener over against Somerset House acknowledged that
he subscribed a List of Names, and a Letter of mine in a Room two pair of
stairs high, but he did not remember that it was of a Woman's handwriting; and
the List and Letters being shown to him, he owned them to be his own hand.

3. Sir James Butler owned the Taking of an Affidavit of Lane about Buggery
charged upon Mr. Oats, and that a Woman came with the said Lane to him.

4. Thomas Jolly the Tailor being sworn, said he carried a Letter from Mrs.
Cellier to the Lady Powis, and brought back an answer, and that when he
returned I was present, and that he had seen me half a dozen times at Mrs.
Celliers.

Upon full hearing of these several Informations and Examinations, this was the
result of the Council.

Whitehall, November 2. Mr. Thomas Dangerfeild alias Willoughby having been
examined the twenty seventh past by the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council
concerning certain dangerous and Treasonable Papers seized in Mr. Roderick
Mansell's Chamber which it appeared to their Lordships had been by him conveyed
thither, was thereupon by Order of the Board committed to Newgate. And having
since given in an Information to the Lord Mayor of London of several
Treasonable practices against his Majesty's Person and Government, and of
hishaving been prevailed with by several of the Popish Religion to Counterfeit
the abovementioned Papers and Letters by which diverse Noblemen and other
Protestants were to have been brought under a suspicion of carrying on a Plot
against his Majesty's Government. And the said Information being yesterday
morning brought to his Majesty by the Lord Mayor, and by his Majesty sent to
the Council Board, Mr. Dangerfeild was sent for, and farther examined by their
Lordships; who thereupon, the last night, Committed the Earl of Castlemaine to
the Tover, and Mrs. Cellier to Newgate; and did this day likewise Commit Mr.
Gadbury to the Gate House, and Mr. Rigaut to Newgate; several other persons
accused, being in the Custody of his Majesty's Messengers. And their Lordships
have appointed the further examination of this matter on Tuesday next.

Middlesex and Westminster,
The Information of Mrs. Jane Bradley of Westminster, Widow, taken upon Oath
this first day of November, 1679. before me Edmund Warcup, Esquire, one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the said County and City.
THis Informant says, that upon a Saturday about three weeks ago one Thomas
Curtice late of Lancashire, now in or about London, came to Heaven, where this
Informant lives, and as she was lighting him out of Doors, he told her that he
heard there were Commissions giving forth, and that Mr. Blood had the giving
them out: and added that if he could get one of them it would be five thousand
pounds in his way, and that this Informant should have part of it: Whereupon
this Informant asked him what way he propounded to get one of them; who
answered, by Captain Brown, who was one of his Contrymen with whom he was
acquainted. Some time after which the said Thomas Curtice brought the said
Capt. Brown to the same house, but they then discoursed nothing of the business
in her hearing, but this Informant did and does apprehend that the said Curtice
meant that those Commissions were to be given out against the King. And she
further says that she sent for Mr. Blood, and acquainted him with the said
discourse; who answered, 'twas very well done to tell him thereof, but there
was no such thing in being; and about a week after, Mr. Blood gave this
Informant a Broad piece of Gold, saying, you are a poor woman, and directed her
to know as much as she could of the matter: And accordingly this Informant did
enquire of the said Curtice about the 5000 l. but could get nothing out of him
more than that he was well assured of the 5000 l. And she further says, that
Mr. Blood and Captain Brown had been at Heaven together before that time. And
she remembers that she did tell the said Brown, that one Lawton, one Pember,
and one Tresby were acquainted with the said Curtice: And she heard the said
Lawton was a Priest-taker: And further says not at present.

Jane Bradley.
Jurat. Die and Anno supradict.

Coram me Edmund. VVarcup.



The said Jane Bradley does further say, upon her Oath, that the last time she
spoke to the said Thomas Curtice, which was when he fetched a Straw-hat from
Heaven, she said unto him words to this effect, When is it that we must get the
5000 l.? to which he answered, I will not meddle in it, it troubles my
Conscience, and it were but Treachery in me if it were done, and it is to no
purpose to meddle in it, for there is a list found out: or to that effect.

Jane Bradley.
Jurat. Die and Anno supradict.

Coram me Edmund. VVarcup.



November 2 the same day. 1. The Deposition of William Woodman taken upon Oath
on November. 2. 1679. before the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy
Council.
WHO says, That he has known Mr. Willoughby at the Lord Powis his house for
about two Months time; and that he has seen him and Mrs. Cellier write
together very often. That he carried a Packet of Letters from Mr. Willoughby
or Mrs. Cellier to the Lady Powis at the Tower; and that her Ladyship opened
the Packet, and read some of the Letters, and gave others to him the said
woodman, who carried them to one Nevill in the Kings Bench; and that he has
carried Letters diverse times between Mrs. Cellier, and Mr. Willoughby, and
Nevill.

William Woodman.

2. The Information of Mary Ayray, taken upon Oath the second day of November
1679. before the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
THis Informant says upon her Oath, That she went with Willoughby and Duddell
to Nevill in the Kings Bench, and left Willoughby at a Coffee-house by the
way, and carried a sheet of Notes taken at Langhorn's Trial, which Willoughby
writ, but was given her by Mrs. Cellier to carry to Nevill: And she says, she
carried a Letter from Nevill to Mrs. Cellier, and a Letter from Mrs. Cellier to
the Lady Powis; she has also seen Singe with Mrs. Cellier, and she has seen
Willoughby write the Speeches of the five Jesuits, the which Mrs. Cellier did
dictate to him: and says also, that she has seen Lane at Powis-house, who
went by the name of Johnson; and that Mrs. Cellier ordered him to be called by
that name. This Informant also says, that she went with my Lady Abergavenny
last Winter to the Earl of Shaftsbury, about her being Indicted as a Popish
Recusant, but has not been at any other time since with the Earl of Shaftsbury;
but knows nothing of the Earl of Shaftsbury's being threatened to be killed by
the Lady Abergavenny: and says, that Mr. Nevill did bid her tell my Lady
Powis, that he would write to his Friend.

Mary Ayray.

3. The Information of Bennet Dugdale a Joyner, taken upon Oath before His
Majesty in Council, November. 2. 1679.
THe Informant says, That he has wrought at Powis-house, and has there seen
Mr. Willoughby, and that he went with Mrs. Ayray to see one in Prison in the
Kings Bench, but knew not that his name was Nevill, that Mr. Willoughby stayed
in the mean time at a Coffee-house there by: he says, that when they returned,
they brought some Papers with them; and that soon after Mrs. Ayray went to the
Tower; that he has at Powis-house seen Mr. Willoughby, Mrs. Cellier and
others often writing: he remembers, that one Mr. Lane lay there in the house;
and that Mrs. Cellier was once in great fear, when she thought that Lane was
lost: he does remember, that Mr. Willoughby did once ask him if he could make
a Hand-Press in order to Printing? and he made answer, he would ask the Lord
Powis and his Lady, if he might make such a thing: he says he went Once or
Twice with Mrs. Ayray to the Gate House, who went with money to the Prisoners:
but the reason of his being the more with Mrs. Ayray, was by the reason of a
Match proposed by Mrs. Cellier between him and her: That in Powis-house there
is a private place made by him, and by the Lady Powis's Order. Sworn before the
King and Council.

Bennet Duddell.

Tuesday, November. 4. 1679.
1. The Lady Powis was called in, to whom the Deposition of Woodman was read,
her Ladyship said,

That to her knowledge she never had a packet from me, or ever sent a Packet
to Nevill, that she has had several Letters from Mrs. Cellier, and perhaps she
may have given at some time a Packet to her boy, written from some body else;
That her Ladyship never went to see Nevill at the Kings Bench, but going there
to see the Lady Gage, some body pointed to Nevill as he was at the Window, and
once before that she thinks she saw him elsewhere: That she never had Letter
from Nevill, though perhaps she might have had one from me.

2. To the Deposition of Duddel she says,

That it is true one Mr. Ayray did bring to the Tower some Remarques upon
Langhorn's Trial, but she never saw any thing brought from Nevile at the Kings
Bench.

3. To the Deposition of Susan Edwards she says,

That though she has been at Mrs. Celliers, she never had so much as lighted
out of her Coach to have any discourse with me.

4. To the Deposition of Mrs. Ayray, she says as before,

That she never brought her Ladyship any message from Mr. Nevile.

5. To the Deposition of Mr. Jolly a Tailor, her Ladyship says,

That she had two or three short notes from me, as also a great packet of
papers brought by Jolly from me, but looking them over, she found them very
insignificant things: That once or twice she had some short notes from me, but
was much surprised to receive them.

She affirms that I never told her of my having been alone with the King;
though she was indeed told it by Mrs. Cellier, but for any such answer, as to
lament that I was not then prepared to Kill the King, she never gave it, and
abhors any such thoughts, having never heard of any such thing, or any other
Treason in her life.

That for my Lodging so long at her house, all the servants are able to
testify, That it was without her knowledge, and when she came there I still
endeavored to keep out of her sight.

I said that after I was to make my first appearance at the Council, Mrs.
Cellier went to her Ladyship to the Tower, to frame an excuse touching forty
shillings that should have been lent me by one of her Ladyships servants. Her
Ladyship answered, It was true Mrs. Cellier came to her with a story in her
mouth of about forty shillings owing to one of her servants, but her Ladyship
chid her severely, and told her she would keep no servant that would be guilty
of such a thing, her Ladyship added, that she never saw me but twice.

Mrs. Cellier being called in, and asked whether she had not been at the Tower
with the Lady Powis to frame some excuse for me, flatly denied the same, but
being told that the Lady Powis had even now owned it, she then confessed that on
Thursday seven-night she was there, and told her Ladyship how her Husband and
her Son Mr. Blazedale were bound for my appearance, when Justice warcup came
and took me from her house.

That I did indeed advise her to say something touching money due to a servant
of the Lady Powis, but that her Ladyship hearing thereof, was displeased at it,
then she railed at me.

And being told of her industry to get my Nativity cast, she said that I having
desired the same, she got Mr. Gadbury to do it, but I affirmed Mrs. Cellier
sent her maid Margaret, whilst I was in Prison, for the time of my Birth.

Bedford was then called in, who referred himself to the account he had given
of his Correspondence with me by Information, to Mr. Justice Warcup.

And further says, That he went about with me to several Clubbs.

That he went with me also to Thompson in Fetter-Lane, who was then Printing
the Presbyterian Unmasked: That I have often brought with me to the Coffee-House
papers fresh and wet from the Press: That I went to pay moneys to Mr. Dormer in
St. Johns's: That I enquired of him after Clubs; and that he naming the Kings
Head Club, thither I went, and would have got a List of the Names, but the
Drawer refused. The like happened at another place; but at the Green Dragon we
got a List of about Eighty Names of such as used to meet there.

Afterward we went to the Sun and Ship Taverns, to enquire if the D. of
Monmouth had not been there the Night before his departure.

That I told him how by Gadbury's means I was acquainted with Sir Robert
Peyton, and by him was getting into the King's Head Clubb, but that Sir Robert
dissuaded me upon the account of the Charge, for that they did sometimes make a
Purse of one or two Guinneys a man about special service.

That I lay for a time at the Goat near Exeter-house, and that going with him
thence to drink Cock-Ale, it so flew up into my head, that going into a
Coffee-house I raised a great quarrel there about a Word relating to Sr. Thomas
Player, the Matter of which had been heard by Mr. Secretary Coventry, That I
showed him a Paper called The State of the Three Kingdoms, that I told him,
that the Lord Shaftsbury, Dr. Tongue, Sir William Waller, etc. had private
meetings about Fox-Hall about the Plot, and that it was there hatched by them,
and that I had Lodgings at Mrs. Celliers, and lamented once unto him my wanting
of Twenty Pound for some great design; that I had been at the Lord Clarendon's,
whom I complained of as a Dilatory man.

That I asked Bedford, if at their being together in Cliffords-Inn-Garden, he
did not receive from me a Gift of forty shillings, and if I did not discourse
to him so and so concerning the D. of York, and the D. of Lauderdale, and about
Scotland, and touching three hundred Horse that were to be raised by Sir
William Waller.

Bedford denied any Gift of forty shillings in the Garden, but that he borrowed
forty shillings at two other times.

That he never spoke to me of either of these Dukes, or of Scotland. And as to
the three hundred Horse, he said he had given an account of it to a Minister of
State.

I replied, That as to this of the three hundred Horse, he spoke it also to Mr.
Stanford the D. of Newburgh's Agent, who if called upon, was able to testify
the same.

Mr. Justice VVarcup coming in, acquainted the Board, that Mr. Cellier and his
Son-in-Law Blazedale the Apothecary did both attend, and that there were yet
wanting the Examinations of some of their servants: Upon which the Lord
President directed him to take those Examinations.

Blasden called in and Sworn, said, That Margaret brought him a Note for Opium
to cause Rest; but he refusing to follow that Direction, he mixed something that
was less Dangerous, which the Maid afterward told him signified nothing; and
therefore ordered him to mix somewhat a great deal stronger.

Mr. Cellier being asked about the Paper of the Nativity, says, He read it not
himself, but that his Daughter read it to him; He remembered only something of
Prophecy, or a Man's Fortune: That there were in it the words Horoscope,
Venus, Mercury, etc. That the Man should be Hanged at last; but he knew no more
of it, or of whom it was, but that he burned the Paper, and Owned, That he was
a Roman Catholic, and a French Merchant.

But Mr. Blasden, in whose House the Paper was read, said, It set forth, How
that his Adventures should be very various, and that he should come before some
Judge, and be in Danger in a Sea Fight.

Then I asked Cellier, if he did not remember when in the presence of his Wife,
I said, I was then come from my Lord Shaftsbury? This he denied, and also that
he heard any Discourse extraordinary between me and Rigaut, but that Rigaut had
been twice at his House, and that I and he played at some Game together: He
denied also that he saw any Dagger in his House, or that ever any was hid under
his Beds-side: He acknowledged to have seen the Lady Powis at his House, but
not six times in all.

But Mr. Blasden said, He had seen her Ladyships Coach a dozen times, which he
could see plain from his Shop; but did not remember to have seen her Ladyship
go into Mr. Cellier's above twice.

The Lord Peterborough was called in, and having been told what was Objected
against him as having encouraged me at his Lordship's House, to go again to the
Lord Shaftsbury, and to be sure to Dispatch him the third time: His Lordship
flatly denied any such thing; and then in a large Discourse appealed to the
known Method of his Life and Conversation, his Constant Services to the Crown,
and how little he had been concerned in this Matter, as being known by all Good
men not to be capable of such a Thing: That as to the Earl of Shaftsbury, he
came lately Over with great Expectation of his aid and favor in Parliament;
touching an unhappy Difference arisen with a great Ally (meaning his
Son-in-law's Father.) And that the Earl of Shaftsbury had already testified so
much Countenance in this matter, that he came over full of Inclinations to do
that Lord greater Services than he can well express.

That before his Daughter was disposed of in Marriage, a very Noble Lady, the
Lady Powis, who had testified very great Inclinations, to have her Married to
her Ladiship's Nephew; upon which Obligation he then grew Intimate with the
said Lady, and being a Person that is not wont to forget his Friends in their
Afflictions, had often gone to that Lady, to give her the best Comfort he
could; That waiting on her Ladyship when he came lately from Flanders, she
recommended to him just at parting a very Charitable Woman, one Mrs. Cellier,
unto whom the late Duchess of Tork was a Debtor in 5 or 600 l.

That his Lordship being one of the Duke's Commissioners, did promise to
further her Business: That in further Recommendation of this Woman, the Lady
added, That she was a great Servant to the Duke and also to the King: And also
being a Woman of great Understanding, and getting Acquaintance by her
Opportunity of being a Midwife, into many considerable Families, she had
wrought about several Incensed Persons to be of better Principles and
Inclinations both to the King and the Duke. And more particularly, that this
Woman had now found out a Man who was very able to discover any dangerous
Practices against the King.

That Mrs. Cellier came soon after to his Lodgings, that she gave a great
Character of one Willoughby, who had much improved himself abroad in the
Service of the Prince of Orange, and under the Duke de Villa Hermosa; that this
man coming over and resorting to the Coffee-Houses, was much Suprized at the
Rebellious discourses that he heard; but that concealing his thoughts, he grew
Familiar with the most Mutinous, who liked him so well, that they carried him
to their Clubs and private meetings, and being admitted to their Secrets, he
found that great and dangerous things were preparing against the Parliament.

That she desired his Lordship but to procure a Warrant for making a Search,
and that all the whole matter would be Plainly discovered; but she desired that
this Warrant might be obtained without the King's knowledge: That of all this
Information, his Lordship gave an Account to the Duke, who refused to have any
thing acted therein without the King's knowledge; That I came with Mrs. Cellier
to his Lodgings where the Duke saw me, and I was afterward handed to the King.

That when I came afterward to his Lordship, I mentioned the difficulty of
getting a Warrant; and Complaining of want of zeal in the King's Ministers, I
said I would yet do my business without a Warrant, and by the Custom-house way.

That as concerning my Lord Shaftsbury, I told him that there was some Woman
about the Duke that Writ to the Earl of Shaftsbury all the dangerous things she
could Invent; and to make proof of this, came afterward to show two Letters,
which his Lordship presently saw were Written in Sir Richard Bolstrode's hand;
and contained nothing touching the Duke, but such matters of Common
Intelligence from Brussels, as he himself or any other man might fitly write.

Whereupon he said, I pretended to him that there was a third Letter of greater
Importance, which he had lost; but as to those two Letters, his Lordship said
they were given to the King.

Soon after this I came to him at Midnight, and said I was going to Prison; To
which his Lordship could only say, That if I were guilty of any Crime, he knew
not how to help me; but if I were to suffer by mistake, the King's Ministers
would soon discover it, and set me again at Liberty.

His Lordship upon my question owned, That he being at Dinner at Lamb's, I came
there to him about a Meeting to be had at Mr. Gadburies with Sir Robert Peyton,
and perhaps it might be upon a Letter from the Lady Powis, as I had affirmed.

His Lordship did acknowledge, That he gave his Servants charge to admit me
when ever I came; And that he did also call me Captain Willoughby: but the
occasion was, that I telling his Lordship, that I hoped his Majesty would
gratify and provide me as good an Employment as I had refused from the other
side; his Lordship did say, Doubtless His Majesty will provide for you, and
that when ever any Forces were sent abroad, I should not near to fear but that
I should have a Company.

That he did not wonder at all at my confident Words, since they had been the
best Cards I had to play for my Life: but that his Lordship's actions have been
such, as will except him from any shadow of reflection that can happen by such
a Creature as I.

As to the business of Sir Robert Peyton, he would conceal nothing that the
Council desired to know. And first he said, he knew not that Sir Robert was
Privy to any thing relating to me, but that Mrs. Cellier telling him (as he
said before) the good Offices she had done the King and Duke, with some that
were Inflamed against him, she named Sir Robert Peyton for One, who told her,
That if he could be forgiven what was past, he would come in and help the
Government; but that his greatest fear was from the Duke, who was thought to be
a Person of Animosity that could not Forgive: That when his Lordship assured
Mrs. Cellier of the contrary, she told him that Sir Robert would not be willing
to meet at any Public Place, but at Gadburies he would; where accordingly they
met, where Sir Robert Peyton declared, He would come into the Kings Service to
all Purposes; that he seemed to complain of some hard Measure, and doubted much
of the Duke's reconciliation; but his Lordship going far toward Sir Robert's
satisfaction, he afterward met the Duke at his Lordship's Lodgings, and had
all the Assurance he could desire; which is all that he knew or could say
concerning Sir Robert Peyton.

Here I did acknowledge, That I told his Lordship of an Ill Woman in the Duke's
Family that corresponded with the Lord Shaftsbury, and I had lost one of the
Letters.

His Lordship told the Board, That he could not but be troubled to have his
name mentioned by such a Person as I was; but yet if any whoever should come to
morrow to him again and tell him of any dangerous Practices against the King,
and the Government, whether by the Lord Shaftsbury or any other Lord
whatsoever, he should hold himself bound in duty to Hearken to any such Person,
and to Endeavor to discover such danger by all the ways he could.

Mr. John Webb of Missenden in the County of Bucks, being called in, said, He
knew me, but remembered not when I went down to his House, but that I was sent
by Mrs. Cellier, and not by my Lady Powis; That he knew nothing of any Letters
sent down by me, or of one Mr. Jean, or any other Priests at his House; that I
only went down to fetch up a Child.

Then I Objected, That he knew Jean so well, that at his last coming from home,
he brought him a Letter from Jean, being then at Mrs. Cellier's. Webb denying
this, the very Letter found by Sir William Waller was produced and read; upon
which, Mr. Webb said, It was possible, but he had forgot it. And I saying, That
Mrs. Celliers was by when that Letter was delivered to him, Cellier denied it.
But I replied, That Webb knew all, as well as what he would now excuse.

The Copy of the aforesaid Letter from H. Jean to me.
SIR
I Received yours on Monday last, and think my self much obliged to you, for
that you remember your Captive Friend; it is some divertisment to my retired
life, to hear sometimes how affairs stand; both that I may the better know how
to set my steps that are laid for Innocent Men, and learn also how to value an
Innocent Solitude more than the Tumults of a confused World. I perceive by
yours, the old Sticklers are still busy, and strive to blind the peoples eyes
with a Popish Plot, that there own may not be seen. When was there ever
Mischief or Treason hatched against Monarchy, but under the Cloak of Religion,
and Zeal against Popery? Things are so plain, that who are not wilfully blind,
must needs see the good old Cause taking life again: God bless the King, and
direct his Council, That we may live in Peace and Justice under him: This is
the Prayer of

SIR, Your very humble Servant, H. Jean.
Pray present my humble service to Mounsieur Cellier and his Lady.




John Porter, Butler to my Lord Powis, being sworn, says, That he is a
Protestant, that he has seen me at Powis-House several times, and that I
lodged there, but not by the Knowledge of the Lord or Lady; he remembered that
Lane was also there by the name of Johnson. He did confess he gave me a Bottle
of Sherry at the Tower, but not by the Lord's Order; and that I dined there
another day, and that he did lead me to the Lodgings of the Lord Arundel, and
the Lord Bellasis

John Lane being called in, said, That he lay at Powis-house for a Month or six
Weeks by my Order and Mrs. Cellier's, from whom he had his diet; that he went
by the Name of Johnson, fearing to be arrested by Mr. Oats for what he had
testified against him; and in that fear he went down to Grayes near Graves-End,
and had a pair of Shoes given him by me, who also got him out of Prison, which
was a chargeable work; he said he made an Affidavit before Sir James Butler.
And being asked by one of the Lords, Whether he had not before the house of
Lords, made two contrary Affidavits? he acknowledged, That out of fear he had
done so, but that the first drawn by me, as Mr. Nevil had directed, was true
and the other false.

Mr. Knox being called in, said, He knew me from the time we met at Powis
house, going there in search of Lane, who was to give the Evidence for him.

That the Examinant knowing in whose house he had been, was much troubled, in
as much as he is a Protestant; that it was true, that he being in Prison writ
little notes to his Brother under the Door, but knew not who conveyed them:
That he knew Mrs. Ayray, that he had seen me at Mrs. Cellier's house, and there
had had some Money of me, though he was ever cautious of me, fearing I was a
Papist. That I met him once at Procter's Coffee House, where he read to me an
Affidavit made by Osborn, and owned, That I did deliver Papers unto him; he
also owned, That Rogers and Sherman the Sadler told him, that they heard Nevil
report, how he had furnished some with money to get the Examinant out of
Prison; which he with anger questioning Nevil about; Nevil made answer, it was
true, and plain demonstration.

Mr. Dormer being called in, said, He knew me, having seen me at Mrs. Celliers,
from whom I once brought him Five Pounds; and that he had seen me twice or
thrice at Powis-House, where he had been to wait upon the Lady, to whom he was
related; and that he had been at Mrs. Celliers to see a Child brought from
Peterley that was his Nephew; that Mr. Webb of Peterley was his Kinsman, That
he knew not of Mr. Jean, nor any such man there, having not been for three
quarters of a year at that house: That he knew nothing at all of the
Presbyterian Plot, mentioned by me, and says he never carried to the Tower the
Pamphlet called, Traitors transformed into Martyrs; but that indeed he had one
of those Books, and remembers he gave it to Mrs. Cellier, meeting her once with
me in Tower-Street. He owned that he saw me once at the Rainbow Coffee-House,
and there pulled off his Hat without speaking to me; That he had seen the
Danby-reflections, but knew not who writ them.

Being asked, if he had heard any thing of the Murder of the Lord Shaftsbury?
he said, That several Months ago there was such a report; And that one Adamson
a Watchmaker with a Barber and others in Holbourn, were concerned in it; but
that he never heard any thing else thereof, much less ever consulted such a
thing with the Lady Abergaveny.

That he knows Turner the Bookseller, and had the Pamphlet before mentioned,
from him; but denies that he ever writ the same, or that he ever delivered Five
Pounds to one Sharp, to pray for any man's soul.

Mrs. Woodman, who lives in Drury Lane, at the Corner house of Parker's Lane,
being called in, said, That Margaret, formerly Maid to Mrs. Cellier, had been
without attending, but would be gone; though she advised her to stay, and that
being out of service she knows not where to find her.

The Lords bid her tell Margaret, if they met, that a Messenger should take her
in Custody, unless she would attend the Clerk of the Council of her own accord.

Friday, November. 7th, 1679. in the Afternoon.
I was sent for to Council, and in my presence Margaret Jenkins, formerly
Servant to Mr. Cellier, being Sworn, and Interrogated by me, answered,

That she carried Money to me in Newgate, but remembered not how much it was.
That I was afterward in the Counter, and sending earnestly to her Mistress to
get me out, she sent the Examinant to me with 50 s. But the same not being
sufficient, she brought it back again, and 3 l. was afterward sent.

She acknowledged, That her Mistress bid me get out by Tuesday, and that being
out, I should presently come to her.

That she did carry several Letters between me and her Mistress, but knew not
what they concerned.

That she did carry two small Vials to the King's Bench, but knew not what was
in them, nor whether the Lady Powis was concerned in that Advice.

That after carrying the first Bottle, she went next Morning to the
King's Bench, and that I sent for a second Bottle, it being in a little Vial
Glass.

She owned, That I spoke to her about sending to Mr. Bedloe, and told her also
of my acquaintance with Strode, for that we had formerly been Padding together.

That she once brought Money to me to give to Monson.

That Mrs. Cellier did acquaint the Lady Powis of my desire to see Mr. Bedloe.
To which her Ladyship answered, I might do what I pleased, for she would not
meddle with that matter.

That I told her I made Strode high in Drink, having taken something that
hindered me from being in that Condition; and that I gave her some Notes of what
I had then learned from Strode.

As to the Cause of her turning away, She said it was on this Account: An
Irishman who is a Solicitor, came once and told her, That her Mistress had
got a Rupture by keeping me in her House; And that the truth was, We lived in
such a manner together at Powis-House, that the Old Man her Husband was sent up
thither to keep us honest; That of this she gave some Account to Mrs. Cellier's
Daughter, and upon this occasion she was turned away; her Mistress also telling
her, That seeing she could not live quietly at her own House, she had no
further need of her Service.

She said, She saw me twice at Powis-House, that time she was there waiting at
the Table on her Mistress and me, and that she poached Eggs for us. Being
asked, Whether she did not lately hear from Mrs. Cellier, by way of Advice and
Instruction, how to behave her self? She denied that she had any Letter or
Message from her, or had seen her of a long time.

Nevil, alias Pain, was called in, he said he knew me, and had seen me four
times at Powis-House. That he knew not of my going to Mr. Webb's in
Buckinghamshire.

That he never had any Letters or Papers from the Lady Powis in his life; but
that betwixt him and Mrs. Celliers, many Letters and Papers had past: And
denied not, but that the Danby-Reflections past out of his Hands.

By Mrs. Cellier the Papers of Knox, Lane and Osborn were brought to him for
his advice, which having given, he sent back; he remembered that I did attend in
the Rules when Mrs. Ayry and Dowdel came over to him, but knows nothing of
twenty seven papers that he should send to me, and desires if any such thing
were objected to him that he might see his hand.

That for the many Lists objected to have been writ over by him, he denied the
same; he said he knew Monson and Keymish from many years acquaintance; he owned
that Mrs. Cellier came to him in the Fleet, to tell him of Prance his being
tortured, and how that the Lord Shaftsbury was setting up Strode to be a new
witness; he said I told him, that he had turned Strode the wrong side outward.

He denied the sending of any Letters or Lists to his remembrance, or any
Letter to the Tower by any Woman: He knew nothing of the Affidavit made by
Lane, but would not deny that such a thing might have been. He said that Knox
was troubled he should declare as he did, for that he was told, that he was
taken out of prison by Mrs. Celliers charity.

He said that the second discourse he had with me at Powis's house was,
concerning Mrs. Celliers having offered to procure me an Ensigns place under
the Duke of Monmouth, in the late expedition to Scotland, or else that I should
stay and depend upon her.

He said farther, That Mrs. Cellier from being his friend, became his enemy. I
replied, That Mrs. Cellier had sent him 80 l. and that her husband had been his
security to keep him from prison, but that upon some difference arising upon
complaint made, that Nevils daughter was like to turn Whore, old Celliers
withdrew his security, and so Nevil was returned to prison.

Nevil in answer to this reviled with many passionate expressions, and as to
the writing the Pamphlet Timothy Touchstone, he denies it, and says he knew
nothing of Mr. Jeane the Priest in Buckinghamshire.

As to one Cox in Covent Garden he said he had been his Agent about his
business in Ireland, but denied to have heard any thing from him about Ten
thousand pound, which I objected; he acknowledged that he was still for the
advice of Indicting false witnesses, and had twenty times advised the Indicting
Oats and Bedloe, but as for the framing a Presbyterian Plot, and to draw men
into it, it had been a great villainy, and he utterly denies the same.

That he only had from Mrs. Cellier Fifteen pound; but that she had of his
money Seventeen pound; That the commerce between her and me was very
scandalous, and she was suspected to defraud the Charity which came through her
hands, which by the Collection of all forts of Catholics was about Twenty two
pounds per week.

He acknowledged, that he advised me to compound my debts, and not to depend
upon shifts of Law.

He owned that he received all the Trials that were printed, and had fingered
them out, as would still appear by the Books he had by him; for that seeing how
ill things hung together, and that some things looked like perjury, he thought
it would be easy to frame Indictments against the Witnesses.

That as to his informing me of a List of mutinous Coffee-houses he denied the
same, having never been in above four or five in his life, but it was notorious
enough how all the Coffee-houses were factious.

He declared his great hatred and animosity against Mrs. Cellier, who formerly
indeed came to him every day, but that she caused her husband to withdraw his
Bail, and he was again clapped up.

To this I objected, That it was not altogether Mrs. Cellier, but the advice of
the Lords in the Tower, that he should be again confined; forasmuch as when he
was formerly in that Condition, he had been very industrious about writing of
Papers in their business, but that being at Liberty, he chiefly followed the
Playhouse.

Nevil here reflects upon me as a Lewd and Infamous person, to which I replied,
That if I were such as he said, it was the more plain, that I could not proceed
in such weighty undertakings as I had managed, without considerable Counsel and
Direction; which is agreeable to what I have affirmed.

The Lady Powis said, She hoped the Oath of an Infamous person should not bring
her in danger, for that no person of Common sense would ever trust such a
Creature as I was with any thing of importance.

Mrs. Cellier said, She never caused me, or any body else to put forth
Pamphlets, but that indeed I did make some, and put them forth, which were very
inconsiderable things, that I did once read to her two Pamphlets wherein was no
matter of hurt but the things were foolish, and mere Chimaera's, and then she
railed upon me, etc.

The Lord Peterborough called in, said, That he gave his servants charge to
admit me whenever I came, and that he did call me Captain Willoughby, yet his
Lordship told the Board, he could not but be troubled to have his name
mentioned by so infamous a person as I was.

Mr. Nevil alias Pain, called into the Council on Friday, Novem. 7. 1679.
says, That I had writ him a kind of a Challenge, which he knowing my life,
rejected: besides, that I was grown in behavior proud, and high as a Prince.

Midd. and Westmin.
The Information of Thomas Curtis of Westminster Cloth-worker, taken the Fifth
day of Novem. 1679. before Edmund Warcup Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace in the said County and City.
THis Informant says, that about half a year ago, he became acquainted with
Mr. Willoughby, taking him to be a very Civil Gentleman, and not knowing that
he had any other name; and about the second day of October last, he met the
said Willoughby at the Hoop-Tavern on Fishstreet-hill, and there drank a Bottle
of Rhenish-Wine with him; in the drinking whereof, he the said Willoughby told
this Informant, that he looked on him as an honest man and one that loved his
King and Country, and expressed himself to be a Protestant, and much against
Rebellion: and further added, that he would put this Informant into a Way to
serve his King and Country: whereunto this Informant replied, that he would
serve his King and Country to the last drop of his blood in anything that was
just: to which the said Willoughby replied, that he would not put this
Informant on any thing but what was honorable and just, and that he would make
it easy, but at that time refused to tell the business, but appointed this
Informant to dine with him at Mrs Celliers the next day following, which this
Informant did, and after Dinner, the said Willoughby took this Informant into a
private room, and there told this Informant, that there were Commissions given
out privately by the Fanatics, and persuaded this Informant to get one, and if
this Informant did so, he would bring this Informant to the King, and that it
should be 5000 l in this Informants way, besides being taken care of for the
future: But this Informant replying, that he did not believe there was any such
thing, the said Willoughby answered, that he knew it to be true, and that he
had been at several meetings with them, and named one in Holbourn, another
which he called Sir Thomas Player's, or my Lord Shaftbury's in London, a third
that was Sir Robert Peyton's, and particularly said, that Bloud's party issued
out these Commissions.

And this Informant had heard before that Mrs Cellier had harbored the
Gentlemen that came over from St. Omer's and that she was a Papist, but the
said Willoughby did never intimate to this Informant that he was employed by
the Papists in this Affair, and charged this Informant not to say any thing of
this Matter to Mr. Nevil because he had no Correspondence with him nor desired
any: nor to Mrs. Cellier because she was a woman: And then this Informant
promised him to see what could be done, and so left him, resolving not to
insinuate into any secret Trust on purpose to betray it; about Four days after
which, this Informant returned to Mr. Willoughby and told him he had been at
the Club in Westminster-market, but could not learn any such thing, and when
this Informant had seen the said Willoughby, this Informant went to Mr. Nevil
and Mr. Nevil bid this Informant never to meddle with such villainous
treacheries: and this Informant further says, that he likewise told Mrs. Jane
Bradley the same story, and that he heard that Mr. Bloods party, the Fanatics,
had the giving out these Commissions, and she then said, she would use her
interest with one Captain Brown, who had formerly been her Sweetheart to get
one: And the said Jane Bradley had several times since wished we could get the
5000 l. saying she would share therein: and this Informant did tell her that he
heard those Commissions were given out by Mr. Bloods party, by those people
where he was concerned, and that this Informant would beg his Bread before he
would be guilty of such Treacherous designs, and that it was to no purpose to
meddle in it for there is a list found out as he heard: and this Informant
remembers the said Willoughby asked this Informant if he knew Colonel Mansel,
which this Informant said he did, and he also told this Informant that he had
been in the Earl of Shaftsbury's Company or Club, and further says not.

Tho. Curtis.
Jurat die and anno supradict.

cor. me Edm. Warcup.



And this Informant says, that Mrs. Bradley asked him in whose name the said
Commissions were to issue out, whereunto this Informant Answered, that he heard
that it was in the name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, and did
farther say he heard some should hold that the Long Parliament was not yet
Dissolved, but this Informant does not remember from whom he heard these
particulars.

Tho. Curtis.
Jurat eodem die

cor. me Edm. Warcup.



Middlesex and Westminst*
The Examination of Henry Blasedall Apothecary^ Arundel-Street, taken this
Sixth day of November, 1679. before me Edmund Warc^ Esquire one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace (...) the said County and City.
WHO says, that a Bill was brought to this Examinants Shop by one Margaret a
Servant-maid to Mrs. Cellier, about the Seventeenth day of May last past, which
Note contains as folloeth -- Nine Grains of Opium dissolved in Syrup of
Clove-Gilliflowers of Balneo vaporis by it self jss. which this Examina^ not
judging fit to be given inwardly, sent in lieu thereof two Gra^ of Laudanum in
a little Spirit of Wine, and a little Syrup of Gilliflowers; and this Examinant
believes the said Note or Bill to be t^^ handwriting of Mr. Willoughby; and as
this Informant has since un derstood, the said Dose was intended for some
Prisoner in the Marshalseas, to make him deliver some Writings, when he might
b^ lulled asleep by the said Dose; and this Examinant does conceive, b^ what
Mr. Bedlow said at the Council Chamger, that it might be intended for one
Stroude, who it is said was then Prisoner there, as further says not.

Henry Blasedall.


Capt. coram me Edmund. Warcup.



The further Examination of Mary the Wife of Henry Blasedall, taken as
aforesaid.
THis Examinant says, that Margaret declared, when she (...) back again to her
Husbands Shop, that they had as good (...) sent a little fair water, for it did
no good; and the same Dose be^ sent a second time by the same Margaret, she
said if there were better Physic in the Shop than that, they were not fit to
keep (...) it was good for nothing; and she further says, that the (...) lay
among her Mother Mrs. Celliers Hoods and Scarfs; and (...) this Examinant 'twas
waste-paper and good for nothing but to (...) whereupon this Examinant took it
as such, but observing (...) upon it, she read as much of it as she could,
which to the best rem^ (...)


