The WHYs? and the HOW^ OR, A Good ENQUIRY: A SERMON Preached before Their
MAJESTY'S In Their CHAPEL at St. JAMES's The 2d. Sunday of Advent, December
6th. 1685.

By J.D. of the Society of Jesus.

Published by His Majesty's Command.



LONDON, Printed by Not. Thompson at the Entrance into the Spring Garden near
Charing Cross, MDCLXXXVII.

A SERMON Preached before Their MAJESTY'S At their Chapel at St. James's.
Math. II. ver. 3. Joannes cum audisset in Vinculis Opera Christi, mittens duos
de Discipulis, ait illi: Tu es qui venturus est an alium expectamus.

When John had heard in the Prison the Works of Christ, he sent two of his
Disciples, and said unto him: Art thou He that should come, or do we look for
another?


THat Nature is a Book, composed of as many Words as Parts, full of Divinity,
and leading to the knowledge of a God, was an ancient Decision of Trismegistus,
Authorized since by the Holy Ghost, in St. Paul to the Romans, chap. 1. ver.
20. Invisibilia ejus ipsius a creatione Mundi per ea quae facta sunt intellecta
conspiciuntur sempiterna quoque ejus Virtus and Divinitas. For the invisible
things of him, from the Creation of the World, are clearly to be seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead.

However time was, when the unhappy Children of Adam, taking the Book into
their hands, were charmed with the loveliness of its Letters, the Creatures,
and careless in searching after the Composer of so Noble a work; courted and
adored such Toys, as were pleasing to Sense and Fancy, at the same time
Erecting Altars, Acts the 17. v. 23. ignoto Deo, To the unknown God.

But if the Learned Piece of the Universe, coming from under the Press of
Omnipotency, discovered not at the first sight its Authors Name, being
reprinted by the Hand of Mercy, the Author it self, under Characters of Flesh,
appeared on the Frontispiece, visible, and conversant with Men, and verbum caro
factum est, Jo. 1. v. 14. and the Word was made Flesh; and habitavit in nobis,
and dwelt amongst us.

For as in the Creation, it was necessary to read the Book, to know its Author,
this depending of humane Reason; so in the Redemption, it was necessary to know
the Author, to understand the Book, this depending of Divine Faith; and
therefore the Great, and more than Prophet St. John the Baptist, dispatches
from the Prison, two of his Disciples with this message to Christ, Tu es qui
venturus est, an alium expectamus? Art thou He that should come, or do we look
for another? A necessary Enquiry, by which, coming from John in the Prison, we
are taught,

First, the requisites to a good enquiry, which are Solitude, and a right
beginning.

Secondly, to enquire only for what is necessary.

Thirdly, to look for one, and not another.

Truth becomes the Place that I unworthily am in; and that I may say nothing,
but what becomes it, let us implore the Assistance of the God of Truth, by the
Intercession of his ever Virgin Mother, Ave Maria.

Joannes cum audisset in Vinculis. When John had heard in the Prison.
THe first requisite to a good enquiry, is Solitude, for Solitude is the Mother
of Thoughts; Thinking, Fathers Wisdom: when Thoughts and Reason are lulled
asleep, Folly takes its wandering Dreams, and closes our Eyes to the highest
concerns.

The School therefore, in which we are taught the important lesson of a good
Enquiry, is a Prison, the seat of retiredness; And We, to learn our Lesson,
must go to School, that is, retire.

John was in Prison, but with Enlargement from a worse; He was in Prison, but
out of a disturbing World: For if in the beginning, I told you, this World is a
Book, what is a Book to the Readers Eye and Mind, but a Prison? If I said the
Creatures, are so many visible Words, now I tell you these Words, not rightly
understood, are so many forcible Chains, binding our Affections to the Earth.

Yes, the World is a Prison, yet a Prison none fear, all love; and should I
term its hardship, and our engagements, so many Galleys, your Worldlings would
smile, tug on rowing, and never care to better their Condition. They are
stunned with Noises, distracted with Varieties; and, as if living, they were
returned into Earth, they seek nothing but Earthly things: Tenements upon
Earth, Palaces upon Earth, Honors upon Earth, Riches upon Earth, Pleasures
upon Earth.

As for Heaven, it is slighted; As for Eternity, it is forgotten; As for
Judgment, it is not feared; As for Hell, it is not thought on. Enormous
Disorders in a Soul! But what Remedy? what Remedy? Attention, and you shall
hear.

The chosen People of God, the House of Israel, Hosea the 2d. was passed to all
exorbitances of Idolatry against the Lord their God; yet his tender Heart could
not but own them for his People, who so disgraciously had cast him off, and
disowned him for their God; And therefore, with a Fatherly Care, provides for
the retrieving such abominable excesses; But how? First, as he did by Jeremy,
Ezekiel, and other Prophets, so now he threatens them with his dreadful
Judgment; But then, as it were mindful, of the little Fruit, he had reaped from
menaces, he resolves to steer a different course, and betake himself to a more
efficacious way, and it is laid down in the 14th Verse, Lactabo eam, say our
Loving God, I will allure her; and ducam eam in solitudinem, and I will lead
her into a Wilderness; and loquar ad Cor ejus, and I will speak to her Heart; I
will speak to her Heart.

But first I will lead her into a Wilderness; Cor ejus, her Heart: Methinks I
mark something Emphatical in the Words, her Heart. Had she not then a Heart out
of the Wilderness? She had a Heart, but it was not hers, it was divided between
as many Passions as enslaved her. Avarice had her Heart, Ambition had her
Heart, Envy had her Heart, Vanity had her Heart, Luxury had her Heart, all
Vices shared in it: By Solitude God opened her Eyes, made her see her Bondage,
hate her Slavery, break her Chains, and so restored her Heart to her, that she
should give it to him; And therefore I will lead her into a Wilderness, and
speak to her Heart.

Ego vox clamantis, says the Baptist, Jo. the 1. I am the Voice of one that
cries, but where? in Deserto, in the Wilderness. But what? Parate vias Domini,
Prepare the way of the Lord; and what are the ways of the Lord but Enquiries?
If we are Christ's Sheep, as he is often pleased to style us, like Sheep, we
must have our solitary Walks, to hear his Voice. And O! that Christians, of so
many Days, Weeks, Months, and Years, they cast away in Vanity, would now and
then, bestow an hour or two in Solitude, they would soon discover the voice of
Verity speaking to their Hearts, and moving them to the enquiry of a virtuous
Life, and happy Eternity: Ducam eam in Solitudinem.

Yet Solitude, though the first step, is not enough to a good Enquiry: We must
hear, cum audisset; An Enquiry to be good must begin right, and end, where it
began. I explain my my self: John's Enquiry began from Christ, in Christ to
end; cum audisset: He first heard, then enquired; an enquiry is not to begin
from us, but from the Object, our Passion or Ignorance, or both, often
mis-represents, and miscalls things; whereas there is a Truth in each thing, by
which it is really to be known, for what it is. I own, things do not always
discover themselves, at their first appearance; but then, as if they were
composed of interrogative points; they seem to enquire of us, what they are,
for which Reason, a Being or Essence, is termed in the Schools, a Quidity, in
true English, a what? Now to answer this what, we must not begin from Prejudice
or Passion, nor enquire what we would have a thing to be, but what it is: Cum
audisset Opera Christi. The Works of Christ are the first enquiry made to John,
and moved John to enquire of Christ, till by this inter-change of Enquiries,
his Disciples master the grand Mystery of the Incarnation. Were this Order
observed, we should not so often Injure Reason, nor so disorderly misplace our
esteem.

To the clearer proof of this, St. Matthew in his 2d Chapter, presents us with
four Persons, and those of the first Rank, taken up with one and the same
enquiry; yet the enquiry was not equally good in all: nay, in one, the enquiry
after the best of things, proves the worst of enquiries; You cannot but prevent
me with your Thoughts, and remember the Persons concerned, are King Herod, and
the Wise Men from the East. The Wise Men began their enquiry from Christ, Herod
from Jealousy and Ambition; Their's happily ended in the Worship of a new born
Messiah, His in the Murder of Thousands of Infants.

Vbi est qui natus est Rex Judeorum? Where is he that is born King of the Jews,
say the Wise Men; behold the Enquiry: Vidimus enim stellam in Oriento; For we
have seen his Star in the East: Behold from whence the enquiry began: Et
venimus adorare eum, And we are come to adore him; behold where it ends. Herod,
on the contrary, at the report of their enquiry, was perplexed, and disturbed;
Turbatus est Herodes: Yet enquires too; he demands of the Learned, where Christ
should be born? This is little. Bethlehem being determined the place, he
privately enquires of the wise Men, and that diligently; diligenter dedicit:
the time of the Star's appearance: This is not enough; He sends them to
Bethlehem, inculcating a diligent Search, Interrogate diligenter de puero. You
see, not only enquiry upon enquiry, but dilgence upon diligence; Yet that is not
all: He them to return, to give him notice of what they would found; and all for
the new Born Messiah: And yet this enquiry, of the best of things, was the
worst of enquiries; and if you desire the reason, it is, It began not from
Christ as Christ, but from Christ, as he was in the troubled mind of Herod;
Turbatus est; He was troubled.

The wise Men, looked upon him, for what he was; Herod, as upon one he feared;
the wise Men, as upon the King of Heaven, Herod, as upon a Temporal; the wise
Men, as hoping an Inheritance of Eternal Felicity; Herod, as dreading the loss
of a Regency; and therefore the wise Men's Enquiry, ended in Adoring Him as God
and Savior; Herod, in pursuing him as a Rival and Competitor.

So true it is, that a good enquiry must not begin from Us, but Christ; and end
where it began. Each thing has its proper voice; we are not to falsify with
our imperfect Eccho's, of Prejudice and Passion, their natural sound; but frame
the value of each thing; the thing impartially frames of it self: for again, I
tell you, an enquiry to be good, must begin right, and end where it began,
Joannes cum audisset, etc.

Tu es qui venturus es? Art thou he that should come? a necessary enquiry; by
which we are taught, to enquire only what is necessary; that is, to enquire
what is necessary, and no more.

The World, as it would be full of Knowledge, and is full of Ignorance, so it
is full of enquiries; for an Enquiry is the Child of Knowledge and Ignorance:
were we wholly ignorant, we could have no ground; were we perfectly knowing, we
could have no motive of enquiry. But hence arises a difficulty, and it is;
John, not only as a Prophet, and Forerunner of Christ, but even as an
Eyewitness, was perfectly knowing, of what he enquired; and yet enquires of
what he knew. Jo. the 1st. ver. 29. he pointed out our Savior, ecce Agnus Dei,
Behold the Lamb of God, as he Baptized Christ, Heaven was opened, Luke 3. ver.
21 and 22. He saw the Holy Ghost descend in a bodily shape upon Him. More, he
heard a Voice come from Heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son: He could
not then be Ignorant of Christ, and yet enquires, Art thou he?

The difficulty, as you see, is plain; and no less plain is the Solution. John
ordered the Enquiry, but Ignorance made it; the Ignorance of his Disciples, by
an excuse of Charity, he made his own; and enquires by them what he knew, to
teach them to enquire, of what they doubted, and yet was necessary. Tu es? Art
thou he?

Now, to confine my Discourse within its proper Bounds, it will not be amiss to
settle a true Notion and Division of Ignorance, and it is no more than the want
of a Truth, proportioned to our Capacity, if the means of obtaining Truth, be
not in our Power, by force we are ignorant of that Truth, nor can we make
Enquiry, but this Ignorance is invincible, not wilful, and therefore not
imputable to any. If we have the means of compassing a Truth necessary to
Salvation, and make no Enquiry: according as such means are more or less
obvious; and by the measure of neglect, and the Importance of the Truth, our
Ignorance is more or less culpable, and ever founds an Obligation of enquiring
what is necessary.

The Intent of my Discourse bears me yet further, and methinks I discover a
twofold Ignorance, placed chiefly in the Will; The first, proper to the
Faithful; The second, to the Incredulous: The first stops Enquiry, and makes
one respectfully ignorant of what He ought not to know; the other makes one
boldly inquisitive, of what he ought to be ignorant: The first improves, the
second subverts Piety; The first was practiced by the Baptist, the second by
the Jews; The first was taught us by the Spirit of God, the second was a Lesson
of the Serpent: On the first is grounded the Order of the World and Religion,
from the second rises Confusion and Misery.

Tu es? Art thou he? S. John's contented to be ignorant of what he ought not to
know, and enquires not of what he ought to be ignorant: He questions not the
disposition of God, as to his own Imprisonment: No. He knew it was
presumptuous, to enter into the Cabinet-Council of Providence, and make it
responsible to Man. He enquires of Christ, but with reserve: He says not, Why
art thou he? Or how art thou he? But art thou he? teaching us to content our
selves with the Belief of what is revealed, and Obedience to what is commanded,
without the intermixing of our how is, and why's, and with reason, for the
certain Knowledge of the why of God's Providence, and the how of his Mysteries,
being only to be had from his Revealing Authority: If we mistrust it as to the
Substance, we should mistrust it as to the motive and manner, and involve our
selves in a Chaos of endless Enquiries.

How can one that is Born, be Eternal? say the Sammoratens, and so deny Christ's
Eternity; and how can one that is Eternal, be born? say the Ebionites, and so
deny Christ had a Mother; He had a Mother, says Sabellius, but how could she be
a Virgin? and so denies her Integrity: How can one be three, and three one? say
the Arians, and so deny the consubstantiality of the second Person of the
Trinity with the first; how can two Wills, say the Monotholites, and how can
two Natures, say the Eutichians, subsist in one Person? and so confine Christ,
the first to one Will, the second to one Nature, and to avoid drawing nearer
our Times. Did not the Capharnaites, Jo. 6. v. 55. with an impertinent how,
withdraw part of Christ's Disciples from him. Caro mea vere est Cibis, and
Sanguis meus vere est Potus, My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink
indeed, says Christ in express Terms; and notwithstanding the asseveration of
Truth its self; for a quomodo potest hic nobis carnem suam dare ad manduandum?
How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? Many of his Disciples went back,
ver. 66. and walked no more with him.

It is a Folly of Follies, to pass from the Subject of Faith, to that of
Speculations, as if the certainty of the Mysteries of Faith could not subsist,
without comprehending the Manner how they are effected. Let these inquisitive
Wiselings Seat themselves in the Chair of their pretended Science, and declare
me the how of the clearest Truths, the Light of Nature displays. They Live, let
them tell me how? Is the Brain, the Heart, or the whole, the Seat of Life? They
breath, let them tell me how? Is it the Air that presses on us, or we that
first attract the Air, and how? they move, let them tell me how? Does the first
push come from Will, or Fancy? if so, how does Will or Fancy first move it
self? They see, let them tell me how? is it by visual Rays passing from the Eye
to the Object, or by little Images or Species, coming from the Object to the
Eye? They remember, let them tell me how?

Now if in Natural things, they find themselves at a stand: Nor does the
Ignorance of such how is weaken the certainty and evidence of the things
themselves, why should the uncertainty of a how, as to the Sublime Mysteries of
Faith, lessen their Credibility? No, no. Noli intelligere, says St. Austin, In
Joan.
ut credas, sed creed ut intelligas, intellectus merces Fidei est; Do not
pretend to know to believe, but believe to know; knowing is the reward of
believing. For these hows are but false steps in a Christian tending to
Incredulity, as your why's are to Disobedience.

Unhappy Adam, thrice happy had thou been, and in Thee, thy Posterity, had
thou not given ear to a pernicious Enquiry, but rested in an humble Compliance
with Gods Precept. The Lord God, Genesis the 2d. had planted for Man a Garden of
Delights; what more Loving? Out of the Ground he made to grow, every Tree
pleasant to the Sight, and good for Food, what more Obliging? He often visits
him in Person, what more Honorable? He impowers him to eat of all, ver. 16. De
omni ligno Paradisi comede, Of every Tree of the Garden thou may eat freely.
Of every Tree? How comes then the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil to be
forbidden in the following Verse? De ligno autem scientiae boni and mali ne
comedas, But of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil thou may not eat; was
it not perhaps a Tree of the Garden?

More particularly examining the Text; I find the Grant Rigistred in one Verse,
the Prohibition laid down in another, so that I am apt to think the Particle
but to be an Adversative, no Exceptive, and that the forbidden Tree was rather
in the Garden, than of the Garden; it was a Tree of Trial, a Tree of apparent
Pleasure, but real Misery: In a Word, the Trees of Paradise bred only the
Knowledge of Good; this, the Knowledge of Evil: And could an easier Command
issue from the kindest Heart, than of eating what produced a sole Knowledge of
Good, and forbearing what caused an experimental Knowledge of Good and Evil? of
good only by the Loss of it; of Evil, in the punishment of Disobedience?

And yet ungrateful Adam, forgetful of Benefits, unmindful of Favors, heedless
of his own Calamity, and unconcerned for his Posterity, gives Ear to the
perfidious Enquiry of his mortal Enemy. Cur praecepit vobis Deus, ut non
comederetis de omni ligno Paradisi? Why has God commanded you, you should not
eat of every Tree of the Garden? a grand imposture, perfectly opposite to God's
Grant of eating of every Tree: but such why's are never grounded on Truth. Why?
is it not enough that God Commands? Why? and is it not sufficient, it is thy
Duty to obey? even now, thou wast made of Dust of the Earth, and can thou
aspire to be a God? Thou have been told, that Tree should be thy Death, in case
of eating its Fruit; and can thou think by eating it to be Immortal?

But Ambition hears no Reason, unsensible of these necessary Truths, he gives
ear to an un-necessary Enquiry; from Enquiry, he passes to mistrust God as
Envious: Ambitious Immortality, aims at Divinity, but at once forfeits his
present Felicity and Eternal, and so enslaves his whole Descent, to Death and
Misery; and this, by giving ear to the malicious Suggestion of a why? A
dreadful Example, yet not of Force to root out of the Heart of Man such
perverse Enquiries. There is not a forbidden Fruit, which has not a why
written on it, by the suggestion of our Infernal Enemy.

O how agreeable, says a tender Conscience, would such and such a thing be,
were it not an Offense of God? and by little and little the Serpent puts in,
And why should it offend him, it harms him not? That Interest above what Law
allows, is Usury and Extortion, says Conscience: What then, says the Serpent,
art thou the poorer for it? To Covet thy Neighbor's Goods or Fortune, says
Conscience, is unlawful: Why so, says the Serpent, would they not do as well in
thy Hands as theirs? Restitution is to be made for that cheat, that wrong, that
damage done in Goods or Honor, known only to my self, says Conscience; and
why, says the Serpent? The Law of the Land cannot oblige thee? Perjury is a
Sacrilegious Cutthroat, says Conscience, a false Witness, the Sworn Enemy of
God and Man; why? these are Niceties, says the Serpent, business must be done,
and Truth would undo it. To injure my Brother, says Conscience, by rash
Surmises, false Reports, and making a scandal of what is a hidden Sin, is
against the Precept of Justice and Charity; what matters that, says the
Serpent, as long as upon his Ruin thou buildst thy own Greatness? Those
lascivious Inticements, which cast Reason into a Lethargy, and renders Man
little better than a Brute, with all Care possible are to be avoided, says
Conscience: Why so? says the Serpent, they are but Gallantrys and Favors; it
is discourteous, and against good Breeding to disdain them.

And is it possible that such wretched why's, and senseless Insinuations as
these, should embolden the Heart of Man to stand up against his God, break his
Commandments, and set his Justice at Defiance? Is it possible? I wish it were
not the daily Practice of us Sinners.

Should the Apprentice question his Masters Lesson? a Servant his Lords
Command? should a Soldier, in place of charging his Enemy, turn about and
charge his Officer with a Why? Would it not be most preposterous? Each
Tradesman will be credited, and obeyed by his Apprentice, each Master by his
Servant, each Commander by his Soldier: And God! and God! the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, is He not to be Obeyed? Is He to be put off with lingering
why's, and foolish Demurrs? No, no, beloved Christians, let us no more give Ear
to the treacherous Suggestions of the World, Flesh, and Devil, but reading each
Commandment, in place of Why's, let us write over the Words of St. John, Tu es?
Art thou he, O God, that Comands? We will rather Forfeit our Life and Fortune,
than our Obedience. I fear I trespass upon your Patience, and therefore pass to
my 3d point, and second part.

Tu es qui venturus est, an alium expectamus: Art thou he that should come, or
do we look for another?
THe Enquiry rightly discust, implies this Discourse. If thou art not he that
should come, we are to look for another: If thou art he, no other we are to
look for. The litteral sense, I know, implies the Messiah was to be one, but
passing to the moral, what is meant by another, one may demand, and rationally
too. For certain it is, many things are estimable, that are not God, and
consequently are others from God; and are we to shut our Eyes to all? No, so
that we have them open for Truth, which is but one. Must we then neglect our
Temporal Concerns? No; so that we remember our Eternal. Let Rulers, by an equal
management, of the Balance and Sword, delivered them by the Hand of God, look
Majesty be observed, it is not to look for another. Let Subjects with
inviolable Allegiance, employ their Talents and Courage in the Service of their
Prince and Country, though with Honor and Promotion; it is not to look for
another. Let Lawyers be true to their Clients, but only in what is just:
Merchants to their Words, Tradesmen to their Bargains, be it for the
improvement of their Fortune, none of this is to look for another.

To look for another, is to look for any thing in opposition to God; for an
ordinate love of Creatures, with a reference to God, is not a looking for
another, but for God: a Tribute due to his Unity, an Unity without which the
Trinity it self would not be adorable; and Unity, from which derives, and to
which tends the Order of the Universe; an Unity the ground of all Obedience,
Union and Quiet; by seeking this Unity, we shall be united and being united to
God, united amongst our selves, formidable to our Ghostly Enemies: By seeking
another Faith, and not one; another Church, and not one; another God, and not
one; another Government, and not the one and settled, we bring in Division;
Division from God, Division from Religion, and Division amongst our selves; and
Division is ever the cause of Grief, Misery, and Anguish. God is but one, and
will be the only. Vnus Deus, una fides, unum Septima: One God, one Faith, Ephesians.
4. v. 5.
one Baptism.

One of the Darlings our deluded Fancy, strangely dotes on, is that of quiet,
nothing more obvious to our Thoughts and Desires, and nothing less attained to
than Quiet. Of the motion we see in this World, Philosophy makes quiet the
Author, but motion ever excluding quiet; quiet proves but an empty Word. Let
Philosophy then for me, rest in her fancyed quiet, seeing nothing can rest for
it. The World was made for Motion: it is to move, and it moves to be; as it
cannot have for its ends, its own destruction, so it cannot have quiet, nor
afford it to Man.

God alone is the Center of Man's Heart, to Him our Appetite bears us, to Him
all motion carries us. This is the first cause of this Agitation we see in
Nature, and vicissitude of things. Vniversa propter semetipsum operatus est
Dominus, Prove. c. 16. ver. 4.
The Lord has made all things for himself. The World for us, and Us, and World
for Him; an unsettled World for Us, that we may learn to settle in him. Facti
sumus ad te, and irrequietum est cor nostrum, donec requiescat in te, says the
experienced St. Austine. Our Heart is made for the Lord, and it is restless,
till in thee it repose. Thou art the one and only, no other we are to look for;
as Thou art undivided, so is our Heart to be, wholly thine; to this intent
makes a Passage. Luke 12. ver. 13. Ait quidam de turba: Magister dic Fratri meo
ut dividat mecum haereditatem: One of the Company said unto Christ, Master,
speak to my Brother, that he divide the Inheritance with me: But what do you
think Christ's Answer was in the following Verse? Quis me constituit Judicem
aut Divisorem supra vos? Man, who made me a Judge or Divider over you? I know
the literal Sense imports no more, than that Christ came only for the Salvation
of Souls, and not to meddle with Temporal Concerns; yet to my present purpose,
St. Peter, Sir-nam'd Chrysologus, flies higher, and discovers a Mystery
containing the Truth I have in hand, Praeceps cupiditas and incauta, cum fieri
voluit Divisionis autorem, qui ad restituendam venerat humani generis unitatem.
A rash and precipitous desire, that would have him to be the Divider of an
Inheritance, who came to restore Unity to Mankind. Christ's Inheritance we are,
He will not have it divided; he will have it His, and wholly his.

And what has he not done to make it his own. He created us, he redeemed us;
when lost, he found us; he conserves us; by him we are, by him we live, in him
we move; upon these Titles, the greatest Titles of Property, we are His; and in
requital does he not deserve our Heart and Love? Does he not merit that we
should look for Him, and no other? Yes, yes, O Lord, Thee alone, we shall
serve, and love; to Thee alone, by a true Faith, Hope, and Charity, we shall
aspire; Thee alone we shall look for, and not another. That so we may do, God
of his Infinite Mercy grant us, In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, Amen.

FINIS.

