The Right Use of an ESTATE.

BRIEFLY DIRECTED and URGED, IN A SERMON Lately Preached to a Person of Quality,
upon his coming to be of Age.

By THEOPHILUS DORRINGTON.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market. 1683.

To the Right Honorable, John Earl of Kildare, and Baron of Ophalia.
My Lord,
THose whom the indulgent Providence of God has favored with great Riches and
Honors, as it has your Lordship, are under a great necessity to have their
minds well accomplished with Virtue, Wisdom and Piety. No man can use an high
Fortune well, to his comfort and honor in this life, or his happiness in the
next (which in some measure depends upon this too), but he that is a wise and
good man. The more of these outward things any person has in possession, the
greater degrees of inward endowments are necessary to direct him in the use of
them; for greater service to God, and more good to men, is expected by the
Donor from him: and he is exposed to the more and the stronger temptations to
evil. Great Fortunes are like mighty Engines, which if they are wisely and
carefully managed, will perform great and useful effects: But if not, instead
of serving their end, they may dash out the brains of him that uses them. They
usually serve to make men the best, or the worst of Mankind; either the most
glorious instances of Virtue and Religion, or the most enormous sinners.

To some unhappy men that want these inward Endowments, their great Possessions
are only the Instruments of wickedness: They serve to gratify and cherish
foolish and hurtful Lusts. So the Possessors of them become the slaves of sin,
and miserable Captives to the Devil. The mistaken men, grossly imposed upon by
his subtle and malicious arts, are brought into a sordid and pernicious
bondage, whilst they fancied themselves enjoying an uncontrolled liberty.

Thus also these men unfit themselves for all good and heroic enterprises and
performances: They blast their own glory, and interrupt and prevent the praise
and renown which they might obtain. It is often their fate to see themselves
neglected as useless, whilst meaner persons, better accomplished, and more fit
for great trusts, are preferred to them.

Such men spend a few years in a wild extravagant jollity, having the most of
their pleasures forced, and so the less pleasant: And the rest of their days
they commonly wast, perhaps in shame and poverty; sometimes in pain and
sickness too; and with these, under the lashes of an angry Conscience. And if
that becomes so stupid and hard, as to scruple nothing that is wild and wicked,
they make the more haste to a miserable death, and hurry to an endless
perdition.

Thus Riches become the hurt of the owner for whom they are kept, which was one
of the Vanities that Solomon long ago observed in the World. And surely a great
one it is, that a man should make himself miserable by those things that might
yield him comfort in this life, and subserve his eternal happiness: That he
should thus defeat all the wise care, and tender kindness of those friends that
gathered, or preserved his Riches for him. It Is a sad and deplorable thing, to
see men throw away the happiness which they might enjoy, and wilfully run into
those miseries that might be avoided. But I hope, and heartily wish for a
better fate to your Lordship, to whom I account my self much obliged, and to
whom therefore I am very desirous to be in some way serviceable.

My Lord,

It was to assist your Lordship, as well as my weak abilities could, upon your
lanching into a dangerous World, your own Pilot, that you might not thus make
shipwreck of a good Conscience, a good Reputation, a large Estate, and a noble
Soul, that I first composed this Discourse, and delivered it in your hearing.
And for the same purpose I do now, upon the desire of some of your Lordships
very Honorable Relations, humbly present it thus again. If it is in it self
such as may be serviceable toward Piety and Virtue, it may now be the more
serviceable to your Lordship, having this advantage, that it may be
deliberately considered, and the reason and importance of the Rules it
contains, may be better discerned, than from a transient delivery. I presume it
will be acceptable to your Lordship's Prudence in this public way, if it be
useful to so honest and good a design, both for your own, and other men's sakes,
who, with your Lordship, may receive some advantage thereby. And I humbly
conceive it will be acceptable also to your Lordship's great and condescending
Goodness, as a Testimony of my unfeigned desire of your Lordship's Honor and
Interest; and my thankfulness for the great Obligations which your Lordship has
been pleased to lay upon,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Obedient, Affectionate, and Humble Servant,
THEOPHILUS DORRINGTON.

PREFACE to the RICH.
Gentlemen,
TO apply a helping hand toward the reformation of a profane and licentious
Age, is an act of Charity, like that of endeavoring to quench a raging fire.
Vice and wickedness, like that devouring Element, ruin the private Families
where they are entertained; and when they break out upon the public, and
become general, they turn all the glory of a Nation, into the ashes of
confusion, if a general reformation does not prevent. And you are the persons
as from whom our Vices, and our Ruin do ever chiefly flow (pardon the severe
truth): so also at whom we must always begin effectually to reform. Whatever
else may be imputed to me for thus joining my endeavor toward this, I hope
you will also impute a good will and love to my Country, and suffer that, in
your opinion, to expiate the rest.

There are Two things the usual causes of your miscarriage and ruin: one is
thewant of an early government of desire; the other, the insinuations of
flatterers.

Because those that are rich, have a large ability to gratify their desires,
they are apt to indulge these; to let them run without due control and
restraint: and so their Riches prove a temptation and incitement, as well as an
instrument of wickedness. For ungoverned desires will soon grow extravagant and
unlawful, and then push men to unlawful practices. Unless you are accustomed to
early and resolute denials of concupiscence, to moderate your very desires by
the Rules of Religion, you are in a dangerous likelihood to fall into the worst
degrees of folly and wickedness. What men do at first allow themselves but to
desire, intending to stop at wishes, that in a little time they commonly
proceed to practice. And from lesser sins in practice, they proceed to greater,
one sin making way for another.

But there is nothing that you who are rich and great, are more exposed to,
than flattery; nor can any thing be more fatal and mischievous, than that
usually is, if you have not a great deal of wisdom to defend you from the
mischief of it. Flatterers are a sort of Vermin which the poor are happily
free from: They mostly haunt the houses of the rich; and especially those where
a great Fortune is, under the management of an unthinking head, or strong
vicious inclinations. Where such a carcass is, thither will these Eagles be
gathered: There they obtain the easiest admittance; they have greatest success,
and do the most mischief. This worst sort of men, while they please an easy
person, by raising and maintaining in him a high, tho groundless conceit of
himself, obtain to be reputed great friends, and the honestest, kindest men of
his acquaintance. They set themselves only to applaud and commend, to extenuate
the grossest Vices, and put the names of Virtues on the lesser that are in him
they flatter; to represent whatever little and defective goodness there is in
him, as perfect and eminent. Thus they hinder him that is so unhappy as to give
them regard, from all endeavor to improve in goodness, or to amend what is
amiss. A true friend would always please by commending; but if he sees reason
for the contrary, he will sometimes reprove, tho it should displease, rather
than do harm to him he loves, or than not endeavor to do him good. It was an
argument of great wisdom in Agesilaus (which Xenophon reports of him), That he
was always wont to receive kindly the commendations and applauses only of those
who he had observed would upon some occasions reprove and blame him. He well
knew and considered, that no man can always deserve to be commended; that the
very best are not without some defects and errors. A wicked flatterer (and
wicked such men most commonly are) will urge you to the gratifying inferior and
wicked appetites; he takes the part of Vice against right Reason and Virtue. He
will encourage you in the sins you are inclined to, and strive to justify
them, and harden you against the checks of Conscience. Such an one is also
usually very officious and serviceable to any wickedness, to assist and
contrive for the commission of it, and then to hide and conceal it: But in
things that are good and brave, in the projects of Virtue, he is not forward to
be employed. He will perhaps industriously tempt a man to some sin wherein he
can assist, that himself may be the more necessary, and may get the more by the
cursed employment.

Behold, Reader, how young and rich persons are led to their ruin! By these
arts do mischievous flatterers allure weak men into their power, and under
their government, either to make them a prey to their avarice or necessity, or
else a Tool to their crafty and wicked designs. Thus it often comes to pass,
that a great Estate, which might be used with a great deal of honor, and after
left to Posterity, is wasted upon the scum and abject part of mankind; upon
Pimps, Bawds, Whores, Players, Fiddlers, and Buffoons: A Tribe scarce fit to be
named in these Papers, much less to be the ordinary companions of Nobility and
Gentry. It Is impossible that any man should live in good repute, or illustrate
his life with any great and virtuous actions, who gives himself up to the
conduct of such vile wretches as have no Virtue nor Honor.

Now to prevent the mischievous effects of these Two causes, Every man must
know, how duty to God obliges him to behave himself in the use of his gifts: He
must be convinced what is for his true interest, and what it becomes him in
point of true honor to do in this matter, to obtain approbation from God and
good men. He must also be persuaded, so to desire, and so to practice. This
(Reader) I have endeavored to suggest in the following sheets. I have given
you in the several parts of the Discourse, by piecemeal, I think almost a
perfect character of the pitiable and lamentable Object, a debaucht Gentleman;
and also on the contrary, that of one well accomplished with those great and
true Ornaments that illustrate a high Birth and Fortune. I must leave the
Reader to choose which he likes best, tho I have endeavored to persuade him to
that which is so.

I intend not to trouble the Reader with Apology for any defects or failings in
the Discourse; not because I think it needs-none, but because I judge it would
be vain and useless. Whatever real defects it has, it would be said they ought
to have been amended, not excused. And all the Apology in the World, cannot
prevent, but there would be may seeming ones, becuse of the many different
apprehensions and opinions of men. This I am sure of, That whoever are inclined
to find fault, they would do it after all the excuses that could be made; and
such as are candid, and inclined to favor me, will overlook and pardon the
defects, and satisfy themselves with what is good and useful. And they will
excuse me to themselves and others.

1 COR. VII. 31. And they that use this World as not abusing it, for the
fashion of this World passes away.
THE great God who was the Creator of all things, is the supreme Disposer and
Governor of all. It Is his Providence that distributes to every person in the
World that portion of present goods which he enjoyes; and he has appointed
Rules, according to which every man ought to govern himself in the use of that
Portion. Creation gives him an unquestionable right to Government, and we are
indispensably obliged to obey him that made us. We are further obliged to obey
him in the use of present enjoyments, because they are all his Gifts; who can
have more right in all things to rule us, than he from whom we derive our
being, and all that we enjoy?

Further, it is as necessary as it is just and equitable, that some Rules should
be given men in this affair: For how wild and extravagant are they that only
follow the dictates of ungoverned inclination; they live as without God in the
World, they forget all the obligations of gratitude and homage to him; they are
useless at least to Mankind, fit for no good or great employment; they apply
themselves to nothing that is good, but follow their own Pleasure; to gratify
their exorbitant Lusts, they will ruin the Innocent, grind the faces of the
Poor, rob any that they can of their just Right by fraud or violence, they will
despise the limitations of the Laws of men, and good order, which are the
strength and glory of Communities: The unlimited obedience to inclination and
appetite, has been the overthrow of mighty Kingdoms, it has been the ruin of
ancient and flourishing Families; it has often brought particular persons from
greatness, riches and prosperity, to a contemptible meanness, a miserable
Poverty, to painful Distempers and a hasty Death.

Nor is the Remedy in this case provided, worse than the Disease: The Rules
prescribed are as excellent and good in themselves, as they are justly and
necessarily prescribed; they tend directly to prevent these mischiefs and
Calamities, without having any tendency to cause other, without imposing upon
us any thing that is unbecoming or truly prejudicial. The rules that God has
given are certainly the fittest for us, they enjoin nothing unnatural, for they
are adapted by Infinite Wisdom; They are, we may assure our selves, as
indulgent to us, as they can be and be good; they prohibit nothing but what is
hurtful; they cannot be supposed to confine the use of Gods gifts within too
narrow and needless limits, because they are enjoined by infinite Goodness.
It Is inconsistent with that goodness which has bestowed these things on Mankind
for use and delight, to hinder him by any rules from using and delighting in
them so far as is good and convenient for him: Upon which accounts it becomes
every man to endeavor, first, to know the rules by which God expects he should
guide himself in the use of his enjoyments; and after that to observe them.

This Verse that I have read, is part of a sentence which begins at the 29 th.
Verse of the Chapter; which is an exhortation to men, to regard with great
indifferency the things of this present Life: It remains (says the Apostle)
that they which have Wives, be as tho they had none; and they that weep, as tho
they wept not; and they that rejoice as tho they rejoiced not; and they that
buy, as tho they possessed not; and they that use this World, as not abusing
it. Let not your Passions be much moved by any thing here, that you may not
abuse it while you enjoy, nor be uneasy with discontent or grief for the loss
or want of it. And he begins and closes the sentence with a fit argument to
enforce the Exhortation, The time is short, and the fashion of this World
passes away; as if he should say, It Is but a little while that we shall live in
this world, and all things here are liable to change, there is no Condition but
is of uncertain continuance, whether it be prosperous or adverse. Therefore let
all men keep themselves as indifferent to these things as they can, and
endeavor to use wisely and innocently whatever Portion God bestows on them
while they enjoy it.

These words afford to our Meditation this instruction.

It ought to be the Care of all persons to make a regular and good use of those
outward enjoyments which the Providence of God affords them.

The following Discourse on this, I shall divide into these two parts.

1. To show you how a man may use this World, so as not to abuse it. 2. To
illustrate the motives to this, that are included in the Apostles argument,
that the fashion of this World passes away.
To know in the first place wherein the right use of these things does consist,
let us observe that summary of every man's Duty which the Apostle lays down
under Three Heads in 2 Tit. 12. where he directs men to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present World: Thus ought we to guide our selves
in the use of what we enjoy, to take care that we do not contradict in this,
that reverence and pious homage which is due to God; nor that Justice and
Good Will toward other men, which we may desire to find in their carriage
toward us; nor that good and wise Government which best becomes, and is most
advantageous for our selves. These three Heads include all the rules that are
to be observed in this matter, I shall therefore under these range them.

1. He that would rightly use his Portion in this Life, must not suffer himself
to be transported thereby to the neglect or contradiction of those Duties of
Piety which he owes to God: Which includes these following Rules:

(1.) Take heed that you do not love your present Enjoyments more than God:
This is actual abuse of them, as well as it disposes us to further abuse, for
they were never made nor bestowed to draw our chiefest Affection to them; God
is our chiefest good, and does deserve the highest Interest in our Affections:
He has made the mind of man capable to Contemplate and admire himself, to Love
him and apprehend his Love to us, and be delighted therewith; to place then the
chief affection of so noble a being upon any thing below the Supreme good; is
to abuse both that and our selves; it is to content our selves with that low
thing as our Happiness, which was never intended to be so, and is in its nature
unfit for it.

Again, whatever thing has the greatest share of our Affections, it is thereby
in the place of a God to us, that will have most influence and power in the
whole government of us; the homage of mind and body will be paid to it: An
ardent Love, let the object be what it will, prejudices the Judgment, inclines
the Will, leads all the rest of the affections, and so all the thoughts, the
words and the actions, or the most of them shall be most readily employed with
some relation to that. If any Creature then is thus loved, it becomes the Idol
of a man's heart, and we revive the absurd Idolatry of the Egyptians, who made
every good thing a Deity: But did the true God ever intend that his Creatures
should be thus exalted into a competition with himself, for the adoration of
Mankind? or can we imagine that he made these things Servants to us, with a
purpose that we should serve them, and live negligent of our Duty to him.

Since all our enjoyments are the free gifts of a bountiful and gracious God,
it is reasonable they should kindle in us the Love of Him: The better and more
delightful these are for kind, and the larger Portion he bestows, we are the
more bound thereby to love him: Do not imagine that you can fix your affections
in a great degree on your present enjoyments, and yet highly Love God too;
these two dispositions are like heat and cold, which cannot consist in an
intense degree in the same Subject. This is that the Apostle means in 1 John 2.
15. where he says, If any man loves the World, the love of the Father is not
in him: As the one of these increases, the other does proportionably decrease;
if you much love the things of this World, you love them too much, and God too
little.

Now this error and abuse is practiced in the following instances.

1. To have the thoughts and affections wholly employed about the things of
this Life, and limited within the narrow bounds of this sublunary World; to
take delight only in considering and enjoying the Creatures here below; to have
no flights of mind, no aspirings toward God; to have him seldom in our
thoughts, and but very transiently when he is; when the mind does never fix for
a few moments upon him; to think of God without any affection, without any
desire or delight; this is evidently to love the things of this World more than
him: If the Judgment did esteem him the chief good, and were convinced of his
excellencies, and were acquainted how suitable he is to the Capacities of
happiness in man; if the Will did thereupon choose and fix upon him as the
center of its desires, as its ultimate end, and beyond whom it neither needs
nor inclines to seek further for a full content; this were really to Love him,
and suitably to him and our selves; and then the Meditations on him would be
sweet, as they were to holy David, as he says in Psalm. 104. and then they
would often return and abide with you; they would be the gratefullest thoughts,
obtain the easiest admittance, and entertain you longer than any without
weariness: Then would your concern to have an Interest in God be stronger than
the delight in what you enjoy at present; you would more ardently desire this,
'till you could obtain the assurance of it, and that when obtained, would
afford the greatest delight and satisfaction; the disposition of your Soul
would be the same with that of the Psalmist, when he said, Whom have I in
Heaven but thee, and there is none on earth that I can desire besides thee,
Psalm. 73. 25.

2. Again, They are certainly lovers of Pleasure, more than lovers of God, who
allow themselves in unlawful delights; who follow those Pleasures which he
forbids, and will rather break his commands than not gratify their extravagant
desires. It Is the inseparable property of Love to God to endeavor the
observance of his Commands. John 14. 21. This would make a man deny himself,
and resist and mortify his irregular inclinations. Those wild and lawless men
that pursue their pleasures without any regard to what is lawful, or what is
sinful, are under no influence or power either from the love or fear of God. He
that had so true apprehensions of God as to love him, would understand that his
Law allows all the Liberty that it is fit for us to take in the enjoyment of
these things. He would give himself leave deliberately to consider upon how
many accounts it is unreasonable to go further, and thus he would be fortified
against Lust and Temptation.

3. Moreover, That man whose Estate is dearer to him than his Religion, who is
not ready to forsake all his most pleasant enjoyments rather than abandon his
Duty, he loves this World more than God. The question in this case put to him
is, whether he will choose and content himself with Earth or Heaven? Whether he
will retain the possession of present goods, or the unfailing hopes of better?
whether he will have God or the Creature for his portion? And he in deserting
his Religion refuses the happiness it would bring him to. He lets go the hopes
of an eternal happiness, to retain for a few moments an uncertain and temporal
one: he preferrs the Creature before the Creator, and the shallow Streams
before the infinite Fountain of Bliss. It Is the enjoyment of God which
constitutes the Felicity of Heaven, and it is no less thing than this is
slighted, when you desert the way that leads to Heaven. Our Savior has told
us, that he who does not forsake all present contentments to follow him, if
there be necessity for it, is not worthy of him. Without this you have no
interest in his Blood, in his Merits or Intercession. If we are ashamed or
afraid of the Cross of Christ, we shall never wear the Crown of Glory. The
Glories and Honors which he has provided for the Saints will be possessed only
by those that continue such to the end of their lives. The most advantageous
use we can make of our present possessions, is to lose them for righteousness
sake; this is to transferr our treasures from Earth to Heaven, to change them
from uncertain and perishing, to durable and eternal Riches.

(2.) Another rule of Piety to be observed is, That you put your confidence
only in God, and acknowledge your dependence to be upon him: Those to whom the
Divine Bounty has bestowed a plentiful portion of outward goods, are apt to
terminate all their hopes and expectations upon that for the support and
comfort of their Lives; to forget that they derive from him all their
enjoyments, that his Blessing and concourse gives them all their sufficiency
and goodness. Our Savior gives us an exact Character of this folly in Luke 12.
beginning at the 16. v. where in a Parable he introduces a man whose Wealth
increases to abundance, and he takes care to dispose of it to the best
advantage for security and use, but we find no expression to signify that he
owns it to come from God, he is not sensible of a Providence in the case, that
this happens to him by the disposal of Heaven; accordingly he contents himself
in it, applauds and rejoices in his felicity, upon the account of his Wealth,
but is still unsensible of his dependence upon God; and thus the mistaken Fool
flatters himself in the 19 th. v. Soul take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry, for thou have goods laid up for many years: Much pleasure and content he
promises himself from his enjoyments, without seeking to God for it: What
(says such an one) shall I want? my yearly revenue will allow me to provide my
self whatever I desire, and it is enough to last all my days in the
maintenance of a pleasant life; I will live free from care and trouble, I will
banish Business, banish sorrow from my thoughts, and please my self 'till I
dye. The rich man's Wealth (says Solomon) is his strong City, and as an high
wall in his own Conceit; he promises himself from hence a lasting and
impregnable happiness, but God is not in his thoughts. The sensual minds of men
are wont to take notice only of sensible things, and because the concourse and
power of God is excercised unseen toward their support, they are apt to take
no notice of it: What they do immediately, and to the apprehension of sense
derive support and satisfaction from, to that they ascribe it; these men enjoy
the gifts of God, without making acknowledgments that they are his gifts,
without owning that they depend upon him for their virtue and sufficiency; they
cover themselves every day with rich and convenient Clothes, but without
lifting one thankful thought to the kind donour for them; they make the
Provision of their Tables, as nourishing and pleasant, and plentiful as they
please, and then sit down to it as a Swine comes to his trough, with as little
acknowledgment of their dependence upon God; they express no thankfulness to
him for having afforded so excellent Provision, nor implore his Blessing to
make it wholesome and nourishing. Consider, Man does not live by Bread alone,
Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
but by the virtue which Gods Blessing gives it. Every thing in nature depends
upon a perpetual concourse both in its being and operation; you can derive
nothing from any Creature, but what the first cause enables it to afford; the
best Food cannot nourish, the most delicate cannot delight, no clothes will
give you warmth, nor can you find ease on the softest Bed, the largest Estate
will not content the mind, nor any of your enjoyments serve the end for which
you use them, unless the all-sufficient God gives them Virtue and Power; ought
not this to be acknowledged then? should we not Pray to him for the comfort and
continuance of our Lives? should we not render thanks to him for all the
happiness we enjoy? Consider too, that he bestows every good thing which you
enjoy; and own that he has made you rich, he has exalted you in the world: It
was in his Power to have put you in a mean place, to have clothed you with
rags, you might have trotted in the dirt and dust for a poor livelihood among
common men, you might have been in that Beggars condition who stands hungry and
cold at your Gate, and he might have been in your warm Parlour, at your
plenteous Table, still the Providence of God can make such an alteration. Let
him then be owned as the Author of all good, let him alone be trusted in.
Charge them (says the Apostle Paul to Timothy) that are rich in this World,
that they do not trust in uncertain. Riches, but in the living God, who gives
us all things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17.

(3.) Another Instance of of Piety which great and rich persons ought to charge
themselves with, is Humility toward God. The Apostle Paul thought it necessary
that such should be admouished not to be high-minded, as we see in that place
last quoted. Pride is a vice to which Mankind is so much addicted, that it often
arises from things that are real disparagements. We may sometimes hear men
boasting of their follies and sins. Riches and Honors are things generally,
though not very deservedly much esteemed and admired in the World; these must
therefore be very apt to elevate the minds of those that possess them, beyond a
true and modest Opinion of themselves; and if they have such effect, it will
appear in the behavior both toward God, and toward men. It is but too
necessary then to urge such persons to the practice of Humility toward both.
In this place I shall mention what Humility toward God requires, and hereafter
how it must be expressed in our behavior toward men.

To demean your selves in such an humble manner toward God as you ought, do
not forget to acknowledge that you are sinners in his sight: Own that you are
derived from the fallen Adam, and are of the Apostate, guilty race, however
honorable in the World a few of your Ancestors may have been: know that no
greatness of birth can exempt from the real and common pollution; that you
derive a stained, infected nature of whomsoever you are born; that you are by
nature Children of Wrath as well as others; are born Heirs of Gods displeasure,
whatever heaps of Treasure, large tracts of Land, stately Houses, or lofty
titles you are born to. It Is all one in this respect to have been first wrapped
in Rags, or Purple; to have been nursed in the stately Chambers of the great,
or carried about upon the shoulders of a Beggar.

Acknowledge too the actual Transgressions of your lives; that you have sinned
in thought, in word, in deed, in every condition of life, in every Age, in
every place that you have been in, that your Iniquities are more in number than
the Hairs of your head. Acknowledge the aggravations which your sins have
received from the circumstances wherein they were committed: as that they have
many times been contrary to the knowledge and actual checks of Conscience,
contrary to the wise and good instructions given you in your education,
contrary to the entreaties of your best Friends: they have been committed upon
or little or no temptation, or upon your wilful and needless exposing your self
to temptation; that having had the more opportunity and ability to transgress
by having a great Estate, you have been perhaps actually the worse, and so have
answered the greater kindness of God with greater affront.

And upon the apprehension of these great and true disparagements, you should
entertain the meanest thoughts of your selves, be vile in your own eyes, and
own that you may justly be so in Gods; that if he should abhor, and condemn and
reject you into eternal punishment, he were righteous. Let not the greatness of
outward Prosperity hinder you from apprehending the greatness of that wrath
which is due for your sin; believe the greatest to be due. Look upon your
Riches as an unprofitable possession, which can be no advantage in the day of
his wrath; which cannot redeem the guilty Soul from the eternal Prison, to
which if you die impenitent you must be confined. Look upon your Honors as
mean and contemptible things, which can procure no respect from the great and
righteous God. Lament the ingratitude of your sins as they regard God, and the
folly of them as they respect yourselves; that you have behaved your selves so
unworthily toward him, and have so little consulted your own true interest. In
a sense of the wretchedness of your condition, fly to the hope set before you,
and depend upon the satisfaction and merits of the Redeemer alone, to find
favor and acceptance with God. It Is not below the greatest man to repent, but
it is so to transgress. The commission of sin degrades and debases man, the
Repentance for it, if true, raises him up again, to humble our selves before
God is the way to rise in his esteem. While we complain, and lament for our
sins, he pities us; while we judge and condemn our selves, he acquits and
pardons; While with deep resentment we own our selves polluted, he will cleanse
and sanctify us.

2. Again you must express your Humility toward, God by magnifying all the
exercises of his Goodness toward you, and if you are very sensible of your sin
and unworthiness, you will have a very grateful sense of his mercy. The least
gifts of his bounty will be thankfully received, and ought to be so; the
smallest portion, the narrowest Fortune, will keep out discontent from the
humble Soul, and he will praise the God that bestows any thing where nothing is
deserved. Ascribe it to the mercy of God, and the merits of the Redeemer, that
you are suffered to live, that you were nourisht and brought up though born in
blood and pollution; though you had the infection of Enmity against God wrought
into your natures, though you were conceived in sin, and brought forth in
Iniquity. Much admire that when you had forfeited the least favors, the
goodness of God should be liberal to you, and load you with a rich plenty of
the good things of this life. Bless him especially for spiritual mercies, and
the care that he has taken for your happiness in Eternity. Admire the goodness
which ordered your Baptism, and pray that it may prove the Laver of
Regeneration. It was unspeakable mercy, when he might have thrown you away into
misery, that he should take you into the bosom of his Church in order to bring
you to everlasting life. Adore the mercy that gave you by Parents, or Tutors,
such instructions as direct to a wife, happy, and honorable course of life;
and especially have an high esteem of the favor, if these instructions have
made any impression upon you; if you are formed thereby so as to live
regularly, and practice the Rules. Say, Lord what is man that thou art mindful
full of him, and the Son of man that thou thus visitest him?

3. Testify your Humility further, by a ready submission to the Divine
Commands. Do not think you can be so great as to be exempted from the
obligation of his Laws who is Sovereign over all things; or that the obligation
of Obedience is less strict or indispensable upon you, than upon others, when
you are beholden to him for greater gifts. A Humble mind will not quarrel at
any of the Commands of God, nor account any course too strict which he enjoins:
He will say with the great pattern of Humility, the blessed Jesus, Lord, not my
will, but thine be done.

4. Again, you must also quietly submit to every dispensation of Gods
Providence: own his Justice in every affliction he lays upon you, and command
your minds in Patience. It Is unreasonable as well as vain to murmr against
God, and it is madness to rage and blaspheme because he chastises you. This is
like the wild Scythians, to shoot Arrows against the Thunder, which will return
upon your heads, and take vengeance for the bold impiety in your destruction.
By a patient submission under Chastisement, we obtain the Compassion of the
Father of mercies: Prove. 15. 1.
This proves like a soft answer which turns away wrath.

5. Express your Humility toward God, by a modest Reverence in his Worship,
and an honorable esteem of his Ordinances; to meddle with these in a slight
unserious manner, is to profane things that are Sacred.

Your Prayers ought to be altogether serious and devout, without the least
allowed Vanity of the Mind, or wandering of the Eyes, Thoughts or Affections:
Is it not most agreeable and just that we should behave our selves with all
possible solemnity, when we are upon our knees, begging of the great disposer
of all things for what is necessary to our Happiness, or rendering due Praise
for abundant and free mercy?

Again, your attention to the Holy Word of God, ought to be very reverent and
serious, such as is due to divine Oracles. The Holy Scriptures and what is
dictated from them, deserve to be regarded as divine Revlations, as a Message
or a Voice from Heaven: The Commands are of divine Authority, the Promises, the
Threatenings are made by the Infinite and Eternal God; and the greatness of him
from whom these things first come, should strike an aw, and beget a reverence
to them in the minds of all men, tho the Messenger from whom they immediately
receive them be their inferior. Reverence and esteem the Word of God as the
appointed means of Salvation; he has determined, By the foolishness of
Preaching to save them that believe; tho the matter of it may seem foolish to
the ignorant and prejudiced World, and tho the Preachers may seem despicable to
the Proud, yet the effects of Preaching are glorious upon them that believe,
upon such as receive the instructions that in this way are given to them: By so
mean an Instrument. God accomplishes the great effect of the Salvation of men;
what words then can express the madness and folly of those men that despise
this Ordinance of God? they have neither any Reverence for him who instituted
it, nor care for their own Happiness.

That you may not lightly and carelessly engage in the Worship of God, consider
you have therein immediate concern with an Infinite being, you present your
selves before the awful Majesty whom all the Angels humbly adore; who is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the God before whom the Nations of the Earth are
as nothing; who is in Heaven as on a Throne of unconceivable Glory, and thou
art on Earth as at his Footstool. What is the highest of men that he should
forget to behave himself with reverence in his addresses to Heaven. Tho you are
a little elevated among men, and stand higher than some others of them, yet you
are infinitely below the Deity.

6. Further, let your Humility be exercised in having a very modest Opinion of
your best actions. Do not think highly of your deserts upon the account of any
good that you have done: consider it was the giver of every good and perfect
gift that gave the ability to do well; he excited the Will to it, and his
Providence presented the opportunity. Acknowledge the unhappiness of mankind is
such, that no action can be performed by any man that is perfect, and does not
in some respect or other want a pardon. At the best you have but paid a debt in
what you have done, and answered an obligation laid upon you. The best man
ought to expect his reward for the best service of his life, merely from the
mercy of God in Christ.

4. Another Duty of Piety which those that are rich ought to reckon themselves
obliged to perform, is to promote Religion as much as they can in the World; to
endeavor God may be generally honored, since he has graciously exalted them.
Those whom he has lifted above their Neighbors, have greater opportunity to
serve him in this kind than others: but something is expected from all men, and
every man may help toward the increase of Religion, whether he be in a public
or a private station.

And to promote Religion, is the noblest and the most useful kind of service
that you can perform; it is not below the greatest of men to set himself
industriously to it. Religion is the End of the rational Creature; that for
which we are men, and endowed with reason. To promote this, is to endeavor
that God may receive his just rights from men: till they become Religious, they
are so many Traitors and Rebels against the common Sovereign. This World, if it
were without Religion, would be a Wilderness, a Confusion, without peace or
order. This is the Glory of mankind, the Beauty, the Strength, the Happiness of
any Society where it obtains: It is a sure foundation of Wealth, and Renown,
and Stability, to any Community of men. And on the contrary, no Greatness can
be raised or maintained without it. Wickedness and Irreligion have overthrown
many well-establisht Empires, and Combinations, but could never raise one. Air,
Fire, and Water, are not more universally useful and necessary to mankind than
Religion. They can as well breath without Air, be warm in the perpetual absence
of the Sun, or quench thirst without Water, as they can be happy without
Religion prevailing amongst them. Consider too, that almost the whole world
lies in Wickedness! And how little Religion is there remaining amongst us!
Alas! to how great a degree is that Glory departed from our Israel! This loudly
proclaims what need there is that every one do endeavor according to his
place, and power, to increase and spread it.

1. You that are great, that have many eyes upon you, should promote Religion
by a good and pious Example. You are more largely known in your persons than
common men, and yet more known by Name and Report; and as far as this goes,
your Example may do good or hurt to Religion. There is a great propensity in
mankind to imitate those whom they respect, their Superiors: if you practice
Religion, you give it esteem and repute in the World; and if you neglect it,
it is exposed to contempt and scorn: it is you that must bring it into fashion,
and retrieve it from the too general contempt that it now lies under. Consider,
that you do not only disparage your selves by a vicious conversation, but you
infect others too; you contract to your selves much guilt from the sins of
other men; from all those which your bad example does encourage: And if you are
bad men, you are the Pests of the World, great causes of sin, and consequent
misery.

How much more are those liable to the blame of other men's sins, and the
infection of the World, who tempt others to wickedness, who promote the kingdom
and interest of the Devil, and subserve the grand Apollyon in his design of
destroying mankind? they may be reckoned a sort of inferior, incarnate Devils,
who strive to introduce virtuous and sober persons into the wicked practices
and customs of the Age.

2. Further, Private persons may promote Religion* by the well ordering of
their own Families. So far they may command, and they ought to command the
practice of this. The greater any of these are, the further may he that is the
head of it promote Religion: your Children and Servants will help to debauch,
and infect the rest of the World, if they are not religious: for men will take
their Examples from the families of great men, as well as from their Persons:
Keep up the constant Worship of God in your Families, in Prayers, in reading
the Holy Scriptures, in singing Psalms, and in a strict observation of the
Sabbath. Are those Families fit to be called assemblies of Christians, where
there is no constant Worship of God maintained? how can you expect any Blessing
upon your Society, unless you Worship God together? The happiness of a Family
lies in the Love, the Suitableness, the Faithfulness, the Serviceableness of
all the Members of it toward one another, and these things he alone can
bestow. The Governor of the Family cannot know whether those under him do
Worship God at all or not, if they do it not together.

If you would have those of your own Family Religious, you must be so your
self; thus far at least your Example will have great influence; it will have
greater influence upon your Domestics either toward good or ill, than any
other can: The Poet speaks a great deal of truth in that sentence, -- Velocius
and citius nos
Corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domestica magnis
Cum subeant animos autoribus. Juv. Satyr. 14.



The Examples of Vice which we dwell with, if they are in our Superiors too,
do corrupt us sooner than any. The nearness and daily converse with you, is
added to your Superiority, to make your bad example fatal to those of your own
House. The sharpest Rebuke that can be expressed in words, is due to the folly of
those Parents who take no care how they behave themselves before their
Children; who after they have given them a Nature infected and disposed to ill,
that they may not fail to ruin them, give them a bad Example too.

Again, to make your Family Religious, you must restrain those under you from
all manner of Wickedness, by reproving the least errors, and punishing others.
Give them also encouragement to do well, let this always purchase your
manifest favor and good will.

But further, to effect this, you should carefully Instruct your Children and
Servants in the matters that concern their Salvation; if you do not betimes
take care to possess your Children with good and virtuous principles, the
adversary of their Souls will early sow in their minds the tares of Vices; and
should you be less industrious for the happiness of your own flesh and blood,
than the malicious Devil is for their destruction? should any one hate them
more than you Love them, they will have cause to curse you hereafter for having
given them being, if they mi^carry through your neglect; Train up a Child in
the way wherein he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it,
Prove. 22. 6. Let them be accustomed to do well. The constant exercise of Piety
and Virtue from tender years, will make it easy and familiar; Instruct them in
the matter of their Duty, and labor to convince them of the reasons that
persuade to the practice of it; tell them how honorable it is to be good and
holy, what a luster and beauty it has in the eyes of men; that this is approved
beyond any thing even in a wicked World; no man is so universally commended and
esteemed, as he that is steadfastly and strictly virtuous; tell them what a
fragrant odor it leaves behind, how it embalms the memory of the dead; with
what applause the Histories of all Ages do mention brave and good men. The most
partial Histories do never offer to commend any man without ascribing true
Virtues to him: The Memory of the just is blessed, Prove. 10. 7. Learn them to
put a high value upon the esteem of wise and good men; let them account it mean
and base to be valued only amongst those whose Vices make them the Scum of the
Earth, who will only applaud Confidence and Wit in doing foolish and shameful
things; there is no applause of any men worthy to be valued, but that of such
men who are themselves worthy of Praise. Learn them to stand in great awe of
their Creator, to remember him in their Youth, to be more concerned to please
him than men, to be most ambitious of his approbation in what they do: Let them
know that his pure Omniscience does continually observe them, that no darkness,
no secrecy can hide them from his view; that it is of no advantage to conceal
their crimes from the Friends that would reprove them, since the righteous
Judge of all the World observes, and will at one time or other severely reprove
them: They only hinder themselves by secrecy, from enjoying that admonition
which might be a means to cure their follies. Thus endeavor to convince their
reason that they must be good, endeavor by all great and good allurements, as
they grow capable to apprehend them, to persuade and incline their wills to
Religion. Be not contented only with your restraining them from wickedness, but
learn them as much as may be, to restrain themselves; fasten in their minds
such Principles as may have power to keep them regular.

As the observation of the Lords day is one part of our duty toward God, so
it is a practice that highly conduces toward our performance of all other
Duties; it is always observable, that the best men are those that most strictly
devote this day to Religion. You cannot possibly have a religious Family,
unless you keep those that are under you to the public and private exercises
of religious Worship on the Sabbath. This is to give up one day in seven to the
consideration of divine things, and it is consideration which must give them
impression and force upon the minds of men; those most important things
revealed from Heaven, will have no influence upon us, if we do not allow them a
serious contemplation: On other days other lawful and necessary employments
will often interrupt you in doing this. Take then the appointed time, and
improve it as well as you can for this purpose; give your Servants as little
other employment on that day as you can, and keep them as close as you can to
this; spend the time that remains, besides what the public Worship will take
up, in some private exercises of Religion in the Family.

3. Further, Those that are great and rich men, tho not in the Magistracy, may
promote Religion among their Tenants and poor Neighbors, by encouraging and
countenancing those that incline to it, protecting them from Injuries,
preferring them to your Service, and by frequent commendation of them in the
hearing of others. You that have so many Tenants, have perhaps so many Families
that are in some dependence upon you, whom you have opportunity to oblige, and
can encourage or discourage; so many will value your favor or displeasure, and
may therefore be influenced to the outward practice and profession of Religion
at least, by your carriage toward them: It Is an useful exercise of Charity
toward the promoting Religion, when you* will give Bibles and good Books among
your poor Neighbors, and to assist them in the Education of their Children;
such as are very poor, set their Children at the best to work, as soon as they
are able to do any Service, that they may earn somewhat toward their own
maintenance; and they can neither afford them time, nor spare any cost toward
the teaching them so much as to read; and so do many poor Souls live and dye in
a miserable ignorance of those things which concern their Salvation: Oh pity
these Wretches, and endeavor that as many as you can, may have at least this
Instruction.

4. You may yet more largely serve the Interest of Religion, by endeavoring as
far as in you lies, that there may be a learned and pious Ministry: It were a
very public Service and benefit if you should choose some poor Lad, that
appears to have a very good Wit and sober Inclinations, and send him to the
School and the University; you may entertain in your Family a deserving person,
'till he can obtain a more public employment: you may out of your abundance
spare some yearly allowance to assist and encourage a man of mean fortunes, who
with good assistance you have reason to think, might be very useful in the
service of Religion. You may add to the Revenues of small Benefices, for the
encouragement of an able Minister.

5. When persons are admitted to a part in the Government, it is certain that
they have great opportunity to promote Religion; they can force men to at least
an outward practice of it; they can punish Vice and Profaneness, and make it
uneasy to Men; they can make it ashamed of its self when it is grown bold, or
prevent its growing so; they can reward, protect and countenance effectually
those that will be good Men; they can command a general and strict observation
of the Sabbath, and force men to assemble to one or other of the places of
public Worship, whereby they will be under the means to make them good men;
it is in their power to restrain, at least from appearing in public, that
profane liberty of Fancy, so much affected under the name of Wit; which lies in
finding out improbabilities in the clearest and most important truths, and
matter of ridicule in the gravest rules of Morality and Religion; a practice
which tends to make men Scepticks and Atheists, to overthrow Religion, and
civil Order and Government. Good Principles are the foundation of good Order,
and this humor destroys all Principles in the minds of Men, and leaves no
foundation at all, whereon to build Virtue or Piety in them: This destroys the
power of Conscience, serves to justify the grossest wickednesses, and hardens
Men in their sins. It Is much in the Power of the Magistrate to procure an able
faithful Ministry, to protect them from Injury and Contempt, and encourage them
in their work: But I desire to be understood to intend these things only for a
little direction to those young Persons that may hereafter be Magistrates.

Thus I have given you a brief account of those Duties toward God, which are
required of all men to be regarded in their use of present enjoyments.

2. Further to show wherein the right use of the things of this World consists,
I proceed in the next place to suggest, The Duties toward men which this
requires, included under the name of Righteousness: And this includes all the
Duties of the second Table of the Divine Law, required to be observed in our
carriage toward our Neighbors; it commands both Justice and Mercy in that 2
chap. of Tit. To do to others as we would be done by, which is the great rule
of Righteousness, is a rule both of Equity and Charity; he that exercises
Charity to the Poor, and shows Mercy to the miserable, does to them what he
himself would desire that others should do for him, if he were in their
Condition: But I shall not mention all the particulars under this Head, because
I study brevity, but only will lay down a few general rules, which shall
include all the particulars.

(1) Let every man endeavor to be of some good use to the Community he lives
in: It should be the hopes of a young man, that he may in the time of his Life
be able, and have opportunity to do some good service to Mankind: It Is
generosity and good nature to be unwilling to live to himself alone. Prepare
and fit your self for employment, and then readily accept it when it offers it
self; tho it is not wisdom for a man hastily to rush into public business,
before he is well accomplished, and rightly called to it, yet when he is so
called and fitted, he ought not to decline or refuse it; unless the
circumstances happen to be such, as that you cannot with a safe Conscience
undertake it: It Is too great selfishness to consider the trouble, danger, cost
or pains of an employment, wherein you may do great service to the public, so
as to be thereby discouraged from undertaking it: There is nothing great and
glorious, that is not hazardous and painful, and the more difficulties and
dangers attend any good Office, it is the more honorable. I cannot choose but
transcribe those two Stanza's so full of sense, to this purpose in one of our
English Poets.

Davenane Gondib. Canto 6.
Be good, and then in pity soon be great,
For virtuous men should toil to compass Power,
Lest when the bad possess Dominions seat,
We vainly weep for those whom they devour.
Our virtue without power but harmless is!
The good who lazily are good at home,
And safely rest in doing not amiss,
Fly from the bad for fear of Martyrdom.
A good man will not seek an Office for the mere honor of it, but to have
opportunity to do good in the World; but such men ought to seek and receive in
the right way any Offices conferred upon them, because otherwise bad men who
are ambitious will possess and abuse them; he is not worthy to live in a
Society, by and in which he enjoyes Riches or Honor, who will not deny himself
in his own ease and interest to serve the public safety and Prosperity: The
damage and inconvenience which you may sustain in a public employment, ought
not in case of necessity to be regarded, unless it would be so great as utterly
to disable you for performing the Duties of the place. A man ought not indeed
to undertake what he is not able to manage, for this would be a great prejudice
to the public: What unprofitable and worthless wretches are those who give up
themselves to an idle enjoyment of their own Pleasures, to live in Ease and
Luxury, without any concern to do any good! they are the abject, the reffuse
things of nature, differing from the whole Creation besides; every Creature
besides serves to some use and purpose, and they live to none at all.

There are public employments suitable to the several ranks and degrees of
men, and every man should be fit for some or other of the employments that
commonly belong to the men of his rank, and readily apply himself to it.

There are several good Offices that great men may do to the public in a
private condition, as I have in part shown already; you may further help by
your Intercession with the Magistrate to protect the Innocent, to obtain favor
and promotion to men of Wisdom and Honesty, to right those that have been
wronged, and relieve the Oppressed; you may vindicate those that may be
misrepresented and falsely accused.

You may be instrumental to recover or maintain Peace among the Members of the
same Society, which is an Office expressly and particularly blessed in the Sacred
Writ, Mat. 5. 9. It Is an Office exceeding beneficial to Mankind, and therefore
highly pleasing to God, to endeavor the promoting Peace among men: Peace
cherishes Societies, and makes them flourish in Arts, Trade and Religion: Love
is the band that ties multitudes of men together, to the strength, safety and
happiness of the whole Combination. You may perhaps find out ways to employ
many Poor, so to keep them from Idleness, and enable them to maintain their
Families, and subsist without dependence on Charity.

When you are called into any Authority, assure your selves that you are raised
by Divine Providence, more for the public good than your own Honor; think it
glorious to be in such a place a public Benefit, it is to resemble the Deity in
a high and noble manner, who is over all, and good to all, who has power to do
harm, and only does good: consider how much the happiness of all those that are
within the Sphere of your Authority, does depend upon your wise and just
management of your Office; let a generous pity make you loath to cause the
misery of many of your fellow Creatures; it is a barbarous thing to contrive and
delight in the misery of others, and it is ignominious and shameful to cause it
by your neglect; let it be your care therefore, that those who are in some
measure at your mercy, may have no reason to lament that they are so.

(2.) Another rule of Righteousness by which men should govern themselves in
the use and enjoyment of the things of this World, is, To wrong no man of what
is his due, to take or withhold from no person what he has right to, for
maintenance of your own pleasure: Accustom your selves to exact Justice, and do
not desire liberty to transgress the bounds of it in any measure; desire no
Pleasure which is a wrong to your meanest Neighbor, in Person, Estate or
Reputation. It makes the Societies of men acquainted with more Wildness and
Cruelty than the Wilderness it self, when the greater will please themselves to
the hurt and damage of the less; while a Beast of Prey devours to serve his
necessity, a lawless voluptuous man spoils his Neighbor to serve the
extravagance of wanton desires, and is the most inhumane of the two: they are
certainly very unrighteous, who to enjoy their Pleasure beyond all bounds, and
to maintain their prodigal expenses, do contract vast debts which they know
themselves unable to pay, or take no care to do so; this is to Riot at the cost
of other men, to abuse and rob perhaps him that loves you, and from that Love
opened his Purse to your desires: You carelessly scatter that which it may be
your Creditor took a great deal of pains to scrape together; the Comfort which
he promised himself to take in what he had gathered, you disappoint him of; you
take the Bread as it were from the mouths of him and his Family, perhaps to
throw it to your Dogs, and they must go ragged and thin clothed, that your
meanest Servants may be extravagantly fine.

Again, it is a most cruel and unnatural Injustice which they are guilty of,
that wast the Estate upon their own pleasures, which should provide for a Wife
and Children; and there never was any Age so barbarous in this respect as ours;
some spend in superfluity and needlessly upon themselves, while they suffer
their Family to want the things that are necessary; some wast their Estates in
the Company of Strangers, and their own flesh and blood do hardly partake of
them; some are so monstrously cruel as to give away the affection due to a
Wife, a person it may be of Honor and great Virtue, with the Patrimony which
she brought them, to another woman that is base in Birth, or at least in
Lewdness; as if they only took care to be vexatious, and to leave her no
Comfort: Some are negligent of making a treasure for their Children, tho the
Providence of God has put them in a way to do it, out of a prodigal and
voluptuous humor that spends at least all that comes in: And some neglect this
out of a base unnatural Envy, which would not have their own Children live as
comfortably as they have attained to do, without enduring (tho it might not be
necessary) the same pains and hardships; He that provides not for those of his
own House, (says the Scripture) is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8.

Does he that ruins her who committed her self and Fortunes to his Mercy, upon
the Vows and Protestations of his Love, perform those Vows, or is he not false
and forsworn? does he well and faithfully discharge the trust that was put in
him? does he kindly requite the Love that laid the greatest possible obligation
upon him? No, there is no gratitude, no faithfulness in that man. If one falls
into the hands of savage Thieves, he may be stripped and robbed, and be glad to
escape without further harm; but to be thus used by a man, who by great
pretenses of kindness has allured me into his Power, must be the highest
baseness in him, and the greatest trouble and vexation to me.

What thanks do your Children owe you, who have begot them to Sorrow and
Misery, when your extravagant Lusts devour what should afford them a good
Education, and comfort them after your Death? Certainly it is the provision that
Parents make for their Children, or their endeavor to provide well for them,
the care and pains they take to render them wise, good and useful to the World,
and to enable them to subsist without a precarious dependence, if they can,
which is the thing that lays the great obligation upon Children to Love and
reverence their Parents: it is for the most part merely accidental that they are
born, and it is a great unkindness and prejudice to give them being, without
taking what care you can for their Happiness; have you natural affection, who
to enjoy unlawful and excessive Pleasures, will leave them in a condition that
can have none at all. I cannot choose but wonder at those men who inherit an
Estate, which has kept up the grandeur perhaps of a long race of honorable
Ancestors, and by their folly and extravagance do spend it, and leave their
Children Beggars: They leave perhaps a bare Title to their Children or other
Relations, without any Riches to procure it respect and esteem: If these men
had any thing of a noble Spirit, they would scorn to bring either their own
Posterity, or their Name and Title down into the dirt; such are the disgrace,
the ignominy of the Family; they will be remembered with hatred, as long as they
are remembered by Posterity; I wonder that such men are not afraid, lest the
Ghost of some departed Ancestor should disturb them at those midnight revels,
which wast the Estate, and bring the Honor which they purchased with great
Labor and hazard, into contempt and disgrace.

(3.) Another rule of Righteousness may be, To practice all requisite Humility
in your carriage toward men; this is the Justice of requiring no more respect
from others than is due to us, and of giving to others all the respect that is
due to them; Let no man arrogate to himself those excellencies which he really
has not, nor desire the respect due to them whilst he is without them: There
can be nothing more ridiculous, than to see a rich Fool conceit himself wise,
to think his mind is full of Wisdom, because his Baggs are full of Gold and
Silver; or for him who bears a Title, to think himself upon that account an
Oracle: It Is too often seen, that they who have these things in eminence above
others, are ready to conceit that they have Wit, Virtue or Beauty above them
too, and accordingly they expect to be Honored; or if they do not conceit they
have every excellency in them, yet they put too high an esteem upon those they
have; they think nothing comparable to a great Estate or a Title of Honor; and
all the respect of Mankind, they account due to themselves. Tho the useless
Creatures live as Ciphers in the Universe, and only serve to increase the
number of men; they are dogmatical in their most foolish and mistaken Opinions,
and most peremptory and stiff in all their unreasonable humors and purposes.
They are deaf to advice, and offended at reproofs, and will not receive any the
most useful Instruction, because that implies they wanted it. They hate the
most important advice that is given them, under the notion of Control, and
cannot distinguish between obedience to the good Rules, and obedience to those
that give them: They despise the dictates of right Reason and virtue, if
suggested by an Inferior, from an apprehension that to regard them is to
submit to that Inferior; thus their Pride infatuates them to a willingness
rather to be ruined than directed.

Be not too desirous of your own Commendation, nor too much elevated when you
hear it; those who are much delighted with their own Praise, do usually not
much care to hear any men's Commendation but their own; but Humility will not
envy other men their just Commendation, nor blot it with detraction.

Do not despise him that is inferior to you in any thing, he may perhaps
excel you in another: God seldom gives all sorts of excellency to one man; And
as you would not have him despise you for your want of that wherein he excells,
do not you despise him for his want of that wherein you excel. The wise
Providence of God has thus variously distributed his Gifts, that all men might
be useful, acceptable, necessary to one another; every man ought to be
respected for his particular endowment, and according as the nature of it does
deserve: Indeed no man should be despised, for if there be nothing else in him,
he is a man, a Creature capable of reason, and bears some impresses of the
Divine Creators Image. A humble mind will not despise the love and offered
Services of the meanest person, but will account himself under obligation to
requite them with kindness and good Offices; he will neither refuse them, nor
take them as so much due to him as to deserve no acknowledgment.

So far as honesty and the advantage of others will permit, a humble man will
endeavor to render himself easy and pleasant to all in a company, or in his
neighborhood; he will not so stiffly gratify and humor himself, as not to
deny his own inclination sometimes to gratify another, which is the common
error of those that are new Gentlemen, or such as have gotten a great Estate,
but have not had a genteel Spirit infused by Education: The civility of the
World and that which we rightly call a genteel Carriage, is nothing else but a
humble deportment toward all that we converse with.

The richest, the noblest, that are not Magistrates, must content themselves to
submit to Magistrates, and give to each of them the respect which is due to the
place he holds. It Is a Pride that tends to confusion and all disorder, when
such despise and affront those Officers of the State, who out of their Office
are meaner persons than themselves: They ought to be respected in the exercise
of their Authority, out of reverence to the supreme Authority which is over
every man in the State, and from whence they derive theirs. He that affronts
the meanest Authority, does in effect affront the highest, and is in a
preparation to slight the Authority of all Laws too. Such things are never
practiced, but when Law and Order begin to give way to the lusts of men: If the
Cobweb be broken by Wasps and Hornets, little flies will escape through the
holes which they make.

(4) Exercise all the Mercy and Charity toward the Poor and Miserable, which
the Providence of God affords you ability and opportunity for. Imitate the
Father of Mercies, and be ye merciful as he is. He makes every Creature partake
of his goodness: The highest sort have their dependence upon it, and the
meanest are not overlookt or neglected. It is pleasing to the infinite
Fountain, to be always flowing. And it is a high and noble imitation of him,
for you to take all occasions of communicating, as you have power, to those
that are indigent. Freely you have received from God, and should therefore
freely give. As you have been your selves beholden to Mercy, you ought to
exercise it, or you prove your selves unworthy of it. What you give to the
Poor, is treasured in the hands of God, from whence it will return in due time
with a most plenteous Increase. Thus you put your superfluities to a good use,
and shall obtain in reward of thus spending them, many necessary blessings.
It Is a large and comprehensive encouragement to this excellent duty, which the
wise man gives in a few words, in 3 Prove. 3, 4. Let not mercy and truth forsake
thee, bind them about thy neck, write them upon the Table of thine heart, so
shall thou find favor and good understanding in the sight of God and men. Let
the Precepts and Rules of Sincerity and Charity be fastened in thee, let them
abide with thee as if written upon thy heart: Let them also appear in thy
Practice, and adorn thy Conversation as an Ornament of Gold about thy neck. And
then thou shall be favored and esteemed both by God and men.

Perhaps there is no one sort of good Works more acceptable and pleasing to God
than this. How high an account he sets on it, appears, in that he deems the
contrary to it a reproach to himself, and the practice an honor. 14 Prove. 31.
Our Savior pronounces an express Blessing to this also, Mat. 5. 7. and makes
the greatest Promise that can be imagined or desired, to encourage men to it.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall find mercy. They shall further partake
of the divine goodness Mercy in general is promised; which gives us leave to
expect all the various exercises of it; to expect whatever is necessary to our
Souls, and future Happiness, and what is necessary to the continuance and
Comfort of this present Life. Yea, the Mercy of God does not stop at him that
is merciful, but descends upon his Posterity too, and his Seed is Blessed,
Prove. 37. 26.

Among Men it procures a general Approbation and esteem, every one almost will
love him that appears to love every one; it possesses the Minds of Men so much
in a man's favor, as it conceals a great many faults, and expiates the rest.
Tho every man may have some Enemies, the charitable man shall have the fewest
of any: The unjust Accusations and Detractions of bad men, will provoke more to
the hatred of themselves than of him; And on the contrary, there is nothing
does so much raise the envy of the World against Riches and greatness, as to
see all the Advantages of them terminate in the Possessors; to see them seeking
nothing else but their own ease and Pleasure, and neglecting that good which
they might do to others without any prejudice to themselves: self-love is a
vice as generally hated, as it is practiced among men. He that allows it in
himself, will yet condemn it in another. He that seeks only his own advantage,
will seek it alone.

In the Exercise of your Charity, observe the following Rules.

1. All sorts of men that are able, must reckon themselves bound to give some
Alms of that which is their own. Those that labor for what they have, are not
wholly exempted from this Duty. But are commanded to make it one end of their
Labor, Ephesians. 4. 28.
to purpose and design this, that they may be able to afford some relief to
those that are in want.

2. The ordinary measure of your Charity ought to be taken from your ability,
as is directed, 1 Cor. 9. 6, 7. Every man may commonly consider and allow for
his own necessity, convenience and the decency of his condition, and of his
Childrens after him, and what remains after a moderate Provision for these, he
can properly spare. But in extreme necessity of an Object presented, you ought
sometimes to enlarge your Charity beyond these bounds.

3. Every man that wants, is a fit Object of Charity; except such who make
themselves indigent by Idleness and Wickedness. And it is most Charity to them
to leave them without help, that necessity may cure them. A Good man ought to
be preferred before a bad one, to receive your Charity, because this will
encourage Religion, and he is likely to make the best use of what you give. But
you should not easily entertain any hard thoughts of a poor Neighbor, nor
excuse your selves from assisting him by groundless suspicions. A Soul truly
Charitable is not forward to think evil, as the Apostle intimates, 1 Cor. 13, 5.

4. Do not give your Alms in a proud and contemptuous manner; it is more unkind
to disdain and scorn, than it is a kindness to relieve: You should do it with a
sense that the Providence of God might have made you the Receiver, and him the
Giver; and as you would wish to be treated in that case, you ought so to use
him. To give in a courteous and humble manner, adds a great luster and beauty
to the action, and doubles the benefit: When you have bestowed a Gift, you
ought not to insist much upon the obligation, nor expect that he who has been
beholden to you, should in every thing answer your humor, and be wholly at
your devotion: This looks as if you sold your Gift for his Liberty; as if you
made a bargain, instead of doing an act of Charity. If what you gave, did at
first proceed from kindness, you do in effect call it back again, or require
him to pay for it, perhaps more than it was worth.

5. Give your Alms readily and cheerfully; God and men love a cheerful Giver;
It Is a sign of inward goodness, of a powerful inclination to the good you do,
when it flows readily and freely from you. When an act of Charity comes slowly
from a man, and is unnecessarily delayed, it is to be suspected that it does not
proceed from a Charitable inclination; it is the effect perhaps of the indigent
persons importunity, and not of the givers goodness; it is bestowed for your own
ease and quiet, rather than out of compassion to the poor, and is more a deed
of Charity to your selves, than to him that hardly obtains it.

These are the Rules of Righteousness to be observed in the use of present
enjoyments.

3. In the third and last place, We must use these things with Sobriety, if we
would use them so as not to abuse them: And this requires a due regard to our
selves, to our own interest, and honor, and tranquillity, in the use of this
World. That men do not gratify their Appetites, to the prejudice of the mind
or body, to the loss and consumption of the Estate and Reputation, or to the
neglect of those duties which belong to the place and condition they are in.
Every man ought to consider the Circumstances of his condition, whether he is
high or low, rich or poor, and have many Children or poor Relations, or but few
or none; and according to these he may allow himself a more or less splendid
and plentiful enjoyment of his portion. That measure which is becoming, and in
a manner necessary to one man, may to another be extravagant and excessive:
Besides, the true end of every Creature that we enjoy is to be considered, and
to direct in the use of it; nothing should be used for any other than the right
end, or in such a way as does not promote that, nor to that degree that will
contradict or destroy it.

These general Rules I have but briefly mentioned by themselves, because I
judge it will be most useful to propose them connected and applied to the
particular matters which they ought to direct, since it may consist with
designed brevity. I shall therefore show how Sobriety requires us to regulate
our Diet, Apparel and Recreations.

(1.) For the right government of your selves in Eating and Drinking: Consider,
that the proper end of them is to nourish and strengthen the Body, to maintain
it in life, in health and vigor. Meat and drink are as Oil to the vital flame,
which if they be duly administered, cherish it, but if poured on too fast, they
put it out: A man may kill himself with excessive using the means of life. It Is
a great abuse of these things, to please a wild Appetite either with the
quantity or quality of them, to the prejudice of health; and he that destroys
his health, loses that to which all Pleasures are beholden for their
Pleasantness. All the best enjoyments of outward things cannot prevent, but
that the life will be a burden where this is wanting: This is the pleasant
flavor of Wine, and the necessary Sauce of your Sauces, without which they are
all insipid: It Is a certain folly then to incumber your selves with distempers,
which may a long while torment and trouble you, for the sake of so transient a
pleasure as that is, which attends the swallowing of pleasant Meats and Drinks,
which is enjoyed but in that moment wherein they are passing. A wise man would
endeavor to understand by advice and experience, what measure and rule were
most conducing to his Health, and would ordinarily observe that. It Is lawful,
and of some use at some times, to enjoy these things a little beyond the
measure which is merely necessary, as on public or private Festivals, or to
express the welcome of Friends; but to do this often, or without moderation,
will excite the sensual inclinations, and make them unruly and extravagant; and
this were to assist an Enemy against our selves, and to cherish those lusts
which war against the Soul. The wretch that has steept his brain in the fumes
of excessive drinking, exposes himself to the mercy of every temptation. There
is no folly so very absurd, no sin so great but he may commit it. Rapes,
Murders, Adulteries, have been the too frequent Attendants of Drunkenness. Many
a man has done that in his Wine which has been the torment of his Mind, and his
disparagement all his days. It Is necessary and useful at least to a healthful
and vigorous person, to deny himself sometimes the enjoyment of that measure of
these things which is commonly necessary; to tame the flesh, and keep it in
subjection, that he may the better govern himself.

They use Meat and Drink beyond Moderation, who enjoy them to that degree, that
they stupifie the Mind, and weaken the exercise of Reason. Drinking till Reason
is disturbed, tho but in a small degree, is in that degree an excess. Most
certain it is, that habitual Gluttony and Drunkenness have made some men almost
Fools: Either they have become stupid and dull Fools, or rash and violent ones,
drowned in Phlegm and Sloth, or infatuated with rage and confidence. And in
both cases are they fit to be easily imposed upon, and to become a Prey or a
Tool to greedy and designing Knaves. But the best of the matter is, that honest
men need not much fear any faction that depends upon such reeling Supporters.

You must not spend much thought about what you shall eat or drink, nor much of
your time in these Pleasures: This is more than is necessary to promote the end
of them, and shows the Mind too much in love with the pleasure it self. This is
to make the enjoyment of that your End; and then it will be too much your
Business. You will live as if you had nothing else to do but to eat and drink,
and had no other Preparation for Death to make, but to fatten a Carcass for
the Worms. The only good that an intemperate Person does in the World, is, that
he is industrious to deliver it quickly from an unprofitable burden. There is a
just Woe denounced against those swinish Drunkards, that make it their frequent
practice to spend whole days in drinking, in Isa. 5. 11. Woe unto them that
rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, that continue
until night till the Wine inflames them. Thus is all useful service to God
and men neglected, and the Sinner at length contracts a habit of Idleness, and
becomes utterly negligent of his own most important Interests; he regards not
his Trade, nor his Estate, or Salvation. For this sin, because it was to so
high a degree become common among the Jews, it is said in the 13 th verse of the
forementioned Chapter, that people were punished with captivity and hunger and
thirst.

It Is not safe nor prudent to contrive, that your Provision be ordinarily very
delicate and various: you are the more in danger of excess, and do make your
own Table a Snare to you. The affectation of this, when it is for your own
pleasure, shows a wantonness of the Appetite, that ought not to be allowed, and
too great a love to the pleasures of the Palate. Or else it is the effect of
former excess, which having glutted and weakened the Appetite, it now wants to
be excited. Temperance usually preserves it so well, as to need little
assistance from Art. Nature in health wants little of the exercise of Art, and
it serves only Luxury and Excess.

You must so proportion your expenses upon your Diet, as not to neglect any
other necessities of your own, or those of the Poor, the Church, or the State.
He that is so far a Glutton or a Drunkard, seldom stops there. The extravagant
desire increases the more it is gratified, and will soon grow beyond his ability
to satisfy it; and then he will rob either God or Man to make himself more
able. He will make his Feasts, if he can, with the Spoils of the Church, the
necessary maintenance of oppressed Orphans and Widows, and the fruits of other
men's hard labor: And thus he devours his own reputation too, and makes himself
odious to all Mankind.

(2) You must order your Apparel also by the direction of Sobriety. The proper
ends of clothing our selves, are to cover our Nakedness, and conceal our
shame; to defend and guard the. frail Body from all unkindnesses of weather;
and to distinguish the several ranks and degrees of men, by suitable Ornament.
The sensual minds of men are commonly much influenced by sensible things, and
therefore are splendid or grave habits used to procure that respect and
veneration which is due to those Persons that wear them. The common abuse of
Apparel, and that from which all the Irregularities concerning it do proceed,
is too much affectation of Ornament, upon the account of that respect which is
commonly paid to it in the world. Those that least understand true excellency,
and give the greatest Veneration to external ornament in others, are wont to be
most concerned about this for themselves. They take less care to adorn and
accomplish their Minds with Knowledge, Wisdom and Virtue, than to adorn their
outside with fine and gaudy Clothes. Contrary to that advice of the Apostle in
this case, which he gives, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. Let your adorning be (says he) not
that of the outside, of plaiting the hair, and of wearing gold, or of putting
on Apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, in a meek and quiet Spirit, which in the sight of God is of great
value. It Is of more importance surely to have those excellencies which are in
esteem with God, than those which are only valued by the weakest of men. How
little must it deserve of time, cost and pains, to obtain the admiration of
Fools. A wise man, tho he will not slight altogether this sensual means of
procuring respect from the ignorant and vulgar, because that respect may in
some cases be necessary to himself, and useful for them; yet he will not be
much concerned about ornament, because none but such men will value and respect
him at all the more for that.

Since this is all that Ornament serves for, he will not to be fine, neglect
the necessary defense of his body. He will consider, that the rude Elements pay
no respect to a Fashion, and therefore will not expose himself to be hurt by
them, for the unprofitable respect of foolish men.

He will not think that the matter of dressing can deserve to be the sole
business of himself and a servant, for several hours, and to be managed with a
curious accuracy and care.

It Is doubtless a great folly for a man to employ a great part of his Estate in
the provision of his Apparel. The necessity of the body is served with a small
expense; and if you will value the esteem of men, it is wisest to obtain by good
and generous actions the estimation of the best and wisest men: This is a more
valuable reputation than you can purchase by great expenses on your Clothing.

He that affects to be fine above his quality and degree, that he may have the
greater respect, will find none at all: Some will be as foolish as himself, and
strive to be equal to him; and all others will despise and condemn him, either
for his Pride, or Prodigality. Custom is the common Rule that prescribes what
it becomes every man's quality and degree to wear. But since always some of
every sort are so foolish as to endeavor to equal their Superiors, and in so
prodigal an Age as ours is, the Custom allows much more expense upon the
Apparel than is just or necessary; you ought to make those of your own sort
your Pattern, who are the most frugal and moderate men. Together with the
Custom of the Times, consider your own Circumstances; what is required by other
just occasions of expense, and let the Custom be observed only so far, as
Prudence and Justice will permit. Common practice will not justify any Vice in
the sight of God, tho it too often does so in the opinions of men. And if it
displeases him, that others spend a great part of their Estates in the Ornament
of their Bodies, it will displease him if you do so too. If a great measure of
what is spent in this purpose might be spared from this, and better employed,
it ought to be so, and the giver of it expects that it should be. And when you
must render an account how you have used the enjoyments that he gave, you will
appear, if you have been Prodigal in this matter, to have been foolish if not
unjust Stewards.

(3.) Let your Recreations also be regulated by Sobriety.

The goodness of God allows men the use of these for the refreshment of body
and mind: The powers of both are finite, and may be wearied and wasted with
continual labor; we may divert our selves therefore sometimes from business,
to be the better prepared to return to it again; but it is quite to alter the
nature and design of recreations, to make a business of them, to spend all your
time in running from one idle pleasure to another: 1 Timothy 5. 6.
He that lives in Pleasure, is dead while he lives; He is as useless to the
World as a dead Carcass, and it may be infects others too by a bad example, and
he is as bad as dead to himself, in regard that he does nothing toward his own
true Interest: He neglects all his most important affairs; He becomes daily
more and more a Slave to the malicious Devil, by virtue of some sins that grow
confirmed and habitual; he swims down the stream of sensual Pleasures, toward
the dead Sea of Pain and Perdition. In this careless kind of Life, he is only
busy to destroy himself: He that gives himself up to sensual pleasure, does
divert himself indeed, but it is from Wisdom, from Piety, from Virtue, from
everlasting Happiness. Oh consider how unprofitable a life this is! what
advantage have you from past days that have been spent in Pleasure? if you are
sick of the folly, and intend to live more wisely for the future, you have
gained then some advantage by them, but if you are hardened in the mad course,
and inclined still to go on, you are much the worse for them. All wise and good
men grieve to see a young person wholly addicted to Pleasure, they know the
bitter Repentance that will at one time or other follow this; they foresee the
torments of Mind, that early or late it will end in; they know that every
extravagance which you are now guilty of, will one day prove a sharp Sword to
stab and wound you.

Recreations must not be used as Pastimes, there can be no need of any such
thing to us, who have but a little while to live, and much to do; can you not
tell what to do with your time? is it so easy a matter to conquer vicious
inclinations, to wean your affections from their propensity to sensible things,
to furnish your minds with every Virtue; that you can do all this, and have too
much time? if besides this you have any public business to attend, you have
more need to redeem your time than to throw it away; if you may hereafter have
such business, it is your wisdom to improve the opportunity of your present
leisure, for the preparing your self to manage it to your comfort and honor.

Let the Recreations you choose be only such as are lawful; there are as many
allowed as you can want, enough to spend more time about than you can well
afford; do not venture therefore upon any that have certainly sin in them; 1
Cor. 13. 6.
Rejoice not in Iniquity; make not any sins of other men the matter of your
delight or diversion, it is contrary to the rule of Charity to be pleased with
that which is so hurtful and mischievous to the guilty person; it is the
Pleasure of a Devil to tempt and draw men into sin, and then laugh at them; do
not make your selves merry with sacred things, they are not matters to be
jested with, which ought to be reverenced: it is not necessary either to the
Mind or the Body, nor certainly safe, and therefore not prudent to use those
Recreations, concerning which Divines are in dispute whether they be lawful or
no, such as they are which rely wholly upon chance, as Dice and the like: in a
doubtful Case, where no necessity compells, it is too great a boldness not to
abstain from such things.

Choose those Recreations that are least offensive to the Pious and Wise, and
avoid all that are not of good Report: They I think are justly censured, who
frequent public Dancing Schools, and Balls, and especially Masqueraders. It Is
no precise moroseness to censure those who need not disguise or conceal
themselves, if they intended to do nothing shameful: You must value and be
concerned to maintain a Reputation, or you are lost; there is little hope of
that man, that he will ever be good and truly honorable, who is grown
regardless of this; it is a wonder if he does not run into all manner of
wickedness, when the restraint of Shame is taken off.

It Is great imprudence, to use those Recreations that are dangerous temptations
to wickedness. Since our power to resist sin is very weak, and we are naturally
more inclined to comply with than resist it; we ought by flying the temptations
and occasions, to seek that safety which our own strength cannot give us. To
young persons the description and representation of some sins is a Temptation,
especially is it mischievous, when in the representation the guilty person is
introduced wittily pleading for his sin, and justifying or extenuating it for
tho what is wittily spoken, is not always the truth, yet it is generally apt
to impose upon young persons that are inconsiderate, and have not resolutely
fixed in themselves good Principles. You cannot say there is no harm in going
often to the Playhouse, if you become thereby more addicted to sensual
Pleasures, which are there represented with all possible advantages to charm
and allure; unhappy Youth is too much inclined to these without such help: You
do actually receive hurt by seeing Plays, if Lust be inflamed, or Pride in
Apparel increased, or you learn Dissimulation, and become stronger inclined to
any of the Vices of the Age; if you learn there to despise Morality,
Government, Laws and Religion, by seeing the errors and defects of
Magistrates, and wise and good men represented and derided: Humane nature is in
all instances unperfect, and the greatest and best men are not without some
faults, but to represent those of Magistrates and Ministers upon a public
Theater, to be scorned and laughed at, has commonly the mischievous event of
making Magistracy and Ministry vile, and the Age licentious.

Do not play out of Love to Money, or merely to win of others; this is the
Trade of common Cheats, and tends to make you such; this gratifies a covetous
humor, and cherishes it, and is a relaxation that binds you faster in the
bonds of Iniquity. Avoid too the contrary extreme to this, and be not willing
to lose more than is convenient: you must not neglect to provide things
necessary, and convenient, and decent for your self and your family. Be not so
unjust and cruel, as to throw away your Creditors money, your Servants wages,
your Childrens bread and Inheritance, or your Wives Portion, to enjoy so small,
so unnecessary a pleasure as that of play. How barbarous is he, that will make
so many miserable, without any necessity or real advantage to himself. That you
may not tho unwillingly, throw away too much at play, it should be your
resolution not to venture too much: Venture no more than you may be willing to
lose, and if that be gone, command your self at that time to proceed no
further. Gaming does often insensibly entice men into excess, in the time they
spend at it, and in the Money they expose: If they win, they are encouraged to
both these, in hopes that good luck will still favor them: If they lose, they
are tempted to go on with hope to turn their fortune, and recover their losses:
To recover a great deal at once, they are tempted to expose a great deal more,
and so frequently lose more to too much lost already. It requires more wisdom
for a man to govern himself well in these matters, than is commonly found in
those that are much addicted to them.

Take heed that you be not transported with passion in your play. All excess in
it may follow, if you have once given the Reins to passion; and besides, you
will be apt if you are crossed, to blaspheme God, and quarrel with your
Neighbor. That is too dear a recreation, and much more sad in the consequence
than it can be pleasant in the enjoyment, wherein you offend God, and hurt your
Neighbor and your own Soul.

Thus I have finished the first and chief part of this design, and shown you
wherein the right use of the things of this World does consist.

I now proceed to the second thing intended; which is, to urge those Motives
included in the Apostles argument here, to persuade you so to use this world as
not abusing it: His Argument for this is, The fashion of this World passes
away; and the Motives this includes, are these following.

1. It Is possible your present enjoyments may fail and be lost, before the end
of your life: There is hardly any good thing of this World that men enjoy,
which they can be assured to retain in possession all their days.

We cannot be certain of the continuance of our Riches. Job, that on one day
was the Wealthiest man in all the East Country in his time, became by the
next, miserably poor. How many like Instances does History present us with? And
how many more might our own observation in a few years tell us, if we make
observation? If you are Rich in Treasures, Thieves may steal them; if in Ships
and Merchandise, the stormy Sea may swallow them, or they may be seized by
Pirates or adverse Nations: If in Buildings, or a large stock of rich Goods,
Fire may consume them; if in Lands, they may be wrested from you by Tricks of
Law, and the knavery of corrupted Judges and Lawyers. The negligence or
imprudence of Servants may ruin the Master, or if they are dishonest and
wicked, they may draw from him to enrich themselves; especially, when the whole
management of an Estate is committed to them. The Providence of God may blast a
man's Estate, so that it shall wast he knows not how, nor how to prevent it.
Riches, which you may hope will be a defense against Adversity, may expose you
to it. Some have been miserable, and some have lost their lives by being rich:
They are often a Prey to violence and injustice, when poorer Persons are let
alone. In the Invasions of Enemies, the Palaces of the great are rifled, while
the poor lonely Cottage may stand secure; and they themselves are chiefly
sought for and killed, Jer. 52. 16.
or made Captives, while the Poor of the Land escape by being despised.

What constancy is there in the Honors of this World, which depend upon the
changeable inclinations and esteem of men? Has not the World often seen the
greatest Favorites of Princes become the Objects of their hatred and scorn;
undermined and overthown by the detractions first, and then the accusations of
envious men; who after they have shone a little while with the borrowed luster
of their Princes favor, have gone down Eclipsed, and blushed perhaps in their
own blood at their setting.

Stet quicunque volet potens
Aulae culmine lubrico.
Let him who lists ascend the tottering Seat of Courtly Grandeur, said he, in
the person of another, that found it a tottering seat by his own experience:
Seneca Thyest. Act. 2. Chor.
As for popular applause and an honorable esteem among the vulgar, that is
gained by many actions, and may be lost by one: If a man cannot lose a noble
Title while he lives, yet the Respect and Honor due to it, and all the other
advantages of it are usually lost when his Estate is thrown away: He that lacks
bread, may honor himself, but few besides him will do it. It Is ingeniously
said by one, Du Moulin of Contentment.
That Honor without Riches, is like Hops without Poles to support them aloft;
It must creep upon the ground, and is exposed to be trod upon by contempt.

Now, if these things are gone away from you while you live, all the Pleasure,
the Convenience of them is vanished too; and then, what will the wretched man do
to be happy, who had set his chief affections on these things? What will he do
for delights, when all that he delighted in is gone? How burdensome and
melancholy will the remaining part of his life be! How often will he sadly
think, how happy he has been, how miserable he is! Should we trust in uncertain
Riches, and not rather in the living God, when they may fail us, he cannot!
Shall we lay any confidence on friends, when the minds of men are so mutable?
Is not this to lean on a broken Reed, which may fail our trust, and would us
with disappointment? What shame and confusion will seize him in an adverse
condition, who in his Prosperity behaved himself haughtily toward others! How
uneasy will it be to his lofty Spirit, to see himself the scorn of the meanest
abjects! And yet certainly no man is so likely to meet with contempt in a low
condition, as he that practiced it in a higher. It should be a provocation to
brave actions, to consider; Perhaps my Fortune may not long continue my
advantages for the doing of them. A generous and public Spirit, a lover of
mankind, would say, Since the enjoyment of these things is uncertain, I will do
all the good with them to mankind that I can whilst I yet retain them; I will
industriously set my self to this, lest I lose my advantages, and die without
doing any good in my time. If a man has exercised much compassion to others in
their Misery, he will find much in his own; if he has been injurious, and an
oppressor, every one will retaliate, and the same measure that he gave to
others, shall be meted to him again. If by good and virtuous actions a man has
acquired the esteem and friendship of good and virtuous men, they will not
desert him in his adversity, but will join their assistance to comfort or raise
him up; but if all his Friends and Familiars, and all that esteem him, are men
of no virtue, of debaucht Principles and Manners, they will soon forsake him
when adversity comes: The cold blasts of that will very easily cool the love of
such men; and tho they crowd his Table with their company while it is covered
with rich plenty, he may eat his morsels in melancholy solitude when they are
scanty and course. How uneasy will Poverty be to him that lived in boundless
pleasure; who could deny himself in nothing, but was wont to gratify every
desire, and now has nothing to enjoy? He is possessed with high and raging
desires, and has no means to satisfy them. A temperate man will much more
easily endure such a change, who has been wont sometimes to cross his own
desires, and by that means has kept them moderate. It Is certainly the most
effectual course that you can take, to make Adversity tolerable, to use your
Prosperity in Godliness, Justice and Sobriety.

(2.) Your death will shortly call you out of this World, and from the
enjoyment of present things. Thus the fashion of this World passes away.
Eccles. 1. 4
One Generation goes, and another comes. Who is he that lives, and shall not
see death? (says the Psalmist,) Psalm. 84. 48. The eyes that now read this
shall perish, whatever vigor or brightness there may be in them at present:
It Is now your turn to enjoy, perhaps the Riches and Honors which were possessed
before by your Ancestors: They after a while went off the Stage of this mortal
state, and so must you, and leave those things to be enjoyed by others When a
man dies he shall carry nothing away, Psalm. 49. 17.
His glory shall not descend after him: This increases with respect to us, the
uncertainty of the duration of our present condition; Since all your pleasures
fly away with life, who can assure himself any certain continuance of the
enjoyment? It may endure for a few years, perhaps but for a few days or hours
longer. How many things are able to cut the slender thread of humane life! How
easily is a man killed? A hair, a little bone, a fly, the weakest thing in
nature can easily dispatch frail man! How many ill accidents are we always
liable to, besides a multitude of Distempers! What can be more uncertain than
life, which is so weak, and beset with so many Enemies? If it be suffered to
continue as long as Nature, not abused, but carefully cherisht, can maintain
it, it is but short: The flower Life quickly withers, if it be not cut down: It
must needs be short, when it makes continual have to its end: when there is
never the least stop put to the flying days; the flying days hurry us upon
their rapid wings, with restless speed into Eternity: A part of life flies away
every minute, and the remainder grows less; while you are jovial and careless,
your time is wasting, it steals unheeded from you; precious time, which once
gone can never be recalled; a life, a year, an hour spent can never be recalled.

Thus are you never far off, and yet always proceeding toward that important
period, when you must bid adieu to Greatness and Honor, adieu to Flattery and
Complements, to soft Beds, gilt Chambers, plenteous Tables, gaudy Ornaments;
adieu to your stately Houses, beauteous Gardens, large Possessions, shining
heaps of Treasure; adieu to pleasant Music, to sprightly Wine, jovial Company,
brisk Dances, and all the admired Charms of Youth and Beauty: Eccl. 12. 5.
Man goes to his long home, and the Mourners go about the streets: The gaudy
Rooms are hung with melancholy Sable, and his Friends lay aside Ornaments, and
cover themselves with black; he is carried away to the dark silent Grave, to
become neglected dust, and a cold unbeautiful Clod; his place here shall know
him no more for ever; he goes to Eternity, never, never to return again to
time: His Walks, his Houses, his Parks, his Shop, the Exchange, the places of
his Business, or his pleasure shall know him again no more for ever; Oh that
men were wise, that they would understand this, and consider their latter end!

Since the enjoyment of these things is transitory, and will be short, should
we place our Affections upon them? Good things are usually of greater or less
esteem with us, according to their durableness; since therefore Life with its
Pleasures are not durable, it is not worthy of a great Value. If we could but
frame a lively conception of the shortness of this Life, how should we despise
the Pleasures of it? Vain are the Riches of the World, which are useful no
longer than while we live here; Vain are all the Honors and Applauses of the
Age, which cannot rescue us from Deaths dark Prison, nor attend us to the other
World: What account would you make of a fine house founded on a Quick-sand?
what account of Mirth and Jollity in a small Cock-boat on the wide Ocean? what
account of a Pleasant Dream? such alas is all the Prosperity of this World:
Open then thine eyes, thou deluded admirer of these things, and take a view of
the Eternal Pleasures and Glories of the World to come; see what Joys, what
delights, what bright Mansions, what a blessed Society do invite thy affections
upward; the Infinite, Eternal, Unchangeable God, thy chief good, invites thy
Affections, he offers himself to be thy everlasting Portion, and exceeding
great Reward; set thy affections then on things above, and let thy dearest
treasure be in Heaven; spend thy time more in striving to attain these, than in
the enjoyment of present things; conclude it most absurd, to value things
temporal above the eternal, and to choose the frail pleasures of this life, when
they stand in competition with those that are ever lasting. To make your
passage out of this world comfortable, you must be secure of Comforts in the
other; you will be glad to leave a Life so allayed with frequent vexations, as
this is, to every man, when you have good hopes to enjoy that Happiness which
knows no mixture of trouble: Since Death is a common Necessity which every man
must obey, it is the Wisdom and Interest of every one to provide that he may
undergo it with Comfort.

Since the end of all your present Pleasures is certain and near, live piously,
righteously, and soberly in the enjoyment of them, that ye may not when that
time comes, be troubled with a Guilty Mind. Oh how intolerable will it be to
bear at once the loss of all your present Comforts, with the pangs of a
painful death, and the torments of a despairing remorse! How sad a state will
you think your self in, when you are summoned to depart hence, and a rouzed
Conscience presents to your view a long Catalogue of enormous Crimes! Will you
not then wish you had lived a regular Life, when you find your self going to
receive what a Life of wickedness has deserved. Oh how ungrateful now will be
the remembrance of unlawful Pleasures, of your guilty excesses, and mad
carelessness of your immortal Souls! Now the sting of sinful Pleasures is
severely felt, and they wound and torment the Sinner more deep and sensibly
than ever they pleased him before; it torments him to think that for such
things he should cast away himself, and incurr the eternal Wrath of God; and he
is seized with dread and horror, at the thoughts of what is likely for the
future to become of him; he fears he shall be banished by the angry Justice of
God to some dismal abode, where no small Comfort will ever come near him; that
he shall change his merry Companions for the cursed Society of damned Spirits,
to dwell among them a weak, scorned, abused Stranger, to be vexed without pity
by malicious Creatures, whose own Torments increase their rage; he would pray
it may be for Mercy, but his own remembered Cruelty dashes his hopes; he showed
no mercy in his Life, but was deaf to the wants and entreaties of the Poor,
while he spent his wealth in Riot and Luxury; he would cry to God to spare his
Life a little longer, and try how well he would manage the reprieve, but that
he calls to mind how deaf himself has been to the Divine Commands, how he has
despised the Promises and Threats of God, and neglected all the warnings and
instructions that were sent to him: Prove. 1. 24. to the end*
And indeed, Since he has hated Instruction, and despised Reproof, to the last,
God will now laugh at his Calamity, and despise him when these fears come upon
him: The season of abused Mercy is at an end, and deserved Vengeance begins and
now to have been a holy and a good man, would more avail than to have worn a
Crown and wielded a Scepter: Now the greatest of men is rejected, if he be an
impenitent Sinner; nothing but righteousness and holiness can find any favor
with the righteous and holy God: Now will he that was injurious to men, find
the great Sovereign of the World a severe avenger of all wrongs; and he that
abused his enjoyment of the Creatures and gifts of God, shall be banished from
the Happiness of enjoying God himself; this is the direful end of a wicked
Life, and thus will the Wretch be used at last, who abuses his Portion here.

(3.) By the abuse of your present enjoyments, you increase the mutability of
them, at least with respect to your selves: You make your changeable Condition
here more liable to change, if you do not use it well; a man must use a vessel
of Glass with more care than he need to do one of Iron: The loss of your
enjoyments during Life, or by Death, may be caused or hastened by the abuse of
them.

That Estate which might afford a man comfort and pleasure through a long life,
a few years of extravagant expenses will make an end of: the deepest Bag has a
bottom; and you may observe by other men, that the greatest Estate, if it be
not wisely and moderately used, may in a little time be thrown away. The
Glutton and the Drunkard shall come to Poverty; and Drowzieness shall cloth a
man with Rags, says the wise man, Prove. 23. 21. Again, By means of a whorish
Woman a man is brought to a morsel of bread, Prove. 6. 26. He shall be served
just as the Prodigal in the Parable; first gulled and drawn dry of all his
Wealth, and to that purpose may be highly flattered, and carefully pleased and
humored, and when he is poor shall be despised as much, and kicked out of
Doors, and then like him he may have the honor to serve Swine, or be preferred
to dine with them. These sins, when a man becomes addicted to them, do
naturally bewitch him with a strange carelessness of all his Affairs, and tend
to make him most lavishly prodigal. He cannot keep his expense upon them within
any other bounds than necessity forces: As long as his own Estate will
administer to him, or others will lend, these wild sins can find occasion for
expense.

The excessive and intemperate use of sensual pleasures, weakens and gluts the
Appetite, and he that so uses them, can never have so high a Relish and sense
of them as he may that is moderate. Foolish men through their greedy desire of
Pleasure, destroy the thing they love: The Rich Glutton cannot take so much
delight in his highest delicacies, as the hungry Labourer does in his course
fare.

By Excess too, men destroy themselves; they turn food into Poison, and bring
themselves to misery by their pleasures. It blasts the health of their body,
and fills them with uneasy distempers; and hereby their lives are made
miserable, and their death is hastened: After a few tedious and groaning years
they drop betimes into their Graves. Sobriety and moderation are the most
effectual means to cherish the health and life. But a man must begin and
practice them from his youth, that they may have this effect: It Is late to
begin it when you have corrupted the blood, and evaporated the spirits, and
contracted distempers: the Jewel health is much more easily kept, than
recovered when it is once lost.

Poverty, Sickness and Death, the great Enemies of your Pleasures, are the
natural Consequents of the intemperate use of them. But besides, these evils
may be expected to follow this, from the just judgment of God. As he is highly
offended at every abuse of his gifts, he may testify that displeasure by
taking them away from you, or you from them. Consider, careless Sinner, that
you continually provoke the righteous God, to put an end to all your Mirth and
Pleasure; every irregularity you are guilty of deserves this, and perhaps does
hasten intended Vengeance: The more you abuse the Patience of God, the more
unlikely do you make the continuance of it.

Now consider these things but a little, and the folly of a lawless intemperate
Life will most plainly appear; is it not an unparalleled folly to purchase a
little wild Mirth at the dear rate of a miserable remainder of Life, and a
hasty Death? Alas how little of the Pleasures of this Life do you enjoy, who
are so soon overtaken by Distempers! what delight can a Man take in his
dainties, when his sick Stomach nauseates them? what Pleasure is there in
Music when the Head aches, or is affected with a Frenzy or a Lethargy? what
delight has the Sinner in his most pleasant Sins, when he lies languishing in a
Bed, his feeble Limbs not able to support him, and there he is rotting alive?
the remembrance of them is rather vexatious than pleasant, when the pains he
feels were contracted by them. How little of the Pleasures of Life do they
enjoy, that soon dye, are cut off in the midst of their days, and carried out
to be laid in the Dust? Methinks if there were no other Argument for
Temperance, the Love of Pleasure should persuade to it: Consider too how sad
and uncomfortable that Death will be, which you are conscious that your selves
have hastened; when you think how many years longer in a course of nature you
might have lived, and now are called hastily away from all that you have loved
and delighted in.

Thus do careless Sinners pursue their own Misery and Vexation, when they allow
themselves a boundless gratification of their Lusts, and seem to be only in the
pursuit of Pleasure; let it therefore be your resolution and care, so to use
this World as not abusing it.

Now I have finished both the intended parts of this Discourse; I have shown you
how to behave your selves in the use of your present enjoyments toward God,
and toward your Neighbor, and your selves; and the motive which the Spirit of
God thought worthy to persuade men thus to use these things, I have
illustrated; what success this Discourse has upon the Reader, I know not, but
doubtless the great God observes; either it will reclaim or withhold thee from
the Vices of a mad Age, or make thee more guilty in following them, after
having received another Exhortation to the contrary: Thou do not in tend
perhaps to run into the great extravagances mentioned, but yet art unwilling to
observe the strictness of Rule; but consider, that sin is very apt to increase,
that the small degrees of transgression allowed make way for greater, and they
make it just with God, and provoke him to give thee up to such a high degree of
sin, as may severely punish its self. Consider, this general Rule which I have
explained and urged, is the Command of Almighty God, thou can not willingly
break it without Offense to him; it is of no less consequence to observe or
slight it, than to enjoy his favor or incurr his displeasure: Oh think how
easily he can crush the bold offending Worm! think what a danger he is in who
stands exposed by his Crimes to the Divine Vengeance! Dread the invincible
thunder of his Wrath! Think what Vengeance is due from God to him who makes his
Advantages to do much good, the means to do much evil; who contradicts the end
of God in the Gifts that he has bestowed on him, and has been only the more
wicked, for the Bounty of God toward him; who to gratify his own wanton and
unnecessary Appetites, has often Offended; what severe Punishments must such a
Sinner deserve? Consider that this general rule directs you to use your Portion
with Credit and Comfort, to make your Life as happy in what you have, as that
can make it; to improve your Portion to the best advantage; It directs to such
a course as will render your passage out of Life easy and cheerful, attended
with a quiet mind, with the applauses of a good Conscience, and all your good
Actions will then afford you comfortable thoughts and reflections; It directs
you so to use your Portion, as to make your Death as much lamented by others,
as welcome to your self, so as to embalm your Name, and make your Memory blessed
and praised to Posterity. This rule directs you to such an use of your present
enjoyments, as will be matter of Consolation to you in the other World, matter
of eternal satisfaction and joy, when the good deeds which you wrought here,
shall there be eternally rewarded.

I think then the Reader may easily conclude, I have been pleading with him in
his own behalf, for himself and his own interest; I have been urging nothing
but what Self-love together with Wisdom would choose: Who would think it should
be a Presumption in me to imagine, that in such a case I shall prevail with
many? can it be a difficult thing to persuade Men to that which is their own
Interest? but alas, it does too often prove so! Blinded by Lust and Temptation;
men will not see their true Interest in the clearest discovery that can be made
of it. God alone can effectually open the eyes of men to understand that, and
incline their Wills to choose and pursue it; to him therefore I commit the
Reader with this Prayer.

O Thou that art the Father of Lights, and who workest in us both to will and
to do, according to thy good Pleasure; grant I beseech thee, that the mighty
power of thy Spirit may attend these Instructions, and effectually persuade
every person that reads them, to receive and practice them; do thou teach them
to deny all ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live Godly, Righteously, and
Soberly in this present World: Let these Rules be planted in many Hearts, and
from thence be abundantly fruitful in good works, to their Happiness and thy
Glory, the great ends of my ambitious but weak endeavors: Grant this, Oh Lord,
for the sake of Jesus Christ our Savior, to whom with the Father and the
Spirit be ascribed Kingdom, Power and Glory for ever: Amen.

FINIS.

