A DIARY Of the SIEGE of LUXEMBOURG BY THE French KING's FORCES, Under the
Command of the MARSHALL de CREQVI: Containing a full Account of all that
passed in the Siege and Surrendry of the Town.

Together with A Complete Description of the Town, as it stood Besieged*
exactly Engraven on a Copper-Plate.

Done out of FRENCH.

LONDON: Printed by J. G. for D. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar; and are to be Sold by W. Davis in Amen Corner. 1684.

map of Luxembourg

The Explication of the CUT, representing the Town and Siege of Luxembourg.
1. THE Church of St. Nicholas. 2. The Cloisters of the Friars Minims. 3. The
Fauxbove, or old Castle of Munster. 4. The River stopped by the French, to cut
off the Water from the Town. 5. A Causey, which was afterward Blown up by the
French. 6. An Horn work before the Bastion of Barlemont. 7. Counterscarps and
Palizadoes before the Ditches of the Town. 8. The Ramparts of the Town. 9. The
Assault of the French before the Counterscarps. 10. Mines sprang by those of
the Town with good success. 11. The Rampart before Barlemont. 12. The Marshall
de Crequi. 13. The Prince de Conti, and de la Roche-Sur-Yon. 14. Monsieur
Vauban Ingenier. 15. Mines covered by the French. 16. Batteries of Bombs and
Cannons. 17. The Trenches of the French. 18. The goiug forth of the Prince de
Chimay. 19. Works before the Town, the most part mined. 20. The Circumvallation
of the French Army.
A Diary of The Siege of LUXEMBOURG by the French Kings Forces, under the
Command of the Marshall de Crequi: Containing a full Account of all that
passed in the Siege and Surrendry of the Town of LUXEMBOURG.
LVXEMBOVRG, the Metropolis of the Duchy, bearing the same Name, is finely
seated, commodious, of a great Compass, and very strong: being also
indifferently full of Houses. The principal Church is Dedicated to St.
Nicholas. There is besides a very fair Convent; which as it is said, the
Inscriptions also upon the Walls thereof testifying as much, was one of the
first of St. Francis's Order, built in his life time. This Town has undergone
many Misfortunes, having upon all occasions of War, served for the Butt,
whereat Fortune discharged her Arrows. It was in the year 1542. taken and
Plundered by the French; under the Command of the Duke of Orleans, Son to the
great King Francis the 1st. In the Year 1543. it was again taken and Plundered
by the French, and was Finally on the fourth of June in this present Year 1684.
brought under the Dominion of the French.

The Town of Luxembourg is built upon a Rock, washed almost on every side by a
little River, called Alsiette, which comes from the South, and having almost
encompassed that place, continues its course toward the North. The part of the
Rock environed by the River is exceeding steep, and needs no other Defense but
its natural Situation: so that they have scarce built any Fortifications on
those sides. The side not environed by the River, which looks toward the West,
is Fortified with four Bastions cut into the Rock, as is also the Ditch, which
is very deep. There are before these Bastions, Countergards, Half-Moons and
Ravelins cut into the Rock, as are also the Ditches that cover them. Before all
these Works there are two open ways with their Causeys; the first whereof is
defended by four Redouts of Stone in the Angles, bearing out from the
Counterscarp. This side which is not environed by the River, was the only place
whereby the Town could be assaulted, all the rest being found too steep; and of
this side the part attacked was the new Gate, which is on the North, near the
place where the River begins to turn away from the Town.

The French Army commanded by the Marshall de Crequi invested the Place April
the 28th. 1684. New-style. Some days were spent in preparitives for the Siege,
and taking their Quarters.

The Head Quarters were settled from the height of Bambuche to the Village of
Merle: and there were quartered eight Squadrons and Batallions, with four
Companies of Cannoniers. The Quarters of the Count du Plessis, the Marquess de
Genlis, and the Sieur de Joyeuse Lieutenant Generals were thus ordered, the
first from Linsing to the Hill of the Abbey of Bonnevoye with Seven Squadrons,
and Eleven Batallions; the second from the same Hill to the stream which goes
up toward the Village of Hant, with five Batallions; the third from the River
of Alsiette, as you go back again up to Hant, as far as the Village of
Homeldange, and there were Posted eight Squadrons, and six Batallions. There
were also quartered in the bottom of Homeldange two Squadrons of Dragoons of
the Baron de Hasfeld, with two Batallions of Fugeliers, and the Company of
Miners and Gunners.

May the 8th. the Marshall de Crequi gave Orders to open their Trenches.

The Count du Plessys, Lieutenant General for the day, the Count de Broglio,
Marshall de Camp, and the Duke de la Ferte, Brigadier of Foot, Posted
themselves between five and six in the Evening on the Hills of our Lady of
Consolation, with two Batallions of Compaign, which had at their Head the Baily
Colbert, Colonel of that Regiment, one Batallion of Enguien, and one of la
Ferte. The two first Batallions marched in a Bottom behind the Chapel, and two
others on their Lefthand, upon the Reverse of these Hills. The Count de Talart,
Brigadier of Horse, came upon the same Hills with the Horse under his Command,
which were four Hundred, to Guard the Trenches, having before him two Hundred
Foot to make use of, in case the Besieged should make any Sally. At Nine in the
Evening they opened about half a Musket Shot from the Counterscarp, a Trench,
parallel to the attacked side of the place, about five Hundred Toises long, and
this work was carried on two several ways, the one by the Chapel on the
Left Hand of the Head Quarters; and the other on the side of Paffendal, on the
other side of the opposite place. The Pioneers of the Attack of Champaign,
carried on the work from the Right to the Left, within fifty or sixty Toises of
the Chapel of Miracles, which is about a Pistol-shot from the Counterscarp;
and those of the Attack of la Ferte and Enguien carried on the work from the
Left to the Right: and these works met about the Midway. The Sieur de Vauban,
Marshall of the Kings Camps and Armies, who had been at Noon to view the
Counterscarp, and who had the inspection over these two Attacks, caused to be
traced this Night two Batteries, with Lines of Communication to the Trench,
upon a rising Ground, about thirty or forty Toises on this side the Chapel, in
respect of the Besiegers. The Marquess de Renti, Marshall de Camp, made a
false Attach upon the height of the Fauxbourg of Gromp, or of the Basse-Ville,
with a Batallion of Conde; The Marquess de Crenan made another by the bottom of
the Abbey of Bonnevoy with five Hundred detached men: and at the same time there
was a Battery traced upon the Hill of Paffendal, where there was a Batallion of
Orleans, with a Detachment of two Hundred Men. The Prince de Conti, and the
Prince de la Roche, Sur Yon his Brother, were present at the opening of the
Trenches, and passed the Night there. The Besieged for above five hours made
not one Shot, but about two in the Morning they began to Fire very briskly at
us with their Muskets. There was not however above eight or nine of our Men
Killed and Wounded, which were of the Regiment of Campaign. About Break of Day
they played also smartly upon us with their Cannon, which yet had not any
considerable Effect. Some Horse Sallied out of the Town about four or five in
the Morning, but hastily Retreated at the first Firing of the Detachments,
which were commanded to shelter the Laborers. They persisted all that day to
play upon us with their Cannon, but still without much success. On our side
they continued to work on the Batteries.

The 9th. there was a Man stopped, who endeavored to get into Luxembourg: and
there was found about him a Passport from the Marquess de Grana, Dated August
the 28th, with Bills of Exchange for five and thirty Thousand Florins, payable
in Luxembourg, and many Letters in Ciphers. We knew also by the same way, that
there were several Officers who designed to get into the Town, to join with
their Regiments there.

In the Evening the Marquess de Genlis, Lieutenant General for the day, and the
Sieur de Josseaux, Brigadier of Foot, relieved the Count du Plessis, and the
Duke de la Ferte, who had the Right hand of the great Attach: and the Sieur
d'Erlac, Marshall de Camp relieved the Count de Broglio, who had the Left. Two
Batallions of Navarre relieved on the Right the two of Compagne, and the
Batallions of Vaubecourt, and Conti, at the head of which was the Prince de
Conti, accompanied by the Prince de la Roche, Sur Yon in the quality of a
Volunteer, relieved on the left, that of Enguien, and that of la Ferte. The
Besieged (at the time we went to relieve the Trenches) set Fire to the Houses
of a part of the Fauxbourg of Paffendal: they quitted also a Mill, which was
but fifty paces from it, having prepared a Mine to blow it up, (in the belief
they had, that our men would seize thereon:) but we went not thither, and the
Mine sprang without the success they expected. During the night we carried on a
second Trench, parallel to the first of the great Attack, within sixty Toises
of the covered Fore way of the Place: and the Communications were made without
any of the workmens being Killed or wounded, altho'the Enemy Fired Stiffly upon
them with their Muskets. The Sieur de Montmeillant, Captain in the Royal
Regiment, and the Sieur de Favigny, Captain and Aid Major of Piemont, and four
or five Lieutenants were slightly wounded. We continued also to work diligently
on the Batteries raised on the Hills of our Lady of Consolation. The Besieged
about break of day played briskly with their Cannon; but we had not above six
or seven Soldiers slain.

The 10th. Two of our Batteries of seven pieces of Cannon each, began to play
about eight in the Morning with great success; and a Battery of Nine
Mortar-pieces, which had been put n order by the Sieur de Vigny began about
Noon o cast its Bombs against a Platform of the Bastion on the Right; and we
dismounted three Pieces of a Battery of four Pieces, which the Besieged had
erected there, and from whence they Fired very vigorously. The same day a
Battery of five Pieces, which was upon the Hill of Bonnevoye, began also to
Play. We raised one of Two Pieces upon the Rising Ground, which looks into the
Fauxbourg of Gromp, and we continued to work upon one of Fifteen on the Hill of
Paffendal; which was finished with the loss only of Nine Soldiers killed, and
seven or eight wounded, with three or four Officers.

In the Evening the Sieur de Joyeuse, Lieutenant General for the day, the
Marquess de Renti, Marshall de Camp, and the Sieur de Refuge, Brigadier of
Foot, relieved the Marquess de Genlis, the Sieur d' Erlac, and the Sieur de
Josseaux, with the two Batallions of Piemont; the first Batallion of Auvergne,
and the first Batallion of the Royal Roussillon, which entered the Trenches in
the place of the two Batallions of Navarre, and the two of Vaubecoutt and
Conti. In the night there was carried on a third Trench, parallel to the
second, about Thirty Paces from the first covered way, which comprehended all
the Outworks of the Attack. The Besieged burnt this Night the other part of
the Fauxbourg of Paffendal; and Fired also at us briskly with their Muskets.

All the following day they played upon us with their Cannon; and yet killed us
but about Seven or Eight Men, and wounded Ten or Twelve. The same day, viz. the
11th. the Besiegers finished their Battery of Fifteen Pieces, and with their
Cannon and Bombs entirely ruined the Platforms and Defenses of the Bastion on
the Right.

In the Evening the Count de St. Geran, Lieutenant General, and the Marquess de
Nesle, Brigadier of Foot, relieved the Sieur de Joyeuse, and the Sieur de
Refuge, who were on the right hand of the great Attack; and the Chevalier de
Tilladet, Marshall de Camp, Relieved the Marquess de Renti, who was on the
Left. The Trenches were mounted on the Right by two Batallions of Normandy, who
took the Post of the two Batallions of Piemont; and the Batallions of Lionnois
and Turenne relieved on the Left the Batallions of Auvergne and the Royal. The
Trench, which comprehended all the Outworks of the Place, was carried on within
Twenty Paces of the first open way. The Sieur de Vigny made a Battery an
Hundred and fifty Paces to the Left, from the first he had made, to ruin with
Bombs the Platform and Batteries which were upon the Bastion on the Left. The
Lieutenant of the Granadiers of Normandy, a Sub-Lieutenant of Enguien, and Nine
Soldiers were slain, and six or seven wounded.

The Morrow being the 12th. the other Batteries were finished, and Thirty eight
Pieces of Connon, and fifteen Mortar-Pieces began that day to play continually.
The same day about Noon, a Cannon-Bullet of the Besiegeds set on Fire Thirty
Bombs of the Besiegers, which were on the Sieur de Vigny's first Battery: Seven
Gunners and two Soldiers were killed, and there were six grievously wounded. The
Sieur de Caillemote, second Son of the Marquess de Ruvigny, was wounded in the
Throat with a Musket Shot.

In the Evening the Marquess de Lambert, Lieutenant General, the Sieur de
Rubantel, and the Marquess de Crenan, Relieved the General Officers which were
in the Trenches; two Batallions of the Marine Relieved the Post on the
Righthand; and two Batallions of the Queens Relieved the Post on the Left.
During the Night the Besiegers lodged themselves on the Causey of the covered
way; and there was a Communication made from one Lodgment to the other. The
Work was carried on at the Attack of Bonnevoye, within 30 Paces of the Ditch,
on the side of the Gate of Thionville, where a Battery of 5 Pieces was raised.
At the same time we Advanced 5 of the great Battery of Paffendal for to Batter
on the reverse the Bastion and Outworks of the great Attack on the Left, and
to beat down the Gate of Paffendal There was opened at the Attack of Gromp,
within 20 Paces of the Ditch, a Trench, parallel to the Front, which has upon
one and the same Line 4 Towers, and which faces the Hill of Gromp: we brought
down the Battery which was upon this Hill, with a design to beat in pieces the
Gate of this Fauxbourg, and so to be able to dismount 2 Pieces which were on a
Platform within 100 Paces on the Right hand of this Gate, and which much
incommoded the Besiegers: We seized on a Church within half a Masket-shot of
the place, situated upon a rising Ground between Gromp and Paffendal, the
Enemy not making any resistance. Fifty men were left there to keep it. There
was this Night a Sergeant killed, with about Ten Soldiers, and Twenty wounded.

The 13th in the Morning a Soldier of the place came into the Camp; he told us,
that the Prince de Chimay had been obliged to commit the defense of the
Outworks to the Townsmen, and to draw the Soldiers into the Town for fear of
their running away. About Noon the besieged Sprang two little Mines under a
Lodgment we had made on the right hand, upon the Causey of the first covered
way; there were Three Soldiers slain, and about Fifteen wounded.

In the Evening the Count du Plessis, Lieutenant General, the Sieur de Gournay,
Marshall de Camp, and the Sieur de Maumont, Brigadier of Foot, relieved the
General officers in the Trenches: A Batallion of Bourbonnois, one of Humieres,
one of the Crown, and one of Languedoc Relieved those which were at the great
Attack. The Marquess de Humieres, only Son to the Marshall de Humieres, was
slain by a Musket Shot which hit him in the Head. About Midnight 4 Parties of
Granadiers, of 10 Men each, had order to enter at the same time by 4 several
places into the first covered way, to settle themselves therein if they found
not too great resistance; and to seize on a Redout, called the Redout of St.
Mary, which is between the two covered ways: But after they had born a violent
Charge of Muskets, Grenades and Fireworks, they were forced to Retreat,
because this Redout was revested in the same manner as the Ditch, wherein there
was a Caponiere filled with Musketeers, and because there was no getting into
it but by a Gallery under Ground, the end whereof joined to the covered way
nearest the place.

Thus were we obliged to proceed along by digging as far as the Palizadoes,
whence we carried on a Lodgment in the covered way, which the Besiegers
extended on the Right and Left of the bottom of the Ditch of the Redoubt: and
the Miners, to overthrow it, wrought under the Ditch. At the Attack on the
Left, our Men lodged themselves on the Causey of the covered way, whence was a
Communication made to the Lodgement on the Right. A Lieutenant of the Royal
Regiment was killed, with 3 Sergeants, 9 or 10 Soldiers, and 5 Canoniers; and a
Captain with about 20 Soldiers wounded.

In the Evening the Posts of the Trenches were Relieved by the Marquess de
Genlis, Lieutenant: General: the Marquess d' Vxelles, Marshall de Camp, and
the Duke de la Ferte. Brigadier of Foot, with 2 Batallions of Champagne, that
of la Ferte* and one of Orleans. There was finished on the right hand of the
great Attack, the Lodgment in the covered way, upon the brink of the Ditch of
the Redoubt, where the Miners could not easily go on because of the Rock they
there met with; We brought on 2 Pieces of Cannon endeavoring to break the
Communication of the Redoubt with the second covered way. On the Left hand of
the Attack was sent forth a Detachment of Grandiers of la Ferte, to see if the
Enemies had quitted the first covered way on that side. They could not come to
know it, because the Enemies were there couched on their Bellies, and at the
appearance of our Men rose, and obliged them to retire: Ten of the Granadiers
were slain, and 2 mortally wounded; the Captain had his Arm broken, and the
Sub-Lieutenant was wounded the Marquess de Genils's Aid de Camp received a
mortal wound; and two Officers of Orleans were slightly wounded.

The 15th. Three Fugitives from the Place related, That the Governor of the
Town, the Prince de Chimay, was that Night wouuded in the Leg, and that the
Major was killed. That day we Advanced two Batteries, each of two Pieces of
Cannon, for to batter a Redoubt, which is near the two covered ways on the
Left; and in the mean time we played the most advantagiously we could from the
Batteries that were in condition, for to ruin the Outworks and Defenses of
the Bastion on the same side: we seized also two Redouts on the backside of
Paffendal which the Cannon of the Besiegers had very much dammaged.

In the Evening the Guard of the Trenches was Relieved by the Sieur de Joyeuse,
the Count de Broglia and the Sieur de Josseaux, with the 2 Batallions of
Navarre, that of Vaubecourt and that of Conti, in the Head whereof was the
Prince de Conti: The Marquess de la Valette had at the same time his Thigh
broken by a Cannon shot from one of our Batteries which had passed over the
Town. In the night the Besiegers made themselves Masters of a third Redoubt on
the backside of Paffendal. We carried on the Lodgment which was upon the Causey
of the first covered way, near 15 Toises to the right and left; and in the
midst of this Advance were raised two Platforms, for to look backwards into the
covered way: The Besieged Fired fiercely all the night, but with little
success. About 5 in the Morning they quitted the covered way, and Sprang a
Mine, which they believed must be under our Lodgments; but it had not any
effect. The Besiegers took the advantage of an enforcement, which this Mine had
made near the Palizadoes, and made use of it to Lodge themselves there: but
this design would not easily have succeeded, had not the Prince de Conti by his
Presence and Bounty encouraged the Soldiers, whom the fear of a second Mine
hindered from working. An Ingenier and 4 Soldiers were slain on this occasion,
and a Capt. of Navarre, one of Burgundy, the Sub-Lieutenant of the Granadiers
of Conti, and 9 or 10 Soldiers were wounded. We extended the Lodgement which
was on the brink of the Ditch of the Redoubt.

The 16th the Besieged battered with much success the Redout which was on there
left, between the two covered ways: and a Mine, which had been made to open the
Ditch of that Redout on the Right, had all the effect they desired. The Sieur
de Court, Major of Conti, was Killed in coming down from the Trenches. We have
since the 16th ruined, with the great Battery of Paffendal, a Traverse of stone
about 6 Toises long, which was at the point of an Half Moon, that covers the
Bastion on the left, to hinder us from looking between the opposite Hills into
the covered way of the place, we likewise ruined with the same Battery, two
Towers which covered the Gate of the Tower on that side.

According to the last News, come from the Siege, thy continued to batter many
little works, full of earth, and in confusion aginst this Gate, the Bastion,
and the Three Redoubts. whereof ours had made themselves Masters, and which
flanked the Reverse of the Hills. The Besiegers were resolved to set afterward
the Miner to the Bastion, and they hoped to succeed easily therein* because
there was no Ditch on that side.

May the 16th in the Evening the Count de St. Geran; Lieutenant General for the
day, and Sieur de Refuge, Brigadier of Foot, mounted the Trenches on the Right,
and the Sieur d'Erlac, Marshall de Camp mounted on the Left. Two Batallions of
Piemont relieved those of Navarre, and two Batallions of Auvergne, and the
Royal, relieved those of Vaubecourt and Conti.

We carried on during the Night, to the Mine, the Trench which is of the brink
of the Ditch of the Redout on the Right, advancing toward the second covered
way: and we continued to batter a Breach in the Redout. On the Left we extended
in the first covered way to the Lodgment which had been made there, and we
wrought for the Communication of the three Redouts, which are on the backside
of Paffendal: the Enemy Fired vigourously this night and there were nine or ten
Soldiers killed and about twenty Wounded. The same Night we extended at the
Attack of Grondt the Lodgment all along the Ditch, and brought thither a
Battery of 3 Pieces. There was not any new work made on the side of the Attack
of Bonnevoy.

In the Evening of the 17th the Marquess de Lambert Lieutenant General, and the
Marquess de Crenan, Brigadier of Foot, relieved the Guard of the Trenches on
the Right with a Batallion of Normandy, and that of Soissons; and the Marquess
de Renti, Marshall de Camp, relieved it on the Left with a Batallion of
Lyonnois, and that of Turenne.

We continued on the Right to Batter the Redout; and to work through the Mine,
with a design to enclose it. We perfected on the Left the Lodgments and
Communications which had been made there:, and we discharged abundance of
Cannon and Bombs, to finish the ruining the Defenses of the attaked side, and
the Palizadoes which remained on the second covered way. The Besieged also
Fired fierceiy during the Night, and killed us about twenty Soldiers, and
wounded five and twenty, or thirty, with four or five Officers.

The 18th. in the Evening, the Count du Plessis, Lieutenant General for the Day
and the Marquess de Nesle, Brigadier of Foot, relieved the Posts on the right
with two Batallions of the Marine, and the Chevalier de Tilladet, Marshall de
Camp, relieved the Posts on the left with two Batallions of the Queens.

The Redouts of this Attack are of very good stone, and every where
Canon-proof. They have three stories of Battlements, with a revested Ditch,
sixteen Foot broad, and fourteen deep, in the Revestment whereof are
Caponieres, which command round about. These Redouts have communication with
the Ditch of the Place, and the covered Way, by three Galleries under ground,
built one upon another, of six Foot in height, and four in breadth.

The Count du Plessis visited all the Posts of the Trenches. He sent to view
the Breach, which our Canon had made in the highest story of the Redouts on the
right, and to which the Breaches of the Mines made an ascent. We found no body
there: and the Count du Plessis sent thither only six Granadiers and a
Sergeant, for fear there might be Mines. They saw through the Holes of the
Arches, that the Enemies kept yet the lower story, and they cast Grenades at
them, but they were not sufficient to drive them away. The Count du Plessis
caused Bombs to be thrown at them, which yet dissipated them not, till they had
had their effect, and he sent to charge them with sword in hand.

At the same time, we carried on the Minework to the Galleries of Communication
from the Redout to the Ditch, and the covered Way of the Place, and we lodged
our selves by this Mining in the midst of the second Causey. The Enemies,
percieving the Besiegers ready to pierce the Communication, were afraid to be
cut off without being succored, and retired with so much precipitation through
the middle Gallery into their Ditch, that they left many Muskets, and some Hats
in the Redout.

We rolled afterward two great Casks, full of Fagots into the second Gallery,
notwithstanding the Besieged fired furiously upon us from the Gate: and after
two Hours fight under ground, we set up a Traverse, to hinder their Return to
the Redout.

The Enemy did also the same on their side, to stop the progress of our
Workmen. They had prepared four Mines at the four Corners of the Redout: but
they could not set them on fire because of the Water, which was in the lowest
Gallery.

We continued to batter a Breach in the Redout on the left, to make a Mine to
open the Ditch, and to enclose this Redout by Mining, as we had that on the
right. We made a Lodgment on the backside of Paffendal, the length of the
Traverse, and the Face of the Half Moon, within four paces whereof the Works
were advanced. But we were constrained to quit it by the abundance of Bombs,
Grenades and Fireworks, which the Besieged cast from the Half Moon, and the
covered Way. The Communication of the two Attacks was made during the Night,
notwithstanding thirty Toises of the Rock, which were between the two Lodgments.

The same day, being the 19th. four Miners were set to the Attack of Grondt
from the Gate unto the nearest Tower: and they wrought with so much diligence,
that in the Evening they began to charge the Mines. A Captain of the Queens,
and two or three inferior Officers were wounded: five or six Soldiers were
slain, and about twenty wounded.

The 19th. in the Evening, the Marquess de Genlis, Lieutenant General, and the
Marquess de Crenan, Brigadier of Foot, mounted the Trenches on the right hand
with the Batallions of Bourbonnois and Humieres, and the Sieur de Rubantel,
Marshall de Camp, mounted on the left with the Batallions of the Crown and
Vermandois.

In the Night we extended on the right the Lodgment, which was upon the
Communication of the Redout with the second covered Way, above five and thirty
Toises to the right, and as much to the left: and this Logdment was in some
places within twelve paces of the Palizadoes. We perfected on the left the
Lodgment which was made to enclose the Redout.

We had proceeded very slowly in battering it, because we judged it not fit to
finish the making a Breach therein, before the Miner, who was set to the
exterior Wall of the Ditch, and who had required two Days to open it, because
of the Rock he found there, was nearer finishing his Work. There was made also
a Place of Arms, capable to contain a thousand or twelve hundred men in the
Trench, which communicates with the two Lodgments.

We re-established with great Gabions along the Traverse, as far as the Point
of the Countergard, the Lodgment we had there the Night before, and which we
had quitted in the Day. The Besieged cast store of Bombs and Grenades to
hinder us from re-establishing it. The Count de Gasse, Colonel of the
Vermandois Regiment, who supported the Head of the Work on the left, had there
twenty Granadieres killed or wounded. The Enemy cast an extraordinary Number of
Grenades, when we were got within an Halbards length of the Angle of the
second Counterscarp.

The 20th. in the morning they sprang a Mine, which they had under the two
Angles. That on the right overthrew twenty Gabions without hurting above two
Soldiers, and the Damage was repaired in two hours by the Care of the Sieur
Lapara Ingenier. The Mine on the left had not any considerable effect. The
Besiegers also at seven in the morning sprang the Mine of Grondi: and it made a
Breach for six men to enter a breast. The Granadiers of Languedoc and Burgundy
ascended first, with so much vigor, that they drove away fifty Soldiers, which
defended it, and made ten paces beyond the Breach a Lodgment forty Toises long,
notwithstanding they were fiercely shot at from the Rampart, and Ravelin of
Grondt. The Captain of the Granadiers of Burgundy, and he of the Granadiers of
Languedoc two inferior Officers, and thirty Soldiers were wounded: and there
were nine or ten Soldiers slain.

About three in the Afternoon four Soldiers of the Besieged came into the Camp:
and they averred, that the Besiegers had killed or wounded them since the Siege
above three hundred Men: that Captain Gregory, a famous Officer amongst them
for commanding of Parties, was killed: and not the Major of the Town, as the
report went: that the Prince de Chimay made the Women and Children work upon
the Retirades, and that he was still resolved to make a vigorous Defense.

The 20th. in the Evening the Sieur de Joyeuse, Lieutenant General, and the
Marquess de Nesle, Brigadier of Foot, mounted the Trenches on the right with
two Batallions of Champagne: and the Marquess de Renti, Marshall de Camp,
mounted on the left with a Batallion of la Ferte, and one of Orleans.

We extended, during the Night, a great Line, which made the Place of Arms,
from one Redout to the other; and we put it into condition to contain above
three thousand Men. On the left the Lodgment, which was along the Traverse, was
continued to the middle of the Face of the Countergard, notwithstanding the
Enemies fired all Night briskly upon us with Muskets, Bombs and Grenades.

We began also a Platform on the right to look backwards into the covered Way
of the Place, and there were seven or eight Soldiers killed, and about thirty
wounded, with two Officers. The Count de Tonnerre, Colonel of the Regiment of
Orleans, was wounded in the Head.

The 21st. at three in the Afternoon the Besieged quitted the Redout on the
left hand, seeing that it was entirely enclosed by the Works of the Besiegers,
and seeing also the great Breach their Canon had made therein. They retired
into the Caponiers of the Ditch of the same Redout, and from thence fired
fircely upon those that were in it. The Besiegers put two Pieces in battery to
drive them thence.

The 21st. in the Evening the Count de St. Geran, Lieutenant General, and the
Sieur de Josseaux, Brigadier of Foot, relieved the Guard of the Trenches on the
right with two Batallions of Navarre: and the Marquess d'Vxelles, Marshall de
Camp, relieved it on the left, with the Batallion of Vaubecourt, and that of
Conti, at the Head whereof is the Prince de Conti.

About seven a Clock, the Enemy sprang a Mine between two Lodgments, which the
Besigers had upon the Reverse of Paffendal: but it neither killed nor hurt any
body.

At (...) the Miner was put to the middle of the Countergard, which covers the
Bastion. The Besieged, an hour after, sprang a second Mine on the same side.
There were three Soldiers killed, and six or seven wounded. Some time before we
had discovered a Mine in the Redout on the right hand, and taken out the
Powder. During the Night, we brought a Battery of seven Pieces within thirty
paces of the Counterscarp: and perfected the Platform and Place of Arms, which
joins the two Redouts.

The 22d. at break of Day, the Canon of the great Battery of Paffendal, fired
by Misfortune at the Countergard, and there were two Miners killed, and three
others wounded, with a Lieutenant of the Regiment of Conti, and three Soldiers.
Four Soldiers of the Regiment of Conti, animated by the Presence and
Liberalities of the Prince, who executes all the Functions of a Colonel,
continued to work in the Mine, whence many had been repulsed by the Enemies
fierce Firing.

The Miners found at Nine in the Morning a Gallery in the Wall of the
Countergard, pierced with Battlements, which flanked the Reverse, and seized
thereon. They found another underneath, which cut the Countergard across, and
which gave us room to put ten Miners into this last, to make therein as many
Branches, to the end to cast a part of the Earth into the Ditch.

The Enemy, having percieved the Work of our Miners, cast ineffectually great
store of Fireworks, and Barrels full of Powder, to drive them away, and to
oblige the Besiegers to quit the Lodgment. The same Morning the Prince de
Conti, caused to be attached by a Captain, who commanded sixty Men of his
Regiment, a Traverse, which the Besieged possessed in the Fauxbourg of
Paffendal, fifty paces from their Gate, for to go securely to fetch Water at
the River. The Enemies were driven from this Traverse, although they resisted
very stoutly: and we seized of an Out-Gate of the Town, fortified with good
Towers.

About Eleven in the Morning, we knew, that the Enemies had made many Traverses
within their Counterscarp, and the Besiegers, doing their utmost to hinder
their finishing this Work, made themselves Masters of the first Redan on the
right, and that on the left.

The Besieged endeavored to drive them thence with a shower of Grenades and
Stones: but it was without any Success, and they were also in fine repulsed by
the great Firing and Extraordinary Vigor of the Besiegers.

During the Guard, about twenty Soldiers were slain, and there were four
Officers, one Ingenier, and forty or fifty Soldiers wounded. at the Attack of
Grondt, during the Night of the 21st. to the 22d. and all this Day, the
Besiegers labored to get ground on the right, leaving the Ravelin on the left,
and they brought Canon to ruin the Communication of the Gate with the Castle,
which they batter incessantly.

The Marshall de Crequi continues to visit and press the Works, and to give
all the Orders, necessary for advancing the Siege, with all the Vigilance and
good Conduct imaginable.

There arrive daily at the Camp many Noblemen strangers, whom Curiosity,
excited by the report, which is spread about of the Beauty of this Sieges
Works, and of the good Order of the Attacks, brings thither from all the
neighboring Countries.

The Enemies have done their utmost to endeavor the putting some Succor into
the Place.

The Count de Valsassine and the Duke de Bejar undertook to get in at the Head
of four Hundred reformed Officers and three Hundred Dragoons: and they came
within three Leagues of the Place. But having learnt from the Guides of the
Country, the Disposition of our Works, and that it would be impossible to
execute their Design, they retreated, and took their way to Bruxelles.

The Works, which have all been conducted by the Sieur de Vauban with such
Success, that they have hindered the Enemy from making any Sally, are in very
good Condition. They would have been farther advanced, had not the Marshall de
Crequi according to the King's Orders, ordered the Attacks with all the
Precautions, necessary to spare the Troops, and moderate the Ardour of our
Gentry.

May the 22d. in the Evening, the Marquess de Lambert, Lieutenant General, and
the Sieur de Refuge, Brigadier of Foot, relieved the Posts on the right hand of
the Trenches with two Batallions of Piedmont. The Sieur de Langallerie,
Marshall de-Camp, relieved the Posts on the left with one Batallion of
Auvergne, and two Batallions of the Royal.

During the Night and the following Day, our Men wrought on the right hand upon
a Battery of three Pieces of Canon against the Palizadoes of the Counterscarp,
for to batter the Face of the Bastion of that side, and that of the Half Moon,
which is on the left, and for to dismount a Piece of Canon, the Enemies had put
there a little while since. We began also a Battery of Mortar-pieces behind the
first Battery, for to hinder the Firing which the Besieged made from the
Bastion and Half Moon.

The two Lodgments of the Besiegers were lengthned: and there were finished two
or three and twenty Mines in the Countergard, to be made use of, when we should
have seen the effect of three others, which had been made at the point of this
Countergard. The Enemies cast, during the Night, a great Quantity of Grenades
and Fireworks upon the Workmen; and into the first Posts, for to retard the
Works. But in the Day, the Besiegers fired so fiercely, that it hindered them
from appearing to shoot: and the Work went on without any opposition. There was
made at the Attack of old Munster a Battery of Mortar-pieces, for to endeavor
to drive the Enemies out of the third part, which was left them of the Castle,
and to make a Lodgment there without much loss. At the Attack of Grondt, the
Houses whereof the Besieged had this Night burnt, the Works went still on:
leaving on the left the Ravelin, which they possessed, and pushing toward the
Gate of the Castle of Munster, which was in the mean time continually battered
by our Canon. The Marquess de Montpesat was killed at this guard, this Day in
the Morning. We lost there an Ingenier with ten or twelve Soldiers: and there
were two Captains of Foot and three inferior Officers wounded, with fifty
Soldiers.

The same 23d. in the Evening the Count du Plessis, Lieutenant General, and the
Sieur de Morton, Brigadier of Foot, relieved the Posts of the Trenches on the
right with a Batallion of Normandy, and that of Soissons. The Sieur d'Erlac,
Marshall de Camp, relieved the Posts on the left with the Batallions of
Lyonnois and Turenne. In the Night we extended and perfected the two Lodgments
on the Counterscarp: and we wrought to make the Communication of the one with
the other. The Besieged sprang a Mine under the Lodgment on the left: but no
body was hurt by it, because our men were retired to free themselves from a
very great Number of Grenades and Fireworks, which the Enemies cast there
during the space of two Hours. We resetled our selves there afterward, much
better than we were before. At six in the Morning, the Enemies pretended they
would make a Sally: but they durst not advance, having seen our Granadiers
march toward them with great resolution. An hour after, the Battery of three
Pieces of Canon began to play: and at the same time we cast store of Bombs from
the Battery of Mortar-pieces, which was behind it. The fifth of these Bombs
fell upon two or three thousand Grenades, which were in their Half Moon, and
set them on fire. The Fire was very great for above an Hour: and we saw in the
Air abundance of Hats and Pieces of Clothes: which made us judge, that many of
the Enemies were killed and wounded.

The 24th. our Men charged the Mines of the Countergard: and we battered with
two Pieces of Canon the Caponieres, which are in the Ditch, that runs along the
right side of this Work. The great Battery of Paffendal continued to batter a
Breach in the Face of the Castle, which looks toward this Fauxbourg: and we
continued also to cast therein store of Bombs with good Success. The Besieged
possessed no more of the Counterscarp, but the Redan, which covers the
Half Moon, and the two Parties were so near one another, that the Enemies with
Hooks plucked away our Gabions and Fagots, and drew them into their Ditches.
These great Progresses began to shake the Besieged. Two Run-aways, come from
the Place to the Camp, affirmed, that the Colonels and a part of the Officers
of the Garrison spoke of capitulating to preserve their Soldiers: the Besieged
having then lost above six hundred Men, killed or wounded by our Bombs, or by
shot from the Trenches. These Fugitives added, that the Inhabitants, and the
Women incessantly besought the Prince de Chimay to prevent by a Capitulation
the Miseries whereunto they should be exposed, if they expected the last
Extremities. The Besiegers lost at this guard the Sieur de Valorge, Captain of
the Granadiers of Lyonnois, with eleven Soldiers. An Ingenier, two inferior
Officers, and about forty Soldiers were wounded. My Lord Howard, Son to the
Earl of Carlisle, who was a Volunteer, was mortally wounded, as he was giving
Marks of a great Courage.

The 24th. in the Evening, the Marquess de Genlis and the Marquess de Nesle
mounted on the right hand of the Trenches with two Batallions of the Marine:
and the Count de Broglio mounted on the left with two Batallions of the Queens.
In the Night the Enemies fired very fiercely to drive the Besiegers from their
Lodgments, who yet failed not to keep themselves there. They made also an
Attempt against the Miners of the Countergard: and were repelled with the loss
of some Soldiers. The Besiegers abandoned the Attack of Grondt, after they had
drawn thence their Canon. At the Attack of the Castle of Old Munster, we
brought two Pieces of Canon, wherewith we made a Breach of twelves paces in the
Gate, which the Besieged held: and we made two Batteries of Mortar-pieces,
which continually cast Bombs there. There was at this Guard five or six
Soldiers killed, and about twenty wounded.

In the Evening of the 25th. the Sieur de Joyeuse mounted on the right with
Bourbonnois and Humieres: and the Marquess de Renty on the left with the Crown
and Vermandois. The Besieged at the beginning of the Night cast so great a
quantity of Fireworks, that the Besiegers had no small difficulty to preserve
the Powder they carried to charge the Mines. They had already burnt two of our
Soldiers, who carried some in Bags. The Besiegers began three covered Ways upon
the Reverse of Paffendal between the Place, and the three Redouts, for to go
to the Breach of the Countergard, when it should be made. They continued to
batter a Breach in the Point of the Half Moon: to ruin the Caponieres of the
Ditch of the Countergard: and to extend the Mine-work to the right and left of
the Redan of the Counterscarp, which the Besieged were in fine obliged to quit.
There was at this guard a Captain of Foot, and ten or twelve Soldiers slain,
and about twenty Soldiers wounded.

The 26th. in the Evening, the Count de St. Geran, and the Duke de la Ferte
relieved the Posts of the Trenches on the right with two Batallions of
Champagne and the Chevalier de Tilladet relieved the Posts on the left with the
Batallions of la Ferte, Conde and Orleans. The Batallion of Enguien went on the
side of the Castle. During the Night, the Besiegers finished the three Ways
begun on the Reverse of Paffendal. They carried on the Mine-work, as far as the
Bottom of the Ditch of the Countergard: and they wrought at the Descent of the
Ditch of the Half Moon, in the point whereof there was already a Breach for two
Men to get up a breast. There was not however any appearance of hazarding to
get up by this Breach, though it had been even greater, because we were assured
that there were Mines there: and because it was but in the first Envelop of the
Half Moon, which was double. The Besieged sprang two Mines in the last Redan of
the Counterscarp. The first had not any effect: and the other killed three
Soldiers, and wounded nine or ten.

The 27th. in the Morning, we finished the charging of the Mine: and we made the
Powder be carried by Soldiers disguised like Laborers. We made them be thus
disguised, because we had for some time observed that the Besieged shot not
much at the Laborers, believing that they were Countrymen thereabouts, whom the
Besiegers constrained to work. We employed our selves diligently in closing the
Mine, and disposed all things with great care for springing it the morrow
Morning, and for mounting afterward to the Breach. There were ten Soldiers
killed, and about twenty wounded.

The 27th. in the Evening the Marquess de Lambert and the Sieur de Rubantel
relieved the Posts of the Trenches on the right with two Batallions of Navarre:
and the Sieur de Josseaux relieved the Posts on the left, with the Batallions
of Vaubecourt, of Conti, and Auvergne. During the Night, according to the
Orders of the Marshall de Crequi, we made all the Preparatives necessary for
the Attack, which was to be made the morrow Morning upon the Countergard: and
things were disposed with so much Prudence, that never any Action was begun and
continued with better Order, less Confusion, more Constancy, and greater
Success. At break of Day, the Marquess de la Freseliere put the Batteries in so
good Estate, that the Canon of the Besiegers played incessantly for two Hours.
The Sieur de Vigny caused also the Batteries of the Mortar-pieces to be ordered
with so much care, that the Bombs, which fell with discontinuation into the
Bastions, tormented the Besieged. At the same time, the Troops, which were to
be employed upon this Attack, marched to the Rendezvous, assigned them by the
Marshall de Crequi: who, notwithstanding his Indisposition, and an Incision,
which had been made in his Leg the Day before, caused himself to be carried to
the Head of the Trenches, that he might there be nearer at hand to give his
Orders, and might put more Life into what was to be executed. The Granadiers of
Vaubecourt were destined to attack the right Side of the Countergard of the
Bastion of Barlemont, after the Mine should have had its effect: being seconded
by the two Companies of Granadiers of Piemont, and by an hundred Men of the
Regiment of Vaubecourt, which had at their Head the Company of Granadiers of
the Regiment of Auvergne. The Granadiers of Conti were commanded to attack a
Redan, ruined by our Canon, on the left side of the Countergard being backed by
two Companies of Granadiers of Normandy, one of the Royal, and an hundred Men
of the Regiment of Conti. The two Companies of the Granadiers of Navarre were
appointed their Post on the left hand of the Attack of Conti, over against the
Buttress of the Bastion of Barlemont: being seconded by the Companies of
Granadiers of the Marine, of Bourbonnois, and of Rouergue, with an hundred Men
of that Regiment. Each Regiment in a Body was to support its Attack, except
that of the Granadiers of Navarre, which was maintained by the Batallion of
Rouergue.

The Laborers were ranged in three Troops, with the Ingeniers, to be ready to
march when the detached Troops should have seized on the Breaches: and it was
in fine resolved, that as soon as the second Mine was sprung, they should march
by the Ways, which were shown them* All things being thus disposed, about four
in the Morning all the Troops that were at the foremost Posts, were caused to
withdraw from the Trenches, to the end they might be out of the Fall of the
Ruins, which the Mine might make. The Miners were also made go out of their
Hole: and there were left only the Pikes planted with the Colors, and some
Soldiers, to hinder the Enemy from knowing the design of the Besiegers.

The 28th. about seven in the Morning, the Mine was sprung: and its Effect was
very considerable. Nevertheless the Ascent of the Countergard, and the other
Works, was so rough and difficult, that the detached Men, who attacht at the
same time, that the Enemies might not have leisure to retrench themselves, were
obliged to scramble, and thrust one another, to get to the Top of the Breach.

The Troops being advanced to seize on the Breaches, and make Lodgments there,
according as it had been proposed, those, which marched first, extended
themselves under the Bastion on the left, where were thrown at them a great
Number of Grenades. The others which followed them, extended themselves along
the Curtain, and the Bastion on the right at the Foot of the Breach: after
which they ascended together with much order to the Top of the Breach, to
settle themselves there. But those, who advanced to the end of the Curtain,
which joins the Bastion on the left, met with a vigorous opposition.

At the same time the Enemy sprang two Mines in this place, which obliged the
Commanded Men to retire to preserve themselves: but having presently recovered
the right hand of these Mines with the other Troops, they chased thence the
Besieged, and began on all sides to settle the Lodgments by means of abundance
of Fagots, which were incessantly brought thither. The Troops, which were in
the Bastion on the left, to resettle themselves there, were disquieted by the
Grenades, which the Besieged cast also from the side of the Ditch. But we
caused them to be driven by some Officers and Soldiers as far as the Wall,
which is on the left, that goes down from the Place to the Ditch, and flanks
the Bastion of Barlemont, where they labored to retrench themselves.

The Besieged in their Retreat set on fire a little Magazene filled with Bombs,
Grenades and Powder, whereby many of the Besiegers were killed or wounded.
Four Companies of Spanish Foot defended the Countergard, and the other Works,
which are joined thereunto, were defended by Detachments. They made so
obstinate a Defense, that our Troops, though using their utmost endeavors, had
for half an hour much difficulty to get possession of the Top of the Breach:
the place of it self being very high, and the Ruins of the Mine not being
solid enough to make it firm. But after a fierce Charge of Muskets and
Grenades, our Men so vigorously disputed the matter with the Swords point,
that the Enemy was with much loss driven from this Post: and many Spaniards,
who would not ask Quarter, were cut in pieces. Some, carried on with an extreme
desire of signalizing themselves, went as far as the Ditch of the Place. The
Lieutenant of the Granadiers of Rouergue, followed by ten or twelve, bore up
with great Constancy against the Charge of forty Masters: and the greatest part
of the Horse was killed, and the rest put to flight by help of the Firing of
the Granadiers, which were in the Countergard. The Commandant was also killed
by the Count de Mailly, who went to meet him, having seen him advance his Sword
on high. Our Men would have made a Lodgment near the Ditch over against the
right hand Front of the Bastion; but the extraordinary Firing of the Besieged,
which killed us some men, obliged them to take the resolution to retire along
the Battlements of the Wall. The Besieged had placed three little Pieces on the
Terraces, covered with Trees, on the side of Grondt, having judged that they
should be attackt thereabouts: and the Troops, which they played upon in the
flank, were very much incommoded by them: as also by the Ordnance, which they
had on the Flank of the Bastion opposite to that of Barlemont. There was not
for five or six hours any intermission of Firing. We lost twenty or five and
twenty Officers, with about threescore and ten Soldiers: and there were many
wounded, amongst whom was the Chevalier de Megrigny, and the Sieur de Marny
Ingenier. The Captains of the Granadiers of Bourbonnois and Conti were killed.
The Sieur de Saint Marthe, Captain of the Granadiers of Auvergne, and the
Sieur de Castillon, Captain of Navarre, were wounded. The Marquess Bourlemont,
Brother to the Duke of d' Atri, was slain. The Duke de Choiseut was wounded
with the shiver of a Bomb above the left Eye, whereof he died some Days after:
and the Vidame de Laon, Son to the Count du Roy, was wounded with a Musket Shot
through the Body, both of them giving Testimonies of a singular Courage.

The Prince de Conti, and the Prince de la Roche sur-Yon exposed themselves to
the greatest danger with a Valor worthy their Birth, and the last received on
the Stomach a blow with a Stone. All the Volunteers signalized themselves
there, particularly the Prince de Tingry, the Marquess de Crequi, the Count de
Luz, the Count d' Estrees, the Marquess de Thiange, the Marquess de Nogent, and
the Marquess de la Batie. The Duke of Grafton, and the Duke of Northumberland,
his Brother, and many other English Lords, who came to the Siege in Quality of
Volunteers, signalized themselves on this occasion.

The Sieur de Vauban, Marshall de Camp, was one of the first in the
Countergard, and gave there with his ordinary Sufficiency Orders, very
beneficial for the Security and Continuation of the Lodgments, which were made
there.

All the Foot, which were at this Action, acquitted themselves very well of
their Devois: and many Soldiers made themselves be taken notice of.

It was necessary, after the effect of the Mine, and the Lodgment built upon
the Countergard, to make a Descent into the Ditch. The Count du Plessis,
Lieutenant General for the Day, undertook this Care with all the Success, that
could be expected.

He made the Ditch be viewed. He killed or put to flight all the Enemies that
were found before him: and afterward caused the Lodgments to be made,
notwithstanding all the Effects of the Besieged, who cast from above the
Bastions a prodigious quantity of Grenades, Bombs and Fireworks upon the
Workmen, and Soldiers. He received under the Elbow a blow with the glancing of
a Granado, which made him for some time unable to stir it. He ceased not to
continue present at the Work of the Lodgment, till such time as it was extended
from the Gate of the Gallery of the Countergard, which leads to the Ditch, as
far as the Bastion of Barlemont: which made fifteen Toises. Two hours after, he
put the Miners to work in two places, one upon the right toward the Point of
the Bastion, and the other on the left, drawing toward the Flank, the Enemy
not being able to incommode them.

The Works were continued the 30th. and the 31st. with much Success: and we
will give you the particular thereof in the following Relations.

May the 29th. in the Evening the Count du Plessis, Lieutenant General, mounted
the fifth time the Trenches: and made the Descent of the Ditch with very good
Success.

The 30th. in the Morning, we attackt the third Division of the Castle of Old
Munster: and made our selves Masters of it after some resistance of the
Enemies. They soon quitted this Work to retire upon the Rampart, hoping by
their fierce Firing to hinder our Men from lodging there. About two in the
Afternoon, a Company of the Granadiers of Rouergue, one of Languedoc, and two
of Fuzeliers, supported by a Batallion of that Regiment, wholly carried this
Castle. The Besieged had raised behind the Division a Battery of three Pieces.
We could not go to them above seven or eight a breast: and we were exposed to
the shot of the Place. Nevertheless they abandoned this Post near half an hour
before the Besiegers came against it, and left there their Canon all charged.
Our Men made afterward many winding Traverses to lodge themselves safely upon
the Brink of the Ditch: where they extended themselves, as much as the
Groundwork could permit. An Ingenier, and fourteen or fifteen Soldiers were
killed upon this occasion, and there were about forty wounded. About five in
the Evening the Enemies quitted the Half Moon of the Countergard, which they
still held at the great Attack. The General Officers of the Guard, having been
advertised thereof, thought fit, before they seized this Work, to send some Men
by the Breach, which was at the Point of the Countergard, to see whether there
were no Mines, and to open those they should find there. There were happily
discovered under the Countergard the Trains of thirteen or fourteen Toises of
Mines, which were all charged. We took thence the Powder, and we detached
Workmen to make a Lodgment, which exteriorly embraced all the-Parapets. We
delayed to put People into the Half Moon till we had had time to search the
Mines, which was done the following Night. We found there two Pieces of Canon,
which the Enemies had left, and we judged thereby that Fear had made them
retire from this Half Moon. The Sieur Parisoc, Major of Cambray, Ingenier, was
wounded with a Piece of a Granado on the Stomach, as he was setting the Miner
to the Bastion of the Place.

The 30th. in the Evening, The Sieur de Toyeuse, Lieutenant General, the Sieru
d' Erloc, and the Marquess de Nesle relieved the Trenches with two Batallions
of the Marine, and two of the Queens. We finished, during the Night a Battery of
two Pieces of Canon, which had been begun upon the Countergard on the left: and
we carried on by the Mine-work about twenty Toises of a Trench, drawing from
the Countergard to the Curtain, which is on the Reverse of Paffendal.

The 31st. we continued to work to make the Descent of the Ditch: and to erect
a Battery of three Pieces of Canon on the same Ditch, which were to play with
another Battery of seven Pieces, which had begun in the Morning to fire briskly
against a Bastion, which remained before the Besiegers, to hinder them from
entering the Place. We wrought also upon all that was necessary for the
springing several Mines, to the end to give afterward the Assault, in case the
Enemies showed no Design to yield.

But the Prince de Chimay, knowing that the Town was no longer defensible, and
seeing himself pressed by the Principal Officers of the Garrison and by the
Townsmen, to prevent the Misfortunes, which befall a Place, taken by assault,
caused June the 1st. a Parley to be beaten, and demanded to capitulate.
Hostages were soon sent on both sides, and all Acts of Hostility ceased. The
Prince de Chimay desired a Truce for some Days, that he might send to
Bruxelles, to represent to the Marquess de Grana the Extremity wherein he was.
He added thereunto some other Requests, but the Marshall de Crequi thought not
fit to grant him any of them. The Truce was thus broken, and the same Evening
the Besieged and the Besiegers began to fire upon one another.

The 2d. we perceived a white Cloth, whereby the Townsmen would declare, that
they would no longer defend themselves, nor shoot any more. But the Garrison
ceased not to fire at us with their Muskets all the Night, and our Men fired
also briskly both their Musket and Canon to answer them.

The 3d. the Firing of the Besieged diminished by degrees till ten a Clock,
when they entirely left off to shoot and appear. They were above half an hour
in this Condition: and in fine, seeing that the Besiegers erected in the Ditch
a Battery of four great Pieces, they made appear at the Attack, where the
Prince of Conti was, some Men who made a show of desiring to speak. We could
scarce make them leave firing on our side, that we might hear them. They said,
that the Besieged had beaten a Parley on the side of the Castle: and desired,
that we would not level our Canon. They were answered, that the Besieged should
beat the Parley on the side, where they caused their Battery to be erected, and
that they should cease working. They said, they expected a Drum: in the mean
time the Work was discontinued, and in fine the Drum arrived. He cried out,
after he had beaten, that they had made this call to capitulate. Some time
after the Hostages were brought to the Guard of the Trenches, where the Prince
de Conti was; and he sent them to the Marshall de Crequi, who sent also his
into the Town. The Deputies arrived afterward at the Camp with the Articles of
Capitulation, which the Prince de Chimay demanded. There was one in favor of
the Deserters of our Troops, for whom the Besieged demanded an Amnesty; and
another to obtain four Pieces of Canon, which were not granted.

After many difficulties the Capitulation was in fine regulated and Signed: the
Extract whereof follows.

The Articles of Capitulation of the Town of Luxemburg.
I. The Prince de Chimay Governor, the Intendant, the Commissaries of the
Armies and Provisions, the Officers of the Ordnance and of the Troops, and all
the Garrison, their Families, Domestics, and Servants, shall go forth of the
Town in full liberty, with their movables and effects, and without having
their Baggage visited, they shall be conducted by the Passage of the Moule to
Stoken or the places thereabouts: and they shall not in any sort be molested by
our Troops for the space of four days: during which they may take the way of
Louvain or of Malines without being any way opposed.

II. The Foot shall go out by the Breach of the Castle, taking their way by the
Gate of Paffendal: and the Horse, Artillery, and Baggage by the same Gate, or
such other as the Governor shall think fit, with Arms and Baggage, Drums
beating, Trumpets sounding, Colors flying, Match lighted at both ends, Ball in
mouth, with 2 Pieces of Ordnance of Brass, to wit, 2 Demi-Canons, besides which
the Marshall de Crequi gave them two others, which make in all four Canons,
and one Mortar-piece, in respect to the Prince de Chimay, with their Carriages,
Furniture and Ammunition, necessary for six Charges for each piece: and to this
purpose the Besiegers shall furnish them with Carts, Horses, Harness, and other
things necessary for their carryage and remove.

III. There are granted three hundred Carts, and more, if need be, for the
carryage of the Baggage, Males, and effects, which can be removed.

IV. The Garrision shall not march above two Leagues the day of their going
forth, and three the day following. The Commissaries, which shall be at the
conduct, provide for their subsistence; and they may at parting take Bread and
Meat for five days.

V. Concerning Deserters.

VI. The Prisoners shall be rendered on both sides without ransom: but those,
which have been rendered before this Capitulation, shall not be freed from
paying their Ransoms.

VII. There shall be care taken of the Sick and Wounded, which cannot be
removed.

VIII. The Spoils, already taken, shall be enjoyed by those that have them.

IX. The Wives and Widows of the Officers and Soldiers, shall have liberty, if
they will, to remain in the Town.

X. The Inhabitants shall enjoy all their Franchises, as they were before the
Siege.

XI. There shall be granted six Months to the Officers and Soldiers for to
dispose of their Estates.

XII. The military Officers shall not be arrested for Debt on the day of their
going forth; but they shall give sureties and promises to pay.

XIII. The Receiver and Commissaries of the Provisions shall not be searched.

XIV. The Officers and Soldiers of the Besiegers shall approach no nearer the
place than their Works, till the day of the Garrisons going forth.

Articles concerning the States of the Town.
XV. There shall remain no other Inhabitants, but those, that shall make
profession of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion.

XVI. Concerns the Pretensions of the Prelates, Nobles, and Deputies of the
Towns, representing the three Estates.

XVII. The Officers of the Council, and others shall continue in their Offices.

XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, XXIII, XXIV, XXV, and XXVI. Articles, which concern the
particular Privileges of the Country and Territories, depending on the Duchy
of Luxemburg.

XXII. There shall be an Agreement made with the Marquess de la Fresiliere for
the Bells and Metals, which belong to the Artillery.

XXVII. The Officers and Soldiers, which continue in the Service of his
Majesty's Enemies, shall be Subject to the Pains, appointed by the Ordinances.

XXVIII. Orders the enregistring of the Capitulation.

XXIX. The Garrison shall be obliged to go forth of the Place on Wednesday the
7th of this present Month of June, at farthest by noon: and shall at eight in
the morning put into the hands of the Besiegers a Gate, which shall be taken
into possession by an hundred men of the ancientest Regiments, near which the
Besieged may for their security put a Guard: that for the security of the
Articles shall be given three Hostages of equal condition, and the Articles
signed double by the Marshall de Crequi and the Prince de Chimay: and that the
Inventaries of Pieces of Ordnance, Provisions for War, and Victuals, which are
in the Town, shall be faithfully delivered up.

According to this Capitulation, the Garrison went out of the Town the 7th. of
this Month in the Morning, to the Number of about twelve Thousand men: the
Prince de Chimay marching at their Head.

A List of the Officers, which have been killed or wounded, during the Siege of
Luxemburg.
The Marquis de Humieres, Colonel of Foot, killed. The Count de Tonnerre,
Colonel of the Regiment of Orleans, wounded. The Marquess de la Valette, Brig.
of Horse, wounded. Volunteers killed. The Marquess de Montpesat. The Marquess
de Bourlemont d' Anglure.
Volunteers wounded. The Duke de Choiseal. The Vidame de Laon. My Lord Howard,
Son to the Earl of Carlisle.
These 3 dead of their wounds. The Chevalier de Megrigny. The Sieur de la
Caillemotte.
Of the Regiment of Champagne. Captains wounded. The Chevalier de Mablanc. The
Sieur de St. Clement. The Sieur Mablanc the elder. The Seiur Gasquet. The Seiur
Bousquetardon. The Sieur du Plessis Aid Mayor.
Lieutenants killed. The Sieur de Laval. The Sieur Desmoulins.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur de la Villette. The Sieur Dandron. The Sieur
Tillieu. The Seiur la Bastide. The Sieur Bellies. The Sieur St. Hippolite. The
Sieur Pradel. The Sieur Beauregard. The Sieur Dagare.

Of the Regiment of Vaubecourt. Captain killed. The Sieur de Lispinay.
Captains wounded. The Sieur de Constaty. The Sieur d' Arman. The Sieur de
Chaulnes. The Sieur la Comb.
Lieutenant killed. The Sieur de Beaulieu.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur de St. Franc. The Sieur la Boissiere. The Sieur
Vendal. The Sieur la Comb. Sub-Lieutenant killed. The Sieur de Bonvouloir.

Of the Regiment of Anjou. Captains wounded. The Sieur Durant. The Sieur
Extremos. The Sieur Battinguant. The Sieur de Maure. The Sieur de Mont.
Lieutenant wounded. The Sieur Loumagne.

Of the Regiment of la Ferte. Captains killed. The Sieur Menoux Major. The
Sieur Patigny.
Captains wounded. The Sieur de la Rodie. The Sieur Lanty. The Sieur Nosce. The
Sieur St. Bonnet. The Sieur d' Aubarede. The Sieur Picquet.
Lieutenant killed. The Sieur de Renoncourt.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur de Montifaux. The Sieur la Vignerie. The Sieur
Choice. The Sieur Fume.

Of the Regiment of Navarre. Captains wounded. The Sieur Dorignac, Major. The
Sieur du Pont. The Sieur la Harliere. The Sieur Carbonnieux. The Sieur Rieutor.
The Sieur Sormel. The Sieur du Ribal. The Sieur la Forest. The Sieur Mossan.
The Sieur la Salle. The Sieur Massiliac. The Sieur Castillon. The Sieur Macaye.
The Sieur Desu: The Sieur du Pre.
Lieutenants killed The Sieur de la Tourrelle. The Sieur Puget. The Sieur du
Ham.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur d' Orgeval. The Sieur des Essarts. The Sieur
Carignan. The Sieur Bevilliers.

Of the Royal Regiment. Captains wounded. The Sieur de Montmelian. The Sieur
Dorigny. The Sieur Corte. The Sieur la F^itte.
Lieutenants vounded. The Sieur de la Croix. The Sieur Boulanger. The Sieur du
Beuil. The Sieur Sainte-Maison.
Sub-Lieutenant wounded. The Sieur Paco.

Of the Regiment of Enguien. Captain wounded. The Sieur de Toury.
Lieutenant killed. The Sieur de Bichot.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur du Bouy. The Sieur Ferrant.

Of the Regiment of Piedmont Captains wounded. The Sieur d' Or^^ois. The Sieur
Taragny Aid M. The Sieur Chadigny. The Sieur Chastre. The Sieur Siccard. The
Sieur Merry. The Sieur Saint Marie. The Sieur Dezers. The Sieur Lam^non. The
Sieur la Fleur. The Sieur Robert.

Of the Regiment of Avergne. Captains wounded. The Sieur de Saint Marthe. The
Sieur Rigal. The Sieur Dargon.
Lieutenint killed. The Sieur di Glost.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur Loger. The Sieur Breyne. The Sieur Fournier.
The Father Almoner of the Regiment.

Of the Regiment of Lyonnis. Captain killed. The Sieur de Valorge.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur de Lavore. The Chevalier de Raousset. The Sieur
Broccard. The Sieur Saligny. The Sieur le Normand. The Sieur St. Jean. The
Sieur Pelou. The Sieur la Tour. The Sieur Chaudel Aid M.

Of the Regiment of Conti. The S. de Gour, Major, killed.
Captain killed. The Sieur de Moreuil.
Captains wounded. The Sieur de St. Ange. The Sieur St. Seve. The Sieur
Coulange. The Sieur Marege. The Sieur Romieu.
Leutenants wounded. The Sieur de Fenneton. The Sieur Faruze. The Sieur de
Vaux. The Sieur la Tour. The Sieur la Semmerie. The Sieur Bussi du Mine. The
Sieur du Peroux.

Of the Regiment of Normandy. Captains wounded. The Sieur de Lisle. The Sieur
Polignant,
Leutenants killed. The S. de la Roque-Inpugeade.
Lieutentants wounded The Sieur de Givresac. The Sieur Langon, dead of his
wounds. The Chevelier Dus. The Sieur la Martine.

Of the Regiment of the Crown. Captains wounded. The Sieur de la Forcade. The
Sieur de Pille.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur de Novion. The Sieur Malvoisin. The Sieur
Flusi. The Sieur Charlet.

Of the Regiment of Conde. Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur de la Guezeric. The
Sieur Baumi. The Sieur Canac. The Sieur de Jean.

Of the Regiment of la Chastre. Captains wounded. The Sieur Milon. The Sieur
Boislandry.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur Durant. The Sieur la Salle. The Sieur Perre.
The Sieur Brucaval.

Of the Regiment of Turenne. Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur de Larzac. The
Sieur Baltazar.

Of the Regiment of Soissons. Captains wounded. The Sieur de Farnanville. The
Sieur Mignare, de la Colonelle.
Lieutenant wounded. The Sieur de la Board.
Of the Regiment of Bourbonnois. Captain killed. The Sieur Piblard.
Captain wounded. The Sieur Dhiery.
Leutenants wounded. The Sieur de C^mpersan. The Sieur Baudouin. The Sieur
Salure. The Sieur la Bruyere.

Of the Regiment of Rouergue. Captains wounded. The Sieur Daffesq. The Sieur
Fregere. The Sieur Descombies.
Lieutenant killed. The Sieur de Luzam.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur de Monblane. The Sieur Bienfait. The Sieur
Valon^e. The Sieur Meusnier.

Of the Regiment of Burgundy. Captains wounded. The Sieur de Bel^astel. The
Sieur la Siblere. The Sieur Saint Vincent.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur de Bou^desoulle. The Sieur la Pau^e. The Sieur
Maison-Neuve. The Sieur la Fuye. The Sieur Chircourt. The Sieur du Coutroye.
The Sieur Ferrandiere.

Of the Regiment of Vermandois. Captains wounded. The Sieur de la Touch. The
Sieur Savigny. The Sieur la Factiere.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur Arnault. The Sieur de Daix. The Sieur Amiere.
The Sieur Vergeuse.

Of the Regiment of Languedoc. Captain wounded. The Sieur de Saint Ledger.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur Olivier. The Sieur Saint Martin. The Sieur
Goviabat. The Sieur Ro^ville. The Sieur La^glois. The Sieur Ma^elau. The Sieur
Marestan. The Sieur Bonafaux.

Of the Reginent of Hamilton. Captain wounded. The Sieur d' St. Genies.
Leutenant wounded. The Sieur le la Moline.

Of the Regiment Fuzeliers. Captain killed. The Sieur Darquet.
Captains wounded. The Sieur ^aschal. The Sieur Mouone. The Sieur Rabar.
Lieutenants wounded. The Sieur de la Vigne. The Sieur de la Guard, dead of his
wounds.

Of the Marine Regiment. Captain killed. The Sieur Saint Fr^^nc.

Officers of the Artillery. The Sieur de Chevrigny, Provincial Commissary,
wounded. Commissary of the Artillery slain. The Sieur de Cavees.
Commissaries of the Artillary wounded. The Sieur Fleury. The Sieur de Cret.
The Sieur Villedot.

Aids de Camp wounded. The Sieur de la Loutardiere* Captain of the Vessels.
The Sieur du Fort. The Sieur Roquefeuille. The Sieur Gruillon.
Ingeniers killed. The Sieur de Chastillon, The Sieur Perrault.
Ingeniers wounded. The Sieur Parisot. The Sieur Rouselot. The Sieur d'
Harmant. The Sieur le Pautre. The Sieur Racine. The Sieur Grand Comb. The
Sieur Despagne the younger. The Sieur Mace. The Sieur Morin. The Sieur Pauhome.
Father Maximilian, a Recollect, wounded in the Trenches. There were between
four or five hundred Soldiers killed, and about seven hundred wounded. The
Besieged lost above eight hundred Men.
FINIS.

