THE HONOR Due to the Civil Magistrate Stated and Urged; IN A SERMON Composed
for the Day of Thanksgiving, For the happy Discovery of the Late Horrid and
Execrable Conspiracy AGAINST His Majesty's Sacred Person and Government. By
THEOPHILUS DORRINGTON.

London, Printed for John Wyat, at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1696.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE materials of the following Discourse are Thoughts which have a long time
taken possession of my Mind, upon a good consideration of the Duty therein
urged, and of the Behavior of the World with Relation to it. The Occasion of
putting them now together was, The Happy Discovery of the late Wicked and
Detestible Conspiracy against the Life of Our KING; (whom may it please God
long to preserve) and by consequence against our Peace, Liberty, and Religion,
and the Welfare of Europe.

It was at first designed for a Sermon, and in particular for the Day of
Thanksgiving to Almighty God for that Discovery; to which I intended it should
have been somewhat more expressly accomodated in an Application at the End: To
be sure, the best way of expressing our Thankfulness to Almighty God for having
so wonderfully, again, preserved our Good KING, is to study and practice all
that Duty which God requires we should pay to the KING. But having had no
opportunity to use the Discourse in that way, by reason of my uncertain
Circumstances at present, I have resolved thus to Publish it.

Thus it came to pass that it is in such a Method: And the Duty is here Stated
and Urged (as becomes a Sermon) from the Intimations of Holy Scripture
concerning it; and the whole Discourse is chiesly grounded upon Principles of
Religion. Being, then, after this manner at first composed, I was willing to
let it go with this Character; Because the greatest Reverence and Regard is
certainly due to Religion, and to what is firmly and necessarily connected with
the Principles and Precepts of it: All That therefore may, with great Reason,
have a mighty force, and power upon Men. I heartily pray that this Discourse
may, as much as is necessary, revive this Happy and Important Instance of
Religious Practice amongst us, to the Honor of our Holy Religion, the
Obtaining the Divine Favor and Blessings upon the Nation, and the Promoting
the Tranquillity, and Prosperity of our Good KING and his People. To which Ends
I am sure this Practice will mightily conduce.

THE HONOR Due to the Civil Magistrate.
1 Pet. 2. 17. later part. Honor the King.
ALL the Rules of Religion are designed to promote the Happiness of Mankind;
and this we may very reasonably believe of them, since they were all contrived
by that Good, and Just, and Wise Being who created us. Those Laws which tend to
form us into orderly Societies, and direct the Behavior of Men toward one
another, if they were universally observed would certainly produce all that
Advantage and Happiness which can be derived from Society, and Communion with
one another. While we perform what is made our Duty toward other Men, this is
not only for their Good and Advantage, but tends to our own too. As it is for
the benefit of the World that the Great Universal Governor, the Lord of Hosts,
has appointed Governments among Men, and this, as the Apostle says, is an
Ordinance of God for Good; so it is for the Benefit of the World that those
Governments be duly Honored and Obeyed. This is not only to the Advantage of
those that govern, but also to theirs who are governed. And, most certainly, a
Man may, out of Love to his Country, and from a hearty Concern for the Welfare
even of the People urge them, as the Apostle in our Text. does, to Honor the
King.

I shall therefore in this Discourse propose what Honor must be paid to the
King: and offer those Arguments which ought to induce us to it.

We have in this Text an evident and express Command to Honor the King: By the
King is meant the Person or Persons who bear and execute the supreme governing
Authority of whatever Nation. The Precept here supposes a single Person,
because the People whom the Apostle wrote to were under such a sort of
Government; but it does not at all oblige or require that all Government should
be managed by a single Person.

The Duty of Subjects to the King or Governor is comprehended here under the
same Word which directs the Behavior of Children toward their Parents in the
fifth Commandment: Of which Command this Precept in our Text is a Branch. The
Septuagint translate the Hebrew Word in that Command by the same Greek Word
which the Apostle uses here: And the Apostle Paul expresses that which is
required by the Fifth Command, by the same Word which the Septuagint use, in
Ephesians. 6. 2. From what is required, then, in several Places of Scripture to be
paid by Children to their Parents, we may learn how the Civil Magistrate is to
be Honored: And as Children must reverence and respect, must love and obey,
must assist, and cherish their Parents, as there is occasion, so must Subjects
demean themselves toward their Prince. It seems very well said by some Learned
Men, That there is a peculiar Fitness and Propriety of Speech in using the Word
Honor in that Command rather than Love or Fear, though our Parents are to be
loved, and also reverenced or feared: Because, say they, He that Loves, does
not always reverence and observe; And he that Fears does not always Love; but
he that Honors does both Reverence and Love. It is the best general Account,
then, that we can give of the Meaning and Extent of this Precept to say, It
includes all that which a reverential, respectful Love, or a kind and loving
Reverence does require, and would exercise it self by. This I shall now
represent, as well as I can so briefly do it, in the following Particulars.

1 The Subjects must acknowledge and allow all that Authority and Power in the
Prince which of Right belongs to him. This, I think, is of it self very evident
to be included in the Command to Honor the King. And that it does belong to
it, Solomon intimates in those Words, My Son fear thou the Lord and the King,
and meddle not with them that are given to change, Prove. 24. 21. We must
neither in Principle deny, nor in Practice oppose or contradict, nor any ways
endeavor to undermine or lessen the Authority which belongs to the Governor.
We must treat him with Respect as a Superior, and prefer him and his Interests
before our selves, and our own. Every Subject must esteem him superior to
himself; therefore all must esteem him superior to all. If he be higher than
every Part of the Community beside himself, he is higher than the whole. It is
a dishonorable Opinion of the Governor to account him a Servant of the
People. Though a good Prince will (as we to our Comfort find at present)
entirely give up himself to promote the Happiness of the People under him, as
if he were their Servant; yet no good Subject who duly reverences the King will
account him so. His Servants we are to whom we Obey: If he then be a Servant to
the People he is bound to obey them, and then they are superior to him, not he
to them. But this is a Contradiction to Authority and Government: To govern is
the Office of a Superior, and the Exercise of Authority, but a Servant, as
such, is subject to Authority, and does not bear it: They who would have the
Prince accounted the common Servant would themselves be esteemed the
uncontrollable Masters of the People when they are but in the Service of the
Prince: According to the true Character of Pride, which is always disposed to
deny and withold the Honor due to another, and to assume also more than is
due to it self.

And if the Honoring of the Governor requires that we do asscribe and yield
to him all that Authority and Power which of Right belongs to him; it
manifestly forbids all Endeavor to make it less than it is. As due Reverence
and Love must give all that Authority which the Law and Constitution of the
Government allows; so it must be far from endeavoring that this should allow
less than it does. It is Irreverence to invade his Right against Law, and also
to invade the Law it self which establishes it. There is in both these things
an Opposition to his Authority, and a manifest Contradiction to the Subjects
Duty: They both proceed from an irreverent, undutiful and rebellious
Disposition of Mind. The one Sort of Wickedness is like that of a Thief or
Robber, who deprives a Man of the Possession of his own: The other is that
which the Holy Scripture curses under the Name of Removing a Neighbor's
Landmark. And it is very evident that this Wickedness is the worst of the two,
and much the greater Wrong to a Neighbor. The former invades the Possession,
this the Right; the one takes away the present Use, the other endeavors to
deprive him of the Use of it for ever: The one takes but the Crop, or a Part of
it, but the other takes away the Land too. Nor does it at all lessen the Guilt
of this later Case, that the Consent of the Prince is gained to the Diminution
of his Authority. There may be such a thing as a forced constrained Consent; as
when a Man invaded by two Evils, one of which he must needs suffer, therefore
chooses the least. A Prince may be brought into such Straits as to find it
necessary to let go a Part that he may not lose the whole. But it is a guilty
thing to impose upon him in such a Necessity. As it is an Injustice to impose
upon the Necessity or Ignorance of an equal or inferior Neighbor in our
Dealings with him: So it is Injustice together with Irreverence to impose thus
upon the Necessities of a Superior. But especially is it guilty to bring the
Prince under such Necessity, and then to make use of it against him, which is
the usual Method of those who seek to undermine and lessen his Authority. Their
Policy is, to find out Ways to bring him to the Danger of losing his Crown,
perhaps to a foreign Enemy, and then to withold the Assistance necessary to
the Defense of it unless he will part with some of the Jewels of it to them,
which is certainly contrary to the Honoring of the King.

In due Reverence and Honor of the King we must ascribe and yield to him all
that Power and Authority which is his Right and Due: And we must be directed to
determine what is so by the Law and Constitution of the Government we are
under, which is as it were the Landmark or Boundary of Right between one and
another through the whole Community: And to know what the Law and Constitution
allows, we must learn this from those who are Professors of, and Learned in the
Laws. And if they happen to differ in their Opinions of the matter, so as to
ascribe some of them more, and some less Authority and Power to the Prince; a
reverent and dutiful Disposition of Mind, which is desirous to give all that is
due, will follow those who ascribe the more: But those who want a due Reverence
for the Prince, and are rather desirous to yield him as little Authority as
they can, will be sure to follow those that ascribe the less: Which is
certainly a Transgression of our Duty in this Matter, and that which no tender
Consciences will allow.

2. To Honor the King or Governing Power includes and requires Obedience and
Subjection to his Laws. If we own his Authority in Word and Principle but do
not obey his Laws we deny it in Practice. This therefore must needs be included
in the due Honor and Reverence of him. As it is an Exercise of Authority to
make Laws, so it is an Instance of acknowledging that Authority to obey, and be
subject to them. We are bound to this by the Law of God which says Let every
Soul be subject to the higher Powers, Romans 13.

If his Laws are manifestly contrary to the Law of God, and so they cannot be
actually obeyed; yet we must preserve a humble and submissive Disposition, and
quietly suffer the Penalties which are imposed upon us by Law. This is that
which the Apostle Peter commands, 1 Pet. 4. 15. Let none of you suffer as an
Evil Doer or as a Busy Body in other Men's Matters, but if a Man suffer as a
Christian let him not be ashamed. The Apostle intimates there would be occasion
for them to suffer as Christians, or merely for being such; which could come to
pass by no Law but a very contrary one to the Law of God: And he exhorts them,
however, to suffer meekly and patiently, if this should be their Case,
according to the Example of our Master Jesus. And if we must patiently and
quietly bear the Penalty of evil Laws, this forbids the doing any thing
contrary to the Reverence and Honor of the Prince to get rid of those Laws. It
forbids the murmuring against him, the reviling of the Magistrate, the
Endeavor to lessen his Reputation and Esteem among the People, and the making
Parties against him in order to bias and constrain him to alter those Laws:
This is the Spirit of Faction which is undutiful, disobedient and rebellious.
If the Prince cannot be fairly and dutifully persuaded, the Subject must not
endeavor to force him, to alter even an unjust and wicked Law.

Without doubt the Magistrate has Power to make Laws in matters left
indifferent, and which are not expressly and particularly determined in the Law
of God. All the best and most religious Governments of the World have
understood so, and practiced accordingly; and it is a new and false Opinion
which holds the contrary. If the Magistrate can command nothing but what is
commanded in the Law of God he can make no Laws at all, has no Legislative
Power, but all he has to do is to enforce and put in Execution the Laws of God.
This Principle certainly takes from him part of his Authority and Right: And it
is very apt in its Nature and Tendency to rob him of the rest too. It is
commonly seen Iodg'd in a proud and disobedient Spirit: It makes Subjects more
ready to dispute than to obey. It easily finds Pretenses to refuse Obedience,
and so encourages to refuse it whenever a Man's Lust or Humor, or ill-placed
Interest inclines him to do so. It requires the Magistrate to make Laws, not
according to the Light and Wisdom and Justice or Goodness of his own
Conscience; but will have them made according to the Darknesses and Mistakes,
the Self-Love, the Malice, and Perverseness of theirs. It is eager and fierce
for a great Liberty of Conscience to be allowed it self, but will allow none to
the Governor. It is a very common Effect of this Principle in Men that it
withholds them from Subjection and Obedience to the Magistrate in many things
which are commanded by the Law of God. As it is no wonder if Evil produces Evil
and an Error betrays a Man into a Sin. Let us know that while we are mightily
afraid of obeying the Magistrate too far, we are very liable to be betrayed, by
the Subtilty of the Tempter and the deceitful Wickedness of our own Hearts,
into the not obeying so far as we ought.

Under this Head is included the Obligation to pay readily and faithfully the
Taxes, Contributions, and Customs which are established by Law. This our Savior
enjoins when he says, Render to Caesar the things which are Cesar' s: And the
Apostle in like manner requires that we pay Tribute to whom Tribute is due,
Custom to whom Custom, as well as Honor to whom Honor is due. We must obey
these Laws as well as any other: And should account these of singular and
eminent Importance; because these provide the necessary Supports of the
Government, and the Sinews as it were of all Administrations, and Actions for
the public Welfare.

3. The Honor of the King requires and includes a candid and respectful
Censure of his Government and Administrations. We are bound to put as good an
Interpretation as the thing will bear upon the Actions of every Neighbor.
Justice requires this, because it is according to that great and excellent Rule
of Equity, That we do to others as we would they should do unto us. And true
Love or Charity requires it too; which is always ready to think as well of
every one as it can. Therefore the Apostle gives it this excellent Character (1
Cor. 13.) Charity thinks no Evil. A true Reverence for any Person, too, will
make us think respectfuly of his Actions; it will be ready to Honor them as
well as the Person that does them. And the Honor of his Actions is to account
them Just and Wise and Good. This therefore we ought to believe of the
Administrations of the Magistrate, when there is not very evident Appearance of
the contrary; this we ought to believe always when they are capable of such an
Interpretation. We must neither hastily condemn his Actions nor groundlesly
suspect his Designs. These things the Scripture evidently binds upon us by such
Directions as these; Curse not the King no not in Thought: Thou shall not curse
the Gods nor revile the Ruler of thy People (Exodus 22. 28.) which Place of
Scripture the Apostle Paul enforces ( Acts 23. 5.) when he confesses his Error
in having spoken too sharply and irreverently of the High Priest, before he was
aware, and says, It is written thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy
People. The Apostle Jude puts it among several very ill Characters of a sort of
Men, which infested and disparaged the Church in his time, that they did speak
evil of Dignities. It is contrary to Reverence and Love to invent
Disparagements of the Magistrates Actions, to study to find Faults in them: And
it is the same ill Disposition full of Malice and Pride to be very ready to
receive such Imputations, to seek and hunt after them and take Pleasure to hear
them: And it is much more so to spread and publish dishonorable Reflections,
to foment and cherish Suspicions and Jealousies in others: As we ought to
reverence the Prince our selves, so we ought to promote the Reverencing of him
by others.

The due Honor and Reverence of the Prince requires that we do acquiesce in
his Administrations when we do not know the particular Grounds and Reasons of
them: It may be many times unfit that the People should know all the Reasons of
State upon which the Governor acts, especially when it may be supposed there
are some Enemies of the Government among the People; and no Man is capable to
make a right Judgment of an Action when he does not know the Reasons and
Circumstances of it.

We must not presently condemn those Undertakings of the Prince as foolish or
ill managed which do not succeed well. Success is in the Hand of God and he
gives it where and when he pleases: And, to teach Men to acknowledge and depend
upon his Providence, he sometimes gives it to weak and foolish Endeavors and
Designs, and sometimes again he denies it to the best and wisest. It is often
seen (as the wise Man says) that the Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle
to the strong, nor Bread to the wise, nor Favor to Men of Skill. When the
Undertakings of the Governor for the public Good have not their desired
Success, it is more just and reasonable that the People blame themselves, than
that they should blame or censure him: They may justly suspect their Offenses
of Almighty God do provoke him to give Disappointments to wise and well managed
Designs, when these do not evidently appear to be otherwise. And I doubt not it
may be said the Sins of the People may occasion the Error of the Prince when
he does err: To help themselves therefore, in both cases, their best Course is
to abstain from murmuring against the Prince, and humble themselves before God,
and to search out and forsake the Evil of their Doings. Their irreverent and
undutiful Behavior to the Governor under such Circumstances would but add Sin
to Sin, and be likely to pull down upon them more of the Wrath of God.

Further, As the Honor of the Prince forbids that we despise or condemn him
for ill Successes, so it forbids us to envy or grow jealous of him for great
and happy ones. True Reverence and Love wishes his Prosperity, and delights in
the Increase of his Reputation and Glory: But these are the common Practices of
proud Men, and those that are rebelliously disposed; if the Prince does not
succeed well, to despise and condemn him, and if he does, then to grow envious
and jealous of him. It is utterly contrary to our Duty to entertain groundless
Jealousies and Suspicions of the Governor, or to think that if he grows great
enough to do Mischief, therefore he will do it. It was the barbarous Injustice
of the Commonwealth of Athens, that if any excellent Person among them had
recommended himself to the general Esteem and Love of his Country by great and
brave Actions done to the Honor, and the Interest of his Country, they would
reward his good Services by banishing him from his Country. They would fear he
would do harm when they thought he might have Power to do it, though he had
done nothing but Good. And that he might not wrong his Country, they would be
before hand with him, and would wrong him. This becomes no Policy but that of
wretched Heathens who knew not the excellent Rules of Justice and Charity which
our Religion affords, and is the grossest Contradiction that can be to the
Rules of Christianity. This bids us not return evil for evil received; and
therefore much rather requires also that we do not resist or repel evil with
evil; much rather then must it further require that none do seek to repel the
Evil which is but only suspected, by doing that which is certainly evil. But
these Men are for doing Injury to prevent their receiving and suffering such
Injury as they unjustly and groundlesly fear. Thus they wrong the Prince while
they unjustly fear him; they unjustly hate, of necessity, while they unjustly
fear him; and they unjustly undermine his Power to prevent his doing Mischief
while they unjustly fear he will do Mischief: Such a Heap of Wickedness and
Guilt does causeless Jealousy load it self withal.

It is a certain Sign and Discovery of an ill Man to be full of groundless
Jealousies and Suspicions of others. The common Cause of such things where
there is no good Appearance to ground them upon is only this; that such Men are
conscious to themselves they should be what they suspect another will prove in
the same Circumstances: They evidently betray their own Heart, and Thoughts in
the Case, and show that they do not think themselves to have Honesty and Virtue
enough to avoid such Wickedness in such Temptations and Opportunities. And
though they make mighty Pretenses and a great Show, of Watchfulness and Care
for the Public Welfare, they give all wise and good Men Ground to be very
jealous of them, and to wish none such may ever have any Share in the
Government.

4. The Honor of the King requires and includes the yielding him readily all
the Assistance we can in his Administration and Government. every one must
endeavor to promote his Affairs and Undertakings according as their Stations
and Conditions will allow. We should consider him engaged in seeking the
public Welfare which certainly deserves, and we may easily believe will
constantly rquire the public Assistance. As Reverence and Love will charitably
believe his Administrations and Designs aim at the public Good, so it must
needs be that such a Disposition will be ready and forward to assist and
promote them, it will do it very freely, and with a good will, and therefore
with all its Power. But Jealousy and Pride set themselves to entangle his
Affairs, and frustrate his Designs and Endeavors. They are glad to have
something like a seeming Ground to revile and reproach him, and of a Color for
spiteful Accusations and Slanders; and because they have a mind to blame him
they set themselves all they can to hinder him. When they slowly afford him the
necessary Assistance, they accuse him as the Cause why the Work is no sooner
done. They will not do their Duty, but study Excuses to put it off or delay it,
that they may disable him for the doing what is his, and then accuse him as
weak, or negligent, or ill-designing.

If all are bound in their several Places to assist the Governor as well as
they can, then are they also bound to esteem, and assist his Officers and
Instruments, and those that assist him. He that loves and performs his Duty
himself, in his Place, will be well-pleased with another for that he does so
too. But they that hate and design against the Prince, will also set themselves
against his Instruments, and such as serve and assist his Undertakings. Those
that set themselves against his Officers and Ministers, immediately, do many
times ultimately design against him: They are their Enemies because they serve
him faithfully and to good Effect. They would not have his Undertakings
prosper, and therefore hate and oppose those who endeavor that they may
prosper: And that none may help him they will industriously find out Ways to
discourage those that do, and to disable those that would do it. Some set
themselves against Ministers and those that assist the Prince out of Envy
against them, or out of Covetousness or Pride. They hate to see others have the
Profits, or the Honor of serving the Prince which they would fain possess
themselves: And the Humor comes to that Degree of Wickedness that they had
rather such good Service, as others do, should not be done at all than that
their Neighbor, and not themselves, should have the doing of it, which
certainly demonstrates they have more Self-love, than they have of Reverence
for the Prince or Love to their Country.

We ought to assist the Government all we can, though we could expect no
particular Advantage to our selves from what we do: Contenting our sel^^^ with
our Share in the public good which is promoted thereby. We should assist the
Governor to our own Loss, if that Loss be but small, and what may be easily
born, though we are not particularly commanded to it by the Prince, when the
Exigence of public Affairs seems to require it, or the Advantage to the
public would be very great, which would come by such Assistance. A Certainty
of a small Loss should not discourage a Man from public Service, much less may
a mere Possibility do it, or a very distant Probability of suffering it. And
then the mere Love of our own Ease or the Desire to attend only our own
particular Affairs will not excuse us from the Service of the Public and the
Prince. When the Prince needs our Assistance, and commands it, no Hazard that
we shall run, or Loss that we may sustain by it will allow us to withold it.
Therefore it is the constant Style of good Subjects when they profess a due
Readiness to assist the Prince, that they will stand by him with their Lives
and Fortunes.

These are some and perhaps the chief of those Matters which are contained in
this Precept in our Text, to Honor the King. Now this excellent Precept,
though, like all the rest of the divine Commands, it is wise and just and good
in it self, yet it meets with as much Opposition and Averseness to it in the
Heart of Man as any besides. It is in the Nature of all Wickedness to decline,
and abhor Government and Subjection. It naturally says who is Lord over us, and
hates to be conttroul'd: So that it is inseparably belonging to the Corruption
and Pravity of humane Nature to be loath to be governed. Besides, Pride is the
most common Vice of corrupted Nature, and that which is for the most part,
dearest to it, and the last that is cured. And Pride loves, indeed, to receive
Honor, but does not care to give any. It makes a Man think he never receives
enough; but it makes him think, too, that the least Measure is enough to give:
It is no wonder, then, if Humane Nature needs to be exhorted to such a Duty as
this.

I proceed, then, to the second Part of the Discourse proposed; which is to
urge the Practice and Performance of this Duty, as it has been stated: And
there are these Considerations following which require it of us, and ought to
move us to it.

1. We must know that Magistracy and Government is an undoubted Ordinance and
Institution of Almighty God. It is the Will and Appointment of Heaven that all
Nations should have some Government and Order among them: That some one, or
more, should have Authority to rule, and the rest should reverence, love, and
obey that Authority. He has established this Order to enforce upon Mankind the
Laws of Piety and Virtue: To Influence toward the keeping up those Virtues in
the World, which he requires Men should glorify, and honor, and acknowledge
him by; and those which are necessary to render them easy, useful, and
comfortable to each other. And he knows very well how necessary some Government
and Authority among Men is to these Purposes: That without this Mankind would
be as wild as the Savage Beasts, and, perhaps, as little regard Him, and be as
mischievous to one another as they. It may be reckoned a reasonable
Confirmation of this, that Magistracy and Government is an Ordinance and
Institution of Heaven, that we find such a thing still maintained and kept up
in the World notwithstanding the common Unwillingness of Mankind to obey, and
be ruled. Nothing is more evident than a universal Unwillingess to submit to
Government, and be confined by Laws. It is not a new but an old thing, and that
which has always been, for the Subject Part of a Nation to be apt to grudge at
and envy the Authority of those that govern, and often to wish and, as far as
they durst, to endeavor to make it less. There have been always some proud,
ambitious and covetous Men among them who would fain have a Share in the
Government for the Profit and Honor of it to themselves, and who have wheedled
the People to their Side by finding mighty Faults in the Governors, promising
they would govern them better, and especially would give them more Liberty: And
it is an old and a common thing that they get some Fools to believe them, and to
think them mighty Lovers of their Country, and the People, because they cry up
Liberty much; and to account them mighty good Men because they find great Fault
with others. The Histories of all Nations are not without frequent Instances of
Designs and Struggles of this Nature: And these things are very pernicious to
Governments, and tend to overthrow and destroy them: Yet is Government and
Magistracy maintained in the World. It cannot be, certainly, that it could
subsist against so great and constant an Opposition, if it were not supported
by the Wisdom and Power of Heaven; If there were not the Force of a Divine
Institution, and a constant Care and Application of the Divine Providence to
maintain it.

But I account the Authority of Holy Scripture a better Proof in Matters of
Religion than any Reasonings of Men: Let us therefore take notice of what that
says to this Matter; and perhaps there is not any thing more expressly taught us
there than this. The Apostle Paul expressly calls Government an Ordinance of
God, Romans 13. 2. and says, Whosoever resists the Power, or opposes
Government, resists the Ordinance of God: And they that resist shall receive
to themselves Damnation; they commit herein a damnable Sin. God himself says,
By me Kings reign, Prove. 8. 15. When we are commanded to submit to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's Sake, and to be subject and obedient to the
Civil Magistrate for Conscience Sake; These things speak it a Law of Heaven
that Honor and Obedience should be paid to the higher Powers, that is, to
those who are in Authority among Men, and so do conclude that Magistracy and
Government is an Ordinance of God. We ought to look upon Magistrates as the
subordinate Officers of the great and universal Governor of the World; of him
who is Head over all things to the Church, and who has all Power given him both
in Heaven and Earth. He has an unquestionable Authority to Rule, and therefore
has Right to set up what Officers under him he pleases to govern the World by;
he can communicate Authority and Power, and that which they act by is his, and
is derived from him, if all Power be his. This the Apostle Paul most evidently
teaches us, when He calls the Governor The Minister of God, Romans 13. 4. And
the Apostle Peter urges Christians to submit to such as to them that are sent
by God for the Punishment of evil doers and the Praise of them that do well.

Now this is certainly a good Foundation and Argument for Honoring and Obeying
the Higher Powers. This makes Authority to be a Divine and Sacred thing: And
makes it Rebellion against God to Rebel against the Magistrate. We shake off
the Divine Authority, and refuse the Dominion of Heaven when we despise and
refuse the Governments on Earth: We break his Law, we insult his Officers and
Vicegerents, those that do in a peculiar manner bear his Image and represent
Him to the World, when we slight and oppose their Authority. Therefore is this
commonly found in those who have not a due Reverence for Almighty God himself,
but have lost this either by Profaneness, or by a fond Conceit of their
extraordinary Favor with God, and a habit contracted thereupon of rude
Familiarity with Him. Our Savior says to a sort of Officers under Him, which
undoubtedly ought to be reckoned Inferior to these, that which therefore we
may conclude is with more force and reason Applicable to these; He that
receives you receives me, and he that despises you despises me. If we
despise and affront his Vicegerents this rises to an affront and contempt of
Himself. So absurd and foolish is the pretense of opposing the Civil Magistrate
to promote the Kingdom of Christ; and to rebel against his Laws and Authority
because we will own no King but Jesus Christ. He that opposes the Civil
Magistrate does therein oppose the Kingdom of Christ which he pretends to
advance, for he opposes the Officers and Administrators of that Kingdom. And
though this Principle and Practice may be sometimes found together with a mighty
and a fierce Zeal against Popery, it is a deplorable and gross Ignorance, at
best, which makes these two things consist in the same Persons: For this
Principle is in truth, the grand Character of Popery properly so called: It is
in meaning, and constant Effect, where it can have its Natural Effect, just the
same with that which subjects the State to the Church, and the Civil Magistrate
to him or them that Govern the Clergy: And which is a direct contradiction to
that Scripture that says Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers Romans
13. When the Apostle says every soul he certainly designs to exempt none,
whether a single Person, or an Assembly of Men.

2. Another Argument for the Reverence and Honor of the King may be this: The
particular Interposition and Concern of the Divine Providence in setting up
whatever Governors there are in all Nations. It must indeed be granted, That
the first Governors in the World were Parents and Masters, who being Heads of
particular Families Governed the Descendents and Servants of their Families.
But it does not appear that this Form of Government is any where particularly
required by Almighty God: Or that the World, having altered and lest this Form
is bound to be crumbled again into such little Societies and Governments, that
it may return to its Primitive Model. As it is very evident that this sort of
Government was early altered in many Places, so we have no reason to think that
this might not Lawfully be done, when the Exigences of the little Communities,
and the Ends of Government require it. It is a Maxim must be allowed that they
who have Authority can give it, and therefore they may Communicate or Surrender
it. They who were Heads of Families might, by mutual Consent, join many
Families together for the greater strength of the Whole, and perhaps other
advantages, and might Rule them in one Body by a Common Vote as a Senate; and
this might be a very Lawful Foundation of an Aristocracy or the Government of
the Nobility, who doubtless are the Descendents of these Heads of Families,
that were the first Governors of the World. Again: These Heads of several
Families might also agree to choose out one among their Number, who had very
eminent Qualifications for Government, and resign their Authorities to him, and
so make him Sole Governor of the Community, subjecting both themselves and
their Families to him. Some might consent to this out of the Love of Ease and
Tranquillity, and to deliver themselves from the most troublesome Office in the
World, the Office of Governing; others might do it out of Deserence to that
Persons singular worth or Fitness to Govern; or they might all Consent to this
in a thankful acknowledgment of some singular Deliverance or Benefit they had
received, by the Courage and Conduct of that Person, and with the hazard of his
Life and Fortunes for their sakes. And their Consent and Resignation to him
might be a Lawful Foundation of a Monarchy or the Government of One. And if
that Person so set up should forsake them and abandon his Government they might
as Lawfully choose out another of their Company as if he were Dead: As Modern
History tells us the Nobility of Poland did, when the Duke of Anjou their
Elected King forsook them, to take Possession of (what he accounted his
Hereditary Right) the Crown of France. After some experience of this thing, and
when they found that upon the Death of every Monarch, as they were at liberty
to choose again, so in the choosing of another they were apt, by reason of
Competitions, to fall into Feuds and Animosities among themselves, and perhaps
into War and Confusion to the great danger of dissolving their Community: They
might Lawfully, to prevent this, Choose, not only the Person but, the Family
also, successively, to Rule over them; As the Israelites said to Gideon when he
had with great Bravery Delivered them from the Oppression of the Midianites,
Rule thou over us and thy son, and thy son's son. And this might be the just
Foundation of what we call a Successive or Hereditary Monarchy. It must be
granted too, that if that Family should come to be extinct, they might Lawfully
Transfer and Commit the Authority to another Family. Or if any Governor of that
Family should, before his Death, forsake his Government, The Nobility might
Justly choose and set up another of that Family to Govern. Thus they would serve
the pressing necessity of the Community, which must for its own Welfare be
Governed, and would do Justice to that Family, according to their Right by the
Established Law among them.

I shall not trouble this Discourse with the Question whether they that have no
Authority can give any or not, because that is not our Case. It Is certain, The
Governments of the World are now Administered in various Forms, and all Nations
have often changed their Governors, as the Mortality of Men, and the various
Mutations of the World have made it necessary for them to do: And very often by
Force and Constraint has the Governor and Governments perhaps of most, if not
all, Nations been Changed, and all things have been ordered by the absolute
Will of a Conqueror. There is not perhaps any one Governor or Government in the
World that is Descended by an uninterrupted Succession from the Patriarchal
Government; to be sure there is none that can make out such a Succession.

For us it is enough who are Subjects, That whatever the form of the Government
is which we are under, and whoever are the Governors of any People, the Holy
Scripture seems to teach Men to submit to them as appointed and set up by God
himself. This is certainly said, there, of some of them who came by the
Authority they possessed in some of the worst, and unjustest ways. Jeroboam was
born a Subject of the House of David, on which the Crown of Israel was Entailed
by the express appointment of God himself: He had no ground to pretend to it as
a Descendent of that House; but he Rebelled against his King, and was set up
and made King over a part of Israel by others of his Fellow Subjects, who did
this in Rebellion too. For though we find indeed this event was foretold to
Jeroboam, yet we do no where find that the People had God's Commandment to
choose him for their King, and throw off the House of David. Therefore when he
and they were charged with Rebellion by Abijah the King of Judah 2 Chronicles. 13.
they could not say for themselves they had the Command of God for what was
done: Nor could he pretend as much Right to set up himself against the House of
David, as David had to set up himself against the House of Saul. And God
assisted the House of David to chastise him, and the People, for their
Rebellion, with the slaughter of five hundred thousand Men. Yet to this Man
does God by his Prophet say (1 Kin. 14. 7.) I exalted thee among the People and
made thee Prince over my People Israel. Those who gained their Dominions by
Conquest subduing the Rightful Governors and their People with them, are yet
said to be set up over those Kingdoms by God himself: So he tells
Nebuchadnezzer (Dan. 2. 21. by that Prophet) that the God of Heaven had given
him a Kingdom, Power, Strength, and Glory. God had given him the Kingdom, and
the extent of Dominion which he had: Accordingly the People of Judah were
commanded to submit quietly to him as their King when God had made him their
Conqueror. So again, of Cyrus a Heathen Prince and a great Conqueror God
speaks and calls him his Anointed and says he had strengthened his hand to
subdue Nations before him, Esa. 45. 1. It is often said of him in Scripture,
that it is He who disposes of the Thrones, and Kingdoms, and Authorities of the
World. The Prophet Daniel teaches us that He removes Kings, and sets up
Kings, Dan. 2. 21. and again, that the most High rules in the Kingdom of Men,
and gives it to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4. 25. The Great Governor of the
World is absolute Lord of all things; He is King of Kings, and has Right to
change these who are his under Officers as He pleases: Even as a Prince on
Earth can at his pleasure change his under Officers and Ministers of State. We
must then look upon the Governors we are under as those whom Almighty God has
provided, for us, as bearing his Authority in that which they have, for all
Authority is from Him, and his Institution of Government. This must be said of
the several Governors and Forms of Governments in the World; and therefore
whoever or whatever, they are, the Subjects must Honor and Obey them for his
sake. And this is that which the Apostle teaches us in as plain and express
words as he can speak it, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the Higher
Powers: For there is no Power but of God: The Powers that are be ordained of
God.

3. This Reverence and Honor of the King or Governor may be justly urged from
the great and unspeakable Benefits of Government to the World. The Wisdom and
Goodness of God has appointed this as a Blessing; therefore the Apostle says of
the Magistrate that he is the Minister of God for Good. Without doubt
Government is one of the greatest Favors of Providence to this rude and wicked
World. It is certainly that on which all the happiness and comfort of Society
does depend, and by which it is procured and preserved.

It seems as if the World were sensible of the Benefits of this; We may observe
that all the wisest and most civilized People have always formed themselves
into a Body under a Government: And that none but the most wretchedly Ignorant
and Barbarous (if any) are to be found without it. This has obtained the Major
Vote in all ages, and almost the Universal consent; and that (which is very
strange) tho all the particulars are naturally loath to be subject and governed.
In truth, every Man would have others governed, tho he would not be governed
himself. And tho some mightily cry up Liberty it is not a Common one which they
really design. The Liberty which would give others as much advantage against
them, as they would have against others is not for their turn. If their desire
were rightly understood it would appear, It is not other men's Liberty they
desire but their own only.

It is good Government, and Laws well Executed, which must make the Societies
of Men tolerable and useful to each other. Without this, What enormous
mischiefs would their extravagant Lusts every day produce? All the World would
then be truly in a state of War: Men would like wild Beasts prey upon one
another, and the strongest, and the cunningest, would devour and destroy all
that they could get under their power. When notwithstanding Laws and Penalties
there is so much Wickedness and Mischief done in the World we have reason to
believe that much more would be done were it not that a great deal is prevented
by them. We may see the necessity of such restraints by the Rapines, the
Murders, the Cruelties, the Injuries committed where Men have thrown off all
regard to Government and Laws; as in the cases of War, or Rebellion, or when a
People are fallen under the Power of a Proud and Furious Conqueror. How many
Hundred Thousand of Lives commonly go to wrack? How many Cities are demolished?
How many Villages plundered and burnt? How many Provinces almost depopulated if
a War lasts but a few Years? Mankind appear delighted in doing mischief when
they can do what they will, and Lawless Power shows how great an Evil it is by
the mighty mischiefs it does. Tho Governments cannot prevent but that there
will be Wars between Nation and Nation, yet without doubt there is the less War
for the Influence of these; and they maintain Order, and Peace, and Tranquillity
within themselves, whereas there would be no such things in the World if there
were no Governments.

Further; As this prevents the Lusts and Wickedness of Men in a great measure
from doing Mischief, so it often finds ways to make even such things useful,
and like the Art of Medicine turns Poisons into Remedies, it cannot perfectly
cure the Wickedness of the World, but it restrains much, and often makes good
use of the Rest. The Rewards which are given to Public Service make the
Narrow-soul'd Lover of himself, who otherwise would serve no Interest but his
own, set himself to do some service to the Public, for the sake of gaining
them. Some Men are handled as we may say and made serviceable to the State by
their covetousness; some by their Ambition and Pride: And some become of use by
reason of their Luxury and Riot, which yet do usually make Men good for
nothing; If these Vices did not bring them into some necessities and straits
their Country would have no service from them nor be ever the better for them.
It is by virtue of Government that Men are rewarded with Profits and Honors
for Public Service, and this engages the more of them in it. There can at no
time be many found who will, with any trouble or hazard to themselves at least,
seek the Interest of the Public, without some certain particular advantage to
themselves by it. And we often see those who make the greatest pretenses to a
Public Spirit, and Love to their Country, yet caring for no service of it but
what they may particularly gain by, or such as by which they hope to get into
places of Profit or Honor.

Government is the Bond of Union to a Community: That to which they being all
United are thereby United to one another. It is therefore as we may say the
Basis or Foundation of their Strength, and their best means of Defense against
the Invasion of all Foreign Enemies. When the People of Israel were ordinarily
governed by the Heads of their particular Tribes and Families apart, they
always wanted some common Governor to have Power over the whole when they were
invaded by any of their Neighbors: And usually they were greatly distressed till
it pleased God to raise up some such Person to Deliver them. And we may justly
believe it was for greater safety and strength that the World so soon left off
the narrow small Governments of particular Families, and, by uniting several of
them into one Body, did set up larger and National Governments. When the
Governor has at his command the Strength, the Wealth, the Industry, the Skill,
of a great multitude of People the Community is so much the stronger against
any Enemy. Their union and subjection to him is as the string which binds
together a bundle of Arrows: So long as that keeps them together no strength
can break them, but if that bond be taken away, and the strict Union dissolved
it will be easy to do it, because they may be separated. What every one is
able to do being united in the Prince, as in a common Center, redounds to the
Advantage of the Whole. This matter has so much Truth in it that our own Nation
has, within the compass of a few Years, seen, even a Lawless Usurping Tyrant
making himself and the Nation more Formidable abroad, and giving it more Force
and Impression upon its Neighbors, than ev^^ a Just and Lawful Prince can do.
Which is evidently come to pass by this means: He violently made himself be
Obeyed by the force of Arms, Governed by his absolute Will, and commanded the
Assistance and Strength of the Nation to his own time and measure: And so he
united the Strength of it better than it will now be united by Consent. He
Commanded and Forced that Assistance which a Just and Good Prince will, and
does, only Ask for, and waits to have it given him, and to come as it will,
according to the prescribed Method of our Law and Constitution.

Great and many are the Advantages of Government: And this being so, we are
bound in Gratitude to honor that which is the Cause of so much good. Even the
Self-love in Mankind might reasonably induce them to this, in Acknowledgment of
the Benefits which every particular enjoys from that common Prosperity and
Tranquillity, which is procured and maintained by a good Government. To be sure
a public Spirit, and one that is duly concerned for the Welfare of his
Country, such an one must be well disposed to the Performance of this Duty. The
Prince that sets himself according to the Ends of Government to promote the
Happiness of his People, or as our Church speaks, studies to preserve those
committed to his Charge in Wealth, Peace and Godliness, deserves the Honor of
the whole Community: And when his Undertakings accordingly are for the public
Welfare it were the greatest Injustice to him, and indeed a manifest Token of
the Want of a true Love to our Country, to deny him the utmost public
Assistance that can be afforded, This brings me to the last Argument I shall
urge to enforce this Precept.

4. Let us all conspire to pay all due Honor to the King, because without
doing so, the Benefits of Government can never be attained: This is of absolute
Necessity to the rendering it so useful and beneficial as it may be, and is
designed by Almighty God to be. I do not doubt the Truth of that Maxim in
Politics Salus Populi est suprema Lex. It must be true, because the Good and
Welfare of the People is the very End of Government: it is appointed of God for
good. But then, it must be understood of the Community, not of any private
Person or particular Party of Men who have perversely so ordered their Interests
that they are inconsistent with those of the rest of the Community. And we must
needs allow this to be true too, That Salus and Honor Principis necessaria est
subditorum saluti. A steady Reverence and Subjection of the People to the
Prince, and their ready Assistance is absolutely necessary to the Happiness of
the People. What can he do for us if we do not assist him? He must help us by
our own Wealth and Strength if it be done at all. As the Governor must indeed
be wise, just, and good, and rule according to good Laws: So the People must be
patient of Government, and must readily obey the Prince according to those
Laws, or else they can never be happy. By maintaining and allowing his Interest
we maintain our own, and our Duty well paid to him will redound to our own
Advantage. If the Head be sick the Heart must be faint, and the whole Body out
of Order. And if in the natural Body the finest Blood and Spirits be not sent
up to the Head, that cannot diffuse Life, Sense and Vigor so as it should do
to the other Members. So, if the Governor wants his due from the People, they
must needs want that Benefit and Assistance which otherwise they might have
from him. Whoever, then, robs the Governor, robs the People by Consequence:
And they that are Enemies to him are Enemies to their Country. For so far as
they can lessen him, and diminish his Authority, so far they deprive the People
of the Advantage which they might have by his Government. The weaker he is, the
less Effect and Influence he must needs have toward the Ends and Advantages of
Government. And hence it is that the Enemies of their Country, and those
pretended Lovers of it who set themselves against the Interest of the King can
for the most part very readily concur in the same Actions, and pursue the same
Projects and Designs. They both tend whether thinkingly or unthinkingly to the
same public Mischief, and like Lines from different Parts of the Circumference
meet in the Center.

It is a false Notion, and the most unhappy one that a Nation can possibly fall
into, to imagine, that the Interest of the People is one thing, and that of the
Prince another. To think that these two are like the two Ends of a Balance,
and therefore as one rises, the other must needs be depressed. We must know
there is not two but only one Interest between the Prince and the People. The
Welfare of the Head is the Advantage of the whole Body. And if there be any
such Division among the Members as that any one would draw more to its self
than is due, or would withold from another what is due to that, this cannot be
without some Prejudice to the whole. Among the Members indeed some are much
more important than others, and to withold from them threatens the
Destruction of the Body, such Parts are the Head and other Vitals: Such is the
Prince in the Body Politic; he is a vital and important Part and not only
necessary to the well-being, but even to the being of the whole Body: Who
cannot, therefore, be hurt but the Dissolution of the Community is endangered,
nor can he be taken away but the Ruin of the whole is likely to ensue. As
therefore a just and good Prince will often say to his People our Interests are
inseparable, and does always think it; So will always good Subjects think the
same concerning their Prince. If a Prince oppresses and destroys his People,
this is as if a Man should cut off his own Legs with his Hands or one Hand with
the other. If the People set themselves against the Prince, and destroy the
Government, this is as if the Hand should cut the Throat, or, if that could be
done, should separate the Head from the Body. As our Forms of Prosecuting
Malefactors reckon a Fact to be committed against the Crown and Dignity of the
Prince, which was immediately done only against the Interest and Welfare of
some particular Subject: So will the Subject if he rightly understands himself
account, That what is attempted or done against the Prince is really in its
Tendency and Consequences against the Interest of the People too.

While we duly Reverence and Honor the Prince, and render to him what is due
from Subjects, he will have it in his Power the better to keep us at Peace
among our selves, to hinder the Subjects from injuring and persecuting one
another, and to force all in their several places to discharge their Duties
diligently and faithfully, and be the more useful and serviceable to the good
of the Community. And this must also render him the better able to Defend us
against those Foreign Enemies that seek our Destruction. It Is certain that if
the People by their ready and generous Assistance make him great and
considerable in the World they make themselves so too. If they enable him to do
great Actions against their Enemies, and thereby raise his Honor and Renown
they raise their own Glory and Renown also. All the World knows the Prince in
his Person is but one, and cannot do any great matters without a great
Assistance from his People, and so a large share of the glory of his Actions
must redound to the People who assist him to do them. Their Might, their
Riches, their Wisdom and Valor, and their laudable Affection and Esteem for
their Prince will therein gloriously appear to their Immortal Honor. Which may
teach us what to think of those Subjects who care not how Little and
Contemptible the Prince and Nation are Abroad, so they may but hugg the humble
Glory of setting themselves up above their Fellow Subjects at Home.

If Subjects will set themselves against the Interest and Authority of the
Prince, and grow Disobedient and Ungovernable none but fatal and unhappy
Consequences can attend this. If any of his Subjects will have an Interest
separate from and inconsistent with His they make it his Interest to suppress
and destroy theirs. If they will be jealous of him without ground they give him
good ground to be jealous of them. If they oppose his Interests, he must defend
them as well as he can: Not only for his own sake, but for the sake of the
Common Welfare and Tranquillity. This is in him due, not only to the grand Law
of Self Preservation, which he must be allowed to follow as well as others; but
also to the Public Benefit and Peace, which will necessarily go to wrack
whenever the Government is weakened or thrown down: To be sure he must in that
Case be disabled from Serving and Securing it, which is his Duty always to
endeavor to do: And a good Prince must needs desire earnestly, to have it
always in his Power to promote the Public Welfare.

They that oppose the Authority of the Prince with a bare Face, and a manifest
Discovery of their Design, and against apparent standing Law, are commonly with
ease Suppressed, when their Projects come to light, because they can seldom if
ever, especially against a good Prince, make their Party Considerable and
Strong: But then they bring upon themselves the displeasure of the Government
and meet with Ruin from that which was Ordained for their Happiness and
Protection. But the more dangerous Opposition and that which carries the
mischievous and ill Consequences further is, when any seek to undermine his
Authority and Government by secret and concealed Arts, and color their wicked
Designs by specious and plausible pretenses: Perhaps they may find out ways to
use even the Law it self against the Authority and Power of the Prince, and may
manage their Designs so well that he cannot Defend himself against them without
straining the Law to the utmost Rigor, or without some Encroachment upon it.
And what shall a good and a just Prince do in so unhappy a Case? The Support of
Government with the Advantages of it for the Common Good together with his own
Preservation tempt him strongly to make some breach upon the Laws: The
Arbitrary and undutiful Carriage of these Subjects constrain him to some
Arbitrary and Irregular Proceedings against them: And tho in that Case they
will not sail to Clamor loudly against him, yet is the blame of what is done
most justly due to them and they are the Causes of all the Evil that follows.
If he be guilty in this, they are more guilty; they are the Agressors and the
first Spring of the Mischief. If any Case will allow the resisting Evil with
Evil it is this; and I must needs say I think it hard, if not impossible, to
prove that this Case does not justify some Irregular Proceedings in the
Prince. That Rule may take place here That, the Welfare of the People, the
Community, is the Supreme Law, and may overruled any other. And the Support of
the Government is absolutely necessary for the Welfare of the People. But in
this Case the Government cannot Support it self, nor can it be for good to
other Subjects unless it be evil to these. It cannot prevail against them for
the good of the Whole, unless, according to the Supreme Law, it makes some
breach upon Inferior and less Important Laws: And it chooses the least of two
Evils in doing so, as the Destruction of a few Men of ill Principles and
Designs, must needs be a less Evil than the Dissolution and Overthrow of
Government; which must be attended with the Ruin of a great many, and those the
good as well as bad.

If the fair pretenses of such Men make their Party very strong they may
perhaps be able to make Head against the Prince, and then the matter may break
out into a Civil War; which is always an unspeakable Misery, and brings a world
of Woes and Calamities to a Nation, let which Side soever get the Victory. War
puts Law, and Property, and Religion, all that is dear to us, and which these
troublesome Men pretend they would secure, into the Hands of the Rude Soldier;
makes all things subject to the Law less Sword and does certainly expose them
to the greatest danger of being Lost, for the sake of an uncertain Security.
While the Conflict lasts, the greatest Tyranny, and the most irregular and
arbitrary Proceeding, which is that of the Soldier, is every where exercised.
And they who would not afford the Prince the necessary Assistance to Support
the Honor of the Nation, or the Interest of necessary Allies abroad, shall be
forced to spend more in Free Quarter of the Soldier at Home. The wretched
People give away their Property to others, or set it at the Mercy of the most
Lawless Men that it may not be at the Mercy of the Prince. So that this is a
Remedy which cannot Cure, but increases the Disease; and therefore unless it be
those weak People who are drawn in by the specious pretenses of ill Men, none
will betake themselves to this Course but those Men who hope and design to make
their own Fortunes great either out of the Spoils of the Prince or of the
People or both, during the Public Confusion.

If the Conflict determines against the Prince still is the Condition of that
Nation Sad and Calamitous. A State in Confusion is like a troubled Sea which is
not soon appeased when the stormy Wind that ruffled it is allayed. When a
Government is in this way Dissolved it is not easy to settle again into
another. The Movers of the Rebellion who before could not endure a Superior,
are now Proud enough each of them to think none should be their Equals. Every
one strives to set up himself above the rest, and to be sure every one will
disdain that any one should be set up above him: He that would not endure his
Prince above him will much less endure a Fellow-Subject: They who Fought to get
the spoils of the Crown into their own Hands, now Fight about the divideing
them; Thus the Contention and War, and the Miseries of it, must continue: No
Man shall know what Party to take, or where to place his Interests, and yet no
Man perhaps shall be allowed to keep himself a Neuter. And this Contention
commonly by the just Judgment of God ends in the Punishment and Destruction of
the first Authors of the Confusion; they see others Reap what they Sowed, and
find themselves run down and trampled upon by others, who enjoy the Honors and
the Profits of Government which they themselves so guiltily sought and have
missed off.

When the Controversy among these is determined still they that get the
Victory shall have an endless Trouble with the People. They have made the
People so fond of Liberty that they will not easily now submit to be governed.
They have taught them to dictate to their Rulers, and if they are not gratified
in all their Votes to revile and disparage them, to murmur and rebel, and they
must expect to find that they will serve them in the same manner. Meekness and
Humility, Obedience, and Honoring of the Governor, are not now to be found
very frequent among them. These quiet and happy Dispositions were banished from
them before, and that was it which brought things to the State they are in. It
is necessary, then, from the Nature of things that in this Case the People must
be lawless and ungovernable: They will not be persuaded into quiet Subjection
or Order, and there must be no Settlement at all, or they must be forced to
yield to it. And then the Movers of the Opposition to the Prince must take the
same violent and desperate Course themselves, perhaps to a worse Degree, to
make the People subject to them, which they forced the Prince to take for the
Defense of his Government, and for which they stirred up the Rebellion against
him. And so the unhappy People fall under the Oppression of their
Fellow Subjects by their extravagant Fear of the Oppression of their Prince.
They have exchanged one Master for a great many, which is a much worse Case,
and perhaps a good and just Prince for many Tyrants. The People shall find
these new Rulers very heavy ones, and what the Prince chastis'd with Rods these
will chastise with Scorpions. They shall find that those who were loath to obey
are the fiercest Tyrants when they come to rule. That these Men whatever they
pretended, did not design to secure the Subjects Liberty and Property from the
Prince, but to have it at their own Mercy, and to dispose of their Neighbors
Interest as they pleased. They that first endeavored to rob the King of his
Authority and Power will, if they can get that, rob the People next of their
Liberty and Property. As they could find Pretenses for the one they will easily
find Pretenses for the other, and let loose their Pride, their Covetousness
their Malice to prey upon and devour their Neighbous, after they have done as
much for the King. It Is a sottish Stupidity in the People that they do not
expect such things from them. It were a Folly I ought never to pardon in my
self, if when I see any Man cheat and abuse another, I should not expect he
would abuse me too if he could. The foolish People are cajoll'd by these Men
with the alluring Promise of more Liberty, and when these have set themselves
up, they must be contented with less. These are not now the self-denying Men
they pretended to be, but would have the Authority of the Governors rather
increased than diminished, when they have got the Government into their own
Hands. This was it they wanted and will be sure to hold as fast as they can
without yielding the least Degree of it. It appeared before to all wise and
considerate Persons that though they pretended the Peoples Liberty and the
Welfare of their Country as the Reason why they would lessen the Authority of
the Governor and put it into more or other Hands, yet they designed thereby
only their own Advancement; in that they would be sure to vote themselves into
the Authority which they could get from him: And they would never be brough to
demonstrate such a sincere and undesigning Love to their Country as to be
content to exclude themselves and their Families for ever from having any Share
in the altered Government, upon Condition they might obtain the Alterations
which for the Good of their Country they pretended so much to desire. And that
which wise Men, by this infallible Token, understood before, the deluded
Multitude shall now feel, to their Sorrow, when it is too late to help
themselves. They shall see they feared Slavery so extravagantly that it is come
with their Fear, and they so blindly ran from it that they are run into it.

These are some of the Miseries which must ensue upon the Subjects Opposition
to the Interests of the Prince, and Refusal to pay him the Honor which is his
due. All the Benefits and Advantages of Government will thus be distroyd, and
all the Miseries of War, Confusion, Oppression, and Tyranny will take place in
their stead, and chastise their Rebellion and Folly. Destruction and Misery are
in their Ways, who will not know and keep to the Way of Peace.

I might apply all these Arguments with great Reason and Force to urge in
particular, the honoring of our Excellent King; whom the Providence of God
does at present set upon the Throne of these Kingdoms, and has in Mercy to us
so wonderfully hither to preserved. But I hope this Discourse will awaken in
all good People, and those who think they have a Love and Esteem for our King,
a lively and powerful Sense of their Duty, and then they will most effectually
make the Application themselves. And the rest I must leave to the Providence of
God to convince them of their Duty or punish them for want of doing it. I shall
only say further that we have through the Mercy of God, with the best and most
just Constitution of Government, the best King too in the World; we have it in
our Power to be happy if we will; it is an old and most certain Maxim, That
none can hurt England while there is a good Correspondence between the King and
his People; and there never was a time when the People could better maintain
that Correspondence by paying due Honor to the Prince than the present: Nor
could the Maxim ever prove it self true by considerable Effects better than it
may do now, when we have a Prince so eminently qualified to direct and manage
our Efforts abroad. Let us then, as many as would approve our selves true
Lovers of our Country, and sincerely desirous of the public Welfare set our
selves to Honor the King which is the necessary and the best means to promote
it. Let us abhor and suspect the Designs of all such as shall appear to be
contriving against his Honor and Interests, reckoning them, as we may justly
do, the Enemies of their Country; and according to the wise Man's Advice which
it may not be amiss to repeat, Let us fear the Lord and the King, and not
meddle with not join our selves to any of those who are given to change. May
the God of Truth and Order, of Love and Peace teach us all, the things that
make for our Peace before they are hid from our Eyes. To whom be Glory and
Dominion World without End. Amen.

FINIS.

