I Do Appoint THOMAS COCKERILL to Print this my Second NARRATIVE, and that no
other Print the same.

February 6. 1679/80. THOMAS DANGERFEILD.

Mr Tho. Dangerfeild's SECOND NARRATIVE: Wherein is Contained A FAITHFUL CHARGE
AGAINST THE Lady POWIS, Mr. STAMFORD, (the Duke of Newburghs Resident) and Mrs.
CELLIER.

Relating to the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, AND The late PLOT made by
the PAPISTS, To be Cast upon the PROTESTANTS.

WHEREIN IS

I. A True Account of Methods used to Invalidate the Testimony of Captain
WILLIAM BEDLOE and Mr. PRANCE. II. An Account of the several PAPISTS
Imprisoned, and their Crimes, with the Charges it cost them to get out upon
Bail.
Written by his own Hand.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the stocks-Market, 1680.

To the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London.
My Lord!
THough a too prevalent custom has rendered Dedications little more than
Complemental Follies, wherein Authors first make themselves, and next their
Patrons, ridiculous, by extravagant Harangues; yet I cannot but be free from
all suspicions of such vanity in Addressing these Papers to your Lordships
hand, whose solid worth is as much above, as neglectful of popular Applause. I
come not to make you a Present, but to pay you a Tribute; The Loyalty,
Prudence, Justice, and Moderation your Lordship exercises in that Honorable,
but weighty Charge wherewith you are entrusted, and the zeal and stedfastness
you have shown to the Protestant Religion, in these tempestuous times (when
some that seemed fixed stars, have been found but Blazing Meteors), justly
intitles you to the Respects and Gratitude of all true Protestants and
Englishmen; not only in this mighty City, wherein (under His Majesty, whom God
long preserve) you preside, but throughout the Nation too, by the influence of
your generous Example to other Magistrates.

Besides which, my own private Obligations to your Lordships Candor and
Impartial Audience, when humbly requested, loudly call for some public
Acknowledgments from me, who cannot but receive comfort under all
Discouragements that have, or may happen, when I consider, That a person of
your Lordships Integrity and Merit cannot escape the Frowns (shall I call them?
or rather Snarlings) of some little pretenders to the Protestant Interest,
which really they desert through Ignorance, or maliciously endeavor to betray.

Nor know I how better to Implore your Lordships pardon for the presumption of
this Address, than by professing in all sincerity, That the Motives inducing me
to publish this Narrative, were principally the Glory of God, the Honor and
Safety of the King, and the preservation of the true Protestant Religion; and
secondarily in order to those ends, the strengthening of all Protestants against
a most perverse, subtle and cruel Generation, who with restless Endeavors
seek to overthrow the same; Rendered yet more dangerous, because some weak
unthinking people are too easily deluded to own, Countenance and Abet (though
perhaps unwittingly) such their mischievous Designs. And lastly, That if there
be any Papists sincere in their misguided Devotion, the horrid practices of the
Leading men of that faction (nakedly displayed) may open their Eyes, and
convince them so far, as to abandon that pernicious Communion, and embrace the
Truth, thereby becoming at once true Christians and good Subjects to their true
and natural Prince.

This being the only scope, I am bold to promise my self a Connivence for any
imperfections of style or method, my aim herein being Truth, not Rhetoric.
That the Almighty may ever bless your Honor, and preserve this Noble City both
from the Treacherous Malice, and Crafty Insinuations of Romish Incendiaries,
shall be the daily prayer of,

My Lord! Your Lordships most humble and devoted Servant, THOMAS DANGERFEILD.

Mr. Dangerfield's Second Narrative, etc.
THis age has produced diverse strange demonstrations, of the many Damnable
and Horrid Designs, such as possess the Roman Catholic Religion which affords
such Hellish Principles, that the Blood of Princes, Magistrates, Destruction of
Nations, or what Hell it self can invent, cannot obstruct them or stand in
their way, to hinder the promoting their excellent Religion, and as a further
detection of their villainies; I recommend to your consideration this ensuing
Narrative, which had it taken the effect intended might have proved as
dangerous to the Protestant Interest as any, for about the month of February,
1678. One Mr. Strode being a Prisoner in the K. Bench did after some time enter
into a Correspondence with one Lionel Anderson alias Mounson, a Dominican
Priest; and then also a Prisoner there: who pretending some better Opinion of
Mr. Strode then of others, did invite him to his Chamber to drink, which favor
he readily embraced and very often; but at one time being somewhat overtaken
with Drink, the said Anderson alias Mounson, demanded of him of what Family he
was, and the manner of his present Condition and also if he was a Roman
Catholic, to which he answered he was not, but was a well-wisher to that
Religion, then he demanded of him if he would undertake something that would
produce him immediate Liberty, and his future Happiness and good Fortune, he
answered, he would, and desired to know what it was, at which he expressed much
satisfaction, and withal lanched out a discourse relating to the stifling the
Evidence of Capt. William Bedloe, one of His Majesty's Witnesses of this most
Horrid Plot, which was thus. Mr. Strode you are acquainted with one Phillip
Marsh, who has formerly been a Servant to Mr. Bedloe and have often informed me
you held a correspondence with Bedloe: now if so, I will put you in a way by
that means how to create to your self a considerable Interest: provided you
will follow my directions and to give a general satisfaction to all good
Catholics, which Mr. Strode declared a seeming approbation of, and that from
thenceforward he would be guided by the said Anderson alias Mounson who showed
his rejoicing thereat by embracing Mr. Strode in his Arms, and said Bedloe was
a great Villain, and had given false testimony against the Lord Powis, Lord
Arundel, Lord Bellasis, Lord Stafford, Lord Petre, and diverse other worthy
Roman Catholics, but had done it so weekly, that it was to be seen through
every part. And therefore the aforesaid five Lords in particular were willing
to use some means to bring Mr. Bedloe on the Stage, And then further added that
no way could be so proper for accomplishing this Design, as for the said Mr.
Strode to drink with Philip Marsh and enquire of him about the behavior of his
Master Mr. Bedloe, and what Conversation he was of when the said Phillip Marsh
lived with him, and desired if the said Marsh should of himself or could by the
said Mr. Strodes instigation be brought to say any thing material against
Bedloe, that might any ways lessen or invalidate his Testimony, that Mr.
Strode should offer him a reward of money, or to that very Effect.

But Mr. Strode being of better Principles, and therefore desirous to improve
such an opportunity to the discovery of the Romish Villainy, pretendedly, but
untruly to encourage the said Mr. Anderson alias Mounson to proceed in that
design, told him no man was fitter to be employed in such an Affair then
himself, in regard he had known Mr. Bedloe diverse years and had during the time
of his Imprisonment, received diverse Letters from him in which he requested him
to be true to him, as knowing he had or could produce some Papers that would
much invalidate his Testimony, to prevent which he often had by the said Marsh
sent him money; and that by Mr. Bedloes means one Mr. Johnson a Servant to the
Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury, did often come to request his
Testimony against the Lords in the Tower, and in order to it offered him diverse
sums of money all which he had refused to accept of, This feigned story so
encouraged Mr. Anderson alias Mounson to proceed, that he began very hotly to
urge Mr. Strode to use his utmost endeavors in Prosecution thereof, and
accordingly some time after Mr. Strode acquainting him that he had Communicated
the said matter to the said Phillip Marsh, whom he found was as ready as
himself to be directed by him, but that to encourage the said Marsh he had
promised him some Money, Anderson seemed to be very well satisfied therewith
and then protested it should be performed both to Marsh and Strode. Provided,
they would when occasion should require be ready to Swear such matter against
Mr. Bedloe as he the said Anderson would inform them of, which was by Mr.
Strode seemingly agreed on.

Upon the ninth of March following Anderson and Strode meeting, the said
Anderson desired to know of Mr. Strode if he would be true to him, to which he
answered he would, then said Anderson I can believe you, because I have been
imformed you are nearly related to an intimate Friend and Acquaintance of mine
of your Name, and a person of great Worth and Honor; therefore I do assure my
self no man of that name can break his Word, but notwithstanding that Mounson
urged him to take an Oath of Secrecy, to be True to him which Mr. Strode seemed
unwilling to do; but rather then he would lose so probable an occasion to serve
his King and Country in making himself capable of detecting so Villainous a
Roguery, he did on his faith Promise to be true to him, which he being
satisfied with, further to encourage Mr. Strode to proceed therein, then
promised him five hundred pound, and to make him one of the greatest of his
name, If He the said Philip Marsh, and others did so follow his directions,
that Mr. Bedloes Evidence would be taken off, which Mr. Strode pretendedly
undertook to do, but desired to know how he might be certain of the five
hundred pound when the business should be finished, to which the said Mr.
Anderson desired some time to Consider of.

In some short time after the said Anderson alias Mounson, meeting Mr. Strode
in the said Prison, requested Strode to follow him into his Chamber, where he
told Mr. Strode, he had made the design of subverting Mr. ' Bedloes Evidence
known to some persons of very great Quality, (by a scheme he had sent them in a
Letter of the whole thing) who had returned him answer that they were very well
pleased with the same and approved thereof, and gave him their thanks, and also
order to give the said Mr. Strode such security as he should approve of for
what he had promised, and directions where to find the said securities, or if
Mr. Strode would nominate any Person of Credit and Trust, in whose hands the
said sum of five hundred pound should be deposited for his use, it should be
so done, and at a convenient time paid him, together with what he had promised
to Marsh, then he ordered Mr. Strode to let the said Marsh and others, which
were to be employed with him in that design, know that whatever sum they could
in reason desire it should be granted, and immediately after (the business
effected) Paid.

In order to the carrying on of this Affair some time after, the said Mr.
Anderson invited Mr. Strode again into his Chamber, where he entertained him
with discourse still relating to Mr. Bedloes business, but he being very
desirous (as may very well be supposed) to push on the same with all
Expedition, was resolved to lose no time, and the better to encourage Mr.
Strode he fetched forth of his Study a quart-bottle of Brandy, and desired him
to drink of the same, but Mr. Strode being cautious of the Liquor, did request
him to drink first, which he did, but a very little, and desired to be excused
for that his body would not bear drink, as Mr. Strodes would, who drank a
considerable quantity of the Brandy, and then Mr. Anderson fetched a Bottle of
Wine and desired him to drink of that too, which after some little time he did,
then the said Anderson alias Mounson told him, he had acquainted Sir Henry
Tychbourne of the whole business against Mr. Bedloe in as full and ample manner
as it really was intended, and that Sir Henry's maidservant had informed him
the said Anderson alias Mounson from her Master, that he was exceeding well
pleased, and that he had promised as a farther encouragement, he would assign
him the said Strode an Estate in Hampshire worth one hundred pounds a year, for
the space of two years, to be Rent free; and this Sir Henry would give of his
own free will for the good of the Cause, and desired he should be informed of
such a Reward intended for him, but that he might not know from whence it was
to come, and then Mr. Strode left him.

Mr. Strode about a quarter of an hour afterward, coming into Andersons
Chamber again, was promised by Anderson that as soon as Marsh himself, and
others were ready to receive the directions he had prepared for them, to swear
against Mr. Bedloe, that then he would send one Mr. Nevil alias Pain (now a
Prisoner at the Kings Bench, and Accused of High Treason) to a Person of High
Quality, whom the said Anderson alias Mounson said was his very good Friend,
and was sure would make way for the said Strodes Liberty in two days, which
when accomplished the five Lords in the Tower did intend to Petition the
Parliament for their Trials, and to Subpoena the said Mr. Strode as a Witness
in their behalfs, but he being as cautious as the matter would bear, of
Engaging himself too far in such dangerous matters, yet very desirous by that
Correspondence though to his great hazard to be serviceable to his King and
Country, and the True Protestant Religion, he did continue the dissembling his
reality of being an instrument in that Hellish Practice designed. But such was
Mr. Strodes misfortune in the management of this Affair, that whether with
cause or without, I know not; but its all one, with those of that Romish
Religion, if they believe otherwise, but now the scene was changed and Mr.
Andersons Principles only the object, for now he having harbored a Jealousy
in his thoughts that Mr. Strode was not real to him in this Catholic design,
he presently forgets all-those little Vows and Execrations he he had uttered to
make Strodes Fortune, and begins to cast about how to ruin him upon these
grounds of suspicion.

First, He is possessed with a belief that Mr. Strode had Papers relating to the
Plot and concealed them from him. Secondly. That he was likely to be a Witness
for the King, upon that or some other account relating to it, and had not
discovered it to him the said Anderson. And Thirdly, That in regard he could
not get those Papers nor into those secrets, Strode might become very
prejudicial to himself upon these Accounts, presently there is a Consultation
by him with the Countess of Powis, Mrs. Cellier, my Self, Mr. Nevil alias
Pain, Mrs. Celliers maidservant, and Mr. Kemish. And now, Reader observe, how
these holy members, of this holy Carholique Church proceeded.
First, I must be by Habeas Corpus removed to the Kings Bench, and kept a
Prisoner there, in order to be an Instrument in this Design on Mr. Strode, but
to induce me to undertake it, and stir up zeal in me for this good Catholic
Cause, Mrs. Cellier takes upon her to let me know that one Mr. Strode who was a
Prisoner there, held a strong Correspondence with Captain Bedloe, and that
Bedloe sent him Money and Lette^s very often, which when Strode was drunk he
would boast of and had often said, it lay in his Power to do much prejudice to
Bedloes Testimony, and that he had such Papers in his Pocket as would do the
L^^ds in the Tower much service, or to that purpose; which at that time ( (...)
fully believed by me) wrought very effectually with me. And to second this, Mr.
Anderson alias Mounson took upon him to come and instruct me how to attaque Mr.
Strode for the said Papers.

And that in regard of my former acquaintance with him, I might easily drink
him to a pitch, for he was free to drink; and when he was in such disorder, I
might easily pick them out of his Pocket, or otherwise get them from him, which
in regard of our former acquaintance I readily undertook and I did frequently
converse in the Prison with him without any Suspicion from him, as I believe,
of any design intended against him by me, at least at that time.

But sometime after he observing I was somewhat full of money, and more then
ordinarily obliging to him, and always readay to pay for what ever we had
drank; made him then suspect me: and the rather for that it seems he had heard
of my being wounded in Summer set shire, where I had made known to my
Surgeon the great desire I had to converse with one Mr. Atwood then a known
Popish Priest, to a Person of Quality of that Religion, and in the same County;
by which it was apparent to him I was of the same stock or Religion. These
suggestions together with the former Dealings or works of Darkness, he had
been endeavored to be persuaded to by Anderson, made him somewhat cautious;
but these things having no certainty in them, I prevailed with him to accept of
my Company, which was the easier effected, because he wanted money and I did
not, during this time; in regard neither Wine nor other Liquors would attain my
ends, I was furnished by some of the aforementioned other parties with a dose
of Opium, to lay him asleep; but either by Sight or Taste he finding it in the
Drink, spilt it, or otherwise avoided it; but by my insinuations I prevailed
with him to cast off all suspicion of any Design intended by me, and rather
impute it to the neglect of the People of the House.

About the five and twentieth of May last 1679. Mr. Strode coming into my
Chamber, he found me very busy in Writing, and in some of the Papers which lay
on the Table before me, he read his name in diverse places, but the full meaning
thereof he could not understand, yet conceived it could not be of any good
Consequence to himself; then he went up to his Chamber fellow, and Communicated
to him the substance of the whole Affair, and also that of Anderson's, and
desired hi^ ^^^ice, whether or no he should hold any farther Correspondence
with any of Us, as Strode informs me, and he advised him not to do it; for said
he, Anderson offered me a conside^^^^ Reward, if I would by any means procure
him some Papers, which you have, that concerned Mr. Bedloe, but I have denied
to ^erve him, and so I would have you do, meaning Mr. Strode: after this he
qui^ted my Company for the space of a (...) ^^eabouts, but I Attacking him one
day very ea^stly, (...) prevail with him to drink with me again, to which he
yeil^d; at which time from the same hands I had received nine g^es of Opium, to
give him, which I accordingly a^ t^^ time conveyed into a Tankard of bitter
small Beer for him to drink, but the Beer being thereby Thick, and of an
unpleasant Taste, it displeased both his Eyes and Palate, in so much that he
cast it on the ground and never after that would come into my Company, for
which both he and I have cause to praise God, as Strode to (...) present time
does own.

When all these Engines and Ways, that had been set on foot, to carry on this
Holy Catholic cause, would take no effect; I was then released out of that
Prison to manage something of greater moment, but yet was willing to join with
Anderson in a Revenge to be taken on Mr. Strode, lesthe should be made use of
as a witness for the King, and so discover our deeds of darkness, and in Order
to it, we agreed upon a Letter to be written by Mr. Anderson to a Lady of
Quality, the Copy whereof for a better safaction, is, as follows.

June the first, 1679.
Madam,
THe great respects I owe to Your Ladyship, Obliges me to acquaint Your
Ladyship with the most minute Passages, which I learn in Prison; which may
reflect in the least upon a Person Your Ladyship has so great a concern for,
as the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury.

Here is a great Rogue whose name is William Strode a Clothier, who has
formerly been burnt in the Hand at Bristol, for Felony; and at present here in
Prison, and Condemned to dye at Winchester Assizes, for willful Murder; but by
the Duchess of York's Intercession was promised a Pardon which he expects next
Term. This Rogue has reported to me and several ot^^rs, that the Right
Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury has by one Johnson his Lordships Servant,
offered him several sums of Money to join Evidence with Bedloe against the
Lords in the Tower, threatening to Obstruct his Pardon, if he will not join with
Bedloe in Accusing the Lords, or reveal any thing that may do Mr. Bedloe any
harm, whom he says if he durst he could hang; I have seen some Guinnies that
Johnson has (as he said) given him, but yet he says that although he has
promised to Io^n with Mr. Bedloe, (And therefore after his Pardon is got out,
expects to be Subpoen^'d by Mr. Bedloe) he shall before the Lords declare, my
Lord Shaftsburie's proceedings with him as suborning him to Perjury, this is,
Madam, what I think fit that my Lord Shaftsbury (for whom, as Your La^^ship
knows, I always have had a great honor and value) should know, but so as to
be ignorant of the Person your Ladyship has the Intelligence from, fo^fear if
the Rogue upon knowledge that I have discovered him, should invent also some
Villainy against

(Madam) Your Ladiship's humble Servant Lionel Anderson.


Now the Truth is, this Letter was designed to be an obstruction to Strode's
Pardon, for first, it was directed to the aforesaid Lady, who was to present it
to his Lordship, as an accidental thing; though 'twas indeed a contrivance in
general amongst Papists as well no doubt as with the said Lady, if she were
(...) ^ere may all good Protestants discover their Romish Villa^ For first
Strode was to be suborned by them, to swear such (...) as they should direct,
though never so false, and upon the (...) of that he must be hanged, stifled,
poisoned, or any ^g to be gotten out of the World rather than they discovered,
^^w these Persons who can so easily combine, to take away the Life of one
private Person, to accomplish a part of their Design, doubtless would as
readily wade through a Sea of Protestants Blood to finish the whole; it is most
miraculous that God does suffer the Earth to bear such Vipers. Nay, to have
Accomplished this piece of Roguery, how they hoped to insinuate a belief into
his Lordship, when they had even at the very same time, with the greatest
Confidence, and in the highest nature villified him? and no doubt would have
been as ready to have taken his Lordships Life as any others, which they did
afterward endeavor as much as in them lay, had not God of his infinite Mercy
prevented my hand from being the instrument thereof: can these people call
themselves Christians, and hold such bloody doctrines, or ever think their
ramping Priests who ('it is plain) had dispensations to dye with lies in their
mouths, or their Babylonian Midwives, hope to bring any more Sham-Plots too Bed
in this Kingdom; no, the whole Nation are well acquanited with and too sensible
of such their Treachery; as also their Witchcraft daily exercised on many of
the Nobility of the Nation, who it is admired should be induced from a sound
Faith, to follow such Antichristian doctrine. The Letter I tell you of in my
first Narrative, I was sent with by the Countess of Powis to the Right
Honorable Lord Privy Seal, was (as I understood by his Lornships answer) to
pray some favor on the behalf of Anderson.

But I was sometime after that, by the said Lady's Order, to wait on his
Lordship, and to represent Strode's Case, as Anderson had drawn it up agreeable
to that in the afore-recited Letter, in order to the stopping the passage of
his Pardon, as it was intended with the right Honorable the Lord Shaftsbury,
whose great wisdom easily saw through the design, and what the meaning was. By
which may plainly be seen what Audacious Impudence they Act withal.

And for your better satisfaction herein, that that part they represented to
the Lord Privy Seal, was not inferior to the former* I have Inserted part of
the papers first sent by Anderson to the Lady Powis, and by her hand given to
me, who at the same time gave me her Ladyships Order to carry them immediately
to the Lord Privy Seal, who ordered me to read the same papers to his Lordship
at his house at Kensington, which were in Contents thus, as they came from
Anderson, who pretended to have them originally from me, and so did still
continue them as taken in my Name from Strode, viz. May. 11. 1679. Strode did
acquaint me that about 15 years since, he knew Bedlow, who was then but a
servant to Alderman Blackwell at Bristoll; at which time he scarce had any
Stockens or Shoes to his Feet. But Strode denies he ever see Bedlow since,
till he and Oats came to the King's Bench to view the Prisoners which were in
about the Plott; and once since that, Mr. Bedlow came with his Brother who was
the Night after wounded. He denies the holding of any correspondence with Mr.
Bedlow either by Letter or otherwise, but says that one Philip Marsh (who is
either a friend or a servant to Mr. Bedlow) is his friend (that is to say,
Strodes friend) and that they said Philip Marsh has often sent Letters to
Strode, in which Letters it has been desired that the answers thereto should be
left at Bedlows lodging; but the Contents of the said Letters either were not
worth while to repeat, or he was unwilling so to do.

May the 12. 1679. Strode told me this day, that Bedlows occasion of giving him
Money was to the intent he should conceal something he knew of Bedlow, which if
discovered would be of consequence enough to hang him, if prosecuted on the
same; and the sums which Bedlow sent him was the greater, for that Strode
should take particular notice of the behavior of the Priests which are here,
and who they did correspond with; which Strode has done, and has sent some to
follow diverse persons which have come to Mr. Anderson, which persons and their
abodes are, as Strode says, well enough known, and hereupon swore Damn his
soul, if they should not be better known if ever he could obtain his liberty.

May the 13. Strode acquainted me, that his business was either past, or in
great probability so to be, and when he could get his enlargement, there were
some in the world should soon feel the effects of his fury: But amongst the
rest, Mr. Anderson, who as Strode said, was very uncertain of ever being so
near his liberty; but if there ever be any probability for Andersons liberty,
Strode makes no doubt but to prevent the same. By this I find Strodes thoughts
to be laden with venom (as having been thwarted in his temper by some of the
Catholics) and to his power he designs a Revenge on them, but for what I know
not.

May the 14. Strode did this day acquaint me, that his wife had in a Cabinet at
home in the Country, the original papers which concerned Mr. Bedlow, and when
he can be at Liberty to go home he will be very brisk in exposing the said
matters contained in the said papers to a public view; but whilst he remains
in Custody he will not impart the said matters to any person whatsoever, for
that he will not bring himself under Mr. Bedlows Lash.

May the 15. Strode did tell me, that one Mr. Johnson (a Servant to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury) did often come to visit him, and bring him
Guinneys, in order to the prevailing with him for to join Evidence with Bedlow:
but Strodes answer was (as he informed me) that he would not perjure himself
for ten thousand worlds.

May the 16. Jones ( Strodes Bedfellow) did inform me, that he had this day
seen in Strodes hands some papers which did contain the whole matter of the
Popish plott, in a more plain manner than either Oats or Bedlow could make out.

And that the Earl of Shaftsburies servant (whose Name was Mr. Johnson) came
often to Strode, to court him to give his Testimony against the Lords in the
Tower, and had offered Strode most considerable sums of money if he would do
the same.

May the 17. Jones did tell me, Strode had in some discourse informed him, that
Bedlow in the time of his padding was entertained at Strodes house, and
particularly when there had been a Robbery committed but a day before, and at
the same time a Hue and Cry all over the Country to apprehend him: And that it
is not long since that Strode sent to his wife at Shepton Mallet in the County
of Somerset, for the Copyes of some Writings which were in her custody, which
said writings are the original of those he showed Jones.

May the 18. Jones says, Strode has often prayed his advice what to do in a
matter of such weighty Consequence as was to be made out from the aforesaid
papers: Jones answered him, that in regard he was in Reversion of a good
Estate, and had diverse good and honorable Relations to support him, it would
perhaps be much more both for his Credit and advantage to be silent in things
of such a nature, than to stir, unless he could make every particular thereof
visible by a Lively Testimony. Upon which Advice Strode did promise to let it
fall, rather than run the hazard of disobliging his Relations and Friends, and
become altogether obnoxious:

But for your more full satisfaction in these matters, I do not only think it
proper to refer you to my former Narrative, so far as it concerns these
particulars, but also to the Examination of Mr. Strode and others: Which I hope
will not only give a full satisfaction to the good Protestant Reader, but a
full Conviction of the Romish Reader: In order to which, I will show you the
Essential parts of the matters herein contained, as they were severally
delivered upon Oath; that it may not be said to be the Device of my self, to
insinuate a good Opinion in the people, without just Cause.

Somerset. The Information of William Strode of Shepton Mallet in the County
aforesaid, Clothier, taken upon Oath the 19th day of November, Anno Regni
Caroli secundi nunc Angliae, etc. xxxi. Annoque Dom. 1679. before John Speak
Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County aforesaid.
THis Informant says, that about the middle of February last past, Philip
Marsh came to the Kings Bench Prison in Southwark to see me, ( viz.) this
Deponent, and one Welsh a Prisoner there: after the said Marsh his going from
the Prison, Welsh informs the Prisoner, That Philip Marsh was a Servant to Mr.
William Bedlow, and that he knew that they had been long acquainted:
Immediately after Lionel Anderson alias Munson asked me, ( viz.) this
Informant, how long I had known Philip Marsh; I replied, that my first
acquaintance with him was in Winchester Prison, a little before I was removed
to the Kings Bench; also Anderson alias Munson asked me, if I knew Philip Marsh
to be a Servant or Companion of Mr. Bedlow's? I answered, that I knew no such
thing: Then Anderson replied, I must needs know the said Marsh to be acquainted
with the said Mr. Bedlow as well as Welsh: and at that time Anderson enquired
when Philip Marsh came to see me again? I told him, I knew not: Upon the 26th
day of February last past, the said Anderson offered me, ( viz.) this
Examinant, 500 l. Sterling, to subvert Mr. Bedlowes Evidence, and to make me
the greatest of my Name. Some time afterward, and before the Ninth of March
last past, Philip Marsh came to see me again, and after Philip Marsh was gone,
Anderson enquired of me, whether I had discoursed with Philip Marsh any thing
concerning Mr. Bedlow? I answered, No: Whereupon I asked, what I should say
unto Philip Marsh? Anderson replied, To enquire of him what he knows of Mr.
Bedlows Concerns relating to the Plot: I told him, I knew not how to begin,
unless he would give instructions. Then Anderson asked of me, whether the
Fellow, (meaning Philip Marsh) would drink? I told him, I knew not; for in his
Visits here, he never spent at one time above a Groat to his own part; So
Anderson desired me to drink the fellow up: said he, If you have no mind to
drink your self, here be those in the house that would be glad to do it, and
cost what it will, come to me, and I will pay it; and when you find his Temper,
come to me, and I Will further instruct you. But Marsh at that time drank little,
and so took his leave. On the ninth of March or thereabouts, Mr. Anderson said
to me, Will you be true to me? And I ( viz.) this Deponent said, I would. I can
believe you, said Anderson, because you have told me you were a near Relation
to Colonel Strode, Governor of Dover Castle, who is as honest a Gentleman as
any in England: and I know, said Anderson, no man that is of that name can be
worse than his word: However, swear that you will be true to me. I asked him,
How I must swear to him? Anderson answered, Swear by your Faith; and I said, By
my Faith I would be true. And on the said Ninth of March or thereabouts last
past, Anderson offered me ( viz.) the Deponent 500 l. and to be made the
greatest of my Name, for to hire Philip Marsh and others together with my self,
to subvert Mr. Bedlows Evidence: And that he the said Anderson had sent to the
Duke of York, and the Duchess of York, to acquaint them of this his design;
And Anderson said, that they had returned him thanks. Also Anderson further
told me, he had provided Security for the 500 l. which was offered me, or would
lay it in any man's hands whom I should Nominate; and whatever sum the other
Subverters please to have, he was ready to serve it unto them; but 500 l. he
would give upon his own account. I asked Anderson what we should all do for
this 500 l. His answer was, it was to subvert Mr. Bedlows Evidence. In a short
time after there came two young men out of the City to see me, one of them his
name was Trist. Anderson seeing them two with me, inquired of me quick and very
earnest, whether one of them (pointing at Trist) was not a servant to the Lord
of Shaftsbury? I considering his earnestness, imagined with my self he had more
to say to me of the former business: I answered him, Yes, Yes; although I knew
him to be another; and Anderson also inquired of me, whether his name was not
Johnson? I answered, Yes; then Anderson said, That is the man, I know. At which
confident mistake of his I wondered. Withal he then said, I hope you have not
revealed any thing to Johnson, concerning our former discourse. I answered, I
had not: Moreover he said, he would not have my Lord Shaftsbury know it for all
the world. So after that discourse, Mr. Anderson was speaking concerning the
Lords in the Tower, how Mr. Rockly had been with some of them, and that the
Lords were very merry. Mr. Anderson said, that Mr. Bedlow was the main Evidence
against the Lords in the Tower; and if they escape, we shall all escape.
Furthermore, Anderson said to me, as soon as he got out of Prison he would
leave England, and go into another Country. I asked him into what Country he
would go? but he did not tell me. Some time after that Mr. Anderson had these
Conferences with me, I informed my Chamber-fellow Mr. Jones of it, and showed
him the Heads of it as I had wrote them in my Almanac. And further this
Deponent says not.

William Strode.
Jurat* coram me

John Speak: In the presence of Tho. Westly. Rob. Plimpton. Tho. Brown.




Somerset. The Information of William Strode of Shepton Mallet in the County of
Somerset, Clothier, taken upon Oath, the 9th day of November, 1679. before John
Speak Esquire one of the Justices of the Peace within the said County.
THis Informant says, that about three years since, he knew Mr. Willoughby,
and that whilst Mr. Willoughby was a Prisoner in the Kings Bench, he, this
Informant, was very intimate with the said Willoughby, whom he was informed by
others was also named Dangerfield. Some time after Mr. Willoughby was brought
in a Prisoner to the Kings Bench, he takes me this Informant with him into the
Garden, and told me, he heard, I was kept in Prison the longer, because I knew
something which I must swear concerning the Plot. I answered him, If I was kept
in Prison for that, it was more than I knew. But Willoughby said unto me, that
he knew as much of the Plot as any body: And this Informant has been very
often in his Company whilst he remained a Prisoner in the King's Bench, in his
Chamber; where most times this Informant found him writing in great sheets of
paper, seeming to him as if he were Coppying out the writing that lay before
him this Informant came into the Chamber of this Willoughby; and all the
written papers which this Informant says he saw, were just alike Indented, and
spaces and figures about the same distance left in the papers: some of the
papers were as if he were drawing Articles; for in the Margent I saw Figures,
1, 2, 3. and so on to a considerable number; but as soon as the said Willoughby
could, he conveyed those writings out of this Informants sight. Likewise other
papers this Deponent has seen in his Room, written in Characters, which
sometime he left to continue on the Board, but I understood them not: This
Informant has seen Footmen come to him, their Clothes covered with Campaign
Coats, so that this Informant could see nothing of their Liveries, but only
when they were going out of the Chamber. Also this Informant has seen several
Women, at least seemingly so by their Apparel, come unto him most commonly in
the Evenings, with Masks on: This Informant has sometimes seen Willoughby in
the Evenings go into Mr. Andersons Chamber; and after he was out upon Bail,
when he came to the Prison, he always went into Andersons Chamber: This
Informant did tell Mr. William Bedlow in the Kings Bench Garden, that he had
something to relate unto him concerning himself; his brother Bedlow was then
there with him; and it was his next time of being there after the calling over
the Prisoners, by his and Dr. Oats's occasion, as it was reported. And further
he informs not.

William Strode.
Jurat. coram me

John Speak: In the presence of Tho. Westly, Robert Plimpton, Tho. Brown.



London ss. The Examination of William Strode Clothier of Shepton Mallett in
the County of Somerset, taken before the Right Honorable Sir Robert Claiton
Lord Mayor of the City of London this 15th day of January, 1679.
THis Informant first referres to two former Examinations taken before John
Speak Esquire one of his Majestyes Justices of the Peace for the County of
Somerset, dated the 19 of November, 1679. and now he comes upon a third
Examination of what he then omitted, which is as follows, ( viz.) That in or
about the Months of April or May, 1679. Mr. Lionel Anderson alias Munson, who
was then a Prisoner in the King's Bench, did then invite this Informant to his
Chamber, and there gave this Informant a quart Bottle of Brandy, desiring him
to drink a good draught of the same; but the said Anderson himself to be
Excused from drinking rhereof: But immediately after brought forth a bottle of
Wine and did desire this Informant to drink of that too; then when this
Informant had drank, Anderson alias Munson told this Informant, that he had
acquainted Sir Henry Tichburn of the converse which Anderson alias Munson and
this Informant had concerning Mr. Bedlow; and that Sir Henry Tichburn's
Maidservant had informed him the said Anderson alias Munson, that her Master
was well pleased with what the said Anderson alias Munson had informed him of;
which was the Discourse concerning Mr. Bedlow contained in the aforementioned
Examinations: And also that Sir Henry Tichburn did promise for this Informants
Reward, an Estate in Hampshire of 100 l. per Ann. for two years to be
Rent-free. Then this Informant left him; and about a quarter of an hour
afterward he returned into the said Anderson alias Munson's Chamber again,
where he told this Informant, that as soon as Mr. Marsh, this Informant, and
others, were ready to swear to such Instructions as he the said Anderson alias
Munson had formerly said he would give this Informant concerning the subverting
Mr. Bedlows Evidence, he would send one Mr. Nevill alias Pain to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Anglesey, whom the aforesaid Anderson alias Munson said
was his very good Friend, and was sure would get this Informants Pardon (for a
Crime he then was a Prisoner) in two days: And at the same time the said
Anderson alias Munson told this Informant, that the Lord Powis, Lord Arundel,
Lord Peter's, and the rest of the Five Lords in the Tower, did intend (that is
to say, after this Informant was prepared with Instructions he was to receive
from the said Anderson alias Munson) to petition for their Trials, and to
Suppena this Informant as a Witness for them. This Informant further says,
that on the Ninth of March, 1679. Anderson alias Munson told him, he had made
the design for subverting Mr. Bedlows Evidence known to the Duke and Duchess
of York, who returned him thanks, and an Order to provide such Security as this
Informant should Approve of, for the Money formerly promised this Informant by
the said Anderson alias Munson: And further this Informant says not.

William Strode.
Jurat. coram me

15o die January, 1679. Robert Clayton Mayor.



Surry ss. The Information of Tho. Hill now a Prisoner in the King's Bench,
taken upon Oath, the 9th day of December, 1679. Anno Regni Caroli Secundi nunc
Angl. etc. xxxi. Annoque Dom. before me Thomas Foster Esquire one of his Majties
Justices of the Peace for the County aforesaid.
THis Informant says, that he was acquainted with Tho. Dangerfield about 18
Months since, and he afterward see him when he was brought to the King's Bench
a prisoner: The Informant says, he saw a Gentlewoman twice with the said Mr.
Dangerfield at the Kings Bench. This informant at another time saw 2 person in
Livery with a Campaign Coat over the same, come to the said Dangerfield: He
also says, he saw Mr. Dangerfield go into Mr. Munsons Chamber, but knows
nothing of their business: He also says, that Mr. Strode told him, this
informant, he had a paper in the Country, of which he had a Copy then by him,
that did concern the Plot. And Strode also said to this Informant in these
words, Why may not we make our Fortunes as well as other men, for we may get
two or three thousand pounds? Then this Informant demanded, How? The said
Strode answered, By the said paper. This Informant further says, Strode told
him, Mr. Munson had either promised or offered the said Strode Five hundred
pounds. Strode also told him this Informant, he had been with Mr. Johnson
several times, and had received Money of him; and that the said Johnson was the
Earl of Shaftsburyes Servant: This Informant says, Dangerfield told him, he
had been in Mr. Kemishes company, and that Dangerfield desired this Informant
to use his Endeavor to help him to the sight of Mr. Strodes papers, saying,
there was a person of Quality that was his good friend; and that it would do
the said Dangerfield a particular kindness if he could get the said papers from
Strode, who had some other time told this Informant, he could hang Bedlow. This
Informant says, Strode showed him an Almanac, and at the same time said, Mr.
Munson had offered him the said Strode five hundred pounds to take off Bedlows
Evidence. And this Informant further says, when he found the design against
Mr. Bedlows Evidence, he was cautious of meddling, or discoursing Strode any
further. This Informant says, he heard Strode say, it would not be long before
he should have his liberty, and that then some in the world should soon feel
the Effects of his fury; or to this effect. This Informant at another time
asked Strode, where the said Munson should have the aforesaid 500 pounds?
Strode replied, it was sure enough, or to that purpose. Strode also told this
informant, he had given Munson a Copy of the aforesaid paper which related to
the Plot. This Informant says, he has seen in Dangerfields Chamber diverse
papers or writings, but the said Dangerfield would never let this informant see
any of the contents of the said papers.

Tho. Hill.
Jurat. coram me nono die Dec. Anno Regni Regis Tricessimo primo. 1679*

Tho. (...)ster



And one thing more as notable as any, as another Character of the Excellency
of these Romish Christians, I must acquaint you with, which is as follows.

That about the tenth day of February 7 8/9: one Mr. Thomas Williamson Citizen
and Merchant-Tayler of London, being a man somewhat inclined to favor (to his
power) those of the Romish Church, out of his great pity, having once relieved
a Romanist who informed Mrs. Cellier (to whom he was a Proselite) of the said
Charity he had received, she according to the practice of the godly Members of
that Church, found Mr. Williamsons Habitation, whither she repaired diverse
times before he was to be found. But at a certain time meeting with him at
home, they entered into some discourse, amongst which, after she had well
searched his Temper, she demanded if he understood the prosecuting or
soliciting of business at Law, he replied he either did of himself, or easily
could by the help of his Friends, who studied as well as practiced the same.
Then Mrs. Cellier requested him to undertake the Bayling out of Prison diverse
Papists, as well such as were accused of the Conspiracy against the Kings most
Sacred Majesty (whom God preserve) the present Government, and the true
Protestant Religion, as those who were barely imprisoned for being of the
Romish Church. Mr. Williamson answered he would readily undertake the same,
upon which Mrs. Cellier did promise his Reward should be for so doing, fifteen
Pounds for each Person, besides an allowance of all Prison Fees, and all other
ordinary and extraordinary Charges whatsoever, which once being delivered to
her by Bill, should forthwith be paid, in order to which Business she gave him
ten Shillings, and a List of the Persons Names who he was to Solicit for, and
to let you know -- how many he enlarged their Names are as follows ( viz.)

Doctor Southwel for refusing the Oaths, Bayled out of the Gatehouse, his
Charges. 02 l. 15 s. 00 d. Mrs. Green Bayled from the same place. 02 l. 10 s.
00 d. Mrs. Jane Everstone from the same place. 03 l. 10 s. 06 d. Mr. Garret a
Papist Bayled from the same place. 04 l. 13 s. 00 d. Mr. Cook a Glover Bayled
from Newgate for refusing the Oaths. 06 l. 17 s. 00 d. Mr. Mollineux a Papist
Bailed from the Gatehouse. 03 l. 09 s. 06 d. Ieffrey Hudson her Majesty's
Dwarf Bayled from the Gatehouse. 05 l. 04 s. 00 d. Mr. Shelton, alias Napper,
for being in the Plot, Bayled from the Gatehouse. 04 l. 06 s. 09 d. Penelope
Walford Bayled from New-Prison, ^a Papist. 02 l. 08 s. 07 d. Dorothey Wright
Bayled from the Gatehouse, but a Protestant. 03 l. 19 s. 04 d. John Woodman a
Botcher Bayled out from New-Prison for being a Papist, his Charges. 05 l. 06 s.
00 d. Marina Pyott, from New-Prison, a Papist. 02 l. 04 s. 05 d. Stephen Harrys
a Papist Bayled from New-Prison. 02 l. 07 s. 03 d. One Snig a Prisoner for debt
in Ludgate, but a Papist, Mrs. Cellier paid his Debt, which amounted to 09 l.
08 s. 06 d. Mr. Peter Lanton a Papist, Bayled from New-Prison. 02 l. 05 s. 06
d. Iohanna Davice a Papist, Bayled from New-Prison. 02 l. 06 s. 00 d. Arthur
Woolgard a supposed Priest Bayled, but burnt in New-Prison. 04 l. 17 s 06 d.
Robert Goade a Papist Bayled from New-Prison. 02 l. 13 s. 09 d. Madam
Fitzherbert, Williamson was bound for, when she went into France for that she
should not go into any Cloister or Nunnery. 01 l. 17 s. 08 d. Benjamin Haynes a
Papist, Bayled from the Gatehouse. 03 l. 09 s. 07 d. Jane Overton a Papist,
Bayled from the Gatehouse. 02 l. 17 s. 09 d. John Woodman the Botcher Bayled
from Newgate, for being suspected to have Fyred New-Prison. 07 l. 08 s. 08 d.
Snig the Papist Bayled from Newgate. 05 l. 07 s. 09 d. Daniel Edmonds, alias
Captain Kelley Bayled out of the Marshalseas, whose Name was sometime after in
the Gazet. 09 l. 10 s. 09 d. The Sum is 101 l. 14 s. 09 d.
Now when he had given her the Signification of his great diligence by
procuring the Liberty of the aforesaid Persons. He also returned the List of
those Persons he could not get enlarged on Bail, whose Names are --

Mr. Meals at the Marshalseas, not bayled out. Mr. Roach at the Gatehouse. Mr.
Thomas at the Gatehouse. Mr. Lloyd at the Gatehouse. Mr. Oakely at the Kings
Bench. Mr. Thomas Thorn at the Gatehouse. Mr. Anderson alias Munson at the
Kings Bench. Mr. Kemesh at the Kings Bench. Mr. Barnesly at the Kings Bench.
Mr. Doudal at the Gatehouse. Mr. Cullun at the Gatehouse. Ralph Carter at the
Gatehouse. Mr. Vahan at the Gatehouse. Mr. John Parsons. Richard Ganes. Mr.
Ireland alias Douting. Mr. Harcourt. Mr. Gavan and others.
At which time he went to Mrs. Cellier's house to receive his Charges expended
in that Affair, where she acquainted him that his great Care in prosecuting
their Business should raise him a considerable Interest, designing by this to
encourage him, as appears by what she said to him at the same time, which was
as he affirms upon Oath in these very words, viz. These are but small things
which you have yet done. But I will put you upon greater things if you will be
just, for which you shall be well rewarded.

Now it is to be supposed Mr. Williamson did enter into a promise in this as
well as the former affair before he took his Leave; but not long after Mrs.
Cellier sent Anne Blake her Nurse to Mr. Williamson's house, to let him know
how earnestly her Mistress did desire his Company at her house, she having some
mighty Business for him; he being at home went with the said Nurse to Mrs.
Cellier's house in Arundel Street, where he found the Mistress who caled him
into her Lodging-room, and acquainted him after some short discourse that she
had a Business of a great consequence to employ him in, for which he should
have a considerable Reward, at which he being desirous to raise his Fortune,
did demand what the said Business was, to which Mrs. Cellier replied, 'twas
thus, viz. if you can procure me two men of undaunted Spirits, that will be
prevailed with to swear to some directions that I have drawn up to take off the
Evidence of Mr. Prance, I will give them 20 l. apiece for their Rewards.

Mr. Williamson demanded what the Contents of those directions she intended for
the two Persons were: At which Mrs. Cellier at the same time gave him a Copy.
But enjoined him to keep it private, only when he had procured the aforesaid
two persons she did allow he should communicate and debate the matter with
them, he having first engaged them to undertake the said matter: Now the
Contents of the said Note of directions was to this effect, viz.

That they should both agree to one and the same thing, by swearing that at a
certain time when they were passing under Newgate, they heard a most hideous
noise, at which they were somewhat startled, and demanded of a stander by what
noise that was, to which the said person replied 'twas one Prance, who was
brought into that Prison about the Murder of Sr. Edmondbury Godfrey, and for
that he should confess the same, he was tortured with vast weights of Iron on
his Legs, on his Hands, on his Neck, and fastened down with Bolts and Staples to
the ground, so that he could lie only on his back, and that such intolerable
Torture he had endured for some time.

Now, their design by this, was to represent Prance his Testimony Invalid, for
that in as much as the Law has provided, that no person was to be wracked or
tortured for his Testimony in no case whatsoever, they did conceive that to be
Prance's Case, and therefore according to the intent of the said Directions it
plainly appears, their play (I mean the Papists, who were undoubtedly equally
concerned in the thing) was to baffle Prance to save the Convicting of Berry,
Hill, and Green: (as Mr. Williamson on his Oath tells us, Mrs. Cellier informed
him) amongst which said three persons one was a Protestant and no doubt but
they greatly feared that he was not zealous enough, though the rest were to die
with a damnable Lie in their Mouths.

At the same time Mrs. Cellier being apprehensive of some considerations those
two men of undaunted Courage might enter into, concerning the dangerous affairs
they were to be engaged in, she thought fit to desire Mr. Williamson to
acquaint them, provided any jealousies did arise, that they should not fear a
Prison, for if it should so happen that they or either of them, should be
discovered and sent either to Newgate or any other uneasy Prison, she would
make such Interest, That if they could not be immediately discharged, they
should be from such Prison removed to the Fleet, which is accounted by most
experienced persons the easiest of Prisons, at which place during the time of
their confinement, they should have paid them by the hand of M. Williamson 40
s. per week to defray their expenses there, which said money was to be given to
Mr. Williamson by Mrs. Cellier; All which proposals Mr. Williamson seemed to
like well and agree to, but to confirm the Bargain, Mrs. Cellier according to
her usual custom, gives him an earnest penny, praying withal his speedy
prosecution thereof, whereupon he took his leave, and returned home where he
had time to consider and advise what to do in that ill Cause, which was easily
determined, for when he came to lay his hand on his heart, and to enter into a
serious consideration of the great scandal must undoubtedly accrue to him in
this World if discovered, and if not, perhaps the eternal Damnation of his poor
Soul in the next, he in some little time returned to Mrs. Cellier, saying, for
that the time of Berry, Hill, and Greens Trials did so nearly approach, 'twas
not in his power to perform his promise in that Respect and begged her pardon.
At which she was not a little concerned, for if you take the true measures of
the whole thing, it is most apparent Mrs. Cellier was making provision, as if
those two desperate Blades, were Cock-sure to carry on the work she intended
them for; but according to all the rest of their Practices, so is it in this,
for when she found him to evade that Design, in which she had laid herself
open to him, she might think it expedient rather than suffer him to fall off,
and so expose herself to employ him in an Affair somewhat (in his part)
Inferior to the former, which was to this effect; Green, Hill, and Berry being
then convicted of Sr. Edmundbury Godfrey's Murder, Mrs. Cellier gave him a
Note, desiring him to show the same to all his Acquaintance, which Note was as
follows, viz.

The Execution of Henry Berry.
He made no farewel-Speech, but he had prayed a long while. The Ministers were
very Importunate with him to make a public Confession of his Sins, then he
said as follows. I must confess I am a great Sinner; but as for what I am
brought hither and Suffer, I had no more to do with it then the Child newly
born. I cannot but blame my Judge and Jury, for they have dealt wrongfully with
me, I do not Condemn, but I cannot but blame them, for they have wronged me, I
pray God forgive them, and I do truly forgive them, God bless the King and
Queen, and the whole Kingdom; Amen.

Then he and the Ministers prayed a long while, when they had done they left
him to the Mercy of God. As the Cart was drawing from under him, he spoke these
last words. I die as I was born and bred a Protestant, and beg of God to be
mercyful to me as I am Innocent.

And then she the said Mrs. Cellier employed him to go to Newgate for the
Coppie of the Commitment of one Mr. Willoughby (which was the Name I went by)
and from thence address himself to Mr. Recorder, taking Bayl with him to offer
in the behalf of the said Willoughby. Mrs. Cellier promising at the same time
to make such an Interest with the Recorder, that it should be easily
Accomplished, whereupon Mr. Williamson did accordingly make his Address, but
was then Refused, In regard as he supposed the Person who was to pray that
Favor, had not been to wait on Mr. Recorder, then he advised with Mrs.
Cellier, who ordered him to go a second time, saying Mr. Willoughby must be had
out, whoever remained, and ordered him to allow some reasonable time for the
Recorder to be treated with, which he did, and the Bayl he offered was
accepted, and Mr. Willoughby's Discharge Granted. Then Mr. Williamson went to
the Prison to visit there Mr. Willoughby, for whose Enlargement Mrs. Cellier
was so earnest, but Mr. Williamson at his return to Mrs. Cellier, amongst
other discourse happened to say he had been to see Mr. Willoughby, who he
thought was a brisk Man, to which Mrs. Cellier replied in these words, if he
was not so, he would not be fit for our business; in a short time after Mr.
Willoughby was discharged, who soon crept in between Mr. Williamson and the
business he had so long been employed in.

Not long after Mr. Williamson waited on Mrs. Cellier with his Bills to be
paid, amongst which he received four Pounds for Mr. VVilloughby's Enlargement
from the Hands of Mrs. Cellier. At which time he says there arose between him
and Mrs. Cellier some discourse concerning the Murder of Sir
Edmundbury-Godfrey. To which she answered in these Words, it is laid on us now,
but it will appear it was done by the Presbyterians, adding that if any change
were (That is to say, if ever Popery came uppermost (which God of his great
Goodness prevent) for at that time undoubtedly they had a fair Prospect to that
Effect, whatever they have now) there would be more Favor found from the
Papists then they now found from the Presbyterians. And so ended their
Correspondence.

The Information of Thomas Williamson of the Parish of St. Brides,
Merchant-Tayler and Citizen of London taken upon Oath, before the Right
honorable S. Robert Clayton Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of London this
twentieth sixth day of January; 1679.
This Informant says that about the tenth day of February in the year 1678,
one Mrs. Cellier came to his house to employ him to Bail Papists out of several
Prisons, for which she promised this Informant 15 s. each person, besides an
allowance for all extraordinary expenses: which business this Informant did
readily undertake, and was by Mrs. Cellier encouraged with 10 s. earnest, some
time after; when this Informant had bayled ont diverse Papists, the said Mrs.
Cellier did at her house in Arundel-Street say to this Informant as follows,
viz. these are but small things which you have yet done, but I will put you
upon great things, if you will be just, for which you shall be well rewarded;
some time after, the said Mrs. Cellier, sent her Nurse for this Informant to
come to her house, which he did, where she called him into her Lodging-room,
and acquainted him that she had a business of consequence to employ this
Informant in, for which he should be well rewarded, then this Informant
demanded what it was, she the said Mrs. Cellier replied it was thus, viz. if he
this Informant could help her to two men of undaunted Spirits, that would swear
to some directions that she had drawn up to shake off the Evidence of Prance,
hopeing thereby to save the Convicting of Berry, Hill, and Green, for which she
the said Mrs. Cellier promised this Informant that the said persons which he
should procure; should have for their rewards the Sum of 40 l. or thereabouts,
and that this Informant was desired by the said Mrs. Cellier to tell the said
persons they should not fear a Prison for if it should so happen, she would
make such Interest that they should only be Prisoners in the Fleet-Prison,
where they should have by this Informants hand paid duly 40 s. per week, which
was to be given first to this Informant by the said Mrs. Cellier, who gave this
Informant 5 s. in earnest, to go about the said business, but this Informant
did not perform his promise to Mrs. Cellier in that respect, but some time
after this Informant was by Mrs. Cellier employed to bayl out of Prison one Mr.
Willoughby, she being very earnest with this Informant, saying that, the said
Willoughby must be gotten out whoever remained, and then she promised this
Informant to make such an Interest to the Recorder that it should be easily
accomplished, as this Informant affirms was done soon after, for which business
the said Mrs. Cellier paid this Informant the sum of 4 l. or thereabouts, but
before Mr. Willoughby was discharged, this Informant told Mrs. Cellier, he
having first seen the said Willoughby, that he was a brisk man, to which Mrs.
Cellier replied, if he were not brisk he would not be fit for our business, and
this Informant further on his Oath affirms, that he had not been at any time
conversant with the said Willoughby in any other thing whatsoever, etc. And
this Informant says, that upon discourse with the said Mrs. Cellier about the
murder of Sr. Edmondbury Godfrey she said it is laid on us, but it will appear
it was done by the Presbyterians. And further added that if any change were,
there would be more kindness found from the Papists than the Presbyterians.

Thomas Williamson.

These that follow are Copies of the Papers sent to Williamson by Mrs. Cellier,
of her own handwriting.

1. Go to Sr. John Nicholas Clark and ask for an order concerning Mr. Doudal or
Mr. Cullumb, Mrs. Wright, Ralph Carter, Mr. Vahan. 2. Mr. John Parsons,
Richard Ganes, Mr. Thomas Ffloyd, Mr. Ireland alias Douting, Mr. Cullumb. 3.
Sr. I am to desire you to call upon me to morrow at the Earl of Powis's house
in Lincolnsinn-fields at seven of the Clock in the morning, and you will oblige
him who is
Sr. your affectionate Friend and humble Servant Edward VVood.

Now, since I have so fair an opportunity, it may be meet to let you know what
I in my first Narrative omitted. And the Reason why I did so, is fair; for at
that Juncture most persons were desirous to know the meaning of my Discovery,
And I as desirous to satisfy each persons Curiosity.

1. In or about the Month of June, 79. at Powis's House, the Countess of Powis,
and Mrs. Cellier, desired me to go to one Nicholas Stubbs, who then Lived in
Stephens-Alley in Kings-Street, Westminster; and was (as they had been
informed) Bed-ridden, and highly dis-satisfyed in Mind, for some false
Testimony which he had given against one Gifford, a Romish-Priest. With this
Stubbs I was to treat about the Usage, which he received in Prison; and to
endeavor to bring him to a Denial of what he had before Affirmed on Oath:
Which was to this Effect; That he, being a Dying-Man, and touched with a true
Remorse of Conscience did on his Deathbed declare, that he knew not any such
Man as Mr. Gifford; or that there was any such thing, as Burning of Houses,
intended. But that, when he found himself Impeach't for a Crime of such a
Nature, and most barbarously Tortured in Prison, insomuch that his Body could
no longer endure the same, he was constrained to give those Answers he did, as
best agreeing to the Questions proposed: But now he prayed God Almighties
Pardon; declaring himself truly sorry for what he had done.

Here I have thought fit, for a general Satisfaction, to insert an Information
taken from Jane Stubbs; which is as follows.

Westminster. ss. The Information of Jane, the Wife of Nicholas Stubbs, of St.
Stephens-Alley in Kings-Street, Westminster; taken upon Oath, this 13th. day of
December, 1679. before me, Edmond Warcup, Esquire one of His Majesty's Justice the
Peace, in the said City.
THis Informant says, That about the Month of June, last past, Mr.
Dangerfeild, now present, came to this Informant's House, when her Husband lay
very sick; and he then asked, whether Mr. Stubbs (her Husband) had not been
much Tortured, while he was in Prison, about the Fire in Fetter-Lane? to which
her said Husband answered, That while he was in the Dungeon, he was hardly
used, being double-Ironed, and Staked to the Board: But was well enough used
afterward. And the said Dangerfeild enquired into the Condition of this
Informant's Husband, and gave Five Shillings; and promised to get Money to pay
the Rent of her House, which was Five Pound: and promised to return again, but
came not. And asked, Whether this Informant knew Mrs. Cellier? but this
Informant knew her not. And the said Dangerfeild said, He would acquaint Mr.
Oats with the Poorness of this Informant's Condition; and would endeavor to
get some Subsistence for him. And further says not.

Jane Stubbs.
Jurat. die and Anno Superdict. cor. me,

Edmond Warcup.



Now, you are to note, the aforesaid Denial was (if Opportunity had served) to
have privately possessed him with, by promising to take care of his Wife, and the
many Children he was like to leave behind him, if he should dye: But when I
found the Man under a most violent Feavor, and the Wife still present, I was
discouraged for making any Progress, according to Order; but rather was
inclined to pity his miserable Condition, which both his Wife, and Himself,
began to relate to me. After I had stayed some time, and asked some Questions,
and I finding no such Answer as I expected, gave him a Crown; and promised to
bring with me (the next time I came) Five Pound, to pay their Rent; as being
solicited to that purpose, by them both: and in the mean time, to make Mr.
Oats sensible of his great Necessity, according as he desired. I returned to
the Countess; to whom I related the Success I had in that Affair: Telling her
Ladyship, That my opinion was, nothing Matterial could be had from Stubbs. To
which she replied, 'Twas no great matter. But since 'twas her Lord's Advice,
her Ladyship was willing to make Trial of the same. Further adding, That the
Lords in the Tower, did measure out Wit, as Pedlers do Juckle; and that whilst
they beat their Brains on Things of mean Consequence, they let greater slip.
Then I demanded, how that could be? Her Ladyship's Answer was, That in the time
I had been gone to Stubbs, she had been informed by Person of good Credit, that
one Mr. Boyce, and Mr. Praunce, were fallen out; and that now there was a fair
opportunity, for them to come within Praunce, at the same time: Ordering me to
go, and Drink with the said Mr. Boyce, (who, as her Ladyship informed me, lived
in Bell-Savage-Yard, on Ludgate Hill) and to endeavor (if I found by his
Discourse, that Praunce and He were separated) if he would embrace any
opportunity, to be Revenged on Mr. Praunce: Which if he did, according as I
should find him inclined, I was to make some offer, to encourage him. Whereupon
I did that very Day, go to the said Mr. Boyces House, after I had first been to
Converse with one Mrs. Dorothy Sherborne, a Sempstress, living near St.
Clement's- Church in the Strand, how to frame a Discourse which might be
agreeable to the Difference, which was then between Boyce and Praunce: For, as
I was informed by Mrs. Cellier, the said Mrs. Sherborne (who is Sister to Mr.
Praunce's Wife) was the Person, who first gave notice of this Affair by one
Mrs. Mary Quina, who then lived in or about Russell-Street, near Covent Garden.
But when I found Boyce, and had prevailed with him to Drink, I did enter into
some Discourse (which appears by this Information, which follows) relating to
Praunce; but found no Encouragement to proceed, according as the Countess of
Powis expected. But upon our parting, I promised to visit him again: Adding,
(when I found no Compliance in that) I would employ him to cut some Amber for
me. And in order to that, sometime after, I made another Visit or two; but
never gave him any Amber to cut: Nor could I get from him any thing, that would
amount to the Prejudice of Mr. Praunce. So that Design fell. But you may
perceive by the Information of Boyce, and Mrs. Sherborne, that the Scheam
thereof was well enough laid, had Boyce but performed his Part. Here follows
their Informations, etc.

The Information of William Boyce, in Bell-Savage-Yard, Ludgate Hill, Joyner;
(taken upon Oath) before the Right Honorable, Sir Robert Clayton, Knight,
Lord-Mayo^ of the City of London, on Friday the 30th. of January, 1679.
THis Informant says, That about the middle of last Summer, one Mr.
Dangerfeild came to this Informant's House, Situate in Bell-Savage-Court,
London, aforesaid: And told this Informant, That he came from Mr. Praunce,
concerning the Cutting of Amber; and desired to Drink privately with this
Informant. But this Informant being Suspicious of him, did request the Man of
the House where they drank, to come into the Room, as often as he could. In
which Room, the said Dangerfeild acquainted this Informant, that he understood,
this Informant had been very kind to Mr. Praunce, and serviceable to him; but
Mr. Praunce spoke very unkindly of this Informant, behind his back. Whereupon
this Informant made answer, that he had no Reason so to do, if he consulted
God, and his own Conscience. And this Informant further says, That on the
Morrow, the said Dangerfeild came again to this Informant at his own House; and
they went to drink at the same Place, as before* At which Place, the said
Dangerfeild renewed the Discourse that had passed between them, the Day before;
which was, as this Informant did then conceive, to provoke him to say
something, that might have ensnared this Informant, in regard this Informant
had been an Instrument to persuade Mr. Praunce to declare the Truth, touching
the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey. But when the said Dangerfeild had found
this Informant could not be provoked to Discourse, he would have persuaded this
Informant, to meet Mr. Praunce and him, the said Dangerfeild, at the
Horse-Shoo-Tavern in Drury Lane; at which Place, he acquainted this Informant,
he kept a Clubb, and was used to meet there every Night: But this Informant
refused so to do; and more says not.

William Boyce.
Dominus die and Anno, Jurat. cor. me,

Robert Clayton, Mayor.



Comitt. Midd'. Civit. Westminster. The Examination of Mrs. Dorothy Sherborne; taken
on Oath before Sir William Waller, one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, for the County of Middlesex, and City and Liberty of Westminster, the
31st. of January, 79.
THis Examinant says, That sometime last Summer, she went with some Linen to
Powis House, to Mr. Willoughby; who, as she supposed, Lodged there, at that
time. Sometime after this Examinant acquainted the said Mr. Willoughby, of a
Difference, as she was informed; that had happened between Mr. Boyce, and Mr.
Praunce, Brother to this Examinant: At which time, the said Willoughby told
this Examinant, that he would go and see Mr. Boyce; and try to find out by him,
what the said Praunce had endured in Prison. And that not long after, the said
Mr. Willoughby returned, and told this Examinant, That he could get nothing out
of the said Boyce; but that he would go again, for the same purpose: And not
long after, returned to this Examinant's Shop; and told her, that he (the said
Willoughby) had been with the said Mr Boyce, and Drank with him; but could get
nothing out of him. And further this Examinant says not, at present.

Dorothy Sherborne.
Capit. and Jurat. die Superdict, coram. 1.

William Waller.



About the Month of September, 1679. when Mrs. Celliers, and my self, went to
visit Mr. Stanford, the Duke of Newburgh's Resident; whose Lodgings was then in
the Hay-Market. He Entertained us with Discourses to this effect; viz. That Dr.
Tongue did employ diverse Persons to write; and that to be done so warily, that
no Person knew more, than just that Part which he was concerned in: Which Mr.
Stamford did then promise, to acquaint the King's Majesty withal. And farther
added, that he would lay down his Opinion of the said Writing, in words to this
effect; viz. That he did believe the said Dr. Tongue, and his Clarks, were
writing out Directions for Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedloe, how to proceed in the
Plot, against the Roman Catholics; hoping thereby, as I suppose, to insinuate
a Belief into the King, that there was no such thing as a Plot intended, by
that Party; but a Contrived Fiction, by some other. At another time, not long
after, I went by my self, to wait upon Mr. Stamford, with that Paper entitled,
The Cloak in its Colors; which was wrote by some, if not all, the Lords in the
Tower, as Mrs. Cellier informed me. At which time, Mr. Stamford bound himself
in a Promise; and took upon him to say, That If ever the Duke of York come to
the Crown of England, he should have Interest enough to make my fortune there;
promising at the same time, in regard things stood then in so ill a posture,
for the present he would make such Interest to the Spanish Ambassador, when he
returned from Fl^nders, that I should be entertained in his Family and Service;
adding, that my business would be to furnish his Excellency with Intelligence
both from City and Country, as well as other parts, for which he doubted not
but to procure for my Sallery, at least One hundred pounds a year: But when I
should be in such an employ, Mr. Stamford proposed a way how I might be as
serviceable to himself, as the Ambassador, which was to give him the same
Intelligence.

Now this I do suppose was used only as a wheedle to encourage me in the
prosecuting the many Affairs I then was engaged in for the good of the Roman
Catholic Cause, more than a thing really intended by him, in regard I never
was preferred to the said employ he then proposed; but 'twas his usual custom
when I came to wait on him in a Morning before 10 a Clock, to entertain me with
a Mass or two before I left him, always admonishing me, and rather indeed
enjoining me to come and hear Mass with him; which I often did, where I
constantly found a full Congregation, for the most part of English people; and
I doubt not but that he still continues the same exercise.

Now to let you know why I did not insert the Informations of my many Witnesses
in my first Narrative, as well as some in this, I hope this following Reason
may satisfy each Reader; for that in as much as I had the most subtle and
wary people perhaps of the whole Universe to deal withal, I neither could, nor
yet can think it proper to discover to them the whole strength of my Testimony.

FINIS.

