A VOYAGE TO The World OF CARTESIUS.

Written Originally in French, and now Translated into English.

LONDON: Printed, and sold by Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

To my Friend JAMES LVDFORD OF ANSELY, Esquire
SIR,
THOUGH all my Services and Respects necessarily devolve on you, as on the
Inheriter of your Brothers Interests, yet you may lay a more immediate Claim to
my Esteem and Observance, from your own repeated Favors and Obligations: In so
much that I am bound by a double Tie of Gratitude, on all Occasions, to
manifest my Resentments of them, and think my self unworthy privately to enjoy
the Happiness, unless I declare to the World how much I am Obliged to you. You
must needs, Sir, think me sincere in my Intentions, when, upon making so small
and insignificant a Payment, I am willing to call the Public to witness, I am
infinitely still your Debtor. I confess, the opportunity I have had of
improving my Talent by the Advantage of your Brothers Tuition and Instructions,
might (you may justly think) have enabled me to offer you an Original instead
of a Translation, and the Transcribing his Character and Sense, might rather
have been expected than my Authors. But for my Apology, I must plead my
Unhappiness in the loss of him, which yet is no more peculiar to me than to the
whole Society of Magdalen-College, whereof he was a Member. He is there
remembered as a Person in whom the Scholar and Gentleman were so well met, that
neither of them spoiled the other: He was Learned without Arrogance; Genteel
without Vanity; Witty without Affectation; Well bred, Airy, Gay and Easy, yet
never relaxed his Mind so far as to abate in any part of its real Improvement.
And, though to instance the Graces and extraordinary Endowments of his Body,
would be thought perhaps to derogate from those of his Mind, and to make the
Luster of his Virtues stand indebted to his Person, yet I can not but think so
curious an Habitation was designed to answer the Merit of the Inhabitant, whose
outward Structure should represent the Quality of the Owner. But I do not mean
to enlarge on his Character, for that is Work that must be wrought extremely
Fine, or methinks it is Nauseous, even on the Dead; and, whatever I may pretend
to the contrary, will look more like a Complement to your self, than Justice to
his Memory. The little I have said will suffice, I hope, to show that what I
here offer you is not altogether unsuitable to his or your Genius, wherein
Philosophy is divested of the Stiffness and Morosness of the Schools, and has
assumed the Garb and Air of a more Ingenuous Education, than ordinary. Here is
something, Sir, that will entertain your Philosophical Minutes, and something
that will quicken those designed for your Diversion: and all so mixed and
tempered, that the Author seems still to have kept his Eye on those two main
ends, Pleasing and Instructing. Philosophy by this Method is become a la mode
amongst the Women of greatest Quality in France, who pride themselves more in
being accounted Partisans of a Sect, than Leaders in Dress and Fashion. And we
may presume that the Power and Force of Imitation will reach the Minds of our
English Ladies, when Learning shall be set off with the Allurements and Delight
they meet with in reading a Romance. To provoke them therefore I have
adventured upon this Translation, notwithstanding the Prohibition of French
Commodities: But it is not from their Judgments I expect the Approbation of my
Endeavors: My chief Design was to please you; And if I shall in the least
succeed in that Attempt, it will be abundant Honor and Satisfaction to

Sir, Your most obliged, and most humble Servant, T. Tailor.
Magd. Coll. Oxon. May, 7. 1692.
ADVERTISEMENT OF THE AUTHOR.
IT is almost three years since this Book was in a capacity of appearing; and
if it were of any Concern to convince the World of this, it might be done by
the Testimony of Persons unsuspected in this Affair; and such as would merit
Credit when they determined it in favor of the Author. The Reader may perceive
it in two or three places, that have some reference to those times, which were
not thought necessary to be altered. Such is the War betwixt M. Arnauld and
Malebranche Father of the Oratory, of which there is an account given, without
any mention of the Cessation of Arms, or any pretense of a Truce which has
been since concluded. But it may be presumed not amiss, to advise such as think
themselves not obligd to so exact an Inquiry into things of that Nature, that
the Map of the Moon, whose Hemisphere is described at large in the Voyage to
the World of Descartes, is no new thing, and that Pl^to, Aristotle, Gassendus,
Mersennus, etc. are not Inhabitants of those Lands and Countries lately
discovered in that vast Continent, nor, of those wherewith the Author of this
Book has enlarged the Map. Our Astronomers have been acquainted with those
places long ago, and have established Principalities on behalf of those great
Men whose Names they bear. This may be seen in the Almagestus of Ricciolus, and
in many other Mathematicians, who write Observations on the Eclipses of the
Moon.

Some may be farther inquisitive to demand, why Father Mersennus had the Honor
to be made Cartesius his Partner, in the framing of his World, rather than so
many other famous Cartesians he might have made choice of. To which I return,
that Father Mersennus had the Preference, not only on the account of the
particular Esteem and Love Cartesius, as well as other excellent Philosophers
of his time, had for him, but because he was the almost only Gentleman that was
in a condition to be an Assistant in that great Enterprise when he began it;
the other Ingenious Cartesians having not left our World till after him.

A General View Of the whole WORK.
LUCIAN, in his Entry upon his true History, has taken the most advantageous
Method that possibly could be thought on. He proclaims forthwith to his Reader
that whatever he shall say is false. After which giving his Imagination swing,
he loads the Paper with all the Extravagancies his Fancy can supply him with.
By this means he secures himself from that grand Concern which attends all
sorts of Composition, and consists in preserving probability in the Narration;
an Obligation otherwise indispensable to every Writer that pretends to give
Relations. The worst of that Exordium is, it cannot be made use of twice, and
that it begins to be Threadbare, as soon as it ceases to be entirely new. It is
a Liberty the Public would never pardon in any one but him that had the good
fortune first to light upon it: A gentile turn that no one can imitate without
passing for a Plagiary, and a Grace of Wit that admits of nothing surprising or
agreeable in a second Endeavor. That Consideration joined with the difficulty
which may be easily guessed, I had to preserve the strict Law of probability in
my History, will persuade those that shall read it, that I envyed Lucian, more
than once, this his so happy Expedient: Nor can I but acknowledge the same. Yet
I must add, that a second Consideration would inevitably have determined me to
a different Choice, although decency would have allowed me to make use of the
former. I am a Philosopher: And the Profession I pretend to, bars all
admittance unto such a management. The Character of a Philosopher is always to
speak Truth, or to think he does; at least endeavor to be thought to speak it.
For me to divest my self of all gayety of Humor, and then to affect it (to
follow the Example of the greatest Enemy the Philosophers have known) would
have been poorly to support a Quality, I extremely value my self upon. So that
I should be cautious of using the like Preamble, and acquainting my Readers
that all they were to expect of me should be false. I certify them therefore
from this time forward that I have a quite contrary design, and that I mean to
set off my History with an Air of Truth, such as may be able to persuade the
most Incredulous, did they lay by Prejudice in the reading of it, that what I
say is most undoubtedly true. But such is the Nature of Prejudice and
Prepossession, that after all the pains I have take to appear credible, I am
conscious notwithstanding I shall not be believed. Let it be how it will: For
after all I will by no means offer violence to the Judgment of my Readers. Now
see in few Words the design of the Work.

I therein relate the Particulars of a Voyage which I made to the World of
Cartesius. I begin the Voyage very advantagiously, upon an occasion that
Fortune presented me, and which seems worthy to be related. Through the whole
Thread of the History, as I fall in with Emergencies, I explain with as little
difficulty and as pleasantly as the Subject will bear, the most principal
Points of Cartesius his Philosophy. I examine many of them in the way, and
refute the greatest part of them in a manner clear, as I think, and
intelligible enough; and which commonly has in it something new and unreceiv'd.
I have made it my business to diversify and enliven a Subject naturally dry and
melancholy, as well by the variety of Accidents, which give me occasion to
digress upon them, as by some peculiar and not incurious Instances of the
History of Cartesianism: And likewise with some brisk and warm Discourses of
such Gentlemen, as no one will be uneasy to hear Dispute. To conclude, my last
and most principal Business to the Examination and Discussion of the general
System of Cartesius his World, and his managery of the chiefest Parts of it, as
he proposes it in his Book of Principles, and in that which is Entitled, A
Treatise concerning Light, or the World of M. Descartes, which he mentions so
often in his Letters to Father Mersennus, but was not printed till after his
death. And I doubt not, in that discussion, to establish this one Proposition,
that has been often advanced, but still repulsed, and still, I am confident,
will be, as a Paradox to many, That there is scarce any Philosophical
Hypothesis more unjust and incoherent, or whose Conclusions have less connection
with its Principles, than that of Cartesius.

That Proposition, I say, has always seemed a Paradox, because it thwarts the
generally received Opinion of that Philosophy. No one will deny but that some
of his Principles being but mere Suppositions without Proof, the Mind cannot
find that satisfaction it demands: But what they stand upon is, That these
Suppositions being once received, all the rest does follow in so direct a Line,
in so great order and perspicuity, that the evidence of the Consqeuences,
expanding it self (as I may say) upon the Premises, the mind begins of its own
accord to embrace for Truths, what were before proposed as bare Suppositions.

This may be true of some parts of his Philosophy, and particularly of those
wherein he treats of the Nature of some Sensible Qualities, in which a Man must
almost be forced to acquiesce, that shall read them without Prepossession. But
I am of opinion it is false in respect of the general Constructure of his
World, and the Consequences he draws from it. It Is this part of his Philosophy
which I shall more thoroughly examine, and it is this of all other, that has
hitherto best escaped the Censure. Plenty of Objections have been made against
his Metaphysics, against the New Demonstrations, he has pretended to give,
for the existence of a Deity, his distinction of the Soul and Body, his System
of Light, his Rules of Motion, as also those concerning Reflection and
Refraction. Scarce any yet have given him disturbance upon the Hypothesis of
his Vortexes, which is notwithstanding the Foundation of all he says touching
the motion of the Planets, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, the gravity and
levity of Bodies; and of his whole System concerning Light, of which he himself
has been so very fond.

I will not say but they have augmented the Difficulties upon each of these
last Heads, since a great many have attacked him thereupon: But I only say they
have seldom or never examined them with relation to his general Hypothesis, by
which I undertake to show, that commonly what he writes of particular Matters,
is inconsistent with the whole; and it is mostly in that, the Relation of my
Voyage has something altogether new.

For what remains, if I shall succeed in this last Affair, which was almost the
only occasion of this Enterprise, I shall glory to have been the most
mischievous Adversary Cartesius ever met with. For that which distinguishes
that great Man from all the other Philosophers, is not the lucky Explication of
some particular Phenomena's in Nature (that Praise is shared by an abundance of
Philosophers, both Ancient and Modern) but that vastness of Capacity, and
extent of Genius, whereby he could frame an entire System of the World, so well
contrived, that taking for granted a few Principles most simple and easy to be
understood, he could give a reason for all the Occurrencies of Nature. It is
that Attempt, as most believe, by which he obtained his end, and which has
procured him so much Honor and Reputation. To show then his System to be full
of Contradictions, that it is incoherent, that one Supposition destroys
another, is to undertake him in his strongest hold, and to wound him in the
part that is most sensible. We shall see in the pursuit of the History what
ought to be our Thoughts of it.

ERRATA.
PH^nomena's read Phenomenon, wherever it is. p. 2. l. 15. r. lies. ib. l.
35. r. scouted. p. 18. l. 9. r. the. p. 19. l. 8. r. humors, all those Natural
Functions, and all the ib. l. 27. r. Britanny. l. 29. r. of her. p. 21. l. 9.
r. laxed. p. 23. l. 15. r. Vortex. p. 29. l. 25. r. meet me at: l. 34. r. she
gave: l. 36. r. sad. p. 44. l. 2. imagines: l. 21. r. utmost. p. 45. l. 16. r.
merited. p. 46. l. 16. r. murder. p. 51. l. 2. r. talked. p. 58. l. 5. r.
could. p. 64. l. 2. r. in one: l. 25. dele not. p. 69. l. 26. r. Euripus. p.
73. r. Califtbenes. p. 76. l. 5. dele and: l. 7. r. Venturer. p. 77. r.
unimpower'd. p. 79. l. 6. dele we. p. 83. l. 3. r. and. p. 86. l. 8. r.
Placart. p. 100. l. 4. r. ^a^sh: l. 17. r. Galilaeus. p. 112. l. 30. r. hairs.
p. 118. l. 15. r. Peripape^icism. p. 121. l. 12. r. met. p. 122. l. 3. r.
memoir. p. 131. l. 34. r. clawing. p. 141. l. 25. r. alone. p. 142. l. 20.
after to insert be. p. 146. l. 10. r. conceiving. p. 147. l. 12. r. netled. p.
153. l. 21. r. Elaterium. p. 155. l. 25. r. sect. p. 156. l. 19. r. shocked. p.
158. l. 9. dele them. p. 161. l. 4. r. clearing: l. 27. r. not truly. p. 162.
l. 7. supposed; to the. end that. p. 173. l. 1. r. or. p. 179. l. 18. r. Vices.
p. 182. l. 31. r. Des Arques. p. 163. l. 9. r. Tonques. p. 193 l. 35. r. petty.
p. 201. l. 6. r. part: l. 34. r. Port. p. 211. l. 12. r. consists. p. 220. l.
19. r. Wreck: l. 21. r. dissipated. p. 245. l. 31. r. resist. p. 259. l. 19.
dele more.

BOOKS Printed for and sold by Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in S. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Critical History of the Texts and Versions of the New Testament; wherein is
firmly established the Truth of those Acts on which the Foundation of Christian
Religion is laid: By Father Simon, of the Oratory. Together with a Refutation
of such Passages as seem contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of
England.

Memoirs of the Court of Spain: Writ by the ingenious French Lady, and
Englished by Mr. Tho. Brown. Octavo.

Memoirs of the Court of France: By the same Author. Octavo.

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Roman Emperor: Translated out
of Greek into English, with Notes by Dr. Casaubon. To this Edition is added,
the Life of the said Emperor, with an Account of Stoic Philosophy, as also
Remarks on the Meditations: All newly written by the famous Monsieur and Madam
Dacier.

Aristeae Historia LXXII Interpretum: Accessere Veterum Testimonia de eorum
Versione, e Theatro Sheldoniano.

The Works of the Learned, or an Historical Account, and Impartial Judgment, of
the Books newly Printed, both Foreign and Domestic: together with the State of
Learning in the World. Published Monthly by I. de la Crose, a late Author of
the Universal Bibliotheque. This first Volume, beginning in August last, is
completed this present April; with Indexes to the whole.

The Bishop of Chester's Charge to his Clergy, at his Primary Visitation, May
5. 1691.

Five Sermons before the King and Queen: by Dr. Meggot, Dean of Winchester.

A Sermon before the King and Queen, by the Lord Bishop of Worcester.

A Sermon before the House of Commons on the Thanksgiving. Day; by Dr. Jane,
Dean of Gloucester.

Waller's Poems complete, in Two Parts. Sir John Denham's Poems.

A VOYAGE TO The World of Cartesius.
PART. 1.
IT fares with the World of Monsieur Descartes, as with other lately discovered
Lands, whereof such different Accounts are given, as often contradict one
another. Scarce Mention was made of this New World, but an infinite Number of
French, English and Dutchmen resolve to go see it. The Spaniard, however
zealous for new Discoveries, understanding it was barren of Mines of Gold and
Silver, of Indigo and Ginger, seemed not much concerned about it: Wherefore
those that had most contributed unto it were not a little pleased, as
believing, they had no Reason to apprehend the Inquisition's coming there to
disturb them. Among other Things in that World the Earth takes a Turn about the
Sun, as in that of Copernicus: And it is known that M. Descartes has more than
once, Desc. ^om. 2. let. 43, 75.
on that occasion, reflected on the Misfortune of poor Galileus. I cannot tell,
but it may be on his Account he has taken so much Pains to prove this Paradox,
Part. 3. pr. n. 26.
That the Earth stands still, though at the same Time it is carried about the
Sun by that Luminary's Vortex. Let it be how it will, many of those that give
out they have best examined that Country, have made their Relations of it, but
so differently, that a Man can scarce yet determine what he must believe: If
you will credit one Party, they will tell you, It is no World at all, but a
perfect Chaos: That all lie in Disorder, and wild Confusion: That it is
impossible for a Man to turn himself in it: That there is neither Light nor
Colors, neither Heat nor Cold, Drought nor Moisture: That Plants and Animals
there don't live. There you have not only Liberty, but positive Orders to doubt
of every thing in Nature. Some there shall be that will dispute you out of the
Name of a Man; though you have a Face like other Men; though you be made up of
Flesh and Bone as they; though you Walk, and Eat, and Sleep, and, in a Word,
perform all the Natural Functions of a Man; yet, I say, there are those that
shall contest that Title with you, until having conversed you, and understood
you speak consequentially, they shall be convinced that you have Reason.

The Inhabitants look Proud and Scornful, and have not the least Respect for
Antiquity. Aristotle, especially is scouled in all Companies, and upon all
Occasions, by them, being looked upon as a Vain Babbler, and an Antique Teller
of Dreams. It is said, There is neither good Christian nor good Catholic
there, since they tamper with Principles too Delicate and Dangerous, in Matters
relating to Religion. No Body can tell what to make of their Belief of the
Creation of Our World, the Production of Matter and the Providence of God; who,
with them, had no other Care upon him than to order the Cubical Particles of
Matter to whirl about their Center: After which he might sit Idle and
Unconcerned, since all the rest could be managed without the least of his
Assistance.

On the other Side, we are ass^red, A most excellent Conduct shines throught
the whole Composition; That all is admirably contrived, and founded upon the
Rules and Laws of Nature: That this World is indeed disburthened of an infinite
Swarm of Accidents, Qualities, and Intentional Species, as of an unprofitable
Lumber, wherewith the Philosophers have imbroiled and encumbered ours: But yet,
notwithstanding it cannot be denied, but the Senses are subject to the same
Impressions there as here, only with this Difference, that the Causes are more
acknowledged, and better explained.

As to the Point of Religion, nothing seems more justifiable than the Apology
of these Gentlemen, which perhaps some have engaged too inconsiderately for an
Affair of that Weight and Moment. Can we apprehend a greater Idea of God
Almighty, than that which M. Descartes has given? An Idea that he derived not
from the Visible Creatures, that slight and faint Ray of an infinitely perfect
Being; but which his Mind found impressed upon it self, and which left no room
for him to doubt of the Existence of a Sovereign Being, though he possessed
neither Heaven nor Earth, nor any Body, nor indeed any other Soul than his: Can
the Omnipotence of a Deity be advanced to a more transcendent Degree than he
has done it? God, according to him, can cause, That Two and Three shall not
make Five; That four Sides shall not be requisite to make a Square; That the
Whole shall be no bigger than One of its Parts; Effects that other Philosophers
never scruple to place out of the Reach of the God head. But has not an Author
of a little Piece, called, A Letter wrote to a Learned Jesuit, clearly shown,
That it is Descartes World that is described in the first Chapter of Genesis?
Another Book has since been published in Holland, with the Title of Cartesius
Mosaisans, and is to the same effect. The Author of the Treatise concerning The
Influence of the Stars, describes the End of the World upon Descartes his
Hypothesis. Monsieur Scottanus, in a late Apology, that he offered for M.
Descartes, against those that Endeavored to render him obnoxious to the
Suspicion of Atheism, observes to us the Respect he had for Religion,
certifying us, That one of his Reasons for the reducing his Meditations to the
Number of Six, was the Consideration of the Six Days which God employed in the
Creation of the World. If we may credit Father Mersennus, a Learned and Noted
Minim, and an intimate Acquaintance of Descartes, we shall find nothing of a
more Christian Temper, and that inspires us more ravishingly with the Love of
God than Descartes Philosophy. In short, there is nothing more edifying than
the Letter that Philosopher wrote to the Sorbon Doctors, in dedicating his
Meditations to them; which is so true, that not long since, a Friend of mine,
not wont to be very Nice in those Matters, having read by chance the Letter at
my House, which touched him; and finding farther the Title of Meditations in
the Front of the Work, he seriously entreated me to lend him that Godly Book,
to entertain his Devotions during Passion Week.

This so strange Variety of Opinions, and Relations counter to one another, of
a World, otherwise of no little Renown, provoked my Curiosity and induced me to
be convinced of the Truth or Falsity of the Reports, in my own Person. All the
Difficulty was to find a Guide to conduct me to a Country, to which there was
no Road passable either for Horse or Foot, for Coach or Barge, by Land or Sea:
But presently after my Resolve, I was happily favored with the most lucky
Occasion that could be wished, for the undertaking my Voyage with all the
Pleasure and Ease imaginable. Having sojourned some Months in a Country Town, I
struck up Acquaintance with an Old Standard, of about eighty Years, a Man of
Parts, and that formerly had conversed much with M. Descartes. That Commerce
had begot in him an unaccountable Zeal for the Tenets of that Philosopher, and
exasperated him to declaim against the Method and Opinions of the School, the
Prejudices of Childhood, and taught him to make external Elogies on the
Cartesian Philosophy. He had so given himself up to this Opinion, that he could
no ways suffer, in Point of Philosophy, any one to deviate never so little from
it. In a Conference that we had together upon such sort of Things, I desired to
know if he kept up his Correspondence with any Car^esians of Worth and
Reputation. No, (said he) I have broke with all Sorts of Persons that call
themselves by that Name. I can no longer find among them that Zeal and
Observance the first Cartesians, without Reserve attributed to that great Man.
Every one now a days builds Systems according to his own Humor, and allows
himself the Liberty of Adding or Retrenching what he pleases in the Platform M.
Descartes has laid; which is a concern of that critical Nature as cannot be
once touched without spoiling the whole. Since the Death of the Famous M.
Chersilier, I have forbore writing to any single Person, for I am persuaded,
That the pure and unmixt Cartesianism was buried with him.

You Gentlemen (replied I) are of a strange Constitution. All the Prefaces of
your Books are filled with Invectives and Raileries, against those who
implicitly espouse the Sentiments of an Author, and profess they will never
desert him. It looks as if you, and the rest of the new Philosophers, had
banded together in an offensive Confederacy, to make continual War upon the
Followers of Aristotle on that Account; and at the same time you fall into the
same Error for which ye reproach them, and are an hundred times more bigoted
to your Descartes, than they to Aristotle. For my part, I know not how to blame
the Conduct of those that are somewhat moderate, which you are so enraged
against. If their Reason has discovered to them another Path than what M.
Descartes trod in, why are you angry if they follow it? Aristotle held
Possession a long time, and reigned absolute Monarch in Philosophy. The
Prescription and Vassalage of several Ages, confirmed his Title of Prince of
Philosophers. Descartes is a Rebel, who durst encourage a Party against his
Prince: What Right has he to demand a greater Submission unto him, than he was
willing to allow to Aristotle?

Because (answered he) Truth and Reason are manifestly on his side. That,
replied I, is exactly the first step Rebellion ever makes, to enforce the
justice of its Cause, and proclaim the public Welfare does depend upon it. But
notwithstanding Sir (pursued I) I am more inclined to Neutrality in this Affair
than you imagine. I have determined to dive to the bottom of Descartes's
Philosophy, of which I have, as yet, but a dark and confused Knowledge, having
never studied him in his own Works, but in the Books of his Disciples, as soon
as they appeared, and that irregularly, and without Method. But as I am obliged
to leave this Country very speedily, and have but a short time to advantage my
self by your Ability in this Affair, therefore it was that I inquired, Whether
you had any Communication of Letters, or Friendship with any good Cartesian of
Paris, to whose Acquaintance you might recommend me, and who would be willing
to instruct a Scholar so apt and forward as I pretend to be?

That Proposal extremely inspirited my old Gentleman, and I perceived sudden
Joy diffused it self all over his Countenance. Ever since I knew you (said he,
taking me by the Hand) I have observed in you a passionate Concern for Truth;
which is the best, and first Disposition Descartes requires to attain unto it.
Trouble not your self, you have still two Months good, which you must stay with
me; and that is as much time as is required. I shall in a little time receive
some News from M. Descartes, whereupon we will take such Measures as shall much
shorten your Journey.

Hey day! News from M. Descartes! (said I) why he has been Dead this forty
Years. I should be sorry, answered he, to have let that Word escape me in
another's Presence, but I let it ship purposely at present, to highten your
Desire of hearing from me those Things which few in the World are acquainted
with, which presently will surprise you, and the Knowledge thereof will convey
you in a trice to the end you desire. Hear me then:

You must know (continued he) that Cartesius, like the ancient Leaders of Sects
of Philosophers, avoided the publishing all the Mysteries of his Philosophy.
Some he reserved which he only divulged to some particular Friends, of which I
had the good Fortune to be one. All the peculiar Discoveries he had made, which
he thought might be of Use, and either contribute to Morality, or serve to make
any Progress in the Knowledge of Natural Beings, he has obliged the Public
with. But Prudence advised him to suppress such others, as some might have
converted to an evil Use. The Immortality of the Soul is one of those Points,
wherein he was obliged to observe that Method, and certainly is one of the most
Important Articles in Philosophy. To prove this in a plain, familiar and
intelligible way, such as shall force the Mind to give assent, and leave not
the least Scruple behind is to undermine the chief Foundation of Libertinism
and Atheism. This M. Descartes has done, by demonstrating the distinction of
the Soul and Body in a Man, by the only clear and distinct Conception that we
have of those two kinds of Being. That Demonstration is one of the most fine
and useful places of his admirable Meditations. And he was high-surpriz'd to
see it so ho^ly opposed, especially by Gassendus; which, though before he had
asked his Permission, galled and vexed him, a little more perhaps than was
convenient upon that occasion. Which gave rise to a Reflection in the Mouths of
many at that time, and which betwixt our selves was true enough, That M.
Descartes did not understand Raillery. But he had Moderation enough in the heat
of his Conflict, to decline the submitting to the Temptation, which had often
invited him to confirm his Demonstration by Experiment, fearing it might prove
of dangerous Consequence: And that is the Mystery which I am about to teach you.

It was his way (as all know) to endeavor to make good by Experience, the
Truths he had discovered by the mere Light of his Understanding He was in
hopes, that having demonstrated with so clear conviction the distinction of the
Soul and Body, he might make so far a Progress as to penetrate into the Secret
of their Union, and at last come to that of separating, and re-uniting them
when he pleased. The Questions that his Illustrious Scholar, Elizabeth the
Princess Palatine, used to make upon that Head, and the difficulty he found in
himself to invent such Solutions as might be easily understood, put him, in
short, upon the Undertaking. One day he proposed his Design to me, and some
other of his Friends. We thought him Whimsical: And I remember I laughing made
Reply, That there was but one way imaginable to effect it, which was, to find
out the famous Caduceus of Mercury, which that God, they say, sometimes by
Jupiter's Orders made use of, to separate the Souls from Bodies, and after a
certain term of Years to join them unto new ones, according to the Principles
of Pythagoras's Transmigration.

That however did not divert Cartesius from raving on his Project, not
ascertaining himself of the Success, nor judging yet he ought altogether to
despair. That was it, that engaged him in a more exact Study than formerly of
an Human Body, and occasioned him to make those most exquisite Discoveries in
Anatomy. The first Conclusion that he drew from the Idea he had of the Soul, as
of a being perfectly Indivisible, was, That it was not extended through the
whole Body, as vulgarly it is taught. He showed the falsity of that Master
Reason, which was used till then to confirm Men in their Prejudices, that in
whatever part you prick the Body the Soul is sensible of Pain. Then said the
Philosophers, It must be extended through the whole. He exposed the Weakness of
that Argument by two Experiments, that manifestly prove the perception of Pain,
and the Impression of Objects in Places where our Soul is not. The first is
that of those Persons who have lost an Arm, who from Time to Time perceive an
Aching in the Place where their Fingers used to be, as if they had their Arm
entire, although their Fingers are not there, nor by Consequence their Soul.
The second is of a Man that is Blind, which he often instances, who makes his
Staff supply the Loss of his Eyes, to distinguish the Figure and Qualities of
Objects: Who knows by the Assistance of his Stick, whether it be Water, Earth
or Grass that he touches; whether the Floor be Rough or Smooth, etc. For it is
certain he perceives all this by his Staff, although no one will say, That his
Soul is in it. He then demonstrated, That the Impression of Objects upon our
Body consisted only in the Vibration of the Nerves and Fibers, that are spread
throughout the Parts, it being unnecessary the Soul should be co-extended with
them. But it was suffcient to her for the perception of Objects, that that
Vibration should be communicated to some principal part where she kept her
Residence; just as the Vibration caused by the touch of a soft, or hard, of a
rough or smooth Body, communicates it self to the Hand by the Mediation of the
Staff; that as the Staff extended from the Hand to the Body, which it touches,
is instrumental to the Soul for the perception of the Qualities of the Body; so
likewise the Nerves drawn out, for instance, from the Brain to the Hand, may be
ministerial to its perception of the Body that the Hand does touch. And that in
fine, The Pain, caused by the too near approach of a Finger to the Fire, does
no more suppose the Souls actual Presence in that part of the Body, than does
the ail of a Finger, of which a certain Maid complained from day to day, Let.
de Desc.
whose Arm, being gangreen'd, was cut off without her Knowledge. For she only
felt the Pain, because the Humors, or some other Cause, made a Concussion in
the Nerves of her Arm, which ran before to the end of her Hand, and because
they struck them in a manner like to that which was formerly requisite to
excite a Pain in the Finger, before she lost her Arm.

Having made this first Step, and drawn a Consequence of that Importance and
Satisfaction, from so abstracted a Principle as the Indivisibility of the Soul;
it was easy for him to prove she kept her Court no where but in the Brain.
There it is that the Nerves do center, or rather from thence they have their
Origin. It is there that the Philosophers, if you except a few, and in those
Vanhelmont, who seized with a Whim, placed the Soul in the Breast; it is there,
I say, that the Philosophers generally agree to be found that which we call the
Common Sense, that is to say, the only place where the Soul can be advised of
all the different Impressions that external Objects make upon the Senses. But
since the Brain is of large Extent, and besides that soft and whitish
Substance, which commonly goes by that Name, has Membranes, Glands, Ventricles
or Cavities, it was something intricate to resolve, and precisely to determine
in what place the Soul was seated. M. Descartes thoroughly examind the different
Opinions of Philosophers and Physicians there upon, and after having solidly
confuted the greatest part of their Sentiments, that were founded upon but weak
and unsound Principles, he evidently concludes, The seat of the Soul must have
three Conditions: First, it must be one* to the end that the Action of the same
Object that at the same time strikes two Organs of the same Sense, should make
no more than one Impression on the Soul, as to instance, she might not see two
Men where there was but one. Tom. 2. Let. 36.
Secondly, it must be very near the Source of the Animal Spirits; that by their
means she might easily move the Members. And in the third Place, it must be
Moveable; that the Soul causing it to move immediately, might be able to
determine the Animal Spirits to glide toward some certain Muscles rather than
others. Conditions no where to be met with but in a little Gland called Pineale
or Conarium, situated betwixt all the Concavities of the Brain, supported and
encompassed with Arteries, which made up the Lacis Choroides. It is that Lacis
we may be assured that is the source of the Spirits, which, ascending from the
Heart along the Carotides, receive the form of an Animal Spirit in that Gland,
disengaging themselves there from the more gross parts of the Blood; and from
thence they take their Course toward the different Muscles of our Body, partly
dependently, partly independently on the Soul; as the Author of Nature has
ordered it, with reference to the end he proposed to himself in the production
of Mankind.

So far M. Descartes took Reason along with him for his Guide; and for ought I
know he might have stopped there, had not Fortune, or rather the good Providence
of God (who often encourages the laudable Curiosity of those that apply
themselves to the consideration of his wonderful Works) revealed to him in an
extraordinary manner the Secret that he was in search of. And that was without
doubt one of the most strange Effects of the desires of a Philosophical Soul,
P. Malle.* branche.
which a famous Author styles a Natural Prayer, that never fails to be heard,
when it is joined with a prudent and exact Management of our Reason.

Should you believe me, added he, if I should tell you M. Descartes had often
Fits of Ecstasy? Why not? Said I; that is no such incredible thing, of so
Contemplative a Man as he was; nor is it a Case without a President. Who has
not heard of those of the famous Archimedes, in which he often lost himself,
through his vehement Application to Mathematical Speculations, and in one of
them his Life? Syracuse being taken by the Roman Army, whilst he was drawing
Figures in his Chamber with that earnestness of Mind; the Tumult of a Town
taken by Storm, was not loud enough to wake him: And he sooner was run through
by the Soldiers that had forced his House, than he was apprehensive of their
Approach.

Alas! replied he, with a Sigh, you will see in the Consequence of what I am
relating, That the Ecstasies of M. Descartes were no less fatal, though they were
not of the same Nature, and proceeded from a far different Cause. It happened
one Day, whilst we were at Egmond, a little Town in Holland, which he delighted
in, that he entered his Stove very early in the Morning (which he had caused to
be built like that in Germany, where he began his Philosophy) and set himself
to thinking, as he used to do. Two Hours after, I came in: I found him leaning
over the Table, his Head hanging forward, supported with his left Hand, in
which he held a little Snush Box, having his Finger near his Nose, as if he was
taking Snush. As for the rest he was Immovable, and held his Eyes open: The
noise that I made in entering the Room not causing him to stir, I had the
Patience to observe him half an Hour postur'd in that manner, without his
perceiving of me. In the mean while there happened an Adventure that much
surpised me: There stood upon the Cornish of the Wainscot in the Stove, a
Bottle of the Queen of Hungary's Water; I was amazed to see it descend, whilst
no Body came near it, and to pass through the Air toward M. Descartes. The
Cork, with which it was stopped, came out of its own Accord, and the Bottle
fastening it self to his Nose, hung there for some time. I protest I durst have
swore at that moment, there had been no small Conjuring in the Business of our
Philosopher and that some familiar Demon, like that of Socrates, had inspired
him with all the fine Things he still had taught us. But I was convinced not
long after that there was nothing less in it, and I desire you to suspend your
Judgment thereon. He awakened a little while after as in a start, and striking
his Hand upon the Table, This time at last, said he, I have it. I thought him
still in a Dream: And springing up forthwith upon his Chair, transported with
Joy, without seeing me, he cut two Capers in the middle of the Room, still
repeating, I have it, I have it. I burst out with Laughter to see that Frolic,
a thing not customary with M. Descartes, being naturally of a Grave and
Melancholy Temper; who hearing and seeing me at the same time, presently
redden'd, and afterward fell a Laughing as well as I. And as I was urgent with
him to give me the Reason of his Joy and Rapture: To punish you, says he, for
having observed an Indecorum unbecoming a Philosopher, you shall not know it so
soon: And with that he left the Room in which we were, and entered into his
Closet, bolting it upon him. Nevertheless two days after he imparted to me the
Mystery.

We took a turn together out of Town, and after occasional Discourse of several
Things; Well, said he, abruptly, without recourse to Mercury's Caduceus, I have
found out the Secret, not only of the Union of the Soul and Body, but also how
to separate them when I please: I have experienced it already. That was the
Product of the Meditation, wherein you surpised me the other day; and when I
seemed to you to awake of a sudden, I came farther a Field than you imagine:
He spoke this in so serious and positive a way, that he seemed to be in
earnest. It shall be your Fault, added he, if you are not convinced of the
Truth of what I say, and of the Experiment. It is the most curious Secret in
the World. I am resolved to commit it but to very few; but that Adherency which
you have manifested until this time unto me, will not suffer me to be reserved
in any thing. He went on, without giving me time to complement his Generosity,
and related that extraordinary Event in all its Circumstances.

He told me, that being fixed attentively upon the Question which the Princess
Elizabeth had proposed, touching the Union of the Soul and Body, and revolving
in his Mind his former Thoughts upon that Subject, in the midst of that
extraordinary Application, he found himself in such a strange Surprizal in an
Instant, that he was not capable, when he told me of it, to express himself
clearly thereupon, nor could he gain so distinct a Conception of it as when
actually he was in it. All that he could tell me, was, That it resembled a
Trance, because in that there is no use of the Senses; one can neither See, nor
Hear, nor Feel the Impression of External Objects (unless they be extremely
violent) and then there is an end of it: But herein it was quite different;
since the Soul had Perceptions of it Self, and was apprehensive of the
Cessation of its Organical Functions: Which in a Trance is nothing so. That she
was furnished with a World of Immaterial or purely Spiritual Notices, of which
he had sometime discoursed to us, but in an abundantly more perfect and lively
manner, than when his Attention was disturbed with the appearances of Fancy,
which constantly interrupt it: That more Discoveries of Truth could be made
thus in one Minute, than in ten years by the ordinary means; which Knowledge of
Truth filled the Soul with so pure and satisfactory a Joy, that nothing is more
true than what Aristotle says, likely upon the same Experience, That the
complete Happiness of Man, in this Life, if there is any such thing, consists
in the Contemplation of God and Natural Beings.

But he told me, he had no sense of that perfect Joy, till he was fully
enlightened upon the Point that then took up his Thoughts: Which was done in a
Moment. He had the satisfaction not only to know, but to be sensible, in some
measure, of the Truth of the greatest part of those Things which had employed
his Meditations until that time; and of the Evidence of the Idea's he had
framed concerning the Essence of the Body and Soul; to see her advanced upon
her Pineal Gland he had conjectured, and to see that the Union of the Soul with
the Body was nothing less, then that vertual, or rather imaginary Extension, by
which she was supposed commensurate with the Limbs; much less those imaginary
Modes, which the Schools makes use of, to confound and plague the Conceptions
of Youth. But that which was of most Importance was, to see; that this Union
was nothing in Effect, but these actual Commerce and Correspondence the Soul
and Body had with one another. A Commerce that chiefly is maintained in this,
that the Nerves spread through the Body, by their Vibration give occasion to
the Soul of knowing the different impressions, External Objects make upon the
Senses; and in that the Soul pursuant thereupon, by the Motion she immediately
impresses upon the Pineal Gland where all the Nerves concentre, determines the
Animal Spirits to their several marches through the Muscles, to produce in the
Body such several Motions as she shall please to give, and especially those
that are necessary to her Preservation.

After that (pursued, my old Friend) M. Descartes entertained me with all that
happened upon that occasion, and all the other Reflections he had made. The
Principal of which was, That his Soul in that juncture no longer perceiving the
Motions, external Objects caused upon his Body, and by consequence that
Commerce, in which the Essence of Union consisted, being broken, she could
behold her self as in a separate State, though in the mean time she resided at
her usual Abode; that local Presence having the least share in her Union with
the Body: She then had a mind to disengage her self from the Body, and see what
would be the Event of that Separation. No sooner had she wished it, than it was
so. And he farther experienced what he had often suggested to us before, that
if the Machine of the Body had all its Organs sound and free; if it had its
customary Heat in the Heart and Stomach, the circulation of the Blood, the
filtration of the Humors, and all those natural Functions, all the Motions
constantly performed in us without the notice of the Soul would go on as
regularly in her absence, as when she was there. Moreover it fell out as she
was busy in contemplating the operation of her Body at some paces distance from
it, a Fly fortuned to tickle it in the Face; presently the Hand raised it self
to the place, and unseated the Fly just as if the Soul had been actually in the
Body. So true it is that the greatest part of the Motions of our Body, which we
attribute to the Soul, are owing to the sole Disposition of the Machine.

This Soul before she durst venture to wander very far from the Body, made her
entry and exit sundry times; and judging by the disposition in which she saw
it, she might without any apparent danger leave it for some time, she hazarded
the undertaking a very long Voyage. She arrived at Beitany in the Houses of her
Relations, and from thence she made a Sally unto Paris to the House of some
other Acquaintance. She was much concerned to see that the People there had but
an indiffernt Opinion of her Religion; the Country M. Descartes had chose to
live in, and some unwaranted Inferences that one or other had drawn from his
Principles, had given occasion to those rash Censures. It is notwithstanding
true, that all the time he lived and when he died, he was a sound and honest
Catholic.

Finally, such was the success the Soul found in her Rambles when separate from
the Body, that she could when she pleased in a Minute travel three or four
thousand Leagues: In so much that this of M. Descartes parting from Egmond
about half an hour after eight in the Morning, had traversed all France in an
hour and an half, and was returned at ten.

Bless me. said I to my old Gentleman, how expedient would that be for a Person
that so passionately desires to see the Country as I do* You shall gratify your
Curiosity, answered he; but hear me out.

M. Descartes Soul being returned from her Voyage in France, found her Body
almost in the same posture in which she left it. But as yet she was not fully
Satisfied. She was unacquainted with the way and means that led her into this
Condition: And she considered it was an hazardous Exploit, and that being once
united to her Body, she might never, for ought she knew, be disjoined again,
till Death should cause a final Separation. She applied her self therefore
seriously to consider the Nature of her Body, and the disposition of all its
Organs: She found that the Nerves employed in Sentation, and those that serve
for Natural functions, as the beating of the Heart, the circulation of the
Blood, etc. were of a Nature quite distinct. She saw that these were vehemently
distended, and she concluded it might be for the better communicating the
Animal Spirits to the Muscles with which the Nerves are united, and
capacitating them to maintain and continue those natural Motions, the Soul is
not aware of when united with the Body; and that, on the contrary, the Nerves
made use of in Sensation, and by whose Means the Soul received the Impression
of Objects, were almost all unbraced, and lax, which might prevent the Motion,
caused by the Impulse of Objects, from being continued unto the Seat of the
Soul: The Difficulty was to find the true Cause why one should be taxed without
the other, and how she might bring it about to distend those that formerly were
laxed.

Mean while the Snush-Box, which I mentioned, his Body held in its Left Hand,
made M. Descartes call to mind, That before his Ecstasy he had taken
Tabaccco-Snush, and he could not tell but so extraordinary an Effect might have
been produced by the Virtue of that Tobacco. That which he took of was an
unusual kind, which a Merchant of Amsterdam had brought over from an Island
near China, and presented him: It was extremely strong, and M. Descartes, to
mollify it had mixed a certain Herb in it, dried to Powder, whose Name he
never would acquaint me with, nor the Place where it grew, though he presented
me with a great Quantity of the same: He laid a sufficient Dose upon the
Backside of his Hand, and gave it his Body to take; and at the same Time
happened this prodigious Effect in his Brain; for all the Vapors raised there
since his last taking were dislodged and dissipated in an instant. He observed
it was only the Particles of the Tobacco that scattered the F^mes of the Brain,
and that those of the Herb which he had tempered with it being not so fine, and
having very little Motion, fastened themselves in the Nerves that cause
Sensation, and and made them looser than they were before.

Seeing that Effect, he no longer doubted, but concluded it to be the Herb,
which he mixed with the Tobacco, that caused his Trance, and took away his
Senses; and that the Tobacco? at the same Time unhar bouring all the Fumes that
might benight the Brain, left the Soul with the entire Liberty of knowing and
reflecting on it is self, as she had then experienced. After which he thought
that Hungary Water was sufficient to brace the Nerves afresh, that serve for
Sensation, since it is often used to recall those Persons that swoon away. The
Soul takes the Bottle, I not long since mentioned, and brings it in the Air
from the far Side of the Chamber to his Body, (and therein consists exactly the
Magic of which I then suspected M. Descartes guilty) and moistens his Nostrils
with it: The subtle Vapor of that Liquor effected what he aimed at; presently
the laxed Nerves erect themselves, and the Soul straight seats it self in the
Pineal Gland, and finds itself consederate with the Body as before. It was in
that instant I perceived Descartes to come to himself. I told you, he locked
himself forthwith in another Room, it was to make a second Experiment of his
Tobacco and his Herb, which succeeded to his Hearts Desire: Since when, it was
a Business of nothing for his Soul to leave the Body; and since his imparting
to me the Secret, his Soul and mine have made an hundred Expeditions together,
to instruct our selves of the greatest Curiosities in Nature.

As those that read the Works of M. Descartes are unacquainted with all that I
have been relating, they with just Cause are amazed at a thing, which you will
not startle at for the future. I mean the Particulars he descends to in his
Physics, concerning the Properties of his three Elements, at how great soever
remove from Sense they lie; concerning their Figure, their Motion, their Rank
and File in the Composition of his World, and all particular Bodies, concerning
the Disposition of his Vortexes, in which he proceeds so far as to observe the
different size of the Balls of the second Element, Part. 3. Princip.
of which they consist, in their respective Places, how those that come nearest
the Center of the Water are the least of all; those that are a little removed
are somewhat bigger, increasing still in Bigness unto a determinate Distance,
after which they all are equal. Concerning the Formation of their Parts
chamfer'd in Fashion of a Skrew, with which he explains the Nature and the
different Phenomena's of the Lodestone, in a way so fine and easy,
Phoenomena's that till then had puzzled and confounded all the Philosophers,
even those that had so ready a Method of explaining all things by the
Assistance of their occult Qualities: All this he saw intuitively, and of
himself; and for me that speak to you, is it possible to think, That at the Age
of seventy seven, and being of so weak a Constitution as I am; I say, is it
possible for you to think I should have lived to this, and preserved my Health
and Vigor as I do, unless I had had a perfect Knowledge of the Machine of my
Body? Unless I had still filled and made-up the Breaches whereat Life leaks and
runs out continually? I mean not, in applying the Remedies that Medicine
prescribes, whose conjectures are so very uncertain, and from the Use of which
Monsieur Descartes has so frequently dissuaded the Princess Elizabeth: Let. de
Descartes.
But in the Practice of that Critical Knowledge my Soul has of my Body, of
which she perfectly is, and can be instructed as often as she pleases, by
putting herself in the Capacity I have now been-speaking of. I must acknowledge
Sir, replied I, then, it is a most admirable Secret and of Infinite Use; I am
impatient till I learn it of you, and as soon as I know it I am persuaded I
shall improve it to as great a Benefit as Adam would have done the Tree of Life
in Paradise, if he had continued there. And I doubt not but if Origin had known
it, he that looks upon the History of Scripture as Allegory, he would have
believed the Tree of Life to be nothing but this Mystery which God had
communicated unto Adam: But that which you was speaking of your Health, creates
one Scruple in me; How Monsieur Descartes having to the Advantage of this fine
Knowledge came to dye at the Age of fifty four? Was he so much out of Love with
his Life as to neglect the repairing those effluxes of his Machine, whose
Failures and Disasters he could so easily foresee?

Do you believe then, returned he, that M. Descartes is dead? I know not, said
I, how you understand it, but methinks the Corpse of a Man should not be buried
unless he was dead before; and all the World knows that in the Year 1650. M.
Chersilier prefde Let. de M. Descar^es.
the Body of M. Descartes was interred at Stockholm with great, Pomp and
Solemnity, by the Care of M. Chanut, his particular Friend, and then Ambassador
of France at the Court of Sweden: That since M. Dalibert has ordered his Bones
to be removed to Paris, and to be disposed of in the Church of S. Geneve, where
his Epitaph is to be seen, engraven upon a fair White Marble: It seems to me
once more, That all this supposes a Man as dead as dead can be.

All these Particulars are true, said my Cartesian; but for all that it is
false that M. Descartes is dead; for that we call Death is when our Body
becoming incapable of Vital Functions, either by the Defailure of the Organs,
which are wore out in the Succession of Years, or corrupted by some Disease, or
endammaged by some Hurt or Wound, the Soul is obliged to quit her Habitation,
following the Laws of their Union established by the Sovereign Master of the
Universe: But Cartesius's Soul was by no means separated from his Body after
this manner. Hear then the Matter of Fact.

About three or four Months after his Arrival in Swedeland, where Queen
Christina had invited him, and did him the Honor to entertain him in her
Library an Hour in a Morning every Day: Pref. de let. de De^cartes.
He was seized in the midst of Winter with an Inflammation of the Lungs,
seconded with a Giddiness in the Brain; but the Fever having left his Brain,
there had been no great Difficulty in his Recovery. Let. de Descartes.
Himself had wrote a little Time before to one of his Friends, That he had made
some Discoveries in Anatomy, that insur'd his Life for an hundred Years: And
it is known that M. Descartes did not use to go by Guessing, or advance any
thing without a firm Assurance; but an unseasonable Misfortune rendered his
Prediction fruitless; seeing he had not rested well that Night, his Soul had a
Mind to take a little Turn for Recreation-sake; he takes his usual Dose of
Snush, and his Soul leaves his Body in the Bed. By ill Luck the Physician,
contrary to his Custom came to visit him at Midnight; the Noise he made, in
entering the Chamber, did not awake his Body, whose Senses were perfectly laid
asleep by virtue of the Herb, of which I spoke, that was mingled with the
Tobacco: But having put to his Nose a Vial of extremely Spirituous Liquor, to
fortify the Brain, it made a more quick and lively Sally upon the Organ of
Sense than Hungary Water used to do, which M. Descartes Soul made use of when
she would re-enter the Body, and conclude its Trance; it caused it to open its
Eyes, and to give some Groans. The Physician asked it how he did? The Machine
accustomed, some Days ago to answer to that Question, That he was very ill,
made still the same reply; but to other Questions the Physician proposed (since
the Soul was not there to talk rationally, and answer to the purpose) the
Answers were full of Extravagance and Delirium, just as the Machine was
determined by the Voice of the Doctor: It talked eternally of the Separation of
its Soul from its Body, because the last Thoughts the Soul entertained in the
Act of separating her self were those of that Separation, which had left some
Figures or Traces stamped upon the Brain, answering to those Thoughts, and
determining the Tongue to a Motion, requisite to pronounce such sort of Words.
These Symptoms enduc'd the Doctor to believe he was again transported with a
Raving in his Head; wherefore he is out of Hand blooded in the Foot,
Cupping-Glasses are applied, and several other Violent Remedies, which so
exhausted and altered his poor Body, that in a short Time it had spent all its
Strength; it is natural Heat began to faint, and lose itself by little and
little; a De^luction of his Brain fell into his Breast; and in a Word, it
became a mere Cadaver, and unable to perform the Duties of Life, and to receive
his Soul. Thus it happened; so that you see a Man may truly say, M. Descartes
is not dead.

Assuredly Sir ( said I) this is not to dye according to due Form and Method;
nevertheless the Swedish Physician would be held Guiltles before all the
Faculties of Europe; for he has followed the Rules of his Art he acted
according to appearance, and if he did but understand what you are teaching me,
That M. Descartes is not dead, he might boast of the Greatest and most
unprecedented Exploit that was ever known in Medicine, I mean to have killed a
Man without causing him to die. But Sir, I beseech you ( continued I) acquaint
me, if you know, What was the Destiny of M. Descartes Soul; for, according to
the uncontroverted Principles of our Faith, a Soul in leaving this World
receives her Arrest for Eternity, and either has her Portion in Paradise, Hell
or Purgatory for some Time.

That Question ruffled my old Gentleman; And in the Name of God ( said he)
almost in a Passion, rid your self of that Ridiculous Custom you have taken up
in the Schools, of introducing Questions of Religion in Matters purely
Philosophical. M. Descartes had once thought to renounce his Philosophy, or at
least refuse to publish his Works, to save him the Trouble of answering those
impertinent Objections, which were made at every turn and upon all occasions. I
am giving you clear Matter of Fact, and you desire me to Account for the
Conduct of God. But in brief, have not I forestalled all your Difficulties,
when I told you M. Descartes was not Dead? And since he is not Dead, why demand
you if he has submitted to a Judgment, the Dead are only concerned in?

I begged his Pardon for my Imprudence; and agreed with him, That nothing was
more unseasonable and inconvenient, than such sort of occasional Questions, to
a Philosopher that had made a System without regard to any thing of that
Nature. And that likewise put me in mind of entreating my Readers, to use the
same Candor toward me. That they will not wrangle with me, upon the Point of
separate Souls, whole Shoals of which I meet with in my Voyage to the World of
Descartes, nor tie me to answer all the Scruples, they might be able to raise
on that Account. For therein bottom the most agreeable Passages of my History,
with which I should not present the Public, but upon that Condition. I would
entreat them to remember the Privilege these Cartesian Gentlemen take, who when
perplexed in answering the Argument, brought against the Essence of Matter, and
drawn from the Sacrament of the Host, think they have right to cry out, They
are injured; That their Philosophy is sequestered from Things relating to Faith;
That they are Philosophers and not Divines, and undertake the explaining the
Mysteries of Nature, not of Religion: I would, I say, they would do me the like
Justice; or, if they had rather, the same Favor. And supposing any one so
Religious, as to suspect me of the Heresy of those, who say, The Souls in
parting from the Body are not doomed for Eternity; I wish he would consider once
more, that I am in this, an Historian and Philosopher, not a Theologist, and
give a Relation of Descartes's World, am not making a Profession of Faith.
Which the Character of an History (such as I am upon) will bear, far more
independently of the Truths of our Religion, than a System of Philosophy. Any
one that knows never so little must be forced to acknowledge this: Which being
once supposed, I return to the Narrative of my Old Gentleman, who thus went on.

M. Descartes's Soul returning to Stockholm, found her self in the like unlucky
Circumstances, as did one Hermotimus, L. de Anima.
mentioned by Tertullian, who having procured the self-same Secret as
Descartes, left constantly anights, his Body asleep in Bed, whilst his Soul
went a rambling through the World. Both one and the other, at their return,
found their Lodgings out of a Capacity to receive them.

The Task Descartes's Soul enjoined her self then, was, to meet at Paris. She
would not tell me presently of the Accident, but only invited me to take a turn
or two: No sooner said than done. With one Snuff of the Tobacco, I equipt my
self to wait on her. My Soul was no sooner out of my Body, but she said, in
Language Spiritual, she was about to tell me strange News. I am, says she, no
longer Imbody'd; my Corpse is this day to be interred at Stockholm; and he gave
me the Particulars of what I have been relating: Nor did she seem sab or
afflicted thereupon. I then demanded of her if she experienced what the
Philosophers report, That the Soul being the substantial Form of the Body, when
separated for good and all, is in statu violento. She answered me, she knew
nothing of that violent State, but found her self incomparably better out, than
in the Body: And that she had but one Concern upon her, to know in what part of
the vast Space was best to settle her Abode in. That she would take my
Directions in the thing, but that she found her Will inclined for the third
Heaven. The third Heaven, according to the division Cartesius makes of the
World, is the last of all, and that which is the farthest removed from us. For
the first is nothing but the Vortex, in which is placed the Earth, whose Center
is the Body of the Sun, about which, the Celestial Matter that composes the
Vortex, carries us, and makes us turn continually like the other Planets. The
second Heaven is incomparably larger than that in which we are, and takes up
all that mighty space in which we see the fixed Stars, which are so many Suns,
and have each of them a Vortex, of which they are themselves the Center, as our
Sun is of this. Lastly, the third Heaven is all that Matter, or all that
indefinite Extent, which we conceive above the Starry Heaven, and is void of
Bounds, and in respect of which the space of all the other may be considered as
a Point.

Now many Reasons determined M. Descartes to choose his place of Residence in
the highest Heaven. The first was, To avoid the Company of an Innumerable gang
of Souls of Philosophers, that were vaulting and fluttering on all parts of
this our Vortex; for, to tell you by the way, it is incredible how many Souls we
met upon our Journey: And M. Descartes was much surpised to see the Secret, of
which he took himself to be the first Inventer, made use of in all times, even
by those of a very mean Quality, whereby they have escaped a dying, or whose
Souls have lost their Bodies by some Accident, not unlike that of M. Descartes.
But that which made their Company so disrelisht, and perfectly intolerable to
Cartesius his Spirit, was, That these Souls, so disentangled as they were from
Matter, were tinctured still with Prejudice, wherewith they were prepossessed,
when united with their Bodies. That when he would have converss'd with them
about the Principles of Bodies, and the Causes of several Phoenomena's, they
faintly supposed to him, or proved by the Authority of Aristotle, substantial
Forms, absolute Accidents, and occult Qualities, as is done to this day in many
Schools. And except some few Souls of the highest Rank, which he has converted
and proselyted to Cartesi^nism, all are inveterate and inleagu'd against him
with as immoderate Fury, as the Philosophers of this World when he began to
publish his Doctrine here.

The second Reason that biased him to that Election, was, because he looked
upon those indefinite Spaces as a new Discovery, of which he was the Author.
For it was upon his forming a distinct Idea of Matter, whose Essence consisted
in Extension, that he concluded Space, Extension and Matter, to be one and the
same thing, signified under different Names: And being it was necessary to
admit of a Space and an Extension above our World, since we have a most clear
Conception of them, it was plain, That above our World there was Matter too,
and as we can have no Idea of any Bounds or Limits that Matter has, it is
necessary it should be Infinite or rather Indefinite.

Finally, the third and most prevailing Reason of all, and which he intimated
not to me, until we arrived upon the place, is, that well, conjecturing the
Matter above the fixed Stars to be uninform'd, and not yet shaped into a World,
he was in good hopes that he was able to set it to work himself, and fancied
that in dividing and agitating it, according to his Principles, he could reduce
it to a World like this, excepting that it would be destitute of real Men, and
only stored with Automatous Machines in their Likeness. That Project was the
Subject of the most part of his Books, especially of his Book of Principles,
and that Entitled, The World of M. Descartes. We set out immediately for the
third Heaven. I shall not descend to the Particulars of our Voyage. I hope in a
few days you will bear me Company there your self. I Will only say, that upon our
Coasting, we found all Things exactly in that Portrait we had drawn before,
without Form, without due Order, or any regular posture of the Parts, as rude
and unsightly Materials, that require the Hand of the Artist. We surveyed it
all about, and bewildered our selves a long time in the vast Deserts of the
other World; which perfectly represented to me the Face of the Chaos, and that
confused Mass of which the Poets speak. That enterview, as much a Spirit as I
was, filled me full of Horror, so hideously frightful it appeared. It is
notwithstanding here ( said the Spirit of M. Descartes) that I will fix; nor
will I quit this Place till the Providence of God shall dispose of me for
Eternity; he brought me into the World to reform and re-establish the
Philosophy of it. I had with good success began the Business I was sent upon;
but one unlucky Accident, not in my Power to foresee, prevented me from
prosecuting my Design: That shall not hinder me from using the Knowledge he has
given me to the best Advantage. I presume, to accomplish here the System of my
World, of which you have seen the Draught: Matter here is plenty and to spare,
and only Motion's wanting; and I have all encouragement to hope, That God, who,
of his Goodness, uses to condescend, in Quality of an Universal Cause, to the
Thoughts and Inclinations of his Creatures, conformably to their Nature, will
not be wanting to me. Being a separate Spirit, I can lay Claim to greater
Motions far than those that set the Wheels of all the World below a going: I
shall no sooner desire the Moving of this Matter, but God, pursuant to the Laws
of his Providence will create so much Motion as I have a Mind to: There will be
need of nothing more than the Determination of that Motion, and the
Distribution of it, according to the particular Necessities of every part of
Matter. That determination, as I have heretofore explained, depends on Second
Causes, which Province will entirely belong to me; I know very well the Rules;
the Consequences I have drawn from those Rules will infallibly compass my
Design. In short, I find my self in a Capacity, according to my Principles to
warrant the Success of my Enterprise; since notwithstanding the Machine I
undertake is of an unweildy Bigness, for I design to make it as capacious as
our World, and must be composed of an infinite different Parts, since the
Engines that must be played are innumerable, since the Combinations and the
different Determinations of Motions must be infinite, it will not be the Work
of one Day, nor one Year; half an Age is not too much for an Human Spirit for
projecting such a Grand Design: But I am persuaded, my Principles supposed, it
will be sufficient. I shall take no Satisfaction in Visitants, that shall come
and interrupt me, during that Space of Time: I will now begin to enjoy the
Pleasures of Solitude, which I could never find on Earth, and I entreat you to
manifest my Intentions thereupon to all my Friends below, whom you think it
convenient to acquaint with my Circumstances, without telling them precisely
where I am* for once more I say, I would not have, them know exactly what is
become of me, nor what I am a doing: The Men there, and especially the
Philosophers, deserve not to be admitted to the Knowledge of these great
Mysteries, they would ridicule as fabulous what ever you should say concerning me,
as they did for the most part entertain as Whim and Chimera all that I revealed
of my Project touching the Construction of a World. As for you, my dear Friend,
I would that you return to your Body, which now you have left almost two Days;
too long fasting may inflame it, and introduce a Fever* Above all, take Care
you never finally abdicate it, upon your own Authority, which some of my
Disciples have been guilty of, and so many Ancient Philosophers that we met in
diverse Places; for that is contrary to the Decree of Providence* Enquire in
your Way for the Spirit of Father Mersennus, and send him hither; I Will take him
to me for an Assistant, and to keep me company.

Having received the last Orders of this dear Spirit, and obtained Permission
to give him a Visit once at least, in three or four Years Time; having
considered the great Violence I should suffer, in being so long distracted from
him, and the Danger likewise I was in of being so for ever, in case I should
dye during that great Term of Years, he had destined to the completing of his
World; we spiritually embraced each other, and I stood forwith for Paris. I cut
it through a vast number of Vortexes and Planets, without discovering Father
Mersennus; but at last I found him out in Mercury, in which he very much
delighted, because that is a very jolly Planet: I intimated to him the Orders I
had for him from M. Descartes, which he embraced with Joy, having been
all-a-long his faithful Correspondent, and especially at Paris. Being I was in
haste for my Departure, we had not much Discourse together, so we parted; he
bent his Course toward the third Heaven, my Spirit took the Way that led to my
own Home, where she reunited with my Body.

Since that Time I have paid M. Descartes (...) or seven Visits; the last was
about two Months ago. He assured me then, He had dispatched almost all his
Combinations, and that all was as good as demonstrated: And unless the most
evident Principles of Geometry, Mechanics and Staticks were false, he was
confident of the Performance. He promised to give me notice about this Time, to
come and see him, to the end we might take a Review together, and examine his
Design, and may be forthwith fall to work in the Production of his World, that
is to say, to afford me the most Noble Diversion, of which an human Soul is
capable. I daily expect a Message to depart, and it will be your own Fault only
( added he) if you are not a Sharer in this Voyage, and gain a greater Stock of
Knowledge in one Day than the most reputed Cartesians have in all their Life.
This is the Sum of all I had to say.

Scarce had he made an End of speaking, but a Country Gentleman, of no mean
Rank, of a good and genteel Presence, though I disliked the impertinence of his
Visit at that instant, entered his Chamber, in a Country Habit, saying, his
Coach stood ready at the Gate, and that it was Time to go. It was a Design they
had agreed on, to take the Air for a Fortnight; which obliged me to take my
Leave of them and retire.

I knew not what to think of this Relation: I never took him for an Enthusiast,
that had given it me: And surely (thought I) this Story is too well pursued to
be a Dream. I then conceived it might be some mysterious Allegory, containing
all the Secrets of the Sect, of which he would give me afterward the
Explication. I applied my self however to the reading of my fine Descartes, and
I compassed him during the Fortnight, though it cost me many a Head-ake,
occasioned by the too great Intention of Thought: But I understood in the
Consequence, That all he had said was far from Allegory, and that he ought to
be taken in a Literal Sense, at the end of his Epistle.

My old Friend being returned from the Country, sent me a Letter, the next
Morning, in which he notified, He would see me before four and twenty Hours
were at an end, and that I should put my self in a Readiness for my Voyage. I
waited all the Day, with great Impatience; but seeing at last he did not come,
about ten a Clock I went to Bed; half an Hour after, being yet awake, I was
amazed to hear my Curtains drawn on all Sides my Bed, the Casements of my
Windows to fly open with so vast a Noise, and to see, by the Assistance of the
Moon, my old Gentleman in the middle of the Room, and another with him, habited
in an unusual Dress: I protest I was seized with such a sudden Dread, that the
Hair of my Head stood upright, and I sweat all over. The old Gentleman then
approaching to my Bedside, said, You are fearful, take Courage a little, Don't
you know me? I know you ( answered I) in a trembling Tone, but what could I
think to see you in my Chamber without entering at the Door, with such a Noise
and Havoc as was here? What you should, and ought to think, ( said he) is,
that a Spirit separate from the Body, may enter any where without a Key, and
needs not the Convenience of a Door: And for the Noise, it was first to wake
you, and then for the Pleasure of surprising you, and putting you in a little
Fright. Do not you remember the Conversation we had together a Fortnight since?
I well remember it ( said I) but was it all true you then related? Infallibly (
said he) and I now am come to make good my Promise I then made you, of
conducting you to M. Descartes's World: Here is the Reverend Father Mersennus,
who is now come from him, to advise me all is ready; and that he would be glad,
before he puts the Design of his World in Execution, to make a Trial in the
Presence of some of his Friends; you shall be of the Party if you think fit: I
advise you not to lose so fair an Opportunity. At the same Time Father
Mersennus steps up, and bowing low to the Ground, confirmed what my old
Philosopher had said, and added, That understanding by him the Character and
Qualification of my Soul, he could undertake for a kind Reception from M.
Descartes. Pardon Reverend Father (said I) my Astonishment, I am not accustomed
to receive such Visits: Spirits I never saw before, and I could never have
believed they had been so civil and well-bred as I now find them.

Mean while, though I used all possible endeavors to compose my ^elf, I still
was somewhat fearful: I was under strong Apprehensions there might be Sorcery
and Witchcraft in the Case, and that under pretense of guiding me unto M.
Descartes's World, they designed to convey me to the Witches Sabbath. On the
other hand I feared to affront these Gentlemen-Spirits, who for the most part
understand not Will and Humor. And my Memory furnished me with a parallel
Case, of some certain People cajoled with the pretense of such sort of
Mysteries, till having learned a part, and refusing to go on, they had their
Neck writhen by the Devil or his Accomplices: I renounced all manner of
covenanting in my self, and made use of all the Precautions my Prudence could
suggest in that Conjuncture; after which, I spoke to them as fairly as I could,
in this manner.

Gentlemen, you make Profession of a Sect that gives it as a Maxim, That a Man
must not assent to any thing but a Truth, fully and clearly manifest: And that
it is distinguishes you from all others, and especially the Philosophers of the
Schools. The Conversation I had with this Gentleman a fortnight ago, and the
Critical Reading of M. Descartes since, joined with the present Circumstances,
create some Scruples in my Mind, of which should be glad to be cleared before
we go any farther. With you take kindly what I shall propose? We will hear you
readily ( (...) they) and you shall have the satisfaction you demand. Only
settle and compose your self, for you seem a little disturbed: And resolve your
self you need not fear, and that you shall receive no harm.

Those last Words a little revi^'d me, and I began to speak with a more steady
Voice. It is not many days since I read in M. Descantes, That the Essence of
the Soul consist^^ in being a thinking Substance, and that she has neither
Extension, hor Figure, nor Color; which I know not how to reconcile with what
I see at present: For you give me to understand, you be purely Spirits, yet I
perceive in you different Colors, and I see you formed in the Figure of a Man,
and you look like Beings that are extended: Rid me I pray you of this
Perplexity. Father Mersennus presently tool the Word. What you propose ( said
he) stands to Reason: But it is easy to answer you, and plainly to expound the
Thing by the evident Principles of true Philosophy. It is c^^tain a Soul is
essentially a thinking Substance, and that she is neither Figured no^ Colored.
We are purely Spirits indeed, and though we seem to have a Face, and Hands, and
Feet; yet we have neither Face, nor Hands, nor Feet. He must be as
addle-brain'd as was Tertullian, and bent on Error with as great a Zeal as he,
when he engaged himself in that Affair. Who thinks the Soul is not only
Corporal, but has also Parts proportioned to the Body, which she animates, and
is therein just as a Sword is in the Scabbord* His devout Spirit that saw Souls
of a blew Color in his Prayer, had topsyturn'd his Mind upon that Subject.

To make you therefore comprehend how you see us Colored, Figured and
Extended, with Face, Hands and Feet, though we have neither Extension, Color,
Figure, Hands nor Feet; you must know, your Soul, whilst she is united with the
Body, cannot behold another Soul, so as in her self she is, cannot hear her
Speak; or to explain my self more justly, cannot have the immediate
Communication of her Thoughts. To the end then, you might know that we are
here, and that we might make you understand our Thoughts, and the Design that
brought us hither, it was expedient to make use of means proportioned to the
Capacity your Soul at present's in. Now I would not have you imagine, that for
this purpose I was forced to frame my self a Body of some Matter. But only call
to mind what your reading of M. Descartes ought to teach you, That to see an
Object, with regard unto your Soul, is nothing else than to perceive the
Extension, Figures and Colors, of that Object. That that perception is not
caused immediately by the Object, which being at a distance from our Body and
our Soul, cannot act upon them of it self: That therefore's done by the
Reflection of Infinite Rays of Light, which rallying from every part, and every
point of the Object, strike and make the several Threads to quaver, of which
the Optic Nerve's composed. That Concussion is communicated to the Brain, and
to the place of Residence of the Soul; and it is pursuant to, and on the
Account of that Concussion, the Soul forms an Idea of the Object which she
perceives or apprehends in the manner we call Seeing. And it is according to
the various Modifications of that Concussion, that she sees Objects at several
distances under diverse Figures, and of different Colors. From whence it
follows, that the Perceptions or Ideas of the Soul, have no necessary
dependence on the Objects; but only on the exterior Organ, which may be proved
by a thousand Experiments, but especially by that of Phrenetick People, who
perceive Objects quite different from what they really are; and see them where
they are not.

Now that you may perceive a Body in the place where I am, when no such thing
is there, it is sufficient that your interior Organ should be moved in such a
manner, as it would be if a Body was really there. That Is the thing I now am
actually doing upon your Optic Nerve, to make you know that I am here: That is
it, which causes you to see a Body, though in truth there is none to see. And
what I act upon the Organ of Sight, to make a Body appear, the same I do in
proportion upon that of Hearing, to find you Sounds and Words. I impress a like
Motion upon the Strings of your Nerves of the fifth Conjugation, as would the
Vibrations and Undulations of the Air, were it agitated by the Motion of a
Tongue and the Mouth of a Man, who should stand where I seem to do, and should
utter the same Words you at present hear.

Upon these Principles it was, F. Maignan.
that a Father of our Order has most ingeniously unfolded the Mysteries of the
Holy Sacrament, without the assistance of that Medly of absolute Accidents,
that could never be conceived. For, says he, when we are taught the Body of I.
C. is under the appearance of Bread, nothing more is intimated, than that the
Body of I. C. is truly there, where the Bread was, and seems still to us to be,
to the end that Bread may appear where the Body of I. C. actually is* God acts
upon our Senses. He there produces the selfsame Motions, and makes the same
Impressions the Bread did before. So when our Lord presented himself to St.
Magdalen in the form of a Gardener, it was by acting upon her Eyes, just as the
Visage and Habit of the Gardener would have done, and not by clothing himself
with the absolute Accidents of a Gardin^r.

But that which you may gather from this present Experience, is, the manner how
the Dead appear, who sometimes by God's Permission present themselves to those
alive: For they appear by the same Method as I do actually my self. And those
Bodies of Air or Water, which some pretend they attire themselves withal, are
only the Whym^ies and Forgeries of their Imagination, who have treated of
Devils craft in supposing the Principles of the School Philosophy. Have you any
farther Difficulty, said he, upon that Point?

Ah! ( Father, replied I) you have made it as clear as the Sun, and have given
me infinite Satisfaction. Your Discourse is altogether Spiritual. I rely not
much upon the Explication of that Father of your Order, upon the Mystery of the
Eucharist. I take it for a Maxim with the wisest of the Catholic Philosophers,
That all Novelty in such sort of Things is dangerous, at least always ought to
be suspected. You have absolutely dispersed the Doubts that troubled me. It was
indeed long ago that I had a Notion, Sensation was caused by the Local Motion
of the Organs; but that Idea was not unperplex'd. Aristotle had said it before
Cartesius, Arist. in Probl.
but had not explained it. From this time forth I renounce for ever a great
part of the Ideas I had framed thereupon. I solemnly abjure before you, all the
Axioms that respect the Active, Passive, and passible Intellect. I acknowledge
they are Terms that signify nothing, and are of no use but to make the
Ignorant to stare, who cannot understand them, but imagine the Philosophers can.

After that Protestation Father Mersennus's Soul moved my Organ in such a
manner, as gave me to apprehend he was well pleased. Which made me take the
boldness of proposing a second Scruple. Father (said I) I don't well understand
what that World is of M. Descartes, where you would conduct me. For in reading
M. Descartes I did conceive his World was nothing else, but this of ours,
explained by the Principles of his Philosophy. And I distinctly remember I have
read in a Letter, he had formerly wrote these Words; That he should think
himself undeserving of the Name of a Natural Philosopher, if he could only tell
how Things might be, without demonstrating they could not be otherwise. There
he Bravado's it a little. Let. 37. Tom. 2.
But that confirms me, that when he speaks the contrary, and says he pretends
not to give an Account of Things as they are in the World, but only how they
ought to be in a World, that he imagins he would be angry, should we credit him
thereupon.

What you say is true ( replied Father Mersennus) M. Descartes designed not to
be believed in that Particular. So that the World of M. Descartes, is in
earnest, this World explained by the Principles of his Philosophy. But it is
also true, that there is, or rather, will be very speedily, another World, that
may more properly be called Descartes's World, since it will be of his own
Contrivance. And that is the World with which this Gentleman, your Friend, has
entertained you, and that we shall give you a sight of if you please. Nothing
certainly ( said I) will be more diverting: I would quit the Racing, or the
Festivals of Versailles, to be Spectator of this Prodigy, which doubtless, is
the compleatest Work of Philosophy, and the almost Masterpiece of Human
Nature. But Sir ( said I, turning to my old Gentleman) the Story of Descartes
you have formerly related, gives me some disturbance. The Voyage you know is
very long; and a World like this he is about, is not to be built in one Hour's
time. I know my Soul loves her Body very well, and would be much concerned at
her return, to find it incapacitated to receive her. And an hundred Accidents
may happen, against which no one can give Security.

We are provided for them all ( said he:) Look toward the bottom of your Bed.
Good God* ( I cried out) scared out of my Senses: What is it I see? The Devil
then is one of your Club! Wretched Mortal that I am! I am lost, undone: However
I Will die without any familiarity with him. Monsieur avaunt. I renounce utterly
your Enchantments and your Magic.

Softly, foftly ( said he) why all this Alarm? He is no Devil that you see,
though Black: He Is far from being a Devil: This is the Soul of a little Black
that waits upon Descartes. To ease you of all Scruples and Disquiet in a word
or two, I Will give you an Abbreviate of him.

This Little Black was formerly Valet to M. Diverses letters de Des^artes.
Regius the famous Professor of Physic in the University of Vtrecht, who, as
is known, was then the intimate Friend, Disciple, and Admirer of M. Descartes.
Upon these Accounts he me^ited the communication of his Secret, for the
separating the Soul and Body. Since that they broke with each other, in so much
that M. Descartes thought himself obliged to Write against him. Because he
depraved his Doctrine, and made it give Offense. M. Regius, (who if Descartes's
Character be true,) was none of the most Honorable and gentilest Gentlemen in
the World, to revenge himself, and show how he scorned, and trampled on a
thing, Cartesius set so high a rate upon, taught it this little Negro: One time
above the rest, he went to make use of it. Returning one day from the Country,
where his Master had sent him, much tired, he sat himself under the shade of
an Oak: His Soul left his Body to its repose and rambled for Diversion I know
not where. Mean while some Highway-men killed a Man hard by him. The Grand
Provost who was near, being advised of the Murder, came speedily with his
Sergeants: The Noise they made was such, that it awak't the Body of the Little
Black: And there happened something in the Adventure not unlike that, I told
you lately, of Descartes. For the Machine determined by the Noise, and the
strong Impression the Presence of armed Men made upon his Organ, began to fly.
They pursue him, overtake him, and examine him. He contradicts himself at every
Word, in his Answers, which, in the absence of his Soul, were not likely to be
very coherent. The Grand Provost who was a little too expeditious in the
Business, took his Flight, and the Astonishment that appeared in his
Countenance and his Words, for an Evident convicton of the Crime, and caused
him to be hanged upon a Tree, as an Accomplice of the Murder'^ that was
committed. The Soul returning not long after, found her Body hanging in that
rascally Posture of a Malefactor. Forced then, as she was, to seek a now
Abode, she was in a miserable condition. The majority of separate souls which
play in all the vast extent of the World, being Souls of Philosophers, and
Souls of great Importance, and having in a Convention held by the most
considerable of them, declared that Opinion of Philosophy true, that holds an
^nequality in Souls of the same Species: They would no ways admit that the Soul
of an ignorant Negro should enjoy the same Privilege as they, and gave her
chase througout the Universe. In short, her good Fortune would, that she
should, attempt to pass our Vortex and arrive at the very place Descartes's
Soul had pitched upon to Meditate. He had Compassion on her, and allowed her
the liberty to live with him. Father Mersennus brought her hither, in Case
there should be occasion, and we'll leave her with your Body to take care on it.

The Retail of a Story so well circumstanc'd, induced me to credit what was
said, as true. I entreated both the Spirits to excuse the Transport* I was
guilty of telling them, that the Figure and Color he made use of to appear in,
being the same the Devil ^urnishes himself with all, when he would be visible,
had (...) printed on my Mind that horrible Idea. I desired them to give me some
Instructions, how I must be rigged to accompany them in that wondrous Voyage,
that they proposed; saying, I hoped to make infinite Advantage of the Favor
they vouchsafed me, and in their Society, to return so choice a Treasure of
Knowledge, as would distinguish me from the rest of Mankind. Three things,
says Father Mersennus, you have to do: The first is, To dismantle your Mind of
all the Prejudices of Childhood, and the ordinary Philosophy. For it is strange
to see how the Prejudices the Soul sucks in but by the Senses, should make so
deep impression on the Understanding, with Time and Custom; which she chooses
for the Rule of her Opinions. In so much, that Souls separated form their
Bodies, otherwise than by Death, although during that separation they act
independently on the Senses, do yet think, judge and reason conformably to
their prejudice. Without that Precaution, you will make a fruitless Voyage, and be
but where you are, at your return.

The second Requisite before our embarquing is, That you give Orders to this
little Spirit^, after what Method he must treat your Body in your absence.
Whereupon it is advisable to let you know, that when your Soul shall be in
state of Separation, all things will be carried on in the usual Road, not only
as to Natural Functions, but as to those Motions caused by External Objects;
provided that you leave the Machine mounted in the same manner, as it is at
present. So that if you used to wake, and rise at the sound of an Alarm, or at
a certain Hour, as soon as that Hour shall strike, the Motion of the Timpanum
of your Ears communicated to your Brain, shall make way for the Animal Spirits
to glide along the Muscles, and to produce in your Legs and Arms, and your
whole Body, such Motions as daily you your self produced, for the taking of
your Breeches, then your Doublet, and the rest of your Appurtenances, after one
an other, and dressing you from Head to Foot. It shall walk as it used to do;
traverse all the House upstairs, and down. It shall s^at it self at Table, as
soon as the voice of the Page crying Dinner Sir is ready, shall strike upon its
Ears: It shall Eat, shall Drink, and in a word, perform every Action it has
been accustomed to; the Animal Spirits never failing to take their course
toward certain parts of the Body, at the presence of certain Objects, and by
consequence producing always certain Motions in the Body, in certain
Circumstances. Now in all External Actions that we do, there is nothing but
Motion, produced this way. And hence it is that Beasts who are undoubtedly as
Mere Machines as our Body, seem to us at the same time to act both with
Variety, and Uniformity.

The only Mischief that you need to fear, is, in case a Friend should come to
visit you: Because the Body, without the Soul, would be incapable to maintain
discourse, and must answer very impertinent to the Thing in hand. For betwixt
our selves it is only by Discourse that we Cartesians know that those Bodies we
commonly call Men, are truly Men, and not merely Machines: Let. 53. de Desc.
Tom. 1.
But herein it is this Little Negro will be serviceable. M. Descartes has
taught him all the different Motions, possible to be made upon the Pineal
Gland; and all the various Determinations, of which the Animal Spirits are
capable by its means: And how the Words are formed in the Mouth, only by the
motion of the Muscles that stir the Tongue, the lower Jaw, and Lips: And how
particular Words are framed, only by the certain Motions of the Muscles, caused
by that of the Animal Spirits, according to the different Questions, a Friend,
suppose, that gives you a visit in the absence of your Soul should propound to
you. The Little Negro by the various Motions he shall then impress upon your
Gland, and, from thence upon the Animal Spirits, and Muscles, shall form
without failure in your Mouth the Words that ought to be spoke, and such
Answers as the Questions shall demand. And fear not he should make your Body
speak any thing unbecoming of your Soul: For I Will say that for him, Negro as he
is, he is no Fool.

You may take yet an other way: It is but leaving your Body in the Bed, where
it is, and in the Trance you will put it by the taking Snush for the separating of
your Soul. That Trance which consists in slackning the Sensitive Nerves, is not
attended with any further trouble: Mean while, this little Negro, shall make
your Figure, and shall so exactly Personate you, as if your Soul had made no
expedition: And in that there' I be no difficuty, no more than is in my
appearing in the Formalities of a Friar, and this Gentleman's in the same
Physiognomy, and dress you used to see him, as I have but just now explained it
to you. And to observe to you by the by; you see the Cartesian Philosophy
teaches without any Sin, what Apollonius Thyanaeus and many other Magicians
could not do, without first giving themselves to the Devil.

The third and last Thing you have to do, is, To take a little of the
Gentleman's Snush, which he has brought you; so we'll hoise Sale, and stand off
for the Road that will bring us to M. Descartes.

Having returned thanks to Father Mersennus for the Instructions and Light he
was pleased to give me; I assured him, as for the first Article, I durst
undertake; for that I had all along been somewhat Skeptical in point of
School^Philosophy, and that my Mind was free from the contagion of Prejudice,
that commonly is caught there: And as to the Prejudices of Infancy, the reading
M. Descartes had taught me to distrust them. And that whilst he was Discoursing
I had armed my self with a fresh Resolution, of assenting to nothing but what I
should most distinctly conceive, following M. Descartes's advice. I forbore to
mention another Resolution I had made, which was, To fore arm my self, at
least, as much against the Opinionativeness of the Cartesians as the ordinary
Philosophers, well knowing they were as much conceited as their Neighbors.

Touching his Directions, that respected my Body, in my Soul's Absence, I
closed with the second Proposal; Seeing ( said I) Reverent Father, it seems
more simple and feasible than the former. I like it well ( quoth he) since it is
one of our Maxims in any System, to choose the most simple way, and that which
costs least Trouble. However, that was not the Reason that resolved me, but
because I thought therein less Danger, and was not so firmly persuaded that my
Body would be so expert and active in the Absence of my Soul, as was pretended;
and also because the Instance of Brutes which was urged, made little Impression
on my Mind, unable to discard those Prejudices a Soul capable of Sense and
Reason had confirmed. I de^ired Father Mersennus to give Orders to the Little
Black to suit himself with my Person, 'to fee if it would fit him: Forthwith it
was done; and I beheld another me at my Beds Feet, as the Sosia of Amphitryon
saw another Sosia before his Lady's Gate, at his Return from the Camp; only
with this Difference, that I at my Bed's Feet asked very courteously to me in
the Bed, whereas the Sosia who returned from the Army was well cudgelled by
himself Sosia, who stood before the Gate of Al^mena. I recommended to him above
all the fast bolting of my Chamber Door, that no Body might enter, and the
frequent visiting my Body Day by Day, and admonishing him to take Care it might
always lie in a Convenient Posture.

Upon my old Sophi^ter's presenting me a Dose of Snush, I demanded if it was
the True: For I remembered I had heard a Story of one Apuleius, that one Qui pro
Quo metamorphosed into an Ass at the same Time he expected to become a Bird. He
told me, he carried but one sort, and that there was no Danger of Mistaking: I
then presently took it, and sneezed (God bless me) three or four Times, with
mighty Violence. Hereupon I fell into a Swoon, like that of M. Descartes, I
described before, and in an instant my Soul, by the only Act of the Will,
perceived her enlargement from the Body.

I intend not to enter upon the Retail of Reflections I made upon my Soul, and
on my Body, when they were divorced from one another; I will only say, I began
from that Moment to perceive the Strength of Prejudice and Conceit, in
obstructing the Knowledge of Truth; and how wise and rational is the Advice M.
Descartes and his Followers give, precautioning us on that Respect, and yet at
the same time, how little Care those Gentlemen had to make use of the Rules
they prescribe to others. For the first thing my Gentlemen would persuade me,
whether I would or not, was, that my Soul in the instant of Separation, saw
herself seated on the pineal Gland. As I judged it unfitting to begin with them
by a palpable Contradiction; I made answer, That the Separation was performed
so heedlesly, I had no Time to make that Observation. What I said was true, and
was also the least disobliging Answer I could find; for I perfectly remembered,
and was thoroughly convinced of what I had lately read in M. Stenon the great
Anatomist, who was a great admirer of M. Descartes, and looked upon him as the
ingenious Contriver of a Novel Man, but showed and proved by ocular
Demonstration, Anatomy du cerveau.
this Man of his a quite different Creature from that which God Created: And
that the Pineal Gland has not the Situation, much less is capable of those
Motions attributed to it, upon that Hypothesis, That the Vessels with which it
is encompassed, are not Arteries, which might supply it with the Matter of the
Animal Spirits, as M. Descartes supposes; but only Veins, that by consequence
the Honor and Privilege it has given it, of being the Closet of the Soul, is
without Foundation; and that perhaps it deserves not to be advanced (upon any
more considerable Employ it has) above the other Glands, whose Office is
usually of no great Importance in an Animal Body.

These were my Thoughts, though I kept them to my self; and I was desirous, as
much as possible, to accompany them in their Sentiments. I first observed to
them how Digestion was performed in my Body, though my Soul was absent, by the
only Virtue of that Acid Humor in the Stomach, which, by the Agitation of its
insensible Parts, dissolves Meats no otherwise than Aqua Fortis dissolves
Metals: How the most subtle Parts, separated from one another, made a
Cream-like Liquor, called the Chyle: How the Peristaltique Motion of the Guts
served to drive down the grosser Parts, and to give admittance to the Chyle
into the Venae Lacteae of the Mesentery, through the imperceptible Pores,
proportioned to the Figure of the Particles the Chyle's composed of: How upon
the Heats staying in my Heart, just as before, the Blood performed its circular
usual Course, continuing all the consequent Effects, such as Nutrition, and the
sound Constitution of the Limbs, placed at the greatest Distance: How, in short
all the Motions were carried on, by the only Clockwork of the Machine.

And here the Sticklers for the old Philosophy must not resent the Compliance I
used on this Occasion; for if all that was absolutely false, it could never
have been true in this present Juncture, seeing my Body was not corrupted, though
my Soul had left it; but if the Motion and Circulation of the Humors once had
ceased, it must of necessity have been corrupted: Whence it follows, That
supposing my Soul separate from my Body, as I do then suppose it was, it is
plain that all the Motions were performed, and performed only by their
Dependence on the Disposition of the Machine.

At last we thought of setting out: I asked then what Names and Titles of
Dignity or Respect Souls used to treat each other with in their Spiritual
Conversation; for that Souls being in French of the Feminine Gender, I was
guilty all-a-long of an Absurdity, in calling the Soul of M. by the Name of
Monsieur, yet I durst not use Madam nor Mademoiselle. As for you ( said I to
Father Mersennus 's Soul) I may ease my self of that Trouble for the future, by
using your Reverence; so you may, said he, by addressing M -- s Soul with your
Lordship, both Titles are all a mode in Italy, and arrived from thence in
France. But trouble not your Head about it, we continue the same Names we had
in the World when in our Bodies, M. Descartes is M. Descartes still; this
Gentleman is what he was before; I am called Father Mersennus, as you are M --,
for we Cartesians are a little Platonical in the Business. With Plato what is a
Man? He Is a Soul that makes use of a Body: And you may call to Mind a
Particular Passage among others in Cartesius his Method, where he says,
Examining with Attention what I was, and that I could conceive my Body to be
nothing -- and on the contrary, if I did subsist a Moment without thinking, I
had no Reason to believe I had an Existence in that Moment -- I conceived I was
a thing, or a Substance, whose whole Nature and Essence did merely consist in
thinking; so that my self (I mean my Soul, by whose means only I am, what I am)
my self, I say, is a thing wholly distinct from my Body. And I wonder ( added
Father Mersennus) the Philosophers and School-Divines have escaped this
Passage, and have not before this ranked it in the Catalogue of his pretended
Errors; especially since M. Arnauld reflected on it by the by. But let us be
gone, said he, and let us make haste, we have lost a whole half Hour already;
Time's very precious: And with that he Soars up in the Air with the Soul of the
old Gentleman, and I without any more Demurs, set out to follow them.

A VOYAGE TO The World of Cartesius.
PART. II.
THE Weather was very serene, the Air extremely clear, the Moon was in the
Full, and the Stars glittered, methought, in an extraordinary manner, which
made me wonderful impatient to contemplate those Glorious Bodies more nigh
them, whose Splendour, Vastness, Number and Order have been thought a Subject of
Admiration by all Ages, the worthiest Object of the Study and Meditation of
Philosophers, and most sensible Proof of the Divinity; notwithstanding which,
my Guides caused me to make a Halt upon the Pinnacle of a Tower, raised far
above the rest of the Town, to observe the Nature of the Air of that low
Region, and the Parts of which it is composed. Come on ( says my old Gentleman)
you shall know by your own Experience, the Truth of Descartes his Sentiments,
in the Explication of Natural Beings. Remember what he says in his fourth Book
of Principles, that the Air is only an Amass of branched and ragged Parts, of
the third Element, extremely small, severed from one another, and floating in
the middle of the Balls of the Second Element, whose Motions they obey. See how
the Parts of the First Element are mingled through the whole, and fill up all
the Intervals the little Globules and the branched Parts leave betwixt them;
how the Fluidity of this Body, as well as all other we call Liquids, consists
in the Motion of its insensible Parts, which have an indifferent Tendency to
any Side; for being they are all in Motion, and have mostly quite different
Determinations, we may readily conceive two things: First, That upon a Liquid
Body's ceasing to be confined and bounded by a Solid one, it must diffuse
itself on every Side, since it is Parts are in a Motion every way. Secondly,
That upon a solid Body's offering to pass through, finding all the Parts in
Motion, it easily makes a Separation; since, to do this, it is only requisite to
give them different Determinations instead of those they had before; it being
certain that when Bodies, and especially small ones, are in Motion, a Motion so
different as that in which the little Parts are found, it is the easiest thing
in Nature to give them new Determinations, and by consequence to divide a
Liquid Body, and pass through it. These two Phaenomena's then of a Liquid Body,
being explained so cleverly and so intelligibly as you see they are, by the
Principles of Philosophy; the Gentlemen Philosophers of the Schools would have
a great Sway over my Mind, if they would oblige me to acknowledge Fluidity for
an absolute Accident, distinguished from the Motion of the Insensible Parts of
a Liquid Body.

As much inclined as I was to defend the Interests of the old Philosophy, I
must own this Reasoning, joined with that I saw my self, made great Impression
on my Mind; for though I could perceive no such Thing as the little Globules of
the Second Element, of which he talked, and which was a mere Illusion of a Soul
intoxicated, as much as possible, with the Ideas and Prejudices of
Cartesianism; yet I was forced to Acknowledge in the Air those little insensible
Parts loose and disingaged of one another, that undoubtedly constitute all
Liquid Bodies. I plainly saw that subtle Matter which Aristotle himself
acknowledged under the Name of Etherial Matter, and taught to be dispersed
throughout the World, in a most rapid Motion. Thereupon I could not disallow
that plain Explication he had made of the Properties of a Liquid Body: And I
must grant, That were Descartes's Philolosophy as reasonable in all its Parts
as this, I might be a little tempted to turn Cartesian, without troubling my
self to dispute the Globules with him of the Second Element, or offering such
other Doubts and Scruples as then came into my Mind; with entire Submission I
complemented upon all the rest, both these Companions of my Voyage; that is to
say, upon the subtle Matter, and on that branchy Matter, which I termed in
their Language without more ado, the Matter of the First and Third-Element. I
much applauded their Explication of Fluidity, and commended it for its Neatness
and Simplicity; but a little Adventure turned the Discourse, and had like to
have spoiled the Fruit of all my former Complasance.

There was on the top of the Tower on which we lighted, a kind of a Twirl that
was in the Nature of a Weathercock, about seven Inches Diameter; its Substance
was of Plate of Steel, very thin and light; its Sails were exactly equal, and
the Pin on which it turned, smooth and polished: So that the gentlest Gale of
Wind set it a going, and at the same time turned about a bent Iron Rod (for the
observing the point of the Wind) whose end made the Axis to the Twirl. It
fortuned that a Soldier of a Suitz Regiment that quartered in the Town,
discharged his Musket in the Air: It was loaded with two Bullets, one of which
as it flew, but just glanced upon the end of one of the Flyers of the Twirl:
And yet impressed so considerable a Motion as lasted a long time. The Bullet
continued its Motion almost in a right Line, and went very near as far and as
swift, as the other Bullet that never touched upon the Weathercock. I had good
Reason to take notice of that last Circumstance. Father Mersennus slipped not
that occasion to demonstrate to me another of M. Descartes's Principles. You
see ( said he) these Flyers; if that Ball had not slanted upon one of them in
passing, seeing there is not any breeze of Wind, do you think they would have
left that quiet Posture they were in, and turned themselves about? No certainly
( I replied.) The posture they were in a Moment since, could never have been
changed for that they are in at present, but by the assistance of some External
Cause that has made that alteration. But now ( added he) that they are in a
directly contrary State, do you believe they could quit the same, without the
determination of some other Cause that should destroy their Motion, as the
Bullet did their Rest? Father (said I) that Question seems more difficult than
the other to resolve: I have heard it always held, as an unquestionable Axiom,
That every Body, whilst it is in Motion, tends to its Repose as to its end.
We'll grant you ( replied he) that Philosophic Banterage every Body, whilst in
Motion, has a tendency to rest, as to its end. A Body is endu'd with Reason and
a Will, first to have an end, and then to make unto it. But if that Proposition
is capable of receiving any tolerable meaning, it says no more than this, That
in the situation and disposition Bodies have among themselves in the World,
sensible Bodies that are moved do truly lose their Motion by Degrees, upon the
opposition they receive from other Bodies, to which it is communicated, and at
length they rest. For if nothing did destroy that State of Motion it would last
for ever, by the same Rule, that if nothing did disturb the rest of a Body, it
would always remain immovable. And this it is of which I had a desire to
convince you, by the Example of this little Windmill, Fortune has presented us.

Supposing this Gimcrack had turned in the midst of Water, as it does in the
midst of Air, it is a plain Case, it is Motion would quickly have been destroyed
by the great Resistance the Water would have made. If two of its Sails had been
longer, larger and heavier, than the other two, the Motion had ceased sooner
yet: Because that inequality would have been another Cause of a more forcible
Resistance. Again, if you add to this, that the Pin on which it turns had been
thicker, as also rusty and unpolished, the Motion had been lost still sooner,
for the same Reason. But because it stands in Air, and in Air that is very fine;
because it Sails are exactly poised, and its Axis slender, smooth and polished,
the Resistance that it finds is less, and the Motion so much greater, and
longer it will last. Whence we may thus conclude: Much Resistance destroys much
Motion; a less Resistance destroys less; and a lesser yet, destroys a lesser
Motion still; and so on: Hence, if there was no Resistance at all, the Motion
would not flag, but continue always; hence as a Body would maintain its Rest,
unless an external Cause disturbed it in the Possession of that State, so a
Body would continue its Motion, as long as it should meet no Molestation in it.
So then, the great Principle of M. Descartes is established, That a Body of its
own Nature stays always in the Capacity it is placed; if it is at rest 'twil
always rest; if it is of a Triangular Figure it will be of a Triangular Figure
always; if it is in Motion it will for ever be so: But for the rest this
Principle is not peculiar to Descartes, Galileus before him, Gassendus, Hobbes,
Maignan, etc. suppose it true. And I remember likewise, That in making my
Collections for my Commentaries upon Genesis, where I have introduced an
infinite Number of Philological, Philosophical and Astronomical Dissertations,
I have remarked more than one Place in Aristotle, where he either teaches of
supposes the same Doctrine; and Vasques one of the subtlest of the School
Philosophers has proved it at large, as to the concern of Motion: It may
however be said, that no one ever carried it to that Pitch, and used it so
dexterously, and with that Advantage as Descartes; and thence it was that
particular Difference and Honor was paid him rather than to others upon that
respect.

I am much of your Opinion ( I returned,) That General Principle is without
Controversy one of those, the Mind of Man admits without offering Violence to
itself; and the Difficulty that is found in applying it to Bodies, considered
in Motion, proceeds only from that false Idea, so commonly received, of what we
call Modes in Philosophy, and from our conceiting Motion as a positive being,
and Rest as its Privation, though neither Motion is a Being, nor Rest the
Privation of a Being, but one and the other are different and contrary States,
of which a Body Natural is capable. But, Reverend Father, this Whirl-gig here
has raised a Scruple in me, of which I Would fain discharge my Conscience; i^ is
grounded on another Principle of Descartes, concerning which you may call to
mind, if you please, that the Ball that touched the Sail, seeing it but glanced
upon it, lost nothing, or next to nothing of its Motion, that it had so far
preserved, and we saw it arrive to its Journey's End as soon as (at least was
but a Trice behind hand with) the other that never touched at all; and on the
other Hand impressed a very considerable Motion on the Engine: For whether we
measure the Quantity of the Motion, by the Bulk Compass of the Body moved; or
whether we measure it by the largeness of the Space traversed by the Body, in
those innumerable Circles it described, spite of the Resistance of the medium
wherein it turned: Or likewise whether we consider the swiftness of the Motion,
it is manifest the Ball communicated much more Motion to ^he other Body than it
lost itself: And on the contrary, granting the supposition you have just made
unto my Hands, to demonstrate a Proposition of Descartes; I mean, that the
Sails had been unequally balanced, and of a different Bigness, that the Axle
had been Gross, unsmooth, or rusty, and that the Ball had grazed on one of the
Sails less obliquely than it did, it is certain, in these Circumstances the
Ball had lost much more of its swiftness and its Motion, yet would have
impressed or communicated much less than it has at present. What now is become
of those grand Principles of M. Descartes? that a Body at the same instant that
it moves another, communicates exactly so much Motion to it as it loses, and
precisely loses the same Quantity it communicates; for here the Bullet
communicates a great deal, but loses little; and in the other Supposition it
loses much, and communicates but little: What now becomes of those mighty
Axioms that lay the Foundation of his Physics, and support the whole Frame and
Structure of his World? Part. 2. princ. p. 37* let. 72. tom. (...)
That God in the Creation of the World, or Matter, created at the same Time in
it a definite Quantity of Motion, or Transport (as he himself styles it) from
one Place to another, which is always the same without Increase or* Diminution,
although the Parts of which the World's composed, have sometimes more and
sometimes less of it; forasmuch as what is lost in me, is of Necessity received
into another: That God is the universal Cause of all the Motion in the World:
That the Creatures have no Pretense to its Production, and can only determine
that produced already, etc. For if a Body communicates more than it has in it
self, God or the Body it self must needs produce the overplus of the new; and
if a Body loses more than it communicates, that which is lost and not
communicated, must of necessity be annihilated. And this is sufficient to
demonstrate that the Quantity of Motion is not always the same in the World,
but on the contrary it increases and decreases every Moment. In a Word, we see
here a considerable Part of Matter put into a rapid Motion that before had none
at all. I will suppose it was in an Equilibrium, and that a little thing would
turn the Scales; that will not do our Business, it will still be true to say,
there is a new Transport communicated to a large Quantity of Matter: That that
Transport is no small one, since it carries a great deal of Matter through a
great deal of Space; yet notwithstanding the Ball has not lost the least
imaginable, seeing it is carried as far, and as swift, within a Trifle, as it
would have been if it had communicated none at all. But that which seemed of
most Importance was, the Immutability of God, that was interessed in this
Affair: For the Reason why M. Descartes was so zealous to preserve the same
Quantity of Motion to a Grain, was because God's unchangable. See where this
Trifie now has led us? But what a Mischief would it be, if this petty Instance
overturning the Principle of the Quantity of Motion, should shatter all those
Seven fine Rules of Motion Descartes has established with so exact a
Calculation? Mean while they all take it for granted, and subsist but on the
Courtesy of that Supposition; however he makes no Scruple to conclude his
Explication with this remarkable Passage, All this is so evident it needs no
Demonstration.

But not to lose Time in drawing other Inferences, Part. 2. princip.
methinks, my Reverend Father, I may at least with some Pretense of Reason say,
M. Descartes here has weakly maintained his Resolution, that he made in his
Stove in Germany, Meth. p. (...) and 37.
when he there began to play the Philosopher; I mean, of avoiding, above all
things, a too heady forwardness in his Determinations, and the establishing any
Principle, without examining of it with all possible Diligence, and upon
greater Evidence than the most palpable Demonstrations in Geometry afford; of
having so strict an Eye in every thing, and of making so exact an Analysis of
all the Propositions he advanced, that he might be certain nothing could escape
him; for had he guarded himself with these Precautions, before he proposed his
Doctrine concerning Motion, your Windmill, and an hundred Instances might have
come in to his Head, and probably have altered his Opinion, at least prevented
him from saying, These things were all so evident they seemed to need no
Demonstration.

I foresaw that this Discourse would not relish well with my Companions; and I
am sure my old Blade began already to repent him of his Vouching for me to
Father Mersennus, as a Person that with an implicit headstrong Resolution
embraced Cartesianism. The Good Father however gently replied, That he had
observed three Things in my Discourse, a little Malignity in my Reflections,
abundance of false Prejudice that still stuck by me, whatever Assurance I had
given to the contrary, and some Difficulties at the Bottom, for the clearing of
which it was convenient to discourse Cartesius: But let them ( said he) seem as
Big and as Frightful as they can, they will presently disappear, upon his
conversing with you; I have experienced it an hundred Times. No Man was ever
more troublesome to him in Questions than my self, which I used to make on all
Occasions, even 'till I wearied him. These Difficulties once I thought
inexplicable; but one Letter, of about a Page he wrote me, dispersed all my
Doubts, and gave me more Light into the Matters then in Hand, than the entire
Volumes of other Men. I much expected the Reproach of Prejudice, for that is the
ordinary Refuge of Cartesius, and the Gentlemen his Disciples, when they find
themselves pressed a little home: I urged however that Point no further to him;
I only excused my self from the Malignity he charged upon my Reflections, and
upon the Hopes he gave me of the Solution of my Difficulties by M. Descartes,
(I rejoined) You exceedingly rejoice me, Reverend Father, for I am a Cartesian
in my Heart, though I am not a through paced one in my Mind, wanting sufficient
Light to extricate my Doubts, which the Reading the Books of that Great Man has
raised in me; but I have a sincere Love for Truth, and assure your self, I
shall wholly resign my self up unto her, so soon as M. Descartes shall present
her to me.

After that Protestation, which seemed a little to reinstate me in their good
Oponion, we launched again: And it will not be amiss to advise my Reader here,
this once for all, That whatever Room these Harangues and Disputes take up upon
the Paper, they lasted but one single instant, since separate Spirits entertain
each other a quite different way from that they use when in the Body, whose
Tongue pronounces but one Syllable at a Time; one Spiritual Word that a
Separate Soul shall speak unto another Soul, is more full and expressive than a
thousand pronounced or written: And since my taking of this Voyage I have made
a World of fine Discoveries, for the explaining the Way that Angels discourse
together; I question not but to be in Print some Time or other upon that
Occasion: I confess I shall speak many Things that for want of Use will not be
understood; but my Book may find no less a Welcome and Esteem for that, but
rather the good Fortune Books of Mysterious Divinity have met with, that have
been for some Time the only ones in Fashion, recommended merely by their being
unintelligible to those that read them, and pretending to be understood by the
Composers; for it is known by too manifest Experience, the Authors of those
Books are not always such mighty Saints as they would seem.

We parted then from the Top of the Tower, before the Instrument desisted from
its turning, and we steered toward the Globe of the Moon: My Soul perceived an
unspeakable Pleasure to scud it in the Air, and to wander in those vast Spaces,
she could only travel with the Eye before, when united with the Body; that
minded me of a former Delight I had sometime ^asted in my Sleep, in dreaming
that I whipped through the Air, without ever touching Ground, above which I
thought my self exalted many Yards.

We met upon the Road vast Troops of Separate Souls, of all Nations,
Laplanders, Finlanders, Olaus mag. l. 3. c. 17. Tert. de anima.
Brachmans; and I then remembered what I had read in several Books, That the
Secret of separating the Soul and Body was known among those People. But about
fifty Leagues on this side that Planet, there is a Region very well stocked,
especially with Philosophers, and those Stoics for the generality: And quite
from that Place to my Arrival at the Globe of the Moon I descryed how
swingingly History belies an infinite Number of Persons, that it supposes dead,
like other Men; though, in truth, they are no more Dead than M. Descartes
himself. I shall discourse with some of them as I go along.

The Moon has an Atmosphere like the Earth, that by a moderate Computation may
amount to three French Leagues in height. As we were just ready to strike Sail,
we made a good Distance from us, three Souls that held a very serious
Conference together; we judged they might be Souls of Consequence, by the
deference many others in their Retinue seemed to pay them: Upon our enquiring
who they were, we understood they were Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, that were
met in Consult, for the Public Interest; for that being advised by certain
News from our World, That the Venetians had beaten the Turks, not only out of
Ancient Peloponesus, but also the Famous City of Athens, where heretofore these
three Philosophers had made so great a Figure; they had resolved in their
Debate, so soon as any Noble Venetian's Soul should arrive in these Quarters,
to petition her to recommend their Interest to General Morisini and the
Republick's Consideration; To require the replacing the Statues the Athenians
had erected to them; To re-establish the Academy and the Lyceum with all their
Privileges, and to restore the Marbles in the Prytaneum, whereon was engraven
the Justification of Socrates, with the Execrations charged on Anytus and
Melitus his Accusers: And in case they should push their Conquests as far as
Macedonia, to have as great regard for Stagyra, at present Liba nova, as
Alexander the Great had formerly on the account of his Master Aristotle, whose
Country that was. I am surprised, says Father Mersennus, to see these
Philosophers; I never heard any Mention of them here, nor did I ever meet them
in all my Travels: It is true, I have observed in my Commentaries upon Genesis,
That Plato and Trismegistus used to quit their Bodies, the better to
contemplate the Sovereign Good; and that Socrates, as Alcibiades relates in
Plato, had from Time to Time such sort of Ecstasies: It Is true also, I never
took Aristotle for so great a Fool as to throw himself headlong into Eurip^s,
for the Madness and Despair of being unable to comprehend the Flux and Reflux
of the Sea: And many things I have read in that Philosopher, induced me to
suspect he knew the Mystery of Separation; but I never thought to inform my
self whether these Gentlemen made use of it to prevent their Dying. You Will see
( he added) that as M. Descartes has determined to put the Project of his World
in Execution, that he framed while he lived on Earth, so Plato will resolve
upon the Undertaking that of his Republic, which we shall see fixed somewhere
in those Vast and Desert Spaces above the Heavens, where he will convoy a
Colony of Separate Souls, to constitute his Government.

That supposed (said my old Gentleman) Lucian had but ill Intelligence from the
other World, since in his Dialogues of the Dead he often talks of Socrates as a
Man that had passed the Stygian-Lake in Caron's Boat, and as an old Inhabitant
of Hell. Nouveaux Dial. de^ Mor.
But what, Gentlemen ( said I) do you say of our Modern Lucian, I mean the
Author of the New Dialogues of the Dead, that without farther Ceremony places
Monsieur Descartes in Hell, and brings him on the Stage discoursing with the
pretended Demetrius of Moscovy? Is it reasonable to think, That Author, upon
his entertaining us in that Work with some pretty Things, and diverting us with
an abundance of choice Historical Observations, to think, I say, under that
Shelter he had Right to put off all the Frolicks of his Imagination, without
any regard to Truth? To place M. Descartes in Hell, at the same Time he is above
the Heavens, is not this (to express my self in the Quodlibetique Style of our
F^iend M --) Aberrare toto Co^lo?

In the interim we saw the three Philos^phers advance toward us: It Is known
they were three of the finest Gentlemen, that have bore that Character in
Antiquity, and that they have always been distinguished from that Rascality of
Sophists and Cynicks that generally were mere Andrew^, and only purchased the
Reputation of Sages at the Expense of the most abusive Extravagances. Socrates
made the Address, and in a most obliging manner told us: He easily perceived we
were of France, not only because we came that Road, but also that he saw in us
the Character and Genius of the Nation; which People was the most polite at
present in the World; that though he had but little Commerce with our World, he
had yet enough to be certified of that Particular. He demanded the Occasion of
our Voyage, and where we were a going.

Father Mersennus took the Word, and made answer, We were upon a Visit to a
Friend of ours, that lived at a vast Distance; that we were happy in timing our
Voyage so exactly, as to have the Opportunity of paying our most humble
Respects to those Personages, that have given Renown and Glory to Antiquity,
and whose Names after the Tract of two thousand Years were still acknowledged
and held Venerable by all the Nations in the Earth.

It Is believed below we are dead, said Socrates; True ( replied Father
Mersennus) and I my self was guilty of that Universal Mistake: But here are two
Gentlemen (continued he) meaning us, that are still Inhabitants of the lower
World, and who will undeceive it as to that Particular. I shall not be sorry,
for my part, answered he; and it would not be amiss to acquaint the People
there, That the Soul of a Philosopher, such as I am, staid not to be dismissed
from the World by the Decree of a Faction of Corrupt Judges, and the Clamours
of a Multitude, incensed by the Envy and Buffoonry, of a Coxcomb of a Comedian.
Hear the State of the Matter; well knowing the Rage and Popularity of my
Enemies, I thought it not worth while to stay, but quitting my Body, I gave
Orders to my Familiar Spirit, to enter in my Room, and to put a good Face upon
the Business to the End; being more Secure of his Performance than my own,
whatever Constancy and Resolvedness I found in my self. He acted his part to a
Tittle; and I scarce think it is yet forgotten in the World, what Constancy
appeared both in my Looks and Words, when the Sentence of my Death was heard
pronounced; with what Undauntedness I was seen to take from the Executioner the
Hemlock-potion that poisoned my Body, and the Fury of my Accusers, that were
ready to burst with Malice, to see me a Philosopher to the last. It is true ( I
replied) that last Action of your Life has procured you a vast esteem among
Posterity to this Day, and I question whether it will make for your Glory, for
us to publish the true Matter of the Fact, as you have related it. No matter (
said he) I have still a greater Love for Truth than my own Glory, and am more
concerned for Her than for my self. Most bravely answered ( I cried) and worthy
of your self; That one Sentence is worth all the Oration your Demon harangued
your Friends with, to comfort them in your Death, and I am resolved it shall
lose nothing of its Value in the Carriage. If one fine Wit of our World had but
heard it, he would certainly have canonized you for it; he, I say, that in
reading your Story, was much put to it to forbear an Invocation, and crying
Sancte Socrates ora pro nobis (That Extravagance is known to be Erasmus's, and
Socrates himself thought it very impertinent.)

Aristotle next obliged us to disabuse the World of those false Reports, that
were current of his Death; some making him dye of the Colic; others affirming
he poisoned himself; others again, That he drowned himself in Euripus; these
last came nearest to the Truth. He told us then, That being disgraced, and
banished from the Court, upon Suspicion he was dipped in the Conspiracy of
Calisthene, his Friend, against Alexander, he retreated to Athens, where he
opened his School of Philosophy; That he was there impeached of Atheism, as
groundlessly as Socrates, by a Priest of Ceres; which obliged him to retire to
Calcis: That one Day as he was taking a Turn upon the Bank of Euripus, and
recollecting in his Mind the glorious Advantages he had lost, of making his
Fortune, seeing all his Hopes unravelled, that he was for ever discarded from
the Court, and discharged from Athens, the Melancholy that seized him made him
resolve to leave the World; that, to that intent, he made use of the Secret
Aesculapius had left him, from whom he had the Honor to descend in a Right
Line by his Father Nicomachus, formerly Physician to his Majesty King Amyntas,
the Grandfather of Alexander; he made use of it, I say, to separate himself
from's Body, which he left in a Place where the Sea, in a high Tide, chanced to
carry it off. Upon the finding of his Body drowned, every one made his
Conjecture: The Court, that understood what Impression Disgrace would make upon
the Spirit of a Courtier, whose Nature it is, more than may be supposed, upon
Temptation, to dispatch themselves out of the World, concluded very rationally
on the Point; but the Opinion of Aristotle's Disciples carried it. At that Time
he was about explaining the Phoenomenon of the Flux and Reflux of the Seas: He
had confessed contrary to his custom, that he did not thoroughly apprehend it:
And that vexed him to the heart. Thence they readily concluded that the cause
of his despair. One of them confidently proclaimed it in several parts of
Greece. And as if he had been behind him, when he threw himself in the water,
added the words he spoke unto the Sea, just upon his jump; Since I can not
comprehend thee, thou shall comprehend me. The Antithesis seemed very pretty.
That gave Legs to the report, and by that Passport it arrived to us.

There is something strange and new in these Particulars as well as in the
Story of Socrates. And many of the Circumstances are left out in most of the
Authors that have treated on this Subject. That encourages me to hope they will
meet with a kind Entertainment from the Public; since it is this that now a days
lifts our Historians unto Reputation, and sets 'em above the common herd of
Writers: And nothing ^akes so much as Paradox in History; since a Manuscript
that shall thwart the long received Opinions of Mankind, is the only piece in
fashion, especially if sland^rous and invective, and the Extracts sent to the
Compilers of the Holland-Iournals, and the News of the Republic of Learning to
advance the Rate of these Books, are filled with hardly any thing but rare and
admirable Discoveries. But it is not on the faith of Manuscripts I ground my
Reports, things commonly subject to be questioned, but on the Testimony of the
Persons mainly concerned in the History, and who have either done or suffered
the thing therein related. And I challenge all the Burnets in England to evince
me false in any thing, by all the Histories of the Kingdom of the Moon.

As for Plato, he told us, It did not so much trouble his Head, what were the
Sentiments of Men concerning him, and thank't us for the offers of our Service
that we made him: But Experience convinced us of the truth of Father
Mersennus's conjecture, touching the Republic; and also that had his Reverence
been a little more conversant in the Affairs of the Globe of the Moon, he would
have made no wonder at his finding Plato and Aristotle thereabouts; since the
first had effectually established his Republic there, and the second his
Lyceum, both which we see geographically described in the Mapps of that Country
by Father Grimaldus a Jesuit, Carts Selenographiques.
one of the Notablest Mathematicians of the Age. We have nothing of certainty
as to Socrates's abode; but it is more than probable his ordinary Resort is in
his beloved Disciple Plato's Commonwealth.

After this little Intercourse, as we were taking leave of these Gentlemen,
Socrates demanded what Friend it was we went so for to wait on? Father
Mersennus answered, that it was Descartes: Descartes! (replied Aristotle:) What
that mad Blade that came from the other World above thirty years ago? He that
was made the Owl of all the Philosophers, not able to endure him here, and that
forced him to seek out for other Quarters! Truly a very pretty Fellow, that to
have treated me so Bully-like, and with that disdain I am told he did: Me, I
say, that have been the Tutour to the greatest Prince and greatest Conqueror
that ever was! Me, to whose Honor Philippe and Olympias erected Stat^es! Me,
that have taught Philosophy in Athens, that have wrote so many Books and had a
whole Regiment of Commentatours! Me whose Words had passed so long for Oracles,
and the decisions of the Schools; Me, in fine, that all the Philosophers plume
them selves as having gained unto their Party, and not willing, nor indeed
daring to confess, I take the contrary side! I would fain see that bold
Merchant venture on the Benches. I have seen his Books and pity 'em. Would you
guess ( said he) turning hastily to Socrates and Plato; what is the first step
he would have his Wise men make, in order to his safer conduct to the
attainment of Truth? He makes him doubt of every Thing, and bids him take for
false the most selfevident Proposition in the World, that Two and Three are
Five, that the Whole, is greater than its Part, etc. You know Gentlemen, said
he, what work the World have made with him thereupon. For my par't, I Would only
ask the Gentleman one Question, Does he suppose a Man can doubt of every thing,
or does he not? If not, Why makes he it the leading precepts of his Method? For
in point of Precept and Method, it is necessary they be such as can be put in
Practice. In Sy^opsi M^dit.
If he does suppose it, how is it he more than once mantains in his
Meditations, and his Method, that the arguments of the Scepticks, which were
next a kin to those he brings to fetter us in doubts, Rep. aux I^st. de Gass^^d.
were never capable of staggering one single person, that was in his Senses as
to those apparent Truths? Does he think that those he has to deal with, have
lost their Senses? Or does he imagine that the Arguments of the Scepticks would
be more effectual in his Mouth, or in his Writings than in theirs, whose only
Design, for the generality, was to torture and plague the other Sophists and to
make themselves sport with those as should endeavor seriously to confute them?
But never dreamed of one Monsieur Descartes that should one time or other
Martial their Sophisms in the Van of his Method.

But now supposing M. Descartes had induced me to doubt that Two and Three made
Five; and that the Whole was bigger than its Part; I would fain know what
Method he would take to rid me of this doubt, and to replace me in the Statu
quo of certainty where I was before? This could not be done without the aid of
another Proposition, more evident than the other; which must serve to convince
me, that what I began to doubt, was undoubtedly, not to be doubted of. Now what
is with him that high and mighty Proposition, that must brandish its Light on
all the rest, and act the Sun among the other Stars? Why: I think, therefore I
am. For, says he, '^is impossible to think unless I am. Most* admirably
condluded! And is it less impossible that Two and Three should not be Five;
that the Whole should not be bigger than its Part; than it is impossible I
should* be mistaken, unless I think, and that I should think unless I am? If I
could bring my Mind to doubt once of the two first Propositions, should I be
much pained to make question of the third? Or if a Sceptick should be so
impudent to deny me those, need he be more, to deny me this? And should not I
find my self equally empowered to demonstrate to him all the three? Descartes
in that procedure pretends to silence a Sceptick that challenges him to
demonstrate any thing; or to show him the evidence of a Proposition, himself
pretends to have made him doubt of. The Sophist, resolved to deny the evidence
of the plainest Proposition, baffles him: And so will I; telling him, I stay in
the maze of Doubt into which he led me, and am like do to so, since the
Prop^sition he brings to expedite me thence, is as blind and dark as those
which he made me boggle at before.

But probably ( in pursuance of his humor) you are charmed with the wonderful
progress he makes in his following Method. Reflecting, says my Great
Philosopher, upon that first Conlusion, I think, therefore I am. I observe I am
no other way assured of the certainty of it, than by having a clear and
distinct Idea of what I there affirm: So that I can take it for a general Rule,
that whatever I can clearly and distinctly conceive, is true. But is this the
peculiar of that favorite Proposition, only I think therefore I am? Supposing
that Descartes had left me in the capacity I was, and where I must be still, in
spite of Fate, as to the certainty of these Propositions Two and Three are
five, the Whole is bigger than its Part; might not I make the same reflection
on these Propositions as he makes on his? And being not obliged to invent a
Rule of Truth for the Gentlemen Scepticks, but only for my self, which I might
make use of in forming all my Judgments, might not I be allowed to argue upon
my Propositions as he does on his? The reason why I am ascertained of these
Propositions, that is; why I not only doubt not of them, but perceive, I cannot
doubt of them, if I would, is, that I have a clear and distinct perception of
what I there affirm: And seeing I have such an one, can I still doubt whether I
have or not? When to have and to judge I have, or rather to be sensible I have
it, is the self same act of the Understanding. For in effect, from thence it
is; from my own Conscience it is proceeds the impossibility of doub^ing of that
Proposition, two and three are five, as well as of that other, I think
therefore, I am, as all will agree that we are able to judge any whit nicely in
such Cases. I might then equally from these and a thousand other Propositions
draw the same Inference, Descar^es concludes from his, to make a Rule of Truth
on, What I clearly and distinctly conceive is true. And it is as trifling as
absurd, to make the Certainty and Evidence of such sort of Propositions, depend
on the Certainty and Evidence of any other, since they are th^s certain and
evident of themselves, not from any thing prejudicate or antecedent to them.
All of them stand on the same Square as to their Conviction, and nothing's more
unreasonable or against the Rules of Method, than to go to prove them by one
another: Hence it is they are called Immediate Propositions; and even Descartes
himself will own, That that General Principle, What I can distinctly conceive
is true, is no ways a Rule of Truth for such kind of Propositions; but that
their Rule of Truth, i. e. that which convinces me of their Truth, is, as I
have been saying, the only Experience, and internal Sense alone my Mind has of
that Truth, at the instant of forming those Propositions.

Aristotle, whom the very Name of M. Descartes had put in Humor, staid not long
in so pleasant a Road, but pursued to push his Criticisms home. The greatest
Pleasure ( said he) I had in reading that admirable Piece, was to see a Man so
^oil, and perplex himself, as to lie open, not only to the most subtle
Sceptick, but to the meanest Logician, that with three Grains of Wit and Sense,
knew how to enforce the Rules of Logic he has learned: With that he run
through his Method, his Meditations, and the first Part of his Book of
Principles, so as to let us know, he had attentively examined them. He showed
us, in presenting the Order and Array of Descartes's Propositions, that no Man
ever went so preposterously to work as he, for the Inventing and Establishing a
Rule of Truth: For that after having made us doubt of all Things, and next, in
this dark Passage introduced one Spark of Light, all that we can distinctly
conceive is true: He presently makes us suspect that again by Discourse drawn
from his third Meditation. But many things which before seemed evident, are
become again uncertain; which has determined me hitherto to question, whether
Two and Three are Five: Hereupon it came into my Mind, That possibly there was
a God, that could have made me of such a Composition, as I might be imposed
upon in Things that seem most clear and evident: And as often as that Thought
recurs of the Power of God, it is impossible for me not to own, but that, if he
pleased, he might easily have framed me so, as to be mistaken in the Things I
most clearly conceive: But otherwise, upon my steady beholding those Things I
distinctly conceive, I am urged with so clear Conviction, as to be unable to
forbear exclaiming. Deceive me who can; It is impossible, so long as I think, I
should not be, or that I should not have been, since it is true at present that
I am; and perhaps it may be equally impossible that Two and Three should not
make Five, and so of other Things, wherein I see a palpable Contradiction. And
indeed having no inducement to believe there is a God, a Deceiver, and not
knowing as yet whether there be any at all, the Reason that makes me doubtful,
being grounded but on that Suspicion, is but weak, and, as I may so say,
Metaphysical. But to take away this Doubt it self, it is necessary to enquire,
Whether there is a God? And supposing there be, Whether he can be a Deceiver?

Here Aristotle began to descant, That Descartes had no longer Right to put off
that Axiom for a Rule of Truth, All that we distinctly conceive is True: Seeing
he had rendered it suspicious by that Reason, drawn from the Power of God; a
Reason that appeared to him so forcible, that it was impossible, whilst he
reflected on it, not to own, that God, had he pleased, could most easily have
made us so, as to be mistaken in things we most distinctly conceive. This
supposed, the Stress he laid upon the Evidence of his other Propositions, could
at best but balance it, and render his Rule of Truth a Probability: Nay it
could not do so much, since it was not to be done, but upon the Strength of the
Evidence of the Propositions; a Rule that became a most uncertain and fallible,
by that sole Argument, which he found impossible to resist, when he reflected
on it: And that the Argument that made him suspect his Axioms, though founded
on the bare Supposal of the Existence of a God, which as yet he had not
examined, ought not to be regarded as so weak and trivial, in reference to a
Man, that in pursuit of his Method acknowledges the Power of God, in case he
does exist, extend^ to every thing, and possibly to the making us such sort of
Creatures as might be deluded in things they most distinctly conceive. And
that, lastly* it thw^rted all the Rules of Method, for a Philosopher* that was
yet in Doubt of the Truth of that Proposition; All that I distinctly can
conceive is true: To dream of proving the Existence of a God, to clear him of
that Doubt: For how would he be convinced of the Existence of a God, but by
some evident Demonstration? And how shall he be convinced by some evident
Demonstration, so long as he shall doubt, if what a Man distinctly conceives is
true?

From whence Aristotle concluded, Cartesius made a Circle in his Method; which
is the most vile and unpardonable Fault that reasoning can be guilty o^: For,
according to him, he could no ways be perfectly sure of that Principle, All I
distinctly conceive is true: But because there is a God, and because that God
is no Deceiver; nor could he know there was a God, and that that God was no
Deceiver, but because he knew distinctly the Existence of a God, by the Idea he
found in himself, and because he distinctly conceived, That to Deceive was a
thing unworthy of God. In a Word, that he proved the First Proposition by the
Second, and the Second by the First, without having the Right to suppose the
Truth of either. But Gentlemen ( continued he, in an insulting way) upon your
Consideration, I pardon your Worthy Master that his unhappy Stumble: It was
only a false Step he chanced to make in the Dark, notwithstanding which, he
recovered himself, and stood upon his Legs. He concluded, For the Existence of
a God, and many Truths that we undoubtedly and clearly know; the Conclusion is
true though the Inference be false. But you must not take it ill if I add one
Word more, a disgracing his Principles and Axioms one by one, In resp. ad
object. 1.
make you sensible how ill founded is the Reputation of a Philosopher, said to
Argue conclusively and closely. I remember I have read in that Author a
Proposition pleasant enough; viz. That God could change the Essences of things;
That the (...) we call necessary are only True, because (...) will have them
so: And if God had willed it, as he might have willed it, if he pleased, that
Two and Three should not make Five, that Proposition* Two and Three are Five at
this Day would be false. When Descartes advances that Paradox, he would fain be
believed to own a vast Respect for, and most humble Submission to the
Omnipotency of God, and is angry with the other Philosopher^, and impleads them
of almost Blasphemy, for presuming to say, God was not able to cause, that Two
and Three should not make Five: Yet if you track Descartes a little, you will
quickly find* That it is not altogether for his Devotion-sake he maintains that
Thesis* but because that absurd Ten^t was the evident Result of some other
Points of his Doctrine: To have admitted of a Proposition so harsh as that, upon
Constraint, and as a Conclusion drawn naturally from a Principle of his laying,
would not have made much for his Honor, and would besides have discouraged
others: That made him think it his best way to be beforehand with them, to make
the Outcry first, and to wonder how the Philosophers could be so rash and
inconsiderate as to prescribe Boundaries to the Almightiness of God. I shall
not at present meddle with the Absurdity of that Proposition; I design not to
correct all the Blunders of that Knight Errant of a Philosopher; it will be too
Glorious for him to understand I have condescended to criticize upon him. But
to enlarge a little on the Business in Hand, I say, should all I have urged
against his Method be false; should all the Arguments wherewith the World has
baited him, be Void and Null, that Paradox alone would totally overthrow him;
and le^ him suppose it true, it is impossible he should give a^ any Rule of
Truth: For if it hold, That the Truth of Propositions so depends on God, as
that he could have caused those este^m'd necessarily true, to have been false,
it was in his Power to have made these two be false; What I conceive distinctly
is true: To deceive is an Imperfection. If God was able to have done it, how
knows Descartes but he actually has? What greater Reason has he to believe he
has not, rather than the contrary? Has God revealed it to him? Upon his
Principle, I Will doubt, not only as a Sceptick, but now I Will doubt in earnest;
Thus his two Rules of Truth are no longer Rules of Truth. What now betides his
Glorious Proposition, I think therefore I am? I have no need to be a Sceptick
to discredit it: Why? Because I know not whether God from all Eternity designed
it true or false. Nor could I purchase that knowledge without a Revelation; and
still it must be questioned whether Revelation could ^erve for a Rule of Truth,
in these our Circumstances. Thus Descartes Wiseman, who had already made so far
a Progress as to know, he thought, and that he was, is here unfortunately
non-plus'd. I have a world of Reflections more to make, and I should never be
exhausted if I would enter upon his egregious Metaphysics, his new
Demonstrations he pretends to give for the Existence of a God, the Distinction
of the Soul and Body: Upon his way of answering Objections made against the
rest of his Method, if I would trouble my self to let you see how (when his
Propositions are attacked, and at once the connex^^^ of them, or the Method he
takes to come to the knowledge of Truth) he contents himself sometimes to
defend his Propositions well or ill, without endeavoring to justify his
Method, though that is the Piece in which he has pretended most to show his
Excellency; and which is the most despicable of all at Bottom, as I think I
have sufficiently proved to you: But this is enough to satisfy you, I have not
passed Judgment on your Master without sufficient Knowledge of the Cause: And
since I have delayed you too long, Gentlemen Cartesians, I am your most humble
Servant; recommend me to your Illustrious Doctor.

Socrates and Plato followed him, taking Leave more civilly, and more like
Gentlemen than he: And Plato added, he was transported to see Aristotle's
Reputation so run down in the World; and that he deserved it were it for
nothing, but his Behavior toward the Philosophers his Predecessors, and
especially for his ill natured Carriage unto Plato himself: That he had used
all Endeavors possible to suppress the Reputation with which they flourished
in the World, and had used less reserve toward him than all the rest, although
he had been his Master; and merely by his Calumnies in Point of Doctrine, he had
raised himself to the Character of Prince of Philosophers.

You know not, said I, what Time may still bring forth, and you need not
despair of coming in Play again. Aristotle's Philosophy has had many Turns of
Fortune within this Fifteen hundred Years; and I Will tell you, as a Piece of
News from our World, That hardly more than fourscore Years ago, the Sovereign
Bishop of the Christian Church was upon putting forth a Placate, commanding
your Philosophy should be taught at Rome, instead of Aristotle's, and he had
gained the Point, but for a great Man of that Time, called Bellarmine. If that
had once passed at Rome, there had been a Fatal Stroke to Aristotle's
Philosophy, and yours had carried it all the World over. You at once surprise
and please me, ( replied Plato) I am extremely Glad, and most highly obliged to
you for this News: Aristotle shall know it, and I Will employ it to revenge the
Insult of his late Discourse.

Mean while my two Guides were enraged to hear their Master treated in so vile
a manner; they had waited the End of his Discourse, to answer it, but observing
him troop off without giving them the Opportunity, they endeavored, what they
could to stop him: As they saw it was in vain, the old Gentleman raillying,
hollowed him at a Distance, So ho, Good Monsieur Aristotle, where may a Man
find your Sphere of Fire? we have not met with it in our Voyage; though your
Books give us Intelligence it was placed above the Air, and yet below the Moon.
For my part I was highly gratified with that Encounter, and Discourse; I had
the Pleasure to observe, That Spiritual Philosophers no more than Corporal
could forbear disputing, and were no less jealous of their Sentiments and
Reputation. I had the Happiness of this Diversion more than once in my Voyage,
upon several Occasions; of which I shall give account.

After the Departure of our three Philosophers* well, ( said I to Father
Mersennus) what think you, Father, now of Aristotle? Indeed he seemed to me a
litte hot; but after all, methinks he is no ill Disputant: That way of tracing
M. Descartes step by step in his Method of the re-search of Truth, is very
maliciously designed, and capable of raising Scruples, especially that last
Argument taken from the Truth of Necessary Propositions, that with Descartes
have their Dependence upon God, seemed perplexing enough: And I do not remember
that any one has before hit upon the Use that he has made on it.

Stuff! mere Stuff! ( he replied) All that Aristotle has said, scarce any thing
was tolerable but the Circle he charged upon Descartes; and that is an
antiquated Objection; I my self have touched upon it heretofore, as you may see
in the Second Objections, that come after his Meditations, which are my own as
well as the Sixth. I am glad I know so much, ( I returned) they be both most
worthy of you, and admirably proposed, and I am very well satisfied, That
Circle is something more than imaginary; for it is not to be supposed, that
Father Mers^nnus, Aristotle, M. Arnauld, who is the Author of the Fourth Set of
Objections, and several others, had all met in the self-same Point, but that
there was something in it very like at least, what they there apprehended. But
under the Rose, do you take that answer M. Decsartes gives to get out of that
unlucky Circle, and that no one ever yet has took in hand to be satisfactory or
fit to be received? He answers, That in saying, We knew nothing certainly,
before our Conviction of the Existence of a God, he had expressly noted, That
he only meant it of some Conclusions that might come into our Mind, at the some
Time we reflected not on the Principles, from which they were derived.

It would perhaps be somewhat difficult to make that Proposition capable of any
tolerable Sense; but it is the easiest thing of an hundred to show it to be a
mere Fetch and Evasion; and to disprove the Truth of the thing itself, it is
but reading the same Place Aristotle now cited, of his Third Meditation, Page
the thirty fifth and thirty sixth of his Method, Number the fifth of the first
Part of his Principles; and one shall see he there makes us doubt of all, even
of Principles that carry with them their own Evidence; including that Principle
itself, What I distinctly* conceive is ^rue, by the Suspicion we have there is
a God, who could so have constituted us, as we might be mistaken in things most
clearly apprehended: So that when he says, We know nothing surely, before the
Knowledge of a God, he speaks not only of some certain Conclusions that strike
upon our Mind, separately from their Principles, but of all sorts of Knowledge,
and of that it self, What we distinctly conceive is true. And hereupon it is
your self, Aristotle, M. Arnauld and others, have trapt him in a Circle.

I own, That Answer may be found in some of his Letters, occasioned by the same
Objection started to him afresh. I know that he repeats it not by way of
Answer, but couching it cunningly in the First Part of his Principles, where he
gives us an Abstract of his Method, and his Meditations; but that is no Salvo to
the Business. Besides, those Words have a very ill Effect, in the First Part of
his Principles, for they unhappily stand so near the other, that make us doubt
of self-evident Propositions, because of the Suspicion we have of a God, that,
may be, employs his Power to deceive us; that the Contradiction plainly strikes
our Eyes.

Nor has his famous Proposition, I think therefore I am, any better S^ccess;
for having given us that Proposition as the first of which we could be assured,
we might demonstrate to him, That cannot be the first, since its certainty
necessarily supposes the Truth of some others, and in those of these: It is
impossible that that which thinks should not be; it is a Contradiction for any
thing to think, and yet not be in the instant that it thinks. The Proposition
(which is very remarkable) by which he proves that other, I think therefore I
am, at the same Time he pretends it to be the first of all. He declares then,
That when he says, that Proposition, I think therefore I am, is the first and
most certain of all those which offer themselves to the Mind of a Man, who
observes Method in Philosophy; he pretends not to deny but that he must be
certain of this before; It is impossible that he that thinks should not be; as
also of diverse others. ^oyn this Acknowledgment with what he says in the
foregoing Page, We must likewise doubt of other Things, which we held most
certain, of Mathematical Demonstrations, even of Principles that we thought
self-evident until now: What are then selfevident Propositions if not these? It
is a Contradiction, That a thing should be and not be: A thing cannot be, and
not be ^t the same Time, cannot act, and not be, and the like. He then supposes
not the Truth of these Principles, because he doubts of them. And in Truth, the
Reason he brings to make us doubt of self-evident Propositions extends equally
to all. We must doubt, says he, of Principles that we call self-evident,
because we have heard there is a God, who can do all Things; and who knows, but
he may have so contrived us, as we might always be deceived, even in things
that seem most evident? And be pleased to recollect, my Father, what Aristotle
said in Concluding; That Descartes's Propositions were less to be found Fault
with than their Conn^xion and their Disposal in his Method that he takes to
come to Truth; and that the Truth of some certain Propositions was not
absolutely contested, but only with reference to the Method that he takes, by
which he forfeits the Privilege to suppose them, be they as true as may be,
since according to that Method he is disabled from acquiring the Knowledge of
their Truth. And it is upon that account, probably, he was put so out of Humor
with Gassendus and Father Bourdin a Jesuit, who were those that chiefly closed
with him in that Loc^. Their Scruples are proposed in a lively manner in Latin;
and it were well if the French Translation equalled the Original. But upon the
mentioning the French Translation,

Give me leave to add one little Remark, I made a few Days since, and thought
not fit to communicate to others. M. Descartes's dear Disciples being possibly
put to it (at least I so imagine) to disengage their Master of those petty
Perplexities, of which I have been speaking; in the French Version, that has
been put forth, of his Works, and which had his own Approbation, have somewhat
sweetened that distastful Proposition, in the first Part of his Principles. The
Latin has it thus, Dubitabimus etiam de reliquis, quae antea pro maxim certis
habuimus: Etiam de Mathematicis demonstrationibus, etiam de iis principiis quae
hactenus putavimus ^sse per se nota. It would be natural to render it: We will
doubt of other things, which before we held most certain; also of Mathematical
Demonstrations; also of those Principles which hitherto we thought
self-evident: They have turned it so, I say, in French, as to make us believe,
That M. Descartes spoke not of self-evident Principles in general, but only of
Mathematical: Nous dout^ro^s aussi de toutes les autres chooses qui nous ont
semble autrefois tres certains: Meme des demonstrations de Mathematique, and de
ses principes, encore que d'eux-memes ils soient assez manifestes. We will
doubt also of all those things we heretofore esteemed most certain, even of the
Demonstrations of Mathematics and their Principles, though they are
sufficiently manifest of themselves. If this was designedly done, as one may
reasonably suppose, it was a little Innocent Legerdemain, that obliged
Descartes and injured no Man; and prevented at least the Contradidiction should
be visible. But to return to the Answer Descartes made to the Circle alleged,
What think you Father, is it a good Defense? Or is it not to make a Retreat and
Capitulate with his Enemies? Or ^^ther, to speak more plainly and truly, to
unsay and contradict? In good Faith, Father, declare it ingenuously; you have
treated Monsieur Descartes somewhat like a Friend, or rather as a generous
Enemy, you have disarmed him: He was a Man that scorned to beg his Life; you
foresaw too how high he would carry it after the Combat, and still would challenge
all he met with; yet for all that, you have thought fit to give him Quarter, as
a Man that did deserve it in Consideration of those other great Services he has
done Philosophy: I applaud your Generosity, and you have no reason to repent
on it.

That little Softning, with which I tempered the Harshness of my Critics, had
its designed Effect, which was not wholly to sour Father Mersennus. He took it
graciously enough, and only answered* in a rallying way, You are a very
Wrangler, and delight to find a Quarrel; and the Humor that I see you are of,
had you lived in Descartes's Time, you had certainly incurred his spending a
whole Chapter on you. But all that you say comes to just nothing, as I could
easily convince you; but the Discussion of Fact, and Contradiction is too
tedious an Employment for us Travelers. I perceive too Monsieur is tired
already with it, continued he, in showing me the old Gentleman, and only wants
a Mouth to yawn. Come, says he, Monsieur, you seem something Melancholy,
brighten a little, brighten; What do you think of?

Think? of nothing said he. How M^nsieur, (I replied) What Is that you spoke?
certainly Blasphemy against the Doctrine of our Master: If Aristotle had heard
you, what would he have said? Do you think of nothing? So, What Is become of the
Essence of the Soul, that according to Descartes is thinking? I had as lieve
you would tell me that you have no Being as that you do not think.

He took me up in a very serious Air, which sufficiently bespoke a greater
Displeasure my Words had given him, than Father Mersennus before. You put a
perverse Construction on my Proposition, which meant no more, than that my Mind
was not possessed with Melancholy Ideas, as you thought: I am heartily glad,
Monsieur, said I, for Gayety and Briskness are never more necessary than in a
Journey: But since we are fallen bechance upon the Essence of the Soul, I could
wish you would plainly expound what Monsieur Descartes has said thereon; for as
pure a Spirit as I am, I have no clear insight into my own Essence; and I
wonder at it. A very ill Sign, said he, that is as much as to say, your
Intellect is benighted still with Prejudice, and which I have already too much
perceived in you: And I well observe, that Novice which we lately met has
raised fresh Scruples in you by his Sophistry. Monsieur, I replied, to use no
Disguise with you, I Will frankly lay open the Disposition of my Soul, in which I
find it. I am ravished in my Thoughts to meet with those that contradict
Descartes's Philosophy; that opens and enlarges my Mind: But how strong soever
their Arguments appear, I secure my self against them, and still reserve my
Mind docil and tractable for the Instructions of that great Genius, supposing
he has the Leisure or the Goodness to bestow some on me, when I shall have the
Happiness to see him. As for the Preconceptions of the Schools and Childhood, I
have for the most part quit them, as I passed my Word before I undressed me of
my Body: Yet I confess some still remain, concerning the Essence of the Body,
and the Essence of the Soul, which I hardly can call by that Name, in the
signification you employ it, since they seem grounded upon Experience and on
solid Reason. I have however too great a Deference for M. Descartes, to be
thoroughly confirmed that they are not false; so that I am willing to
acknowledge, to speak in ^iner Language, a gloomy kind of Darkness overcasts my
Mind in those Particulars; and I have not yet obtained the Privilege of
Cartesian Souls, to have most distinct Ideas of those two kinds of Being, which
make up the World. But once more I shall submit to your Instructions and
Descartes's.

He then began to explain the Doctrine of Cartesi^s thereupon, but said no more
than I before had read in his Meditations, in his Method, in the first part of
his Principles, and in some of his Letters. I shall not here give any
Exposition of that Doctrine, because I shall have an occasion to speak of it
upon an Adventure that befell us in the Globe of the Moon. I pretended out of
Complaisance to have a better Taste of it than before, and to find more
Solidity in it than when I read it by my self. That acknowledgment restated my
Companions in their jo^ular Humor, who after much Merriment and Droll, upon
Aristotle's Philosophy, wheeled about unto his Sphere of Fire, which according
to his Map of the World ought to be situated under the Moon, of which yet we
saw not the least sign or footstep in our Voyage. They were very Severe and
Witty thereupon, and reminded me of a Suit commenced some years ago, by the
Perip^teticks against the new Philosophers, for di^sturbing them in the
possession of that Sphere, warranted by the Prescription of so many Ages; and
of a Decree made in favor of the Aristotelians, pursuant to a falsely supposed
Survey they had taken of the place. 'Twas ordered that the Sphere of Fire
should still remain where Aristotle had pi^ch'd it. Now as that Decree, say
they, was ^ Decree upon Request and not Contradictory, the new Philosophers may
revive the Action, and bring the Process to a second Hearing: And in that Case
you are able to give evidence of the Truth, and convict the Peripa^eticks of
the invalidity of their Titles, in a Concern of that Importance.

You may say what you please, said I, though that Sphere is not now to be found;
If I was to judge in that Action, I should not so readily condem^ Aristotle. It
may have been dispersed, and spent in the space of almost two thousand years:
For that many Stars that have formerly appeared in the Heavens now disappear:
What Is become of the seventh Pleiade, and of that seen the last Age in the
Constellation of Cassiope? And supposing any one, since its ceasing to appear,
should bring his Action against Tyco Brahe and others that observed it, as
false Intelligencers, that abused the credulous World, do you think it would
not be thrown out? And does not M. Descartes himself give us to apprehend that
our Vortex, infinitely greater than the Sphere of Fire, shall be sometime
swallowed up, when one least thinks on it? And when by that Absorption the Sun
shall become an Earth, and perhaps at once the subtle Matter which is conf^^'d
in the Center of our Earth, forcing its Passage through the Crusts that cover
it, shall make that a Sun; granting that the Books of M. Descartes existed in
another Vortex where are Men, would not they look on all he has wrote of our
World as Fabulous and Romantic?

However, granting that there never was a Sphere of Fire, it was ever admirably
supposed. Never was System more exactly contrived than Aristotle's of the
Elements. They all are ranged according to the Dignity or Meanness of their
Nature. The Earth as the most unactive and ignoble Element, has the lowest
Seat. The Water, less course and heavy than the Earth, takes place above it.
The Air, by reason of its Subtilty, is exalted higher than the Water. And the
Fire the most noble and most vigorous of them all, owns no Superior but the
Stars, and the subtle Matter in which swim the Planets. The extent of each is
likewise proportioned to the Merit of their Nature: Like Brethren they have
divided the Estate of the four Qualities* each of them has two, one of which in
the Superlative Degree. The Earth is cold and dry, the Water is cold and moist,
the Air is hot and moist, the Fire is hot and dry. And to the end they may bear
up still, in the perpetual Combats they give each other; if the prevaling
Quality of one's more active, the predominant Quality of the others put them in
a good posture of Defense against the effort of their Enemy. Could any thing be
more justly or ingeniously imagined? In fine, with how many fine Thoughts has
that Sphere of Fire, and that orderly Disposition of the Elements, furnished
our Preachers heretofore, and still supplies those of Italy? But to mention
something better in its kind, that one Devise of Father le Moine, of which the
Sphere of Fire is the Substance, deserves there had been one, and would deserve
there should be one still, and that it should endure for ever. Designing to
signify the more pure are Friendships, the more durable they are, he painted
the Sphere of Fire, with this Spanish Motto, Eterno porque Puro. This Fire's
Eternal, because it is pure. What an unhappiness it is that that Thought so fine
and solid as it is all over, should at last be false for want of a Sphere of
Fire?

Thus I was defending as well as I could, the Peripatetick Interest, whilst we
arrived at the Globe of the Moon. I shall not be tedious in giving a large
Description of it, since others have don't before me. I will only say that the
Earth, looked to us that viewed it from the Moon, as the Moon appears to those
that view it from the Earth, with this difference, that the Earth seemed bigger
far, because it really is so. So we judged that the Earth, in respect of those
that beheld it from the Moon, had the same Phases as the Moon, in regard of
those that behold it from the Earth; that it had its Quadratures, its
Oppositions, its Conjunctions, except that it could never be totally Eclipsed,
by the reason of its greatness in comparison of the Moon, whose Shade could not
have a Diameter so large as the Earth then in Conjunction.

The Moon is a Mass of Matter much like that of which the Earth is composed.
There you have Fields and Forests, Seas and Rivers. I saw no Animals indeed,
but I am of Opinion if there were some transported they would thrive, and
probably multiply. Empire de la Lu^e.
It Is false that there are Men there, as Cyrano reports; but 'twas undesignedly
that he deceived us, having first been deceived himself. One of the separate
Souls which we found in great Multitudes, and which were there at his Arrival,
told me the Original of that Error. A great Company of Souls surpised to see a
Man with his Body, in a Land where the like was never seen before, had a mind
to know the meaning of it. They agreed together to appear in Human Shape to
him: They accost him, and enquire by what Method he accomplished so great a
Voyage: Made him relate what he knew of our World; and as he seemed equally
inquisitive as to the Transactions of the World of the Moon, and the Life the
Inhabitants led there, the Familiar Spirit of Socrates, who was among the rest,
took upon him to answer: And having declared who he was, as that Historian
himself relates, he made him upon the Spot, a Fantastical System of the
Republic and Society, which is the same he gives us in his Relation, where he
seriously tells us, There are Men in the Moon; characters their Humor,
describes their Employments, their Customs and Government. But it is worth the
knowing that some ^opperies he has inserted, he brought not from that Country,
as the Soul assured me; and that many Profane Allusions and Libertine
Reflections he there makes, were only the Fruits of a debauched Imagination and
a corrupt Mind, such as was that Historians, or of the Imitation of an Author,
yet more Atheistical than himself. I mean Lucian, one of whose Works was made
the Plan to his History of the Moon.

The Inequalities we found in the Globe of the Moon are partly Is^es, wherewith
the Seas there are pleasantly checkered, and partly Hills and Valleys in its
Continent. They belong to several famous Astronomers or Philosophers, whose
Names they bear, and who are the high and mighty States there. We landed in
Gassendi, a Seat extraordinary fine and very apposite, and such in a Word as an
Abbot, like Monsieur Gassendus, could make it, who wanted for neither Genius,
Art nor Science, and who had no use for his Revenues, in gaming treating and
living high. The Lord of the Manor was then absent, whom we should have been
glad to have waited on, since we heard that he still continued his Civility and
Moderation, which were his Natural Endowments. And though formerly there were
some Misunderstandings betwixt him and Cartesius, yet he always very
obligingly, and with a Mark of Distinction, entertained the Cartesians that
came to pay a Visit, and especially Father Mersennus, who was his peculiar
Friend. He was a Man that equaled M. Descartes in capacity of Genius, excelled
him in the reach and extent of Science, but was less heady and conceited. He
seemed somewhat a Pyrrhonist in Natural Philosophy, which in my Opinion is
becoming enough of a Philosopher, who provided he looks into himself, must know
by his own Experience the Limits of a Human Understanding, and the short
Sightedness of its Views.

From Gassendi, Father Mersennus conducted us to the Land that bears his Name.
It is very conveniently situate upon the same Coast, as Gassendi, bordering
upon the round Sea, which others call the Sea of Humors, which is a great
G^lph of the Lunary Ocean, bounded on one side by (...) Continent, on which
lies Mersennus, and on the other by an Isthmus, at the end whereof, Northwards,
is a Peninsule called Dream-land. Mersennus is only commendable for its
Situation and Prospect, being a very hosky and barren Country by the reason of
the abundant Heat there, from which it has taken a Name, and is called Hotland.

We staid in this place about half a quarter of an hour, when I intimated to ^.
Mersennus, that before we prosecuted our Iourny, I should be glad to traverse
the Hemisphere of the Moon wherein we were. That Hemisphere always faces our
Earth, and it is false that the Moon turns upon its Center, as some imagine: It
only has a Motion of Vibration, which weighs it from East to West, and from
West to East, which Motion Galilae^us first perceived, having observed by a
Tube, that the place we call Grimaldi, is sometimes nearer and sometimes
farther off the Oriental Zone of the Moon, and that the Caspian Sea, opposite
to it, is sometimes nearer and sometimes farther off the Occidental Zone.
Father Mersennus, willingly consented to my Proposal, for as much as he himself
had never made that Voyage. We crossed the great Ocean, leaving on the left
Hand the Isle of Winds, and on the right, that of Copernicus, and pass'd^ over
that of Pitheas, still pushing on quite to the Sea of Rains, which is bounded
by a vast Land stretched from East to West, much like that of America, as it is
decypher'd in the Maps; whose Eastern part is called Fog-land, and the Western
Haitland, both seemed like two mighty^ Deserts. Toward the middle of that
Land, upon the Shore of the Sea of Rains, we discovered a kind of a large Town,
of an oval Figure, which we had the Curiosity to go to see; but we found all
the Avenues guarded with Souls who denied us Entrance, though civilly and
obligingly enough. We demanded of one of them, What Town that was, and why
there was no Admission? He answered, it was called Plato, and was the same
where that Philosopher, whose Name it bore, had established his Commonwealth;
that no Persons were admitted there, which he himself had not first examined,
which Caution he observed, for fear some Stranger should bring thither the
dangerous Maxims of the other World, which were the only Pestilence that
Republic had to fear; that Plato was not at home at present, but would return
in a little time; and in Case we desired to have Admission, we might, waiting
the return of Plato, commence our Quarantine at Lazaret, which was a little
Seat upon a rising Ground, we saw some distance from the Town; that that
Quarantine was not a Quarantine of days* but a Quarantine of Years; because the
Con^agious Diseases a Spirit was tainted with, were purged off with far greater
Difficulty than the Pestilential Airs of Bodies are dispersed, which come from
infected Places. We thanked him for his offers, and told him, We came not there
with a Design to settle, but that we were going farther; that if Plato had been
in Town, he probably would have had some Condescension toward us; that we had
met him in our Journey, and had received great Civilities from him: And that we
must endeavor to be contented upon the disappointment of our Curiosity, on
tha^ occasion. So we bent on our Journey, dissatis^fied enough, from the
Republic of Plato, where we little thought they had treated Strangers a^ they
do in China and Iapan.

From thence we traveled over all that Land from North to South, after which
we discovered another Sea, called the Sea of Cold, in which stood a very fair
Island, which they said was Aristotle's; we made no Debate whether we should
take it in our Road: The only Question was, Whether if we were asked who and
what we were, we should declare our selves Cartesians? It was my Sentiment not
to carry it so high in an Enemies Country: But Father Mersennus and my old
Gentleman, concluded for the contrary, without more ado adding, there was
nothing we need to fear; that if we were beset we had wherewithal to defend our
Selves, and in point of Spiritual Assaults, the Number came not in the Account;
that it was not the first time, there had been seen a single Cartesian, that
fronted with good Success a Class of four hundred Peripateticks, marshalled by
a Regent of consummate Experience. Only we must keep a strict Guard upon our
selves, to offer no Insult or Raillery, that might give Offense to those we
conversed with.

But it was a great Surprise to us upon our Approach, to see this Island under
a stricter Guard than that of Plato. They were there in Battle Array, as in a
Town that had the Enemy at the Gates, and expected the next News should be of
being begirt with a close Siege. There was your Court of Guards advanced far
into the Field, your Centuries upon all the Hills round about, and Scouts and
Intelligences in all parts of the Air. As we came within three hundred Paces of
the place, we saw a Detachment of about a dozen Souls, drawn from the Court of
Guard, approach us. He that commanded them gave the Word, Stand, who is there,
and to what Sect do you belong? Our old Veteran undauntedly cried, Long Live
Descartes and the Cartesians. He was amazed at the Reply; ordered us not to
stir a step, and forthwith dispatched an Advice to the Officer of the Guard.

No sooner the Advice arrived to the Officer, but all his Troops at a Signal
given, were armed capape, and gave us to understand by their looks they were in
readiness to receive the Enemy: That is, they were accountred with Syllogisms,
in all sorts of Modes and Figures whereof some concluded for the Soul of
Beasts, others for the necessity of Substantial Forms, in mixed Bodies; others
for Absolute Accidents, and such like Things, against which M. Descartes had
declared. The Officer himself coming up, we presently knew him. He had been an
ancient Professor in the University of Paris and formerly my Regent in
Philosophy: O God! said he, adressing himself to me, and must I have the
Affiction of seeing you on the side of our Enemies condescending even to the
servil Office of a Spy? Is this the Recompense you make for the Pains I have
taken? Have you met with a course of Philosophy, comparable to mine, which was
then reputed, the most gentile and solid in the whole University of Paris?
Where Is that Respect and Submission you owned in your greener years, for the
Prince of Philosophers? What Obligation had you to take up arms against him?
Monsieur (I replied) I still preserve that Respect, that Esteem and Friendship
for you, which I owe, inviolable, and I take it for a peculiar favor of
Fortune to meet you here, to make a fresh Protestation of them. And I assure
you, that I am neither come in quality of a Spy or Enemy, but if you please so
to receive me, of a Voyager: 'Twas purely curiosity that brought me hither, by
the way. As to the concern of Philosophy, I must acknowledge I am a little
Skeptical in that Matter, and know not at present what I am. I am resolved to
try all Sects before I am determined; so that you may, Sir, look upon me as a
Man of an uninterested Country, and that contrives no Plot or Mischeivous
Design against your Commonwealth: These Gentlemen, indeed, are professed
Car^esians, but they are Philosophers and Men of Honor, and have Esteem for
Merit though it be on the contrary side; and who hold, that Liberty of
Conscience in point of Philosophy, is the unviolable Charter of all honest well
bred Men: But ( I pursued) I am highly surpised at the bustle and disturbance
in this Country: There Is no Spanish Town in Flanders so readily Alarmed as
yours; What is it you so much dread?

That which we so much dread, said he, is, that Implacable Enemy of our
Sovereign* your Descartes, who when on Earth, did all imaginable toward the
extirpating the Peripateticks, and only desisted there, as we are from good
Hands informed, to come to ruin them in this Country. It is now more than
thirty years, so exact a Guard has been observed, to prevent a Surprise
consequent to the Advice we have had, that in all this time he has been
forming a Party, and gathering all the Forces possible, in order to a Descent.
This is the Intelligence we have received from a Dutch Professor of Philosophy,
who acts here as Generalissimo in Aristotle's Absence. But Descartes may come
as soon as he pleases; you see we are in a capacity to receive him.

Well, Monsieur (said I) if that be all, you may sleep secure; Monsieur
Descartes, I assure you, has no Design of an Invasion in his Head; he is a
thousand Times farther off this Place than it is from hence to Earth; he is
thinking of Building a New World above the Heavens; he has invited us to see
the Execution of his Grand Design, and thither it is we are going: And to
convince you of the Truth of what I say, it is but deputing, when we part, some
Souls to bear us Company, and they shall bring you an account of what they
there shall see.

You rejoice me mightily, said he, for we Peripateticks are tired with these
long Fatigues: but take it not ill, that I execute my Orders, and conduct you
to the Governor of the Place, according to the Custom, That all Philosophers
of a different Sect from ours, arriving here, give him an account what Project
brought them hither; we have used this Course but since Descartes has given us
these Alarms. So we took the Road that led to the Place, convoyed with a
Detachment of about fifty Souls, Academiques for the most part and Collegians,
who looked as if they did not wish us very well; that Place was only a great
Garden that represented the Lyceum in Athens, where Aristotle used to teach his
Scholars walking, whence they derived the Name of Peripateticks: It Is of a
great extent and very finely kept, it is cut into abundance of Allies, whereof
the four greatest meet in the middle of the Garden, at a round large Fountain,
whereon is raised a stately Pedestal of the most delicate Marble I ever saw, on
which stands the Statue of Alxander the Great, crowned by Victory with Laurels,
trampling under Foot Scepters and Crowns, and Bucklers and broken Arms, and the
Treasures of Asia. Four great Statues, chained to the four Corners represent
the Principal Nations Alexander conquered. I found that Monument so like that
of the Place des Victoires, that I should have believed one had been the
Pattern to the other, had not I at the same Time made Reflection, that the near
Resemblance of those two Hero's, might easily have furnished the Minds of both
the Undertakers with the same Ideas. All the Figures of the Monument, no less
than the other Statues in several Parts of the Garden, as those of Philippus,
Olympias, and many other illustrious Personages, who formerly honored
Aristo^le with their Friendship, are of Silver, for Silver is very cheap and
common in the Globe of the Moon; and it is probably for that Reason Chemists
who always affect Mystery in their Words, call that Metal by the Name of the
Moon.

As we were admiring that noble Monument, we were astonished to see all of a
sudden, four Water-Spouts rise from the four Angles of the Pedestal, the
largest and the highest that ever were; they mounted at least four hundred
Poles in height, and they were brought from a River behind a neighboring
Mountain that was higher than the Wells of Domme in Auvergn; over which the
Water was carried by the admirable Contrivance of the Old Philosophy, that in
supposing the Horror of a Vacuum in Nature, showed how with Pumps to s^ing
Water infinitely high, which Secret is unfortunately lost in our World; for
since the Time of Galileus we can raise Water no higher than three or four and
thirty Foot. We saw these Water Spouts on every Side, the least of which
exceeded the highest Trees that encompassed the Garden. From the middle of the
Garden we observed four Halls of different Figure and Architecture, one at the
End of each of the four Alleys: We were conducted to the biggest of them, which
was of exquisite Beauty and Magnificence, being of Gold, Azure and Precious
Stones. On both Sides, in the Intervals of the Windows was your Imbossed Work
of Silver, excellently carved; but that made a Gallimaw^ry odd and humerous
enough; for on one Part on the Right Hand were r^presented the famous Exploits
of Alexander, the defeat of Darius near the City Arbela, the Attack of Poru^
his Army, the Passage of Granicus, and the Taking of the City Tire. On the
other were Triumphs of Aristotle over the rest of the Philosophers, and the
Extravagancies of those that went for Wisemen before his Time.

The first on the Left Hand exhibits Pythagoras, doctrining his Disciples, and
presenting them with a sort of Table Book, wherein, among others, were written
these three Precepts: First, That they were to hear him full five Years without
speaking a Word to contradict him. Secondly, They must lend an attentive Ear,
especially in the Night, to the Music and Harmony of the Celestial Spheres,
which only Wisemen are privileged to understand. And, Thirdly, they must
abstain from eating Beans.

The Second shows you Democritus laughing with Might and Main, and Heraclitus
weeping in warm Tears, and a Troop of little Children hooping after them as
after two Fools.

In the Third we had Diogenes the Cynique, habited like a Morris-Dancer,
mounted upon a Cross-way-stone, at bottom of which lay his Tub, expounding to
an Auditory much like that of the Singers du pont neuf.

In the last sat Aristotle on an exalted Seat, that looked more like a Throne
than a Magisterial Chair, and at his Feet stood all the Philosophers that lived
before him, in Admiration, and listening to him as an Oracle. Before the Throne
of Aristotle were heaped the Books that represented the Writings of those same
Philosophers, his Predecessors, which one was putting Fire to, to sacrifice
them to the Goddess Wisdom, whose Head resembled a Sun, brandishing abundance
of Rays upon the Face of Aristotle, and making a Glory round about it.

At the Bottom of the Hall, upon a kind of Altar, stands a large Silver Statue
of the beautiful Pythias, formerly Aristotle's Lady, for whom his Passion was
so strong, as to Sacrifice unto her.

At the Top of the Hall was a Ceiling, enriched with admirable Paintings,
lately done, divided likewise betwixt Alexander and Aristotle, agreeable to the
Embossings; for on one Side was the Hero receiving a Thunderbolt from the Hand
of his pretended Father Jupiter Ammon, to fulminate all the Princes of Asia;
and on the other the Philosopher receiving another from the Hand of Minerva, to
thunderclap all the Chieftains, of the New Sects of Philosophy, among which we
easily knew M. Descartes, M. Gassendi, Father* Maignan, and many others.

As we were taken up with the Curiosity of all these different Pieces of
Sculpture and Painting, the Viceroy of the Place came in to give us Audience.
Never was Man so much surprised as my old Gentleman, at first Sight of the
Governor; he had formerly known him in Holland, when he there accompanied M.
Descartes: He was called M. Voetius, the most resolved Peripatetique in the
World, and the most avowed of all Descartes's Enemies; he that most disturbed
the Quiet he came to seek in Holland, and the most obstinately as successfully
opposed his Design of gaining a Party there: Whereas that Man acts the greatest
part in the History of Cartesianism, of which, at the Entrance of my Relation I
engaged to give some Particulars when occasion served; and seeing at the
Intercourse of which I speak, we fell upon a Negotiation with him, as to a
Project of Peace between the Peripatetiques and the Cartesians; it will not
perhaps be troublesome and impertinent, briefly to insert the Difference he had
with M. Descartes, and the Motive that determined him to fix in the Globe of
the Moon.

M. Descartes, Diss^rt. de Meth.
after he had finished his Course of Philosophy, in the College de la Fleche,
ceased not to be a Philosopher thereupon; nay pretends he commenced one but
from that Time. As he was fully convinced there was far less to be gained from
the most curious of Books and Libraries than from the great Volume of the
World, the most Complete and Instructive of all others, to such as know how to
study it as they ought; he pitched upon Travel. During nine or ten Years he run
through most Countries; frequented the Court, as also the Armies of most
Foreign Princes: But still as a Philosopher, i. e. continually making serious
Reflections upon the Intellectual and Moral Part of Man, upon the different
Customs of Countries, upon the contrary Judgments Men make of the self-same
things, conformably to the different Notions they have imbibed concerning them,
endeavoring always herein to alembeck Truth from Falsehood, and to advantage
himself equally by the Folly and Wisdom of other Men; that he might collect a
System of Life, composed and regulated by defecated Reason, whose Happiness, as
far as possible, should be independent of the Turns and Wheels of Fortune.

He began to put his Project in Execution, in a certain Place in Germany, which
he does not name, where he passed the Winter, at his Return from the Coronation
of the Emperor Ferdinand III. where closeting himself whole Days together in
his Stove, he recollected in his Mind all the Observations he had made, upon
the Conduct of Mankind; which he employed to constitute his Rules of Morality,
as they are at present in his Book, entitled, Dissertation de la method de
bien user de sa raison. From whence passing to Metaphysical Notices, and those
of Natural Philosophy, he laid the Scheme to the most part of his Works he
since has left us; making at the same Time an Essay of his Physics, in the
Mechanical Explanation of the Motion of the Heart and A^teries, which certainly
is not the worst Piece we have of his Works.

Next he deliberated what Place was most convenient for a Settlement; Ibid.
he was biased against his stay in Britanny, his Native Country, where his
Family then bore, as it does to this Day, a considerable Port, foreseeing the
Encumbrances he should find among his Relations, would inevitably retard his
vehement Pursuit of Philosophy. In fine, he resolved on Holland, as a Retreat
freest from Disturbance, where every one, said he, minds his own concerns,
without meddling with other Men's; and where the Maintenance of those numerous
Troops, served but to recommend with more Security to the whole Country the
Advantages of Peace, in the midst of a rageing War.

He passed near eight Years in Peace and Quiet, Ibid.
making his ordinary abode at Egmond, a little Town on the Coast of Holland,
insomuch that during all that Space* he never left the Country, but on the
account of his Domestic Occasions, that indispensibly obliged him to make some
Journies into France. Ibid. p. 20*
Happy, if his Zeal for the Public Good, and his Compassion for the Miserable
Condition of Philosophy, had not made him transgress that excellent Moral Maxim
he had prescribed himself, to leave the World as he found it, without
endeavoring to reform it, or rectify its Ideas, to think only of finding
Truth for himself, and of conquering his own Passions; but he was worsted first
by that of Printing, and after by all the other, Authors are subject to, when
they find their Opinions contradicted: For it must be confessed, although M.
Descartes had formed an Idea of a Wiseman to himself, much like that of the
Stoics, yet any one may see in reading some of his Works, he was not yet
arrived to that Apathy and Indolence which makes their Essential Character.

No sooner had he impressed his Dioptriques, and his Meteors; Next that, his
Dissertation concerning Method, and since his Meditations: But he found himself
set upon from all Hands; all the Universities of Holland took the alarm. Doctor
Revi^s for that of ^eyden, Voetius and Dem^tius for Vtrecht, Schook for that of
Groiningue, ratified a triple Alliance against this upstart Enemy; who for his
Part, before he declared and set up his Standard against Aristotle, had made
underhand a considerable Party. Revius having engaged Doctor Tkill on his Side,
a hot and active Man, undertook the Censuring his Meditations, throughout his
Divinity; and the Affair was carried on so far that M. Descartes Friends
advised him to interpose the Authority of the Prince of Orange and the French
Ambassador, to put a Stop to its Progress: But he satisfied himself, to
proclaim he was injured, and to demand Justice of the Procurators of Leyden,
who thought they had done him a special Favor, in obliging their Doctors
Silence, and prohibiting them the mentioning Descartes and his Opinions in
their Academick Exercises; a Proceedure that was not very Satisfactory to M.
Descartes. He was a little better satisfied on the part of the University of
Groiningue, which at the Solicitation of the French Ambassador, severely
checked Schooks Outrageous Conduct.

But all this was nothing in comparison with his great Concernment at Vtrecht,
where Voetius fell like a Lion loose upon him. Voetius was one of the Supports
of the University; whom the Quality of Divinity Professor, as also that of
Minister and Rector, joined with his Reverend G^ey Heirs rendered awful and
venerable to a Town, in which the Corporation of the University maintained a
very considerable Grandeur: He had learned how to employ these Advantages to
the gaining absolute Authority and Command over the Minds of Men, insomuch that
his Sentiments were the Decisions in the University and Oracles in the Town.
It Is known what they were in regard of the New Philosophy, which was the Reason
why those of Descartes's Party durst not declare themselves: Notwithstanding,
Let^. (...) Des^.
at last, Regius the Physician, whom Descartes styles, his Proto-martyr, could
no longer stifle the Hatred he had conceived against Substantial Forms; he
affixed his Theses, wherein he had banished them, to substitute in their Room
the different Configuration of the insensible Parts of every Body. This makes a
great Noise in the University, some take one Side some another: This is the
whole Discourse of the Town, News and Politics are hushed, and the Exchange
now rings with nothing but Substantial Forms.

Mean time Voetius slept not in an Affair of this Importance; he went to the
first Disputes of Regius, suborned a great many Scholars he had gained, and
placed them in several Parts of the Hall; who as soon as Regius his Disciple
began to talk of Subtle Matter, of the Balls of the Second Element, of Ramous
and Chamfer'd Particles, burst out a Laughing, set up an Hiss, clapped their
Hands, and were seconded by the Doctors, the Friends of Voetius: That
tumultuous Outcry dismounted poor Regius, and obl^ged him to cut off his
Disputations. He wrote to M. Descartes* Tom. 1. d^^ Le^^. de Des^.
desiring Counsel in this Conjuncture, and how he ought to behave himself in
respect of Voetius, who had forthwith put up Theses in Defense of Substantial
Forms; and against the other Points of the Cartesian Philosophy: He had
particularly addressed them to the Faculty of Medicine, and the Professors of
Philosophy, imploring their Protect^on of Sub^tantial^ Forms against Regius.

M. Descartes's Advice was, Tom. 1. Let. 89.
That he should forbear Public Disputations, endeavor to draw over Voetius to
answer his Thes^s, but with all the deference and civility imaginable, to
manifest a grand Respect and Esteem for his Adversary, yet so as still
courageously to maintain the Cause of Truth* Regius took that Method, not
without Fear it might cost him his Chair; and certainly he ran a great Risque.
Voe^ius undertook him; put young Voetius his Son, and Schoo^, upon writing
against him: And a little more had caused him to be condemned as an Heretic by
the Divines: He had him before the Magistrates; nor had he so escaped, but upon
giving Security for the exact Performance of what they ordered in a Public
Decree, Never to teach Descartes's Philosophy, to hold fast to the ancient
Dogma's and to make no Attaque for the future on Substantial Forms.

That Blow went with M. Descartes to the Quick, though he seems in his Letter
to Regius to make slight on it, insomuch that he could not forbear revenging
himself; venting a Phamplet underhand, called the History of Voetius; in which
he scurvily treated him, and ridiculed him severely. That turned the Bent of
Voetius's Fury on himself, who quitting thenceforward Regius, whom he saw
foiled and grovelling, and looked upon as a Forlorn-Hope, sent out to Piqueer
and Skirmish, by Descartes, thought he must double his Forces to make an Onset
on this New Sect, and assault it in its Leader. As ill Fortune still would have
it, Descartes and Regius fell to Swords-points, and sharpened their Quills
against each other, as if it had been the Fate of that Philosopher, at that
Time, to have all the Learned Men of Holland for his Enemies, whose Names did
terminate in Ius, Revius, Demmatius, the two Voetius's and Regius.

The first thing that was done at Vtrecht, Let. de Des^.
was to damn Descartes in all Companies as an Atheist, as another Vaninus, who
under pretense of establishing by his Arguments the Existence of a God, aimed
only to rout and confute it. Voetius* declaimed eternally against him in his
Lectures, in his Disputations, in his Sermons. He pitched purposely on Theses
of Atheism, where he brought in every thing that might bring an Odium on
Descartes. And so successfully did they decry him, that when the News of his
Death arrived several Years after at Vtrecht, Prejudice was so deeply rooted,
as to make an addition of dreadful Circumstances, and it was the Current Report
of the Town, That he dyed the most impious and wicked Villain in the World,
without Faith, C^e^gh^on Ep. ad Regium.
without Religion, like Julian the Apostate, casting up a thousand Blasphemies
against Jesus Christ.

Voetius endeavored to uncement the most intimate Friends he had, Tom. 2. des
Let* de Desc.
and as much a Protestant Minister as he was, wrote to Father Mersennus in
France, to enter in a League with him, and to excite him to write against
Descartes, but sped not in that Negotiation. He accused him of being a
Clandestine Enemy to the Religion of the Co^ntry, and seemed by that to be
willing to impeach him as a Traitor to the State. He added, he was an Emissary
and Spy of the Iesuit^, and held an Epistolary* Correspondence with them, and
produced one Letter, especially against him, which he had wrote to Father
Dine^, sometime after Confessor to the King. So true it is that Titus Oats is
not the first that thought of persuading the Protestants of his Country, Hist.
Conj^r. Angle^erre*
the Jesuits gave Commissions in England to levy an Army, in which they had the
Disposal of all places of trust, and made general Officers, Colonels and
Captains.

In short; Voetius partly by hi^ Reputation and Vogue, partly by his Intrigues,
brought it about, that Descartes's Philosophy should be condemned throughout
the University, of which he was Rector: He cited him by the order of the
Magistrates, with a great noise, at the sound of a Bell, by the notice of a
Bedel, to come and answer to the Calumnies he was said to have written against
Voetius. In so much that his Friends advised him ^o be upon his Guard, as being
scarce secure in the place where he was, though it was out of the Reach and
Jurisdiction of Vtrecht. Two Papers, wherein M. Descartes mentioned Voetius,
one of which was the Letter he had wrote to Father Dinet, were declared
diffamatory Libels. That Declaration was Printed, and affixed and sent to the
principal Towns of the United Provinces. If we may believe M. Descartes, there
was no less Design on Foot, than the Banishing him all the Provinces by a
Decree, the loading him with prodigious Fines, the burning his Books by the
Hand of the common Hangman, to which, some said, Voetius had resolved to make
so great a Fire in burning of them, as the Flame of it should enlighten all the
Countries thereabouts. In a word, M. Descartes was forced to get clear of these
Troubles, to employ the credit of his Friends, and the Interest of the French
Ambassador, that might hinder it from proceeding any farther.

These Quarrels were kept up many Years* and M. Descartes foreseeing the
Apologies he he designed to have presented to the Magistrates of Leyden and
Vtrecht, to justify himself, and demand the reparation of his Honor, would be
ineffectual in the procuring such satisfaction as he pretended due to him,
thought often of leaving Holland, where he found not the Repose he at first
proposed to himself. The Letters he received from the Court of France at that
time, with the promise of a good Pension, if he would come and live at Paris,
determined him to depart: But the Troubles of the Kingdom unluckily-stop'd the
Career of his good Fortune. Letters were sent him in Parchment curiously
sealed, and full of the greatest Praises in the World: But that was all; nor
had he his Letters gratis. Never Parchment, as he pleasantly says, cost him so
dear, and was so unuseful as that: Nothing could hinder him from returning to
his beloved Holland, without fear of falling afresh into the Hands of Voetius,
Schook and Revius: But not long after, the Queen of Sueden sent for him to
Stockholm, where it is vulgarly said he died.

What I have hitherto said of the difference of Voetius with M. Descartes, has
been taken for the most part out of the Letters of that Philosopher. Voetius
informed us in the Globe of the Moon, of the other Particulars that concerned
himself, to wit, That after M. Descartes's Departure from Holland, he grew
reconciled to Regius the Physician, who in the Feast of Reconciliation, as a
Badge of the real Intentions of his future Friendship, presented him with some
of Descartes's Snush, which he often made use of, but especially to come to the
Lyceum in the Moon; that having highly merited of Aristotle, by those famous
Exploits managed against Regius and Descartes, in the Defense of the
Peripatetick Philosophy, that Prince of Philosopher^ had offered him the Employ
we saw him in possession of; that he nevertheless waved the accepting of it,
till, understanding that Descartes's Soul left no Stone unturned to bring the
Souls of these Parts over to him, his Zeal for the Ancient Philosophy had
wrought upon him to quit his Body, in order to oppose the Designs of that
dangerous Enemy.

This is that very Voetius that was formerly the Hero of Peripa^ecism in
Holland. Our Greeting notwithstanding was extraordinary civil on both Hands;
and after our mutual Compliments to each other, he expressed the Joy he had to
hear M. Descartes was hatching no ill Design upon the Lyceum of the Moon. He
confessed likewise the Regret he had for urging that Philosopher heretofore so
far: But that his own Reputation in Holland was incompatible with Descartes's.
That if he had once permitted the new Philosophy, to take Footing in the
University of Vtrecht, he must either have been obliged to learn it, or hold
his Tongue in all Disputes: And he found much uneasiness to consent to one or
the other: That he was then too old to become Descartes's Scholar; and that it
was easily guessed how ungrateful a Task it had been for an old Philosophy
Professor, to hear all his Decisions disputed, without the Privilege of
defending them, at least by way of Arguing; for that Descartes having thrown
out of Doors the Terms made use of in the Schools, he had been obliged in all
public Acts, to stand as a Person that was Deaf and Dumb: He that had always
been renowned for his Subtilty and Penetration. That he had observed in his
Philosophy many good Things, among abundance of others that seemed somewhat
hard. And that having often discoursed Aristotle concerning that Philosophy,
they had both concluded it would not be impossible to make some Accommodation,
and if we were willing, it would be no trouble to him, to enter in a particular
Conference thereupon: We gladly embraced his Offer, and after having ordered
his Attendants to retire, he spoke as follows:

You may easily see, Gentlemen, by the Rank I hold there, I have a great share
in the Favors of the Prince our Sovereign: I have yet a greater in his
Confidence: You will readily think so, by one Profession he has made me, and
which I am well assured I may safely venture to make you in his Name. It is
this, That his Interests are indeed closely united with the Interests of those
Philosophers that write themselves Aristotelians, but at the bottom they are no
more the same than are their Sentiments in point of Philosophy: But
notwithstanding he has hitherto dispensed with the Promiscuous confounding of
them. The Pleasure, and at once the Honor to see himself Marching at the Head
of all the Philosophers in Europe, that with an unanimous Consent attributed to
him the Quality of their Prince, was well worth the trouble of conniving at the
diametrical Repugnance he saw in the reasoning of most of those, who declared
to be entirely his. That division it self, which was to be found among his most
zealous Par^isans, who took it to be a greater Honor, and made it of more
Concernment to have engaged him on their side, than Truth it self, did not a
little contribute to his Glory: To see himself independently on Reason, by the
sole weight of his Authority made Umpire of all the disagreeing Philosophers;
to enjoy peaceably the Privilege of Infallibility, among those that disputed it
with Pope and Councils, had something charming in it, that induced him to think
it best to be contented, without being much concerned at their taking or
mistaking of his meaning; seeing, whatever they say, he only, by the Voice of
both Parties was always in the right. But since that M. Descartes, M. Gassendi,
and some others, have thrown off the Yoke of his Authority, and to justify
their Conduct have undertook, and with Success enough, to show the Absurdity,
or the unsoundness of some Opinions of the Schools, of which they pretend to
make him the Warantee, because the best of his Disciples have awarded them unto
him with an universal Consent: He has thought fit to declare himself on the
first occasion, and to entreat the Public, as also those Gentlemen the new
Philosophers, to do him Justice in that Particular. He protests then to
separate his Interest in many Articles from theirs, that style themselves his
Disciples: He declares that in the Questions of the Schools, many things go
under his Name which are none of his; as is for Instance, that most Childish
Notion of the Horror of a Vacuum. That he himself has certify'd and proved by
Experience, the Pressure of the Air, which at this Day is made a Principle in
the Physical Expilcation of such Phenomena's, as have most alliance to the
Question of a Vacuum. That he is no ways the Father of an infinite little
Beings, introduced in the School Philosophy. That his Writings have often been
mis-interpreted, and Men have commonly taken for Natural Beings, what in his
Idea were only Denomina^^ions and Metaphysical Attributes.

This Calm, continued he, with which I speak, after that ungovernable Obstinacy
you formerly knew me guilty of, might stand for my Credentials, as to you, in
Aristotle's Absence: But I will farther add, that since you meet him out of the
Globe of the Moon, he has dispatched an Express, in which he gives orders,
that if you passed this way, I should not fail to inform you of his Thoughts
and Intentions, and to let you know that whatever Warmth appeared in him in his
Discourse against Descartes, he would notwithstanding gladly hearken to some
Accommodation with him: Furthermore this is no unpremeditated Resolution. The
Expedient has been formed, and written long ago, and the Fault will not be ours
if you do not see it, and take upon you the presenting it to Descartes, if you
so think convenient. We returned, we most joyfully accepted it, and that we
thought our selves happy any ways to contribute to the Reconciliation of the
two greatest Philosophers the World has known, and the Reunion of two Parties,
that were at present the only considerable in Europe. He took forthwith out of
a Cabinet that was at the end of the Hall, and where, upon handsome Shelves,
stood a good sight of Books, excellently bound, and that looked exactly like
Books the new Philosophers have composed, within this thirty or forty Years,
and that Aristotle and Voetius had undoubtedly read; he took, I say, from a
Cabinet, a kind of Memoirs, with this Title in Latin Words, De Consensu
Philosophiae Veteris and Novae. We have, said I, an Ingenious Man of our Wo^ld,
that has wrote a Book with the same Inscription. M. Du Ha^el.
I my self have read it ( he replied) and a Man may easily see by the way it is
wrote in, the Author is well versed in all parts of Philosophy. He is a
Gentleman unbiassed as to one side or other, is thoroughly acquainted with the
Interests of each Party, and therefore the fittest Person that I know to
mediate in that Affair. A preliminary Point is taken from his Preface, which is
much in the right on it, and whereto Aristotle and Descartes must forthwith
accord; that the Sect-Leaders of Philophy, Neque omnia, neque nihil viderunt.
With that he presented us the Project of Accommodation, and desired us to read
it at our leisure, in our Voyage; as also to take with us, as we had offered at
our Arrival, some Aristotelian Souls, to accompany us to Descartes's Place of
Residence, to the end he might know by them, what that Philosopher had resolved
upon the Propositions laid down in that Treaty. We thanked him for the Honor
he did us, in intrusting us with so Important a Negotiation; assured him, we
would do all that lay in us toward the facilitating its Success; and after
much Expression and Acknowledgment of his Civilities, we begged his leave we
might pursue our Voyage, since we had a vast way still to go, and had spent
many Hours in that we had passed already. He conducted us out of the Lyceum,
and giving some Instructions to two Souls of the Country, that seemed Spirits
of Note and Fashion, ordered them to wait on us, so made his Conge.

Designing to run over that whole Hemisphere of the Moon that is opposed to our
Earth, we kept on our Road to the North, and leaving Democritus on the left, we
passed through Thales, and drove on quite to Zoroaster; from whence we made a
double toward the West, through desert Lands, where we saw the ruins of some
ancient Towns, as of Atlas, Cepheus, Hermes, without meeting Man, Woman or
Child, till we came to the Lake of Dreams, on whose Banks we found three
separate Spirits, with whom we were taken up one Moment in Discourse, as we
passed along.

We surprised the two first, stoutly Cursing and Banning their Wives they had
formerly in the World. One of which was, that Hermotimus mentioned by
Tertullian and Pliny, who leaving his Body abed, to make a Ramble, as his
Custom was, his Wife, that did not love him, slipped not the opportunity of
calling up her Servants, to whom she showed, not without tearing her Hair and
playing the Mad-woman, the Body of her Husband unsoul'd and breathless, and
carried the Humor on so well, that the Body was burnt, according to the custom
of the Country, before the Soul returned, who was from thenceforth forced to
seek another Habitation.

The other Spirit was a Roman Senator, whose Name was Lamia, whose Wife had
trickt out of the World by the same Project, though, a little more it had
miscarried. For as he related it, The Soul being ret^rned to look its Body,
where 'twas left, not finding it, and seeing the Family Mourning, begun to
smell how the Matter stood: It Posted presently to the place where was built
the Funeral Pile to burn the Body, and arrived there, just as the Fire began to
seize it. The Soul thought it inconvenient to reunite her self with it, for
fear it might be obliged to be burnt alive, she only moved its Tongue, so as
many of the Standers by heard these Words twice distinctly repeated, I am not
dead, I am not dead. But seeing the Masters of the Funeral Ceremonies, who had
undoubtedly received an Item from the Dame, unconcerned as 'ere, she left it to
be burnt, and came to fix in the Globe of the Moon.

The third, whom we found two Leagues farther in a ghastly Grot, was the famous
John Duns Scotus, commonly called Scot, or the Subtle Doctor. He has passed for
a dead Man unto this day, on which Account some have given out most ridiculous
Stories, and highly disadvantagious to the Reputation of so worthy a Person,
and which have still been well confuted. But the truth is that he is not dead;
and that having by the subtilty of his Mind, found out the Secret so many
others have procured, his Corpse was taken for dead, and was buried in the
absence of his Soul, which took Sanctuary in the Globe of the Moon. He was
encompassed by a Crowd of little (I know not what you call them, for they were
not Beings, but I think) Formalities. He was the first Father of them in the
Philosophical World, and he that gave them first Repute. They be the prettyest,
littlest, slender, -- you would think them next to nothing. Perceiving we were
Philosophers, to be a little more affable than ordinary, he began to ask us
what we thought of an Universal a part rei, and whether we did not take it to
be Objective Precisions? Our old Gentleman, who besides his Cartesian Ideas
upon Philosophy, had still a Relick of that gruff and surly Humor Aristotle's
Compliments had provoked, answered him in a careless Air, We concern not our
Heads much with such insipid Trifles; that it was but Irish Gibbrish, and that
none of us had any Pretensions to the Elogy Buchanan gives his Country
Philosphers, otherwise Men of Sense and Worth, Gens ratione furens and mentem
pasta Chimeris. Trifles and Chimera's, replied Scotus! They are the finest and
most solid Questions in Philosophy. By this it was we distinguished our selves
in my time; by that Subtilty wherewith I handled these Questions, I was
advanced to the quality of Doctor Subtilis. Trifles and Chimeras, quoth a! You
French Philosophers, have you ever read the History of the University of Paris?
If you have not read it, read it: You will see if these things were looked on
heretofore as Trifles. You will see under the Reign of the young Lewis, one
Rousselin of Britanny, at the Head of the Nominals, disputing Hand to Fist in
the University of Paris, against those who held an Universal a part rei, and
from Arguments they came to Swords, that there was Manslaughter in the Case.
You will see, what I have been told is done, since I quit your World. That in
the reign of Lewis the Eleventh, the Court and Parliament interposed themselves
in Philosophical Differences, which you call Trifles; that by the order of the
King, the Books of the Nominals were chained and padlock'd, strictly
prohibiting the opening them ever after: And I would to God, those Decrees had
not been repealed by the Asserters of that empty Philosophy, which will have
Universality consist in Names and Conceptions: Then at this day I should have
reigned absolute in the Schools.

But ( continued he) taking Courage, Are not you of that Party of Philosophers
I have heard talk of some time since, and whose Works I have likewise seen in a
Visit I made Aristotle, who have a certain British Cavilier for their Leader,
called Descartes? Yea verily, replied our old Cartesian, and we take it as an
Honor so to be. Be gone, cried he, all in a Rage and Passion* Away with you!
Hence Heretics, as you are, who take it for an Honor to be of a Sect, which
by its Principles is obliged to renounce the Faith of our most Holy Mysteries.
Your Descartes holds that a determinate Extension is essential to a Body, and
that a Body being once of the size of a Cubical Foot, it would be as great a
Contradiction to lose that Extension, as to conceive a Mountain without a
Valley. It will be then a Contradiction that the Body of the Savior of the
World which had the bulk of many Feet, should be comprehended in the space of
the least Particle of the Consecrated Host. Once more be gone Excommunicates:
And since you will stay here in spite of me, I abandon the place; and
forthwith he marched off.

That his extraordinary Zeal was no less surprising than diverting. But that
which pleased me most, was, That upon our leaving that place, the two
Aristotelian Souls which Voetius had deputed to accompany us, began by the way
to resume the Argument of Scotus, and to urge it vigourously against Father
Mersennus and my old Man, who were much perplexed to rid their Hands of it. But
they proposed an Argument against the manner whereby M. Descartes, and after
him M. Rohault undertake to explain the Mystery of the Eucharist, without the
assistance of absolute Accidents; which may merit a place in this Relation.

M. Descartes in his Answer to the fourth Set of Objections, proposed against
his Metaphysical Meditations, explains the Mystery of the Eucharist as follows.
He says, That the Body of I. C. after the Consecration, is in the self-same
place the Bread was in before; but that it is so precisely in the same space,
that in what place soever, it was true to affirm before the Consecration, here
is Bread; it is true to say after the Consecration, here is the Body of I. C.
So that if we conceive that before the Consecration there was, whether in the
Surface or in the Substance of the Bread, little Piramidal, Cubical or
Triangular Spaces, filled with Piramidal, Cubical or Triangular Parts of Bread,
we must conceive, after the Consecration, those little Spaces are possessed in
the same exactness by the Body of I. C. From whence it follows, according to
him, That when it is said the Body of I. C. is comprehended in the same
Dimensions, and the very Superficies as the Bread, by that word Superficies is
to be understood, not only that external Surface that terminates the total
Figure of the Bread, but also that which terminates all the parts which are in
the depth and substance of it, separated from one another by the Pores, and
little Intervals that are filled up with Air, or some other Heterogeneous
Bodies: In so much that should some insensible parts of the Bread be put in
motion by the Air, or some other Body, the new Substance, that takes the place
of those insensible Parts, is equally put in Motion.

Upon that Supposition M. Descartes argues thus. Whatever makes an Impression
upon our Senses is only the Superficies of a Body. Every Body therefore that
has the same Superficies as the Bread, will make the same Impressions on our
Senses as the Bread. Therefore since the Body of I. C. is so precisely in the
same space as the Bread, that it has the same Superficies to an Hair, it must
inevitably make the same Impressions on our Senses as the Bread, that is, it
must reflect the Light, as the Bread did, and with the same Modifications: And
from hence we see in it the same Color and the same Figure. It must be pressed
toward the Center of the Earth, by the Impulse of the same Matter that pressed
the Bread before, because of the Figuration of its Parts of which it was
composed; and hence we perceive in it the same Gravity. It must vibrate the
Nerves of our Tongue, and insinuate it self into the Pores, just as did the
insensible parts of the Bread; and hence we apprehend in it the same Taste,
etc. From whence he concludes, That Mystery may be admirably explained, without
the encumbrance of absolute Accidents, which are kept in service without any
occasion for them.

See then one Difficulty among many others our Peripateticks proposed against
that Explication; we will demonstrate ( said they) that, granting that
Hypothesis, the Bread is not at all changed into the Body of Jesus Christ in
the Eucharist, but that after the Consecration, the Bread still remains in the
Host.

In order to their Demonstration they demanded of Father Mersennus and the old
Gentleman: I. Whether by the Principles of Descartes, the Matter of all Bodies
considered in it self, and independently of the different Modifications of its
Parts was not of the same Species? They answered, Yes. II. If that which
constituted the Specific Difference of Bodies was not, according to them, the
different Configuration, the different Situation, and the different Motions of
the Parts of those Bodies? They acknowledged it. That supposed, said they,
we'll evidently prove, That the Substance in the Eucharist, after its
Consecration, is nothing else but Bread; for the Matter or the Substance, which
has the same Configuration of Parts, the same Motion, and in a Word, all the
same Modifications that constitute the Essence of Bread, is Bread, according to
the aforesaid Principle: But the Substance found in the Dimensions of the Host,
after the Consecration, has all those Modifications; and it is only by the Means
of those Modifications we conceive it to have the same Superficies as the
Bread, taking the Word Superficies in the same Sense Descartes gives it: And
it is in virtue of those Modifications that that Superficies makes the same
Impressions on our Senses as the Bread did before the Consecration: And it is
from the same Reason that it reflects its Light precisely to the same Angles as
the Bread: That it receives all the same Impulses, and the same Determinations
of the Matter, that pushes it toward the Center, as the Bread: That it
communicates the same Vibrations to the Nerves of the Tongue as the Bread:
Therefore the Substance that is in the Space of the Host, after the
Consecration, according to Descartes's Principles, has the Form or the Essence
of Bread; therefore it is Bread, which was to be demonstrated. And from thence
our Catholic Peripateticks concluded, It was not without good Ground that
Recourse was had to Absolute Accidents, in the Explication of that Mystery.

They made yet one Reflection more upon a Saying Descartes adjoyns to his
Explication, and which ruins his Answer. Notwithstanding, says he, the Body of
Jesus Christ, to speak properly, is not there, as in a Place, but
Sacramentally. For, said they, What is it, for God's sake, to be in a Place in
proper speaking, but entirely to fill a Space? to hinder the Passage of other
Bodies that present themselves; to reflect the Light, to be pressed downward;
to have Motion, etc. But all this, according to Descartes, agrees to the Body
of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Host. And on the contrary, the Notion
commonly received of a Sacramental Existence attributes not to a Body in that
Capacity all those Properties; for none of those that have spoke of the Body of
Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, have supposed it was that which reflects the
Light, etc. Nay, they say the quite contrary.

So they concluded, deriding the Vanity of the Applause M. Descartes assumes to
himself in that Place, upon the Intelligible Manner, wherewith he pretends to
have explained that Mystery, and upon the Obligations he has laid on the
Orthodox Divines, for having furnished them with an Opinion more agreeable with
Divinity than those usually received. Applause, as well grounded as the
Prophecy he made a little after, by which one Day it shall come to pass, that
as soon as the World shall be reclaimed from the Prejudices of the School, all
the Opinions of our Old Philosophers and Divines thereupon, shall disappear and
vanish as Shadows, at the Approach of that Light, wherewith those Glorious
Principles of the New Philosophy shall fill the Minds of all such as know how
well to use them.

For my part, I was of Opinion, upon hearing Monsieur Descartes so refuted,
that he had better have stuck to his general Answer, be it as bad as it will,
That he was a Philosopher and not a Divine, and that he pretended not to
explain the Mysteries of our Religion by the Principles of his Philosophy. I
was astonished too in that Occurrence, That such sort of Answers had the good
Luck to meet with no Reply, especially having to do with M. Arnauld, who would
never willingly take the last Blow in Point of Disputes and Books. But I am
persuaded I have since found the Solution of that Difficulty in a Letter M.
Decsartes wrote to a Father of the Oratory, a Sorbon Doctor. He says, speaking
of M. Arnauld, That his only Judgment, as young a Doctor as he was, was of more
Weight with him, than that of half the Ancient Doctors of the Sorbon. Was not a
Clearing of that nature able to disarm the most incensed Adversary in the World?

During that Dispute, wherein Father Mersennus and the Old Blade thought it
unnecessary to keep to Mood and Figure, and were content to evade the Objection
by much raillery upon Absolute Accidents, alleging they ought to be banished
to the Desert of Scotus, to make up his Train and Attendance, with all his
little Formalities; We crossed the Calm Sea, and turning short to the Right, we
passed through Hipparchus, Ptolomeus, and the Peninsula of the Stars, and from
thence we cut through the Sea of Clouds. We entered into the Demy-Island of
Dreams, I mentioned in the beginning; so called from the little Mansions in the
Globe of the Moon, inhabited for the most Part with Chemists, that are in
Pursuit of the Philosopher's Stone, having not been able to find it upon Earth;
and a World of Judicial Astrologers, who still are as great Asses as they were
in the other World, and spend all their Time in making Almanacks, and
correcting by exact Supputations the false Horoscopes they made in their Life
time.

Among others we found Cardan, who though he was possessed of a good Copyhold
Eastward, on the Shore of the Ocean of Tempests, could not yet forbear making
frequent Visits of his Brethren of the same Society. He passed away his Time
but discontentedly, having not yet conquered the Shagrin and Melancholy,
occasioned by that Notable Horoscope of Edward VI. King of England, whose most
remarkable Fortunes and Adventures he had foretold, quite to the Fiftieth Year
of his Age, who yet had the confounded Luck to die at Fifteen. Two other
things, much of the same Nature, entertained his Thoughts in that deep
Melancholy: The first was the Death of his Son, whose Horoscope had proved
Faulty, he having not foreseen what yet came to pass, That he should be
executed at Milan, in the four and twentieth Year of his Age, for poisoning his
Wife. The other thing was the uncharitable behavior of Scaliger and Monsieur
de Thou, in publishing in their Books to all Posterity, That he was suffered to
dye with Hunger. For after all, said he to us, they are Liars, for were I dead,
'twas impossible I should be here. I must confess, that having foretold the Day
of my Death, in my Horoscope, I made my self, and finding I was mistaken,
seeing at the Time prescribed no Sign or Symptom of approaching Death, I shut
my self in my Closet; and not having Confidence to appear from thenceforth in
the Sight of Men, since every Moment of my Life to come had been the continual
Reproach of my Mistake, I even resolved to quit my Body, and come and inhabit
here. And this, Gentlemen, is the real Truth of the Matter. We took occasion to
extenuate the Causes of his Affliction, by telling him of the Reputation he
always had, with a non obstante to all that, in the World, as an extraordinary
Man, and distinguished from the Vulgar: After which we took our Leave of him,
and posted from thence to Mersennus, where we launched for our Voyage over the
Moon. There it was that the two Philosophers stepping aside for some Moments,
we read, altogether, the Project of Accommodation betwixt Aristotle and M.
Descartes, which Voetius had given us charge of, and whose principal Articles I
shall here relate. It was divided into two Parts; The first was to regulate the
Method, how the Aristotelians and Cartesians must for the future demean
themselves toward one another, in their Books, Disputes and Conversations. The
Second, which was very long, contained several Propositions, that the
Aristotelians remitted, to make some Advances nearer the Cartesians, demanding
the like Abatements from the Cartesians, whereby they might approach better the
Aristotelians. That Second Part was rather a Confutation of many Cartesian
Opinions than a Treaty of Accommodation, which gave me to conjecture it would
fail of the Success they promised to themselves, or at least pretended to
propose themselves. It Is easy to see that Aristotle, or at least Voetius his
Secretary was well informed of our Sublunary Occurrences, and what was for and
against his Party and his Adversary's.

A Treaty of Accommodation betwixt Aristotle, Prince of Philosophers, and M.
Descartes, Chief of the New Sect.
PART I.
THey shall not for the future Abuse or Vili^ie each other; that Way being
unphilosophical, and being likewise already exploded the Schools, by the
Worthiest and best of the Professors.

The Ladies and knowing Women must no longer treat Aristotle on their Besides
as a Fop and a Pedant: They ought to know he has been a Soldier, a Man of
Courtship and Intrigue, who, before he became a Philosopher, took his Pleasure
and spent his Estate, that was no little one, being Son of the Chief Physician
to Amyntas, Grandfather of Alexander; and perhaps there was never a Philosopher
in the World more a Courtier and a Gentleman than he.

On the other Hand the Old Professors of Philosophy must remember to be more
sparing of their Epithets, of which they are commonly too liberal on Cartesius
his Account; constantly styling him Enthusiast, Madman, sometimes Heretic and
Atheist. Voetius from henceforth voluntarily makes him an Authentic
Satisfaction as to all those Points, in default of that which the Procurators
of Leyden and Vtretcht denied him, corrupted by the Friends of the aforesaid
Sieur Voetius; who is his most humble Servant.

Aristotle shall disclaim all those Books composed against M. Descartes, in an
Injurious and Abusive Way, such as is that Tract entitled, Deliriorum Cartesii
Ventilatio. At least he shall order, That they be corrected, and that in the
New Edition Care be taken to retrench some Expressions a little too strong and
biting.

M. Descartes also, on his part, shall give Orders, That in the New Impressions
of the Works of some of his Followers, some Prefaces be lopt off, or rather
some Malicious Satyrs against the School Philosophers, not caring to
distinguish them from one another, and throwing unjustly upon all, the Faults
of some Particulars, such as are the Passion of Wrangling, Confusion, Equivocal
Terms, and Ignorance in the most Curtious Parts of Physics.

It shall be prohibited all the Cartesians to give a Character of Aristotle's
Merit, before they have read him, especially before they have seen his Logic,
his Rhetoric, his History of Animals, and others, where he treats Natural
Philosophy in Particulars: And they shall take heed of giving a Judgment on
that Philosopher's Parts by his Books De Phisico auditu, that are not so clear
and perspicuous as his others; the Author having his private Reasons for his
writing in that manner; which have yet been more confounded in Tract of Time,
by a swarm of Translators and Commentators, who often talk Greek in Latin, and
whereof some understood neither.

Be it prohibited likewise all the Peripateticks to be angry at Descartes's
philosophy before they have thoroughly examined it, under the Penalty of
rendering themselves ridiculous, as some have done, who have placed him in the
Catalogue of Atomists; that is, of such as fancy Bodies composed of Atoms or
indivisible Parts; or as another that wrote ingenuously to M. Descartes
himself, he had plainly seen with his Eyes the Subtle Matter, having by the
luckiest Accident imaginable observed an abundance of little Bodies playing in
the Air, by the Advantage of a Sunbeam, that passed through a chink of one of
his Casements.

Lastly, Aristotle entreats the Gentlemen Cartesians, not to father upon him
whatever they find in the Books of his Disciples, without consulting himself;
promising on his part, to give no one the Title of Cartesian but upon mature
Deliberation, especially in regard of certain young Abbots, Cavaliers, Proctors
and Physicians, that call themselves Cartesians in all Companies, for a
Pretense to Parts and Ingenuity, which they sometimes get the Repute of, by
that only Confidence of talking at all rates of Subtle Matter, Globules of the
Second Element, Vortexes, Automata's and Phenomena's without understanding any
thing but Terms.

The Second Part of the Treaty.
WHereas the Article of Substantial Eorms has occasioned the greatest Noise
and Division between both Parties, as may be seen by the Registers of the
Universities of Vtrecht, Leyden, Groninguen, Angers, and as would be testified
by those of the University of Paris, Caen, and several others, had Care been
taken for the Recording all the Acts and Deliberations held upon that Affair;
it is therefore necessary both one and the other, each as to their particular,
should remit something for Peace and Quietness-sake.

Aristotle complained forthwith of the Delicacy of the first Cartesians, who
thought it advisable to take Disgust at the very Name of Substantial Forms. For
suppose, said he, that no more was meant by that Word than the Principle of the
Properties of every Body, and that which is the Cause why one Body so differs
from another, that Use has given it a particular Name, and made it a Species
distinct from other Kinds of Bodies: What has that Term so Distastful and
Extraordinary? As to the Idea the Peripateticks have affixed to it, making it
to speak, an Incomplete Substance distinct from Matter; he said, That
Definition being no where to be found in his Writings, at least in express
Terms, he might, if he thought good, disown it, and devolve upon the Arabian
Commentators, as on the Creators of that Being, all the Railleries and fine
Things pretended to be spoke by the new Philosophers on that Chapter. But that
he was not yet in that Humor, the Cartesians having concluded nothing
rationally against that System. That an Incomplete Substance was no Chimera,
since the reasonable Soul in Man is undoubtedly so. That their grand Axiom
brought to demolish Substantial material Forms, viz. Whatever is Material is
Matter; was palpably false, as they have been answered an hundred times, seeing
Motion and Figure, which are material Things, are notwithstanding devoid of
Matter; and also that he looked upon the ordinary Doctrine of Substantial Forms,
as his true Doctrine. Nevertheless, adjoined he, we shall see what use M.
Descartes will make of it, and what Advances he will offer on his part. When he
shall have granted Brutes a Soul, the Peripateticks will consider whether they
shall recede from some other Point.

Upon which, he brought many Arguments to persuade him to be less hardy and
intractable thereupon. He represented how that Article of his Philosophy had
shockt the whole World. That his earnestness and zeal for that Opinion had been
excusable, if he had been the first Author; but it is well known a Spaniard,
called Pereyra, first lit upon that Notion; and some were so malicious as to
say, he had drawn it from the Spaniard's Book before he deduced it from his own
Principles. That he had already gained, by that Opinion, as much Honor as
could be expected; that it was looked upon in the World as an Ingenious Paradox,
on which he and his Disciples had descanted very subtly, and had sufficiently
plagued and tormented the School Philosophers; but that the latter and more
intelligent sort of Men could not forbear Laughing, when they seriously
undertook to maintain it as a Truth. That 'twas known this was the first Effect
the Preface to a Book, Entitled, L' Ame des Betes.
The Soul of Beasts, produced in the Mind of its Readers. A Book wrote indeed
with a great deal of Wit, but wherein the Author too seriously drives at the
Conversion of the Philosophers upon that Subject. That no one had brought one
substantial Reason to destroy the prejudice of all Mankind in that particular.
That no one had yet demonstrated that a middle Being, betwixt Spirit and
Matter, was a thing impossible. That the Promise the Cartesians had made, to
explain all that we see admirable in Beasts, by the sole disposition of the
Machine was whimsical, and not to be relied on, since it never had been put in
Practice. That when they talked of these Matters in general, they sometimes
spoke pl^^sibly enough; but when they descended to Particulars, they were
either much to be pitied or not endured. That the only Idea of the manner of
Brutes acting on infinite occasions, compared with that Paradox, made it look
extravagant. That whereas 'twas answered, that Argument proved too much, and
made for the reasoning of Beasts; it must be acknowledged that Instance
perplexed the Philosophers, and gave them trouble to get clear off; yet after
all, whatever pain it put them to, their Argument lost nothing of its Force;
and the Instance on the other hand infinitely increased the difficulty. For if
it be hard to comprehend, that Beasts should not have Reason, upon seeing them
act in so admirable and methodical a manner, how much more difficult would it
be to deny them bare Perception? And lastly, for Descartes to give up that
point, would not be construed to retract; having himself declared, he could not
demonstrate, that Beasts had not an apprehensive Soul, Let. 67. Tom. 1.
no more than it could be demonstrated unto him, they had.

After that, Aristotle passed to another Point, which had some Connection with
the former; which was, The Essence of the Soul, made by M. Descartes to consist
in actual Thinking, as he makes the Essence of a Body to consist in actual and
determinate Extension. He tells them, That though he has many Scruples, as to
his Method and Manner whereby he offers to demonstrate the distinction of the
Soul and Body, and that many People continued dissatisfied a little with the
Answers he gave to the Objections of Gassendus and M. Arnauld; notwithstanding
he would not dispute him that Glory of having said something thereon, wholly
New and very Ingenious. That he is likewise disposed to follow his Opinion
touching the Essence of the Soul, provided he would satisfy him as to one
Difficulty taken from Experience.

Many Persons, said he, have made you that Objection: That if the Essence of
the Soul consisted in actual Thought, it were impossible she should exist
without thinking; and thus it would follow, we should have Thought whilst we
were in our Mother's Belly. You will not scruple in the least that Consequence:
And as to what is rejoyned by them, that had we constantly Thought, whilst we
were in that Capacity, we must necessarily have remembered some one of those
Thoughts, at least, that we had there: You answer, The reason of our
Non-remembrance, is, because the Memory consists in certain Traces, which being
made in the Brain, upon thinking of an Object, are there preserved; and that
the Brain of Infants is too moist and soft for the preservation of those
Traces, at least in such a manner as is requisite to cause remembrance. But you
are pressed upon that Answer, Lettr. Tom. 2.
for as much as in several places of your Writings, you distinguish Memory into
two sorts, whereof one depends upon the Body, and those Tracks or Footsteps
impressed upon the Brain; and the other, which is purely intellectual, depends
upon the Soul above. You also distinguish Notices into two kinds: The one that
depend upon the Organ, and the other Immaterial, that are wholly Independent on
it. Now we can easily apprehend that the disposition of the Brain of an Infant,
may be in the cause why the Soul recollects not those Thoughts which have their
dependence on it; but in regard of the Memory wholly intellectual, those pure
Conceptions, those immaterial Notices which are altogether independent on the
Organ, and the different Plaits or Impresses of the Brain, the humidity of the
Brain can be of no Moment, and we must undoubtedly remember those Thoughts, and
the Motions of the Will that have pursued them. You will say, that an Infant in
the Mother's Womb is destitute of those pure Notices, and of the use of the
intellectual Memory. Tom. 2. Let. 4. 38.
But that is the thing I am asking a sufficient Reason for, and of which I
should be highly pleased to be convinced. In effect Voetius had given express
Orders to both his Envoys, to see that M. Descartes gave a clear Explication of
the Point.

From the Essence of the Soul they proceeded to the Essence of the Body.
Aristotle entered on that Article with an acknowledgment of an Error he formerly
fell into, advertising at the same time M. Descartes to take care to avoid the
like Misfortune. I believed, said he, the World was from all Eternity, upon a
false Principle I suffered my self to pre-possessed with, to wit, That God was
a necessary Being in his Actions, as well as in his Existence. You have one
also, of which the self same Error is the necessary Consequence: And I am not
the first that has put you in mind of it. You not only affirm, That the Essence
of Matter consists in Extension, but farther, That Matter, Extension and Space,
are but three different Names of one and the same Thing: From whence, with you,
it follows, That wherever we conceive Extension and Space, there must
necessarily be Matter. And from thence you conclude, the World is boundless and
infinite, or, as you choose to speak, indefinite in Extension. Your Adversaries
of the Terrestrial World have endeavored to demonstrate, That bottoming on
those same Principles, the World and Matter must always have been, and that
Matter must necessarily continue always. For as there is Matter at present,
where we conceive at present Space and Extension, so by the same Reason there
always has been, and ever will be, Matter, where we conceive there ever has
been, and ever will be Space and Extension. But we conceive that there always
has been, and that there always will be Space and Extension, where the World at
present stands. This is a nice Point, and might justify the Conduct of the
Doctors and Magistrates of Vtrecht on your Respect. Betwixt our selves (
continued he) the reasoning that bewildered you in that unextricable Maze is a
mere Sophism. A real Attribute, say you, cannot comport with nothing. Now to be
extended, is a real Attribute, it cannot therefore agree with nothing. It
agrees notwithstanding with Space, and with what we imagine above the
Firmament, and call by the Name of Space. Therefore that which is above the
Firmament is real. Therefore that which is in the Indefinite above the
Firmament, is Matter. Therefore Matter, Extension and Space, are the self-same
thing.

You ought to have apprehended the defect of that Reasoning from two Respects.
First, from the Consequence that is taken from thence, concluding for the
Eternity of the World, and which voluntarily offers it self to the Mind.
Secondly, that supposing it false, as indeed it is, that the World should be
Eternal, they will demonstrate to you by an Argument, exactly like yours, that
another Attribute, no less real than tha^ you term so, comports with nothing.
For if the World is not Eternal, it is plain a Man may truly say, that nothing
is Eternal; since, excepting God, there has Nothing been from all Eternity. Now
to be Eternal, is methinks, as real an Attribute as to be extended. But as it
is a manifest Absurdity to affirm, a real Attribute can accord with nothing, it
is necessary to reconcile it all, that you agree with your Adversaries, that
those Words, Extended and Eternal, when attributed to Nothing and to Space,
make in our Minds quite contrary Ideas, to what we have upon our attributing
them to a Being or a Body. When we attribute them to a Being or a Body, they
signify something Positive; when we attribute them to Nothing and to Space,
they give a Negative signification. In a Word, when it is said, nothing is
Eternal, no more is meant, than that there has been no Being created from all
Eternity. And when it is said, There is only an extended Space beyond the
Firmament, it is understood there is no Body there, and that there may be one
to fill up that Void, and nothing of a Body, which we there conceive. We cannot
speak of Nothing and of Space, but we must speak Something of them. We cannot
express what we think of them, but by the Terms in use: Those Terms are the
same we employ to speak of Beings: But if we make Reflection on the Ideas, we
shall see they are wholly different, nor are they ruined and destroyed by one
another, as is pretended.

This puts me in Mind of a little Instance, subtle enough upon this Subject,
which formerly Dr. M^re, an English Gentleman, gave you, he whose Elogies went
so far as to apply to you what Horac^ said of Homer; Qui nil molitur inepte. He
proposed this Question to you. Suppose that God should destroy the World, and
reproduce it a little after, might not it be said there would be, or at least,
that we conceive there would be some Interval between the Destruction and
Reproduction of the World, although nothing of real interceeded betwixt them
both? From whence he proceeded to conclude, That supposing in a Chamber God
should annihilate all the Bodies that are between the Walls, there would yet be
Length, Breadth and Depth, although at the same time there was nothing real
there. He thought to have foiled you, supposing you would readily have assented
to his first Proposition, of which there seemed no Doubt or Scruple: But I am
persuaded he found himself well enough Matched, when you denied him that we
could conceive in his Hypothesis, any Duration or Interval, between the
Destruction and new Production of the World.

The Author of a Letter wrote some years ago to a Cartesian Philosopher,
afforded the Reader Sport and Diversion enough upon that Point, by several very
pretty Hypotheses which he offers. But as I am not given to Trifles, and it is
unbefitting a Philosopher of my Character to be merry, I shall only make use of
your own Principles. I Will take that Hypothesis that supposes the Air in a
Chamber to be destroyed by God, without any admittance or production of another
Body there. That Hypothesis, once received, makes it manifest, That Extension
may be conceived without a Body, and by Consequence, that the Essence of Matter
consists not in Extension. You will not admit of this Hypothesis: But I am
going to show, that it implies no Contradiction, by a reasoning much like one
of those you make use of in another Case, and take for Demonstration.

For according to you, seeing I distinctly conceive a thing that thinks, not
conceiving Extension, and because I distinctly conceive Extension, not
concerning a thing that thinks; I have good Grounds for my Conclusion, that a
thing which thinks is distinguished from Extension and that Extension is
distinguished from a thing that thinks. Thus it is you demonstrate the
distinction of the Body and Soul, and thus it is evident, one may exist without
the other, with-a Contradiction; and that from this grand Maxim, That the
difference of Ideas is the only means we have of knowing the real distinction
of Things, and their Independence upon one another. Upon that Principle thus I
argue. I most distinctly conceive the Destruction or Annihilation of a Body,
without conceiving the production of another Body. Therefore it is no
Contradiction a Body should be destroyed without another Body's Production.
Therefore it is no Contradiction the Air betwixt the four Walls of a Chamber
should be destroyed, and yet no other Body produced in its room.

Or thus, which turns to the same Account. I most distinctly conceive a part of
Matter, setting aside all others, and I most distinctly conceive all other
without that, for Instance without conceiving the Air enclosed in a Chamber. My
Hypothesis then is established, as well as the Consequences that naturally
follow, against your Opinion, touching the Essence of Matter. So that if you
have any Inclination toward a Peace, you will be content to say, that
considering Things in their natural Capacity, Matter is necessarily extended;
but will willingly give up that Expression that has disgusted all the World:
That Extension, Matter and Space, were all the very same thing.

That Insult which Aristotle made upon M. Descartes, in* bandying one part of
his Principles against another, worsted my old Gentleman's Patience, and
rattled him so, that 'was ten to one but he had tore the Paper on the spot. He
proposed our going off without acquainting Aristotle's Ambassadors, who were
stragled a good way from us, telling us, the Company of such sort of Cattle was
not very pleasing: But we represented to him how dishonorable a thing, and
unbecoming of Descartes that would be. That that Paper was not so much a
Project of Peace, as a Challenge and Defiance, Aristotle had sent h^^; that
probably he might slight it, and probably he might think it worth while to
answer it: That M. Descartes had so wonderful a Gift of persuading and
captivating Spirits, and the production of a World was a thing of that
surprising Nature, that doubtless the two Souls that bore us Company, must be
converted to Cartesianism, provided M. Descartes would be at the pains of
explaining his System to them in a plausible and familiar manner. These Reasons
settled him again, and we pursued in the reading of the Paper, in expectation of
the two Souls.

From the Essence of the Body and Soul, Aristotle passed on to their Union, and
the Relations they have betwixt themselves. He began with great Encomiums on M.
Descartes for having opened the Eyes of the Philosophers, and showing them the
Unusefulness as well as Absurdity of their Intentional Species, in many cases,
alleging, That he had taught nothing on that Occasion, that ought to be held
so strange and incomprehensible by the Peripateticks, had not they deserted the
Sentiments of their acknowledged Master, to follow the Whimsies and
Imaginations of his Commentators. That he himself had remarked in many Places,
That the Sense of Feeling was dispersed throughout the Body, and through all
the Organs of the other Senses: That Vision, Taste, the Perception of Sounds
and Smells were only caused by the local Motion of some Bodies, that touched
and moved the Organs of the different Senses; that in effect, if that Motion
were insufficient for the Soul's perceiving Objects, those intentional Species
substituted in their Place, would be as far from serving Turn. That he was not
for rejecting M. Descartes's Doctrine concerning the Seat of the Soul in the
Pineal Gland, were it proposed only as a pure Hypothesis, since all that others
say amounts to nothing better; but it was insufferable that System should be
urged as a settled and demonstrated Truth. And that the Respect M. Descartes
still pretended for Truth and Experience ought to make him qualify and moderate
his Assertions thereupon.

He entreated him likewise to be more Human and good-natured toward those who
taught the Soul was expanded through the Body; and this is what he added to
show the Cartesians were a little Unreasonable in that Affair: For, said he,
when you assert the Soul is placed in the Pineal Gland, either you suppose she
takes up all the extent of that Gland, or that she only possesses one
indivisible part of it; if she possesses all the Capacity of the Gland, she
herself must thence be extended; for that Consequence entirely resembles yours,
which you draw against the Philosophers, who make the Soul expanded throughout
the Body. If she only possesses an indivisible Part thereof, there must
necessarily be some part of Matter that is indivisible, and not extended: And
thus in admiting that disjunctive Proposition, you appropriate to the Soul,
what you affirm belongs to Matter only, otherwise you grant an Attribute to
Matter, which on all other occasions you deny, and pretend according to your
Principles, however we understand it, that it is the only peculiar of a
Spiritual Soul. Besides, all the Nerves, where are the Radiations of the
Spirits, that enter in and out of the Pineal Gland, can neither part from the
same indivisible Point of the Gland, nor meet there; so that if the Soul was in
an indivisible Point of that Gland, she could not have the Perception of all
Objects there. But if you reply, The Soul is not in the Gland as a Body is in
another Body, or as a Body is in a Place, but that the Soul in quality of a
Spirit is not in that Gland, but because she acts there, because she thinks
there, wills there and perceives Objects there; and that, since the Different
Impressions of Objects terminate in diverse Points of the Gland, where she is
advertised of them, it may be said, the Soul is in all the Gland: The
Philosophers that undertake you, are ready to take you up with a fresh
Objection: For if the Soul acts, wills, thinks, apprehends Objects in all the
Gland, that is to say, in a very devisible Space; and if that be sufficient to
affirm she is in all the Pineal Gland, it will be true, according to their
Hypothesis to say, The Soul is in all the Body, since it acts and perceives
Objects in all the Body; she sees them in the Eye, as you say, she perceives
them in that part of the Pineal Gland, where the Optic Nerve does point, or
the Rays of the Spirits that proceed from that Nerve; she perceives Sounds in
the Ear, or as you say, she perceives them in another Point of the Pineal
Gland, where the Nerves do center, or the Rays that serve for that Perception.

Thus that pretended Bugbear of Philosophy, I mean the Presence of the Soul
throughout the Body, that causes her to feel in the Hand, when that is pricked,
and makes her move it presently, and withdraw it, upon the Sense of the
Compunction, that makes her stir the Foot in order to advance, methinks is no
longer monstrous or frightful, nor a Prejudice of Infancy evidently false,
seeing that Presence of the Soul throughout the Body is no other than that
which is allowed her in the Pineal Gland, the Pineal Gland being extended as
well as the whole Body; for the Diminutivenss of the Extension makes nothing to
the Purpose: Why therefore should that Vertual Extension of a Spirit be turned
to a Jest and Ridicule, when it is the same as is admitted by the Cartesians,
when both are well explained? and undoubtedly all the Sensations may very near
be as justly explained upon this Hypothesis, as upon that of the Pineal Gland.

From all which Aristotle concluded, That M. Descartes had better acknowledge
with the wisest and least conceited of the Philosophers, that the Relation the
Soul had with the Body in the Perception of Objects, was an incomprehensible
Mystery to the Mind of Man: That the manner of Objects acting on the Senses, as
also how their Action was carried to the Brain, might be very well explained,
but that a Bar was put to all farther Progress, unless a Man would run himself
into an unintelligible Jargon, or advance Propositions dangerous in themselves,
or in the Conclusions that might be deduced from them.

He went on in commending M. Descartes for his Integrity, Let. de Desc. Tom.
1. Let. 69.
manifested in his declaring there was nothing in the Idea of a Soul, or a
Spirit, that included an Impossibility of the Production of Motion by them; and
at once he blamed the Inconsiderateness of the Cartesians, who fool-hardily
advanced, That no Creature whatsoever had the Power of producing Motion. It is
true, adjoined he, with a little dash of Malice, that Paradox, as ill founded
as it is, is one of the Principal Pillars of the Cartesian System: For without
it how should an equal Quantity of Motion be kept up in the World, where there
are so many Souls, so many Angels, and so many Devils, whose greatest Pastime
it is to produce and create Hurlyburlies every Moment? But M. Descartes is so
much more Praise worthy for preferring the Interests of Truth before those of
his own System, as dear and beloved as it was.

The next Article was upon that grand Paradox of M. Descartes, In resp. ad 5.
object. Let. 110. Tom. 1.
That the Essences of Things and Truths commonly called necessary, are not
independent of God, and that they are only eternal and immutable, because God
has willed it so: That God is the total and efficient Cause of the Truth of
Propositions: That it was equally arbitrary for God to cause that it should be
false, that all the Lines drawn from the center to the Circumference should be
equal, as to create the World: See then the Abridgment of what Aristotle spoke
at length upon that Subject.

He said, He did not well understand what was the Sense and Meaning of those
Words, God is the e^ficient and total Cause of the Truth of Propositions: For
the Truth of a Proposition, since it is not a Being, but a mere Relation of
Conformity that it has with its Object, could not, to speak properly, have an
efficient Cause; and if in some Sense it might be said to have an efficient
Cause, that could be nothing but the Mind or Tongue of him that Frames and
Pronounces the Proposition. Again, he demanded if M. Descartes spoke in general
of all Necessary Truths, or only of some Particulars. He could not ( continued
he) speak of all: For doubtless he did not believe that God was, or had been
able to make these Propositions false, There is a God; God is the free Cause of
all Beings; God is a necessary Being. He must therefore only speak of
Propositions relating to the Creatures, because according as he expresses
himself in one of his Letters, Ibid.
God is the Author of the Essence as well as the Existence of the Creatures:
But that he had made a Reflection, That the Truths which respect the Essence of
the Creatures have a necessary Connection with those that appertain to the
Essence of God; and that if it was possible for the one to be false, the other
might be so too: As, for example, this, The Creature essentially depends on
God, is a Proposition belonging to the Essence of the Creature, which if it
could be false, that other would fall into the same Circumstance. God is the
absolute Master and free Cause of all Beings; for neither the one could be true
without the other's being so, nor could the one be false unless the other was
likewise false: Whereupon Aristotle advised M. Descartes to have a special
Care, lest the profound Respect he affected toward the Omnipotence of God,
should not only degenerate into Superstition, but should proceed so far as to
bring him to Blasphemous Conclusions.

After that Aristotle made a frank and honest Acknowledgment, That Descartes
had explained the Nature of most sensible Qualities in a finer and exacter way
than he had done: As of the Hardness of Bodies, of Liquidity, of the Power of
the Elaverium, of Cold, of Heat, etc. And to manifest he had no other Concern
than for the Interests of Truth, he retracted, without Ceremony his Position of
the Eternity of the World, and his Sphere of Fire. But since that Sphere of
Fire makes one of the principal Parts of the Peripatetick System, and is one of
the chief Ornaments of his World, he presumed that M. Descartes could do no
less than abandon all his Vortexes in Exchange, against which he urged many
Reasons: But Voetius having understood from us that M. Descartes was ready to
put his World in Execution, and the Design of our Journey was, that we might be
Witnesses of that mighty Action, he wrote a Postscript in the Margent, in which
he promised to submit himself to that Experience; and supposing it should
answer the Pretensions of M. Descartes, his Vortexes should be received, at
least as a good Hypothesis, for the explaining the Phenomena of the World,
which God has made. But he farther adjoined, That in case M. Descartes should
fail in his Attempt, he should be obliged thus far to condescend, That his
Physics, which turn for the most part upon those Hinges, is an Edifice without
Foundation: And that he should rest contented with the Praise common to all the
Leaders of a Sect, viz. That his Philosophy had something that was Good and
True in it, and that he should avow with the rest of Mankind, that to build a
World, and establish a System of Philosophy, true in all its Principles and
Conclusions, was a Point the Mind of Man in its utmost Endeavors could never
reach.

Lastly, as to M. Descartes's Demonstrations touching the Existence of God, the
Rules of Motion, and some other Opinions, for which that Philosopher had
engaged a greater Zeal and Earnestness, and which required a more through
Discussion: Aristotle proposed to him the pitching on some Neutral and
Unprejudiced Place, where they might confer together before disinterested
Arbitratours, to whose Determinations they should submit themselves.

He concluded with a gracious Offer of associating him in the Empire of
Philosophy, upon those only Conditions comprised in that Project. He admonished
him to fix some Bounds to his Ambition, assuring him of the Vanity of his Hopes
if he pursued to carry them any farther; for that his own Authority was too
well established throughout all Europe, to be endangered by the Enterprises of
a new Comer: That almost all Universities and Colleges had renewed the Oath of
Allegiance to him, and had made an Offensive and Defensive League against the
New Philosophy: That some Ladies and fine Wits of the great World, that seemed
to set up for Patrons and Protectors of a new Party in France, were not such as
much stress might be laid upon: That a Philosophical Dress of Mind would be as
changeable among the French Ladies, as the other Modes and Fashions for the
Body: That few were to be found already that valued themselves thereupon: And
that 'twas said, since the Play of one Moliere, the Name of a Learned Woman was
become a kind of an Affront. That though several Learned Men, and many
Mathematicians were taken formerly with the new Ideas, there were a very few at
present, that cared for the Name of Cartesians: Some having presently deserted,
to take the part of the Gassendists: Others having cut out Systems for
themselves, composed of what they thought best in both the ancient and new
Philosophers: And almost all affecting to be Originals without tying themselves
to any Sent Ancient or Modern whatsoever. An effect of more pernicious
Consequence than is imagined, of an ill Example which has been given, by the
new Schism made in Philosophy.

Scarce had we made an end of reading our Paper, when the two Paripateticks
re-entred in Mersennus, and told us, That from the Western Coast they descried
something as an Opaque Body, that they knew not what to make of, sailing
through the Air with wonderful Speed. I Will venture my Life on it, says our old
Gentleman, it is some incrusted Star, that tumbles from Vortex to Vortex, after
having lost its own; and is become a Comet. We made toward it with all have,
and the Cartesian Conjecture of the good old Man gave us good Diversion, when a
few Moments after we perceived it was nothing but a Man mounted on an extremely
black and condensed Cloud, whose whole Accoutrement looked exactly like that of
a Magician, that was either going to or coming from the Devil's Sabbath. In
effect, Father Mersennus, who knew him, informed us that he was a Chinese
Mandarin, the President of the Magicians of his Country, whom he had often met
in our Vortex, and about a year ago, had had a Conference with him upon the
Existence of a God, and that he had proved it to him by the Demonstrations of
M. Descartes, that as resolved and case-harden'd an Atheist as he found him,
his Demonstrations had s^ock'd him so as he had promised to examine them at his
leisure. He moved us to proceed to meet him to learn what was the Success of
his Conference, and whether the Mandarin was converted. So we advanced toward
him; but only Father Mersennus put on a visible Countenance. They saluted each
other, and after some Complements passed, Father Mersennus demanded, Whether he
still doubted of the Existence of a God? He answered, he was thoroughly
convinced; and that he owned himself under a great Obligation to him, for
having put him upon the Examination of a Point, of which he was ashamed to have
so much as doubted, for want of making some Reflections, with which a most
ordinary capacity might have furnished him. God be praised ( exclaimed Father
Mersennus) what Joy is here for M. Descartes when we shall certify him that his
Philosophy has conveyed the Knowledge of God to the ends of the Earth! It was
certainly with very good Reason he wrote to me upon a time, that he was
undetermined whether he should publish his Works of Philosophy, Tom. 2. Let. 37.
but that he thought himself obliged in Conscience, not to deprive the Public
of five or six Sheets, that contained the Demonstrations of the Existence of a
God.

Father ( replied the Mandarin) I would not advise you to communicate to M.
Descartes the Success his Demonstrations had in China. They passed there for
pure Paralogisms, at least two of them that are most in his Esteem, and that
are drawn from the Idea of a God, and a Being absolutely Perfect. And my
Obligation to you consists not in your having communicated to me those
Demonstrations, but in that having communicated them, in order to my examining
them, it took me in the Head, after having observed their weakness, to discuss
some other which that Philosopher makes light of in comparison of his own, and
which yet are those, I owe my Conviction to. A certain European Doctor, by the
Name of Thomas Aquinas, whose Sums the Jesuits have translated into Chinese,
which I consulted upon that occasion, and the explication made me by the
Mandarin Verbiest, who arrived in China out of Europe, some years since* have
made a hundred times more Impression on my Mind, than all the Cartesian Visions
that seemed extremely shallow.

That Answer Thunder struck the poor Father Mersennus, who demanded hastily of
the Mandarin what fault he found with M. Descartes's Demonstrations? He set
himself presently to refute them, in so much, that we had the pleasure of
seeing their Civilities and Complements changed into a real Dispute.

To let you see, said the Mandarin, that it is not on a groundless Supposition,
I condemn your Demonstrations for Paralogisms, you must know that after I had
heard them from you, I fortuned to find them in the Hands of a young Hollander
in China, who was upon a Voyage with his Country-Merchants, your Descartes's
Meditations. Seeing I was already in part acquainted with their Contents, and
wished to be more satisfactorily instructed, he made me a Present of them, and
there I read afresh all those Demonstrations, all the Objections made him
thereupon, and all the Answers he returns. The first Reflection that I made in
general upon my Reading, was, that those Demonstrations and Answers given to
the contrary Objections, left me wholly, at least very much, in doubt, and my
Mind fluctuating in as great uncertainty as before, concerning the Point that
was in Dispute; and that though I did not see forthwith the Faults of them, yet
methoughts I saw them. Upon that I presented them to two of my Friends, of the
Tribunal of Mathematics, constituted of able Men, that are accustomed to a
Geometrical Method, especially since the European Mathematicians arrived in
China. After they had run them over, one of the two assured me, without
deciding any thing, that if those Demonstrations were true Demonstrations, they
were admirable, since they were extremely plain and simple: The other adjoined,
that that Simplicity it self rendered them suspicious, for as much as, said he,
the more simple they are, the more they ought to have of the ordinary Effect of
Demonstration, on the Minds of those they are proposed to. Now I am insensible
of that Effect: My Mind finds not the evidence so strong as to be carried away
with it: On the contrary, I perceive, I know not what Doubts and Scruples, that
stand in the way of my Assent, and that induce it to believe those Reasonings
are false. And I remark, added he, that all, as well Friends as Enemies, of
that Philosopher, that have wrote their Opinion of his Demonstrations, have
made the same Reflection, and Experimented the same thing, as I my self. We set
our selves therefore to a serious Examination of them, and began with that
which M. Descantes proposes first of all in the Geometrical Abridgment of his
Meditation.

An Attribute which we see distinctly contained in the Idea of a thing may be
truly affirmed of that thing. But in the Idea of God, that is to say, in the
Idea of a Being absolutely perfect, I distinctly perceive necessary Existence
is contained; since necessary Existence is a Perfection, and a Being infinitely
perfect, comprehends all sorts of Perfections. Therefore I can affirm Existence
of a Being absolutely perfect, and say with Truth and the greatest Assurance,
that God exists.

Upon a second reading of that Demonstration and Examination of each particular
Proposition of it, whatever appearance of Truth they seemed to carry with them,
all our Scruples began to grow in us afresh. We applied our selves to the
finding out the Cause: We examined our selves, according to the Council of the
Author of the Demonstration: And we descended into our own Breast, to see if we
had not hoarded up some Prejudices that might block out those Propositions,
whose Evidence, we thought, deserved admittance. We found none at all there,
having been to that Instant very indifferent as to the truth of that
Conclusion; and supposing the Balance was not in an exact Equilibrium, we
certainly inclined toward the side of the Existence of a God, rather than the
other. So that the Prejudice which favored that Existence, was more to be
feared on our Account, than on the contrary. Moreover we were conscious to our
selves, we were not concerned at the reputation of Descartes, and that we were
untouched with Envy, with which he seems to suspect some of his Countrymen
tainted, who had declared against his Demonstrations. That encouraged us to
believe, our Scruples proceeded from the Demonstration it self, which by
Consequence, must only carry a seeming Evidence; since a real and true Evidence
of a Demonstration or a Proposition, is necessarily accompanied with a
satisfaction and tranquillity of Mind, that perceives it self enlightened in so
lively a manner, as makes it impossible to doubt or withstand the Truth. Hence
it is that maugre the Wranglings of those Descartes calls Septicks, it is
impossible to have any Scruple concerning first Principles, any ways to doubt,
if the Whole be bigger than its Part; and whether it is impossible that the
same Thing should be, and not be at the same time. Reflecting therefore upon
that Argumentation, we supposed it must needs seem evident, and at the same
time we experienced from within ourselves, that nothing was less really so. All
the Difficulty was to discover the Spring of that false Light, and to find out
what it was that dazzled, instead of clea^ing our Perspectives. We presumed we
might be understood, and our meaning thereupon be clearly explained by these
Reflections.

The Axiom that makes the first Proposition in Descartes's Reasoning, is true
but upon the Supposition of two Things. First, that the Idea of which he speaks
be a real one, that is, such a one as represents a real, at least a possible
Object. Secondly, that the Mind, which forms that Idea, be clearly convinced
that it is real. Thus because the Idea of a right-lin'd Triangle is real, and a
Geometrician acknowledges it as such, perceiving distinctly the equality of the
three Angles with two Rights, upon that Idea he may truly affirm of that
Triangle, that it has three Angles equal to two Rights.

But if the Idea is not real, or if I am not evidently assured it is so, it is
false that I can affirm a real Attribute of it, which I distinctly perceive in
it. Take for Instance, that imaginary Idea of A Mountain without a Valley, in
as much as it represents a Mountain to me, I have an Idea of an Height; yet I
can truly and absolutely affirm, that a Mountain without a Valley is high.

If the Idea is real, and yet is not evident to me that it is so, it is true
that the Attribute I distinctly apprehend in it, agrees to the thing it
represents: But it is false that I can affirm that Attribute of the thing in
Hand, or that I can demonstrate to my self that property from that Idea. As
supposing this Idea was a real one A Horse that has Perception and Sense:
Descartes that thought it was not real, could not conclude from thence, That an
Horse was capable of Pain and Pleasure; although that property is distinctly
contained in the Idea of a Being furnished with Sense and Apprehension.

That once supposed to the end, I may demonstrate the Existence of God, by that
sole Idea ( A Being absolutely perfect) it is not only requisite it should be a
real Idea, as it certainly is, but that it be evident to me, abstractedly from
all the usual Demonstrations, that that Idea is a real one, that is, that it
represents to me a real Object, at least a possible one, and no Chimera. Now I
maintain, before Descartes, that Idea is not evidently real, before the
ordinary Demonstrations: For if it be evidently real, it is either ^o of its
self, or from the Disquisition I make of the Ideas it is composed of. It is not
so of it self: For if that Idea were manifest of it self, our Mind could never
make a Problem of it, nor demand seriously of it self before the Demonstration;
Is a Being infinitely perfect, a real Being, or an Imaginary one? No more than
it could make a Question of these, Is the Whole bigger than its Part? Can a
Thing be and not be at the same time? Since they are manifestly real of
themselves. But our Mind before Demonstration, can make it self this Demand,
whether a Being absolutely perfect, is really a Being, or in Fancy only? And a
Man that never had reflected on the things that prove the Existence of a God,
would not be in the least surpised, to hear that Question seriously proposed,
as he would be, should any one ask, as if he were in Doubt, whether the Whole
is bigger than its Part. That Idea then is not manifestly real of it self. It
remains then that the Evidence of its reality must be fetched from the
Examination that we make thereon. If so, M. Descartes ought to have minded us
of that Precaution, before we entered on his Demonstration. But I prove that
antecedently to Demonstration, the reality of that Idea can neither be evident
to us of it self, nor by the discussion of the Terms contained in it. First,
because the Attribute is not comprehended in the Idea of the Subject: Since it
is not essential to a Being to be absolutely perfect. Secondly, because that
Discussion affords me many seeming Contradictions, which my Mind knows not how
to reconcile before the ordinary Demonstrations. For to examine and unravel
that Idea, which of its self is very general and confused, is to retail all
Perfections, whereof not one must be wanting to a Being absolutely perfect. Now
among those Perfections, there are some that blunt and repulse the Mind,
because she has not so great a reach as to conceive them. For Instance, that
that Being should be of it self, that that Being should be Almighty and
Independent of every thing in its acting, even to the Power of producing Beings
out of Nothing. There are others that seem to her inconsistent in the same
Subject. For instance, she conceives Liberty and Immutability, Immensity and
Indivisibility, the Properties of Bodies and of Spirits, as so many
Perfections. She sees that the Perfections which agree to several Beings
separately, must all be united in that absolutely perfect Being. Conceiving
therefore a Being absolutely perfect, the represents it at once as a free
Being, and an Immutable, as one that can desire and be averse to the same
thing, though its Will be always Unchangeable, that is, Omnipresent, without
being extended or divisible, that is, a pure Spirit, and at the same time
includes all the Perfections of Bodies possible to be produced.

Nay I dare presume to say, that this Idea thus analyz'd, in respect of a Mind,
that never made any Reflection on the Reasons that conclude the Existence of a
necessary Being, discovering so many Contradictions in that necessary Being,
would as soon represent it as an Imaginary Being, as a real one, and that, not
supposing those usual Reasons, that prove to us a first cause of all Beings,
and the Reflections that follow them, we should as easily regard that Being as
impossible as possible. From whence I at least conclude, that the Idea of a
Being absolutely perfect, cannot be looked on as an Idea undoubtedly real, by
him that examins it, before his Acquaintance with the ordinary Demonstrations.
Consequently, that he that examins it cannot absolutely attribute Existence to
that Being, and which is the same thing, cannot demonstrate to himself the
Existence of a God, from the Idea of a Being infinitely perfect.

The defect therefore of Descartes's Paralogism, consists in this, that he
supposes, before any Demonstrations, the Idea of a Being absolutely perfect, to
be taken by the Mind for real, and as having a real Object, which is palpably
false.

All this discovers the Original of the Scruples all the World have had, as to
that Demonstrations, and which those themselves have not been clear of, whom
the difficulty of resolving so subtle a Paralogism has drawn over to
Descartes's Party, who doubtless had they been honest and sincere, must have
confessed they still felt some disquiet in their Mind on that Particular; and
that it was by mere Violence they had at last accustomed their Understanding to
tell them, that Demonstration was evident. This was the Fault which some felt,
rather than saw, that made them deny Existence to be enclosed in the Idea of a
Being infinitely perfect. For absolutely speaking, although it is comprised in
the Catalogue of Perfections, appropriate to that Being, yet the Mind to which
the Idea was not manifestly real, took it not in, and excluded it, in making
that very Problem, Does a Being absolutely perfect Exist? Until the Arguments
independent of that Idea had resolved the Problem, and convinced it that such a
Being did Exist.

And let not Descartes say, that that Idea including nothing but Perfections,
it is evident it includes nothing but what is Real; for a Chimerous Idea may be
composed of only Real Ideas; here then is one exactly like that we are in
dispute of, A Triangle that has all the Perfections of Triangles. That Idea,
though it includes nothing besides real Perfections, is notwithstanding a
Chimera, since for Instance a rectangled Triangle has opposite Properties to
those of an Equilateral, and that Opposition is the reason they are
inconsistent with one another. So, though all the Perfections of Beings are
real, it does not follow that that Idea, A Being that has all the Perfections
of Beings, should be a real Idea; and the Opposition I observe betwixt some of
those Perfections, naturally influences my Mind, unless prevented by the
ordinary Demonstrations, to doubt, at least, whether that Idea is not a
Chimera, as well as the other I have been speaking of. From hence it is that in
pursuance to the Demonstrations that convince me of the Existence of that
Being, but that give me no clear and distinct Knowledge of its Essence, I
confine my self to say, That Being must contain the Perfections of all other
Beings eminently, that is to say, in a way I don't conceive, and which would
never have come into my Head, or at least would never have been looked on by me
as certainly and evidently possible, unless I had been convinced of the
Existence of the first Being, before the discussion of its Essence.

That Solution of Descartes's first Paralogism, made way to the discovery of
that other Default of his, where he concludes the Existence of God from the
objective reality of the Idea (as he speaks) which we have of God. That Idea,
(says he) which I find in my Mind, has an infinite objective reality, since it
represents to me an infinite Being. Therefore it has that infinite Being for
its cause; therefore an infinite Being exists: For otherwise the Effect would
have perfections, that were not in its cause.

Those who have undertook that arguing, give us to understand, they have found
it to be a greater Paralogism than the former, and bring many Reasons for it,
which M. Descartes refutes as well as he is able: For my own Part, my Opinion
is, That M. Descartes supposes in that Reasoning, what lay on him to be proved:
For he not only supposes that that Idea has an objective reality, but farther,
that I can be ascertained independently of the common Demonstrations, that it
effectively has an objective Reality, or that it has a Real and not an
imaginary Object: But I am incapable of knowing whether its Object be real or
imaginary, before the Demonstrations, as I have already proved: And if I can
doubt whether that Object is not a Chimera, I cannot suppose it has an
Objective Reality, but ought to fear it has an Objective Vanity, if I may be
allowed so to speak; and in that Case I can by no means conclude, That God has
impressed it on my Mind, and consequently that there is a God: But I ought to
think, That probably it proceeds from nothing, as Descartes expresses himself,
That is, from an Imperfection of Mind that has produced it, as it could
produce this same a Mountain without a Valley. Hence it is clear and manifest,
that those two pretended Demonstrations are mere Paralogisms, and that both are
maimed and lame in the same part, and defective on the same account.

Besides, M. Descartes can never demonstrate to me the Truth of the
Proposition, on which all his reasoning depends; viz. That the Cause of an Idea
ought to contain formally or eminently all the Perfections which the Idea
represents; for when it is said, The Cause contains all the Perfections of the
effect, that is not meant, nor is it evidently true, but of such Perfections as
the effect possesses, and not of those it only represents; for the Perfections
the Idea represents, are not the Perfections of the Idea, the only Perfection
of the Idea being to represent all those Perfections: A Quality that has
nothing of Infinite in it, and consequently supposes not an infinite Cause.

I say that Quality includes nothing of Infinity, because the Perfection of an
Idea is not measured by the Dignity of the Object that it represents, but by
the manner wherewith it represents it; which being most imperfect in the Case
before us, cannot be infinite. And this single Instance which I subjoyn to all
that Descartes's Adversaries have said upon the Matter, is sufficient to show,
That the Proposition on which is grounded his whose Reasoning, will not pass
for a Principle of a Demonstration.

Lastly, continued the Chinese, Supposing the Reasonings of that Philosopher
were not false or sophistical, they would scarce merit the Name of
Demonstrations in the Subject they proceed upon: There never can be
Demonstrations of the Existence of a God, whilst they are not received as such,
that is, whilst they are not received as convincing Arguments beyond reply, the
Truth of which is so prevalent as to destroy all contrary Prejudice. Now dark
and clouded Minds can never be pierced by that Metaphysical Subtilty: Those of
a middle Rank find themselves perplexed, whether by their Prejudices, or for
want of Penetration; most of those of the first and most exalted Order,
discover in them, or think they do discover very knotty Difficulties. All this
put together makes one general Prejudice on their Consideration, that never
read them, and which might warrant their Prudence to conclude, if there were no
other Demonstrations of the Existence of God, there were certainly noneat all.
So that my Advice to your Philosopher and his Followers is, Not so highly to
prefer his Demonstrations before those commonly made use of: For if it be true
that all others are inevident in comparison of these, very mischievus
Consequences might be drawn from that Principle, against the Existence of a
First Being, of which the Libertines (if I may judge by those of the Empire of
China) would not fail to make advantage.

Whether the Spirit that drove on the Cloud, on which the Mandarin was horsed,
and which was one of the grimmest and blackest Devils in all Hell, grew sowr'd
and uneasy at these Discourses, from which Inferences might be drawn very
prejudicial to the Interests of the Sabbath, or whether the Mandarin was
himself in haste, and expected to hear nothing new upon that Affair, he had no
sooner uttered that last Sentence, but we saw him on a sudden hurried toward
the East with an incredible Swiftness.

Father Mersennus, that stood on Thorns to give him Answer, could not forbear
following him, and kept him Pace for above thirty Degrees. He returned to us
about a quarter of an Hour after, and spoke a little angrily. It is strange how
the Enemies of Descartes make their Insults, and treacherously fall upon us,
then betake them to their Heels, without giving us so much as Time to put our
selves in a Posture of Defense, and to reply to that noisy Trumpery which they
think to put off at the rate of Oracles: If the Mandarin, no less than
Aristotle had relied upon their Forces, and believed, as they pretend, their
Arguments a Match for Descartes, they would not have shrunk when they were to
grapple, and would at least have tarried the Answer that was to be made them;
but these are Donquixots of Knight Errants, that bravado it by discharging a
Pistol in the Air, and never stand to it before the Enemy, which they make as
if they did encounter. But in the Time that I have accompanied our Mandarin, I
have overturned his Ideas: He has promised me that this Day twelvemonth he will
be again in Mersennus, where we shall have a fair and leisurely Conference upon
Descartes's Demonstrations; then, Gentlemen, I desire your Company, said he,
and if I do not convince my Gentleman, so as to stop his Mouth for the future,
I Will commence Peripatetick on the Spot, and utterly renounce Cartesianism. We
promised him to wait on him at that Time: But, Father, said I, we have been
long upon the Road, yet have made no great Progress in our Journey, I desire we
may dispatch it as soon as possible, for I am in fear for my Body, and would
not for a World it should stay without me above four and twenty Hours. With
that he looked toward the Earth, to see what Hour it was, and told me, it was
but seven Hours since we left France, and provided we made no Halts in our way,
in five Hours, at latest, we shall arrive in Descartes's World.

So we left Mersennus, and departed from the Moon, by the Northside of that
Globe; we made toward the Starry Heaven with all the Speed we were capable of;
that is to say, in one Minute we compassed many thousand Leagues. It is a
prodigious, and inconceivable thing, the multitude of the Stars; a Man can
discover from the Earth, with the best Glasses, but a very inconsiderable Part,
in respect of those that lie out of Sight. We crossed the Sign Sagittary, where
I took pleasure in observing the principal Stars, that are usually described on
the Celestial Globes; that Sign resembles an Archer near as much as I resemble
an House; whereof yo^ may imagine my two Eyes the Windows, my two Arms the
Jettings that flank the Main of the Lodgings, represen^^d by the rest of my
Body.

Had I a mind to divert my self, as Ovid does, in his Description of the
Chariot of Phaeton, I might make a thousand pretty Astronomical Allusions, and
could create in my Road many new Zodiacks, in which a multitude of Animals
celebrated in the Fables that some have left behind them upon Earth, might take
place, and have Reparation made for the Wrongs done them by the capriciousness
of Poets and Astronomers, that have given the Pre-eminence to others of perhaps
not half so great Worth and Magnitude: But the Reader may easily imagine to
himself all that. I shall say no more of the Conferences we had in the rest of
our Voyage, where I was little more than Auditor. The two Peripateticks held a
Dispute almost all the way with Father Mersennus and the old Gentleman, upon
several Points of the New Philosophy, but all they said amounted to little more
than may be seen in Father de la Grange and other Books, that treat of such
sort of Things. It pleased me to see with what Heat each maintained his Party,
and endeavored to draw me over to it; but I was satisfied in praising first
one and then the other, without giving up my self to either, and only took upon
me the Quality of Arbitrator, (which they seemed by common Consent to award me)
for the moderating the too great Vehemence and Zeal for the Sect that sometimes
transported them a little farther than was allowable. Mean while I took notice,
That Father Mersennus, that conducted us, made us still leave, from Time to
Time, the direct Road, to fetch a Compass about, and aimed to keep us at a
Distance from the Body of the Stars, or, to speak in the Cartesian Phrase, from
the Center of the Vortexes. I demanded the reason of his doing so; telling him,
one of my greatest Curiosities would be to contemplate a Star at hand, and to
consider the Motion of the subtle Matter in the Center of the Vortex, and that,
that was the readiest way to convince me there were Vortexes, such as Descartes
has described. He answered, it would be more convenient to satisfy my
Curiosity as I returned, after that M. Descartes had himself explained the
different Determinations, the Subtle Matter is capable of, in a Vortex; that
thereby I should better take his Meaning, and before that it would be but a new
Subject of Confusion to my self, and of cavilling to the Peripatetick
Gentlemen. It behoved him to hold to that, and I had from thence forward but a
very ill Opinion of the Vortexes, of which I saw no likelihood in the Motions
of the Matter at a good Remove from the Stars. But at last we arrived to the
Third Heaven, which was the End of our Voyage. The Occurrences, that happened
in my Stay there, shall be the Subject of the Third Part of my Relation.

A VOYAGE TO The World of Cartesius.
PART III.
THE Third Heaven of the World of Descartes, is the same with what the
Philosophers heretofore called the Imaginary Spaces; but seeing the Word
Imaginary seemed to import nothing but what was Chimerical, and in the
Imagination only he chose rather to term it the Indefinite Spaces. There have
not been wanting some that have started Difficulties upon the Term Indefinite,
which in several Places he seems to substitute in the Place of Infinite,
without any Necessity; but at last his Disciples have made it al-a-mode, and
Custom has warranted its Use. As soon as I set Footing in those vast Regions,
I descried indeed the finest and most advantageous Place possible to be
imagined for the Building of a World in, nay for the Construction of Millions
and Infinite Worlds, but I saw no Materials proper to begin, or to make the
least Part of so great an Edifice.

Having traveled six or seven thousand Leagues without any News of Tidings of
Descartes, we agreed to separate our selves, that we might find him out the
easier: Father Mersennus took one way, the Old Gentleman and I, with the two
Peripatetick Souls the other. In short, Father Mersennus found him, and quickly
after we had parted, we saw them both together, making toward us. The obliging
way wherewith he received me, certified me, T^^t Father Mersennus had given him
a good Character of me, and spoke of me as a Man that in Time would prove one
of his most zealous Followers. He likewise very respectfully saluted the two
Peripateticks, but gave them to understand the Pains they had taken, in coming
to treat of an Accommodation with him, were manifestly to very little purpose:
That Father Mersennus had already sufficiently advised him of the Propositions
they designed to offer, which he assured them he should not be very forward to
condescend to; notwithstanding he would give them a favorable Audience, and
satisfy them beforehand he had no ill Design upon the Kingdom of Aristotle;
thereupon, giving Orders to Father Mersennus to entertain the two Gentlemen, he
accosted the Old Sage and my self in particular.

The Discourse began with the ample Protestations of Friendship, M. Descartes
and the Old Stager made each other, mutually expressing the Joy they had in
seeing one another: The Old Gentleman, out of hand took upon him to make my
Elogy, speaking a thousand fine obliging things of me to Descartes; especially
he cried up the uninterested Love I had for Truth, the Desire of Learning that
always had appeared in me, and the Readiness I had promised, to embrace the
Instructions, in the Inquest of which I had made so long a Voyage. I waved, as
modestly as possible the other Praises that were given me; but added, That for
the Love of Truth and Desire of Learning, I must stand up, as for my only
considerable Accomplishments; that as to the Readiness I had engaged to receive
M. Descartes's Instructions, that ought not to come into the Account, since a
Master of his Character and Worth, and a Genius so Admirable and Transcendent
beyond all others, as his was, had Right to demand and require that entire
Submission from all that pretended to Wisdom or Equity in the World.

You are pleased to carry your Compliment a little too high, replied M.
Descartes, and I question whether the generality of those that are reputed the
Wise and Equitable Persons of the World, would subscribe to that Homage and
Submission you their Representative vouch for them: I question too, according
to the Rules of Physionomy of Spirits, whether I ought to build much upon that
pretended Tractableness, wherein you pride your self so much; methinks I
perceive still at bottom of your Soul some kind of, I know not what,
Prejudices, that indispose it for the Knowledge of Truth. Tell me, in beholding
this vast Space, (continued he) what is it you think you see? Monsieur, ( I
replied) that is a perplexing Question, but to convince you that I speak from
my Heart, in promising to be instructive, I will make Answer to your Question
just as my Thoughts are of it: According to you I ought to say, That beholding
the great Space, I see a Body or Matter; but without Dissimulation, methinks,
in effect I see just Nothing.

At that my Old Sophister tipped the Wink upon me, which I took not at that
instant, nor understood the Meaning of it till after. It Is enough, says M.
Descartes, let us talk of someting else: Give me an account, pray, how goes
Philosophy in your World, if you have any News of it; for these many Years I
have been ignorant almost of all the Concerns there, as well from the
Indifference and Disregard I have found in me ever since my quitting the Body,
for the Sentiments of Men, as that Monsieur here, who is the only Person that
has visited me since, having retired in the Country many Years ago, has been
incapable of hearing the Particulars of Affairs that concern Cartesianism,
contenting himself to learn, and to assure me from Time to Time, my Philosophy
continued still to have very many Friends, and very many Enemies.

And I am not much better instructed, I answered, with what regards your Sect,
having but begun to interest my self in its Affairs, since those few Days I
have had the Honor of this Gentleman's Acquaintance; however, I will inform
you of all that I could hear, or that has come to my Knowledge, without giving
my self much Trouble of Enquiry. Your Philosophy, as you know, was set up with
all the Advantages and Disadvantages of Novelty, and it has experienced the
Fortune which all New Doctrins use to find. Many there are that have embraced
it with Admiration, and defended it with Earnestness and Passion. It has met
with the Patronage and Protection of Persons commendable for their Parts,
Capacity and Politeness; but almost all Bodies and Universities have rejected
it, and declared against it: Each acted in that as in all things else,
according to the Principle of Self-interest: Some took your Side, as
apprehending themselves thereby distinguished and advancd above the Herd;
others denied it, as fearing the diminution of their Credit: The Motive and
Pretense of both Parties was the Love of Truth and incorrupt Doctrine. The
Posture of present Affairs has almost the same Face still; yet if we judge by
the Books, whether of Philosophy or Medicine, brought from England, Holland and
Germany, Cartesianism has made very considerable Progress in those Parts.
Scarce once in an Age is printed any Course of Philosophy according to the
Method of the Schools; and almost all the Works of that Nature, that at this
Time are public in France, are Physical Tracts that suppose the Principles of
the New Philosophy: Such Books as treat of an Universal, of Metaphysical
Degrees of Ens Rationis, create Fears in the Booksellers Minds; they will cumber
themselves with no more of them, and endeavor to rid their Hands of all that
they have left, at any rate, as Merchants do their Stuffs when the Fashion's
over. All those Questions, heretofore so famous, wherewith the Presses have
groaned for almost two hundred Years, and that have found Employment for so
many Printers, are no where heard of but in the Schools of the Public
Professors. Out of the Desks there is no talk of the Thomists, the Scotists and
the Nominals, at least there is no Distinction made betwixt them; all are
numbered in the same Predicament, and on the same Side which they call the Old
Philosophy, to which is opposed the Philosophy of Descartes, or the New
Philosophy.

You have had the good Fortune with your Luster to efface all the New
Philosophers that have risen both in and since your Time; and to make use of a
Comparison, that bating the Odium of the Subject it is taken form, has nothing
in it but what makes for your Renown; As in Spain the Name of Lutheran is
indifferently given to all Heretics of whatever Sect or Faction, so the Title
of Cartesian is attributed to all those that have undertaken to make
Refinements in Point of Natural Philosophy. I have seen more than one bold
Venturer, that in full Dispute has listed Gassendus among your Followers,
though you was undoubtedly his Junior by several Years: And I know a certain
College, where the Professor durst not speak of Insensible Matter, of the Rules
of Motion, of the Perspicuity of Ideas, lest he should be forthwith accused of
Cartesianism.

For the rest (excepting in the Exercises of some Honest Religious Persons,
that doubtless have no ill Design, but not having read you, would yet assume to
themselves the Honor of engaging you) that treating you as an Atheist, is
quite out of Doors, as is the making that Proposition a Precedent for your
Religion, which you advance in the Entrance on your Metaphysics, That we must
doubt of every Thing; yet some of the finest and clearest Heads do not stick
seriously to affirm, That the late Conversions of the Huguenots in France have
robbed you of many Disciples; for upon their Conviction of the Real Presence of
the Sacred Body of I. C. in the Eucharist, they confidently assert the Falsity
of some of your Principles, which they are at a Fault to reconcile with the
Reality of that Mystery.

But no matter, all such as have a sound and unprejudiced Notion of Things,
though they stand diameter to your Opinions, do you Justice, and give you an
Encomium that seems none of the least; which is, that they acknowledge you have
opened the Eyes of the Philosophers of our Times to the Discovery of the Rises
of their Method in Philosophy, by that just and reasonable Reproach of the
little Concern they had, for the most part, to dive to the Bottom of the Things
they treat of, whether in Metaphysics or in Physics, and the little
Application they bring with them, both in framing to themselves and giving
their Disciples clear and distinct Ideas of the Things disputed of; the Abuse
that was made of the subtilty of Mind, perverted only to the multiplying
Wranglings and trifling Disputes, to the inventing of new Equivocal Terms, to
the confounding rather than enlightening certain abstracted Questions, prudently
enough introduced the Schools, for Exercise and an Occasion of Dispute and
Emulation, to the Minds of Youth, but ridiculously made the main Stress and
Essentials of Philosophy, that from thence had degenerated into an Empty
Science, composed of Words and Terms that signify nothing: The little
Observation made upon Experience, that is the Mother of Philosophy: The
implicit Dependence they had on the Sentiment of another, often superficially
considered and ill understood.

I can also assure you, that kind of Advice, though envidiously at first
received, has not failed of its Effect. The Desk-Philosophy has changed its
Countenance in the principal Colleges of France. The most ingenious of the
Professors affect to treat of the ordinary Questions, and those that are most
crabbed with greater Solidity and Method, with more Justness and Exactness,
persuaded that those Questions thus handled have a greater Power than is
imagined to form a Juvenile Mind, if it is capable of it, to render it Correct
and Just, to accustom it insensibly to make those so necessary Abstractions, in
order to the avoiding Mistakes and Fallacies in the Train of a Reasoning, spun
through a Discourse, in the Examination of a Mathematical Demonstration, the
Discussion of a Physical Experiment, or perhaps a Political Interest or Concern.

Since when Men are more shy of calling the Proofs they bring for their
Opinions, Demonstrations, they are not so eager to declare War against those
that talk otherwise than themselves, and that often say the same thing. They
have learned to doubt of certain Axioms that have hitherto been held Sacred and
Inviolable, and upon Examination have sometimes found them unworthy of so great
a Title. Occult Qualities are under a Suspicion, and a Cloud, having lost
considerably of their Reputation. The Horror of a Vacuum is no where received
but in the Shools, where no one will be at the charge of Glass Tubes, and
certain Instruments which manifestly prove the absurdity of that hackney'd
Solution, that has been constantly given to the most curious and extraordinary
Phenomena's of Nature. All sort of Experiments are daily made. That of the
Gravity of the Air is tried a thousand different ways; and there is scarce any
little Pretender to Physic in the Town, but has at his Fingers ends the
History of M. Paschal's Experiment.

Here M. Descartes, interrupting me, demanded what was that Experiment of M.
Paschal? I answered, it was that made in the year, 1648. upon the Well of Domme
with Torricelli's Tube. Wherein the Quick Silver was observed to fall a great
deal lower at the top of the Mountain, than in the middle, or at the bottom;
from whence has been evidently concluded the Gravity of the Air. Does that,
replied M. Descartes, go by the Name of M. P. -- 's Experiment? It is then,
because he put it in Practice, or rather because he occasioned it to be
practiced by M. Perrier; for assuredly it is not because he invented it, or
foresaw the Success. And if that Experiment ought to bear the Name of its
Author, it might more truly be entitled, the Experiment of Descartes. For it
was I that desired him two years before to make the Trial, Let. 77. Tom. 3.
and assured him of the Success, as being entirely conformable to my
Principles, without which it had never come into his Head, being he was of the
contrary Opinion. That Man is Fortunate, continued M. Descartes, in point of
Reputation. A great many Persons were formerly made to believe he had composed
a Book of Coniques, extracted from himself by the mere dint of Reason, at
sixteen years of Age: That Book was sent me; and before I had read it half,
Tom. 2. Let. 38.
I concluded he had made great Advantage of Monsieur des Argues's Instructions;
which Conjecture, a little after was confirmed by his own Confession. What you
say ( replied I) a little surprises me; for in the Preface to a Tract, De l'
Equilibre des Liqueurs, Printed after M. P. -- 's Death, your Testimony is
quoted upon that Particular, and it is not altogether conformable to that you
give at present: For there is no notice taken of the assistance he received
from M. des Argues. It is only said, the thing appeared to you so prodigiously
uncredible, that you would not believe it. But that you was persuaded that M. P
-- the Father, was the genuine Author of the Piece, but was willing to confer
the Honor on his Son. I know not, said he, what they have made me speak or
think in that Preface, but I am very well assured I say nothing at present, but
what I had wrote in plain Terms to Father Mersennus, Tom. 2. Let. 38.
after I had seen the Work.

After all, said I, Monsieur, I am not much surpised that M. Paschal at
sixteen years of Age, without any foreign Succor, wrote a Book of Coniques,
and by chance jumpt in his Thoughts with M. Descartes; he that at twelve years
old, before the sight of any Books of Geometry, made himself particular
Definitions, Figures, then Axioms, and pushed on his Notices so far, that when
he was caught at his Operations, he was already arrived to the thirty second
Proposition of the first Book of Euclide, which he had never read.

Do you credit that, said M. Descartes? Why should I not, said I! It is so
affirmed and circumstanc'd in the Preface, I have mentioned, as leaves no room
to doubt of it. M. Paschal, the Father, desirous that his Sons (...) time
should be employed in the gaining of the Tongue, which he taught him himself,
was cautious to conceal from him the very Names of things, that are used in
Mathematics, and constantly forbore to mention 'em to his. Friends when he was
present: Notwithstanding according to the Author of the Preface, The Passion
that Child had for such sort of Science, joined to his piercing Understanding,
served him instead of a Master; seeing his Tasks that were ordered him, robbed
him of all other opportunities, but his Hours of Recreation (a Circumstance
very remarkable) he laid out all he could of those in these Speculations. He
was constrained, says he, to make his own Definitions, calling a Circle a
Round, a Line a Bar, and so of the rest. After his Definitions, he made him
Axioms; and as we: proceed from one thing to another in that Science, he
carried his Researches so far, that he was arrived to the thirty second
Proposition of Euclide. As he had made that Progress, his Father accidently
entered the Room he was in, and found him so attentive on the Proposition he was
upon, that it was a good while before he took notice of his Approach. But it
was a far greater Surprise to him, upon his Demand, What he was a doing? To
hear him say, He was in search of such a Thing, which was exactly the thirty
second Proposition of the first Book of Euclide. He asked him then, What made
him think of that? He answered, it was his Discovery of such an other Thing;
thus, as it were, analyzing and explaining his meaning still, by the Names of a
Bar and a Round, he came down to the Definitions and Axioms of his own
Contrivance. M. Paschal was so astonished at the greatness and force of his
Son's Genius, that leaving him, without speaking another Word, he went at the
same juncture to a Friend's House of his, one M. Pailleur, admirable in the
Mathematics. When he came there, he stood immovable as a Statue, and as a Man
transported. M. Pailleur observing that, and seeing him in Tears, was very much
affrighted, and prayed him to conceal no longer from him the cause of his
Displeasure. I weep not, said M. Paschal, out of any Grief, but Joy. You know
what pains I have still taken to prevent all Knowledge of Geometry in my Son,
for fear it should take him off his other Studies. Yet see what he has done;
upon that he related all to him that I have said: And M. Paschal, by the Advice
of his Friend, desisted to offer violence to his Son's Inclinations, who was
yet but a dozen years of Age, and gave him an Euclide.

Seriously, said I to M. Descartes, do you think a Man could have the Face to
circumstantiate a Lie so methodically as this? Could any thing seem more
probable than the Circles he calls Rounds, and the Lines that he calls Bars?
Is not that enough to persuade us of the Truth of his Axioms, and the thirty
second Proposition of Euclide? What can be more Natural, than the Surprizal of
M. Paschal the Father, excepting perhaps it was a little too long, who took
thereupon his Cloak, and ordered his Horses to be put in the Coach, yet
remained, at his Arrival at M. Pilleur's House, in so immovable a posture, as
was capable to scare him? After all it is very fine and extraordinary, and it
would be great pity it should be false.

And I say ( replied M. Descartes) it is greater pity that it should be true,
and that any should believe it: For if once it be credited, that a Child of
twelve years old, that has never seen a Book of Geometry, and in whose
Presence all endeavors have been used to suppress the very Name of it, whose
Mind all day long was taken up with quite different Notices, who had no time to
spare but his hours of Recreation, which no Body probably ordered him to pass
away in Solitude, should be able to frame to himself a Method of Geometry,
invent Axioms, and arrive at last to the thirty second Propositon of Euclide, I
say, if such like things be once received for Truth, the Public will become
the Subject and Game on which, in a short time, the most Romantic Panegyrists
shall sport the Extravagancies of their Imaginations. That way of praising is
injurious to the Persons praised, and a Commendation so improbable as that,
renders the Truths themselves suspected, that shall be found in Company with
it. M. Paschal was a Man of a most exalted Capacity, but was far from being an
Angel or a Devil. I told M. Descartes thereupon, I chanced into a Company not
long since, where one was speaking much to the same purpose as he had done,
upon this Topic, and there fortuned a Gentleman to be there, a Friend to a
Society that was under no mighty Obligations to M. P. who seeing all People
ridicule that Fable, said, in a careless leering Air, that the Author of the
Preface and his Friends, did, at most, but Justice to M. Paschal* and that they
had rather been too backward in that they had said no more; and as he was urged
to unmask himself, as to the meaning of a thing every one perceived he was not
very serious in, he added, That Hyperbole, as extravagant as it looked to him,
appeared but a very mean return for the Obligations they were under, for his
Letters to the Provincial, in which he had done 'em very signal Favors that
were worth these, and that were on a more important Occasion. To which all
agreed, and 'twas acknowledged M. Paschal's Services to those Gentlemen could
not be repaid in a better Coin. Yet I must needs tell you M. P. wrote only, by
the Memoirs that were given him, and that he thought true, as false and
precarious as they were, not knowing the Spirit of a Party wherein he was
engaged. Undoubtedly he was rather over-reached himself, than any design he had
to impose on others. Let us say no more on this occasion; and M. Descartes
recalled me to the Chapter concerning Cartesianism.

He inquired then, what Strength he had in the Universities, and most
celebrated Colleges of France? And how his Doctrine was looked upon there? I
told him, without Ceremony, what I knew concerning it: That I knew no College
that openly professed his Doctrine, that most of them were discharged from
Teaching of it: That in the University of Paris, extreme care was taken lest
the Professors should give too much liberty on that side: That Cartesianism had
been the Debate of several Assemblies, and how that I had heard, from some
Body, that it had been talked of putting it down by an Act of Parliament; it
was proposed to the late Chief President, M. de la Moignon, but that that
Expedient was not prosecuted. That the University of Caen, which next to that
of Paris is the most flourishing, at least, for Philosophy, had in one Thousand
six Hundred Seventy seven, declared against that Doctrine, and condemned it as
contrary to Orthodox Divinity; denying all hopes to any that should undertake
to maintain it, of their admission to any Degree in the University; and
forbiding all such as were already admitted, the teaching it viva voce, or by
Writing, upon pain of forfeiting their Privileges and Degrees; that the
Example of Angers had been imitated therein, that two years before had made the
like Decrees, which had been confirmed by a Placart of the King put forth at
Versailles in the year, 1675. and that most of the other Universities had gone
in imitation of the same Proceedings.

This News chafed M. Descartes. And what, said he, has no one in these
occasions undertaken my Defense? Would no Corporation, no Community declare for
my Doctrine? We have seen whole Orders take on them the quality of Scotists and
Thomists, and to carry the Interests, some of an Universal a part rei, others
of an Universal a part mentis, sometimes beyond the Bounds of a laudable
Emulation; whilst a Philosophy so Solid and Curious as mine, shall be abandoned
to the Humors and Caprice of the Universities. I had pardoned the Hollanders,
that their ill-natured Behavior, who were not obliged indeed to have those
Considerations for a Stranger, as I was in respect of them; but I could never
have believed they would have treated me so in France, my Native Country; to
which I am sure I have given much Honor and Reputation. Why were my Bones
translated from Sweden to Paris, if at the same time they entombed them with
Pomp and Funeral Elogies, they blasted my Memory throughout the Kingdom? I
quitted, it is true, the World, a little with the soonest: But after all, I left
it not before I had acquired a most wonderful Esteem. I had taken infallible
Measures for the securing my Party: And my Affairs had never been reduced to so
damned a Plight, had my Disciples trod in my Steps, and kept their Eye exactly
on my Views and my Designs.

For I must confess, said he, I was not exempt from the Weakness and Blind Side
of all Leaders of a Sect. I was concerned for the Progress of my own, though I
feigned to seem as indifferent for that as any thing else; and the Hopes I had
one Day to see it take Place of all the rest, served as an Incentive to
encourage my Endeavors: I had drawn up my self a System of my Management, for
the accomplishing my Design. My first Prospect was that of cajoling the
Jesuits, and sounding them, to try if I could engage them in my Interests, or
at least make a Party among them; that would have been a Parting-Blow indeed,
and my Affairs for ever after would have stood secure of any Rival or
Competitor: They are possessed of the Colleges of the principal Towns in
France, and there are among them a great many Men of excellent Sense, and
capable of protecting my Opinions, if once they were admitted. Diverses Let.
de Des^. Tom: 3.
I sent them my Works, desiring them to examine them, and assuring them, I
would submit them to their Judgment. Circumstances were very favorable at that
Juncture; their Provincial was my Countryman, my Friend, and my Relation: My
Regent in Philosophy, who was still living, and whom I had observed to be a
better Naturalist than most of the Philosophers of that Time, wished me very
well. In short, I questioned not my Success; but I was highly surpised upon
Father Mersennus his acquainting me from Paris that Father Bourdin, the
Mathematician of the Jesuits College, had published Theses in opposition to my
Docrin. Those were the first that appeared against me in France; such a
Thunderclap as that gave me quickly to understand how the Society stood
affected, and how little Stress I ought to lay upon the Friendship of some
Particulars. Not long after the same Mathematician wrote against my
Meditations, in no very serious Style, turning them to Droll and Ridicule;
which occasioned on my part a very smart and vigorous Answer. I complained
thereof to Father Dinet, in a Letter that I printed with my Meditations: In a
Word, an open Breach was made betwixt the Jesuits and my self. I desired Father
Mersennus very carefully to watch the Behavior of the Fathers toward me, and
to give me Intelligence of all. I made a Resolution too to fall upon them, and
confute some one of their Printed Courses that was most in Vogue; but I
desisted from that Design for some particular Reasons.

Mean while I had another String to my Bow: There was set up a Party at that
Time in France, diametrically opposite to the Jesuits, composed of those who
write themselves S. Austin's Disciples, and who were zealous Sticklers for M.
Iansenius, the Bishop of Ypres his Doctrine. Monsieur Arnauld, as young a Doctor
as he was, had already got an extraordinary Fame: In the concern I had with him
upon account of some Objections he raised against my Meditations, which I
answered with the greatest Expression of Esteem I had for his Intellectual
Capacity, I found out what he was, that is, a Man ambitious of Distinction and
Novelty, and of whom one might be sure, if once one had engaged him in a Party,
recommendable with those two Temptations: Therefore I was well assured of him;
and I believe the Resentment I expressed toward the Jesuits, was that which
most endeared him: This fell out so well, that from thenceforth you should not
see a Iansenist Philosopher that was not a Cartesian. It was likewise these
Gentlemen that brought Philosophy in Fashion among the Ladies; and I had Advice
from Paris at that Time, That nothing was more customary in their
Dressing-Rooms than the Parallel of Monsieur d'Ypres and de Molina, of
Aristotle and Descartes.

I dreamed next of hooking in some Fraternity or other; well-remembring what I
used to hear the late M. Iansenius say, That such sort of People espouse an
Interest without knowing what it is; and he was of Advice it would be of no
small moment for his S. Austin to be seconded with some such Herd; because,
added he, when they are once imbarqu'd, nothing can put a Stop to them pro and
contra. I had an Eye upon the Minim Fryens, upon the Score of Father Mersennus,
who was my intimate Friend, and in great Repute with the Order; but I
considered that though those Fathers had Men of Parts and Learning among them,
yet they were little abroad, and taught not publicly: Again, Father Mersennus
assured me, That if the Matter was brought before the Chapter, Aristotle's
Party would infallibly carry it, 'cause of the Old ones, who had for a long
Time equipt themselves with all sorts of Philosophical Furniture, and would
never be at the Charge of suting themselves afresh.

You did well in avoiding that Game ( interrupted our Old Gentleman) for since
that a Father of their Order, one Father Magnan, a Rational, Understanding Man,
striking a little out of the Usual Road, and treading in a new Track, has, as I
am informed, been chastis'd in a General Chapter, and Prohibitions have been
made for any to embrace his Principle; and since the main of their Studies as
well as of other Seminaries, are Metaphysics and Divinity: What is properly
called Physics is not very current; the Offensive and Defensive League entered
by several Orders for Physical Predetermination, against Mean Science, is the
grand concern that has found them Employment for almost an hundred Years.

And it will continue them in Employment still, ( replied M. Descartes) for the
same Reason as made me take those Measures I speak of, that is, because
Predetermination and Mean Science are become the Sentiments of the Order and
Community; a Quality I designed to give my Philosophy, to eternalize it: But,
however, when I quitted the World, I left Things in so good a tendency that
way, as encouraged me to hope I had a main Party in the Congregation of the
Fathers of the Oratory. It is a considerable Body in France, whose Business is
Study, many whereof have rendered themselves Famous by their Knowledge and their
Writings. The Emulation that is between them and the Jesuits, with a Salvo to
the Esteem and Respect they have for one another, was enough to procure me an
Hearing in their Congregation: What, have those Fathers forsaken me?

You make me call to Mind, said I thereupon, some Passages in that Business,
that may be worth your Hearing. I know not whether you have reason to be
satisfied or dissatisfied with the Reverend Fathers, you shall be Judge your
self. About ten or a dozen Years ago there happened some Divisions in the
University of Angers, occasioned by the Fathers of the Oratory's defending
certain Theses, wherein much New Philosophy was interwoven, partly according to
your Principles, partly according to the particular Notions of the Professors:
Recueil de ce qui s^est pass en l' Vniversite d^ Angers.
The University took alarm at Sight of those Innovations, and would not suffer
the Theses to pass: She gave the Court an Account of it, and the Father
General. The Court was inclined for the University, which obliged the Father
General to order in the Congregation, That no one should swerve from the
Ancient Opinions, or any ways teach the New Philosophy. But here comes a Cup of
Comfort for you; speedily after came out a Printed Letter, penned in excellent
Latin, to the Reverend Father Senault, General of the Oratory, entitled,
Epistola eorum quotquot in Oratoriana Congregatione Cartesianam doctrinam
amant: Wherein, after having laid down the Motives that induced them to beseech
him not to straiten and infringe their Minds; on that Particular were added
these Words, ut noris quam late Cartesiana haec labes, (si labes est) --
grassetur. Plusquam ducenti numero sumus, quos pestis ista infecit.

Hereby you see what Strength you had in that Congregation: Which yet was no
Impediment to the Proceedure and Decree of the General Assembly of the Oratory
in 1678. declaring she embraced no Party; but that she always had, and would
still maintain that Freedom and Privilege of preserving Sound and wholesome
Doctrine; and that she laid restraint on none but such as were censured by the
Church, or as savored of the Sentiments of Iansenius and Baius in Divinity, or
of the Opinions of Descartes in Philosophy.

Oh the Base and Cowardly -- cried M. Descartes, all enraged. Softly, Monsieur,
I replied, if you your self had headed a Corporation, whose Essential Interests
you had engaged to maintain, you would have had very different Thoughts from
those you now have under the Quality of a Leader of a Sect. Neither Prudence
nor Conscience could oblige a Man to become the Martyr of a Philosopher.
Matters are of a quite distinct Nature in Point of Philosophy and Religion: A
Man may allow of the Opinions of a Philosopher, considered in themselves, and
at the same Time be included in such Circumstances as make it prudence to
Acquiesce.

But two things there are, which I have already observed to you, which should
make you overlook those Paltry Affronts you Philosophy has met with. The first
is, that what is in it more choice and better than ordinary, begins to be
authorized in the Schools of the most zealous Peripateticks; who no longer
oppose the Truth, that you have insus'd into them, but only so husband
Aristotle's Stake, as it may not be said that ever any Philosopher had a
clearer View than he. You know the Adventure of the last Age in France; the
wisest Heads of the Kingdom could do no otherwise than approve the greatest
Part of the Regulations made in the Council of Trent, notwithstanding there
were Reasons that obstructed the adhereing to that Couuncil, on
Discipline-account. What was done? The States of Blois made Ordinances exactly
like a great Part of the Decrees of that Council: Thus, without admiting the
Council, they followed in effect the Purport of it. The Peripateticks have in
some sort transcribed the Conduct of those grave Politicians. It Is a Crime
among them to be a Cartesian, but it is an Honor to make good Use of the best
Part of M. Descartes. And to compare the Fortune of your Doctrine with that of
another that in our Days has made such a Bustle in the World, before the
Propositions of Iansenius had been condemned at Rome, his Followers highly
complimented him upon them: His was the Pure and Incorrupt Doctrine that was
copied from the great S. Augustine; but they had no sooner been censured as
Heretical, but they vanished in a Trice, and could not be found in Iansenius
his Book: No one could heartily believe they ever had been there, and in Spite
of Bulls of Popes and Ordinances of Bishops, 'twas reckoned a Mortal Sin to
sign a Condemnation of Propositions, and a Form of Faith, without the
Distinction of De Iure and de Facto. The quite contrary happened in the Affair
I am speaking of.

At first, when the Cartesians made Mention of Subtle Matter, and ridiculed the
Horror of a Vacuum, talked of the Elastick Virtue of the Air, the Pressure of
its Columns, and the manner of the Impression of Objects on our Senses,
Aristotle was brought to confront them with a quite contrary Doctrine.

Since that Time, upon Examination of the Reasons on which your Propositions in
those Instances depended, they would not say that you were in the Right; but
many undertook to affirm, That Aristotle had taught the greatest Part of that
before you. There has been since discovered in his Writings an Ethereal
Matter, the manner of Sensations by the Concussion of the Organs; the
Demonstration of the Gravity of the Air, and the most delicate Truths of the
Equilibrium of Liquors: So instead of the Iansenists abandoning, or seeming to
abandon the Right, and sheltering themselves under the Fact, the Peripateticks
fall on Possession of the Right by the Fact itself; that is, the Peripateticks
now find in Aristotle what according to themselves had not been visible for
these thirty Years. On the contrary, the Iansenists have lost Sight of the
Propositions they had pointed to us heretofore themselves, before they were
condemned: So that would you make any Abatements, as I hope you will, that I
may make good my Promise I made Voetius your Old Friend in Holland, we should
see M. Descartes turn Peripatetick, and Aristotle Cartesian.

The other Thing, that is Matter of Consolation to you, and that in Defiance to
all the Efforts of your Enemies must encourage you to hope for the Immortality
of Cartesianism, is the uncontrollable Liberty that is left to every one of
Writing for and against it: And that at this Day the most Solid and Ingenious
Patron of the New Philosophy, is a celebrated Father of the Oratory, whose
Books are in great Reputation. He forthwith required his Name and Character. He
is called, said I, Father Malebranche: He Is a Man of an extraordinary piercing
Judgment, of profound Thought, that has a wonderful Gift at methodizing his
Reflections, which he opens and displays in the neatest and most lively manner
imaginable; that knows however to give an Air of Truth and a probable Turn, to
the most extraordinary and abstracted Notions; that is skilled to the utmost
Perfection, in preparing the Mind of his Reader, and interessing him in his own
Thoughts. In short, he is the most charming Cartesian that I know. His
principal Work is called, The Search of Truth; and it is from that in
particular that he has been acknowledged for such as I have described him: Yet
I cannot conceal from you a little Accident that may somewhat allay the Joy
that News must excite in you; which is, That this Illustrious Champion of the
New Philosophy, has been sometime since at Variance with M. Arnauld, whose
Friend he had ever been before, which made a kind of Civil War. The Onset and
Defense on both Sides is managed with Vigor and Courage; each of them combat
in their own way: Volumes of five or six hundred Pages apiece are sent out by
M. Arnauld in the turning of an Hand: The other is less luxuriant, but more
strict and pressing: He takes those Captains for his Precedent, who only make
use of some select Troops, without any regard to Number, that always march
close and in good Order, who let the Enemy wheel about as often as they please,
but are sure to break their Ranks whenever they see an Advantage. Discourse is
various concerning the Motives of that War; M. Arnauld is the Aggressor: The
most refined Politicians, who, as you know, never fail to make the best of
their Talent on such Occasions, say, It is a Trick and Evasion of the Old
Doctor, who has several other such at command. Some Years ago there appeared
two Books against him; one was titul'd, The Spirit of M. Arnauld, wrote by a
French Protestant Minister, retired to Holland; that is a very roguish Book, I
must confess, and full of Venom and Gall, but he leaves M. Arnauld inextricably
in the Briars; he not only turns his own Weapons upon him, but also against the
Catholic Religion, and concludes directly from the Principles and Practice of
M. Arnauld, that most of the Arguments he takes to be most forcible and
Advantageous to the Catholic Religion, are null and insignificant, are mere
Show and Outside, fit only to dazzle the Eyes of the Ignorant, and such as
cannot penetrate to the Bottom of Things.

The other Book, which was printed the first of the two, but was not made
public till some time after, was written by a Jesuit against a French
Translation of the New Testament, commonly called, The Mons New Testament, done
by the Gentlemen du Port Royal, and whereof M. Arnauld took upon him the
Patronage and Defense. That Book of the Jesuit is Solidly, Scholar-like and
Politely wrote. He very pertinently comes over M. Arnauld on many Occasions,
and adds from time to time, in those Places, he challenges him to give an
Answer to such and such a Point: Notwithstanding, those two Books found no
Reply; and no one could say they were unanswered, because they were despised
and did not deserve the Pains. Religion it self was engaged, that Answer should
be made the first (as has since been done by another Hand) and M. Arnauld's
Honor and Reputation were interess'd to satisfy the Scruples, the Evidence of
Fact, and the Force of Reasons in the second, had raised in the Minds of Men.
See then what was the sense of the Politicians of the Commonwealth of Learning.

It Is known by long Experience, that M. Arnauld never used to be very Dormant
in the case of Books wrote against him. Whence then proceeds this extraordinary
Patience, he would fain seem to have at present? Whence comes it, that instead
of defending himself against his Enemies, that make voluntary Insults to attack
him, and fall so foully on him, he makes himself new Adversaries, and out of a
gayety of Humor falls to Daggers-drawing with his Friends and Allies, whilst
his Country is abandoned to the Pillage and Descretion of his Enemies? Here is,
say they, the short and the long of the Business. Those two Books Nonplus M.
Arnauld. The first upon several Articles presents you with an Argumentum ad
Hominem, and is beyond Reply. The second is penned with that Circumspection and
Exactness, as Wards off all Passes, gives not the least hold, and blocks up all
the out-lets, where ere his Adversary might escape him. It would be no part of
Prudence to engage on so disadvantagious Terms. He must not, however, be seen
to baulk or decline the Challenge; (and besides M. Arnauld had resolved to
leave the World, whenever he desisted to make a noise in it, and to Write and
Dispute whatever it cost him:) Therefore he cunningly procures himself a
Diversion. He picks a random Quarrel with Father Malebranche, threatening an
Attack on a Treatise of his, concerning Nature and Grace, which he had presumed
to publish contrary to his Advice. He compiles a great Volume, against two or
three Chapters of the Research of Truth. That Book is answered. M. Arnauld
thereupon makes his Reply. Father Malebranche charges again. M. Arnauld makes
yet another Onset. Here some are inquisitive, why M. Arnauld neglects to answer
both M. Iurieu and the Jesuit? Hey day! cry others, how would you have him
answer them? Does not Father Malebranche find him his Hands full? Whose little
Volumes he is forced to overwhelm with bulky Books, to obstruct the entrance of
that monstrous Impiety into the Church, viz. the Doctrine of a Corporeal God:
Without which no Man can find out what he means by his intelligible Extension,
that is, he says, in God. However the other Concern is urgent and requires
Dispatch. But what would you have a Man do? they add. Is it possible he should
be every where at once? Whilst the King of Poland marched with all the Forces
of his Kingdom to raise the Siege of Vienna, was he not necessitated to suffer
the Garrison of Kaminiec to overrun Podolia, and the Tartars to inslave
V^raine?

If that Conjecture is not true, said M. Descartes, it is however very
probable, and those Gamesters play the Politician not amiss. But what ( pursued
he) is the Subject of Dispute betwixt those two famous Authors? For I assure
you, I perceive a Concern upon me, upon their Account. The Matter in Debate ( I
answered) is of the Nature of Ideas, and the manner of our apprehending Objects
that are without us. M. Arnauld would have it, that our Idea's are nothing but
the Modifications of our Soul. Father Malebranche pretends, that that Opinion
is unwarrantable, and maintains we have no other perception of Objects than in
God; who being every where, is intimately united with our Soul, and who
following the general Laws of the Union of the Body and Soul, communicates to
us the Idea of the Object that he has in himself, and at once makes us
apprehend the Impression of it. Both one and the other strive upon occasion, to
engage you on their side, or to show rather, that they advance nothing
contradictory to your Thoughts upon Ideas: But I am of Opinion, you never
penetrated so deep in that Affair, as that either of them can gain much by your
Authority.

What you say of me is true ( replied M. Descartes;) but which at last of these
two Combatants have got the better on it? I answered him, I was not rash and
inconsiderate enough, to set up for a Decider of the Difference and Advantages
of those two Hero's: That I could only say that they fell to it in earnest: That
though M. Arnauld had proposed to himself the encountering Father Malebranche's
Tract of Nature and of Grace, he thought it advisable to begin with the
Confutation of what he had written touching Idea's in his Search of Truth,
looking on that past (to use his Thought and his Expression) as (...) Outworks
of the place he had a Design to ruin. That the Subject being very Abstracted
and Metaphysical, and above the ordinary Capacity of Men, and Father
Malebranche's System on that Particular, requiring a very great Attention to
comprehend it, M. Arnauld seemed to have taken designedly that Method of
Assault, for the making a more advantageous Effort on his Adversary; but that
Father Malebranche, without giving up his Outworks, wherein he acquit himself
admirably well, had drawn them into the Body of the place, that is to say, had
incorporated them with the Interests of Grace, which is very disadvantagious
Ground, and too slippery a stand for M. Arnauld, where he was very closely
pressed. Yet that I durst not undertake for the Success of Father Malebranche's
Self on that Side, because of the great Experience of M. Arnauld in such sort
of War, wherein he undoubtedly merits the Encomium Admiral Chatillon used to
give himself, viz. He had wherewith to be distinguished from the greatest
Captains that ever were, in that having been always beaten by his Enemies,
having lost all the Battles he had been obliged to Fight, after all his
Misfortunes, he still stood upon his Legs, in a capacity to relieve his Party,
and bearing still a Part and Figure, able to disquiet those by whom he had been
worsted. I might likewise add, without affronting Father Malebranche, he is
already sensible of the loss he has sustained since that first Breach: For
before that unhappiness, and whilst he was a Friend of M. Arnauld, he was every
where extolled for a sublime and infinitely penetrating Genius; and at present,
he is a Man that speaks nothing but Perple it (...) and Contradictions, whom one
can neither understand nor follow without danger of Error: So true it is that
M. Arnauld's Friendship is at this day, as it ever has been, a prodigious bank
of Merit to those that are so fortunate to enjoy it, and that Societies, no
less than particular Persons that were destitute of that Advantage, would be
very little better for their Reputation.

As I was thus entertaining Discourse with M. Descartes, I perceived in an
Instant a change in me, that carried something in it much like what we
experience in some sudden Faintings, wherein all things seem to alter and turn
color. I could never have believed a Soul separate from the Body, had been
capable of such an Accident. M. Descartes, who was aware of it, and well
understood the cause, left me for a moment to wait on Aristotle's Ambassadors.
I knew not what Intercourse they had, till the old Gentleman's Information, on
our return to the other World. He told me Mr. Descartes declined entering all
Dispute and Business with them; only assuring them he had not the least Design
of making any Inroad into Aristotle's Dominions; but that he thought it a
difficult piece of Work to effect a through Accommodation; and that it would be
proper for each to preserve their Liberty in Opinion, as before, without being
restless, and concerned to bring over that of others to it; notwithstanding to
the end their Voyage might not be wholly ineffectual, he promised to see that
the Cartesians behaved themselves with greater Respect and Esteem toward
Aristotle, upon condition Aristotle would restrain the Peripateticks from
flying out with that outrage against Cartesianism.

To come to my Spiritual Metamorphosis, I knew not the reason of that neither
till my return; and it was this. We must suppose that as long as our Soul is
united with our Body, the most part of its Ideas and Conceptions depend on the
disposition of our Brain. The diversity of that Disposition consists, as say
the Peripateticks, in the difference of the Species, Apparitions or Images of
Objects, contained in the Cavities of the Brain, or imprinted on its Substance.
The new Philosophers more truly say, That those kind of Pictures are nothing
but the Traces and Footsteps stamped on the Brain, by the ordinary Current of
the Animal Spirits, that flow in great Plenty, as in little Rivers, and wear
themselves a kind of Channel, to which they usually keep. In what way soever
that different Disposition causes the different Idea's and different Judgments
of the Soul (for it is an inscrutable Mystery) it is certain it is done, and
that different Ideas suppose different Traces. So that should a dissection be
made of a Peripatetick and a Cartesian Brain, with the help of good
Microscopes, for the discovery of those Prints that are exquisitely fine, one
should see a prodigious difference in the Complexion of those two Brains. I
never indeed questioned that Truth, but I thought that dependence of the Soul
lasted no longer than it was in the Body, and that as soon as the Separation
was performed, it had no more Correspondence with it: But I experimented the
contrary, and my Fellow-Travellers assured me that so long as the Body has its
Organs sound and free, let the Soul be ten thousand Worlds apart, it will
receive the same Impressions, as if it resided in it: And that if M.
Descartes's Snush had not lax'd the sensitive Nerves, I should have seen,
whilst I was in Descartes's World all the Occurrencies, the Eyes of my Body
were presented with. I should have heard every noise that beat upon the Drum of
my Ears: And so of all the rest.

So astonishing an Effect as this makes no Impression on Philosophical Souls:
For if they be Peripateticks they presently explain it by the Sympathy betwixt
the Soul and Body of the same individual; and if they be Cartesians they
expound it by the general Laws of the Soul and Bodies Union, which is in cause
that God on occasion of such and such Motions made in the Body, produces such
and such Thoughts or Perceptions in the Soul; and say they, one of these Laws
is, That whilst the Organs of the Body are capacitated for Employment, the Soul
wherever she is, receives the Impressions of Objects that affect them; it being
as easy a thing for God to advertise the Soul of that Impression, when she is
remote from the Body, as when present, proximity of Place being wholly
insignificant in the thing; since, according to them, the Motion of the Organs
is not the real cause that produces Sensations, but only the occasional cause,
that is, that which offers an occasion to God Almighty of producing them in the
Soul.

My Old Gentleman then, as I was saying, in our Return confessed the Trick
Father Mersennus and himself had agreed to play me: They had given
Instructions, before they departed, to the little Negro, that was commissioned
to guard my Corpse, at such an Hour, in which they easily foresaw we should be
arrived to M. Descartes's World, to take Care so to determine the Animal
Spirits in my Brain, as they might no longer keep the beaten Tracks they had
been used to, for the exciting Peripatetick Spe^ies in my Mind, but to make
them glide in such a Current as was necessary, and as he knew how, for the
implanting Cartesian Ideas in their Room; which he performed with that
Dexterity, that whether it was by the Legerdemain of Sympathy, or by virtue of
the General Laws of Union of the Body and Soul, my Notions were all in an
instant turned topsie turvy: And I, that a Moment since could see nothing in
that Immense Space, in which I was, began to perceive Matter there, and to be
convinced that Space, Extension and Matter were all one and the same thing.
After which, as often as M. Decsartes bade us to conceive how such and such
Motions were effected in Matter, I saw them more distinctly than your most
clarified Cartesians do your Chamfer'd Parts of Matter wreathed in shape of
little Skrews, by the Struggle they have to squeez betwixt the Balls of the
Second Element, or to constitute a little Vortex, round the Loadstone, and to
cause that wonderful affinity that is found betwixt that Stone and the Poles of
the Earth, and with it and Iron.

It is plain that an Universal Revolution of Ideas, like this, cannot happen in
the Soul, without causing an extraordinary Commotion in its Substance, no more
than a general Alteration of Humors can occur in the Body, without a Change of
its Constitution. I was therefore infinitely surpised at so prodigious a
Change, being wholly unable to give any probable Guess at its Cause, but could
not help attributing it to some Secret in M. Descartes's Philosophy; who
returning quickly after, addressed me in a more Familiar Air than at my first
Reception. Well, what, shall we begin to fall to work upon our World? I see you
are at present capable and worthy of reaping that Satisfaction. Monsieur, said
I, I know not where I am, nor what I ought to think of my self: But certainly
nothing can more effectually dispose me to a Belief that you are capable of
becoming the Creator of a World, than that Power you manifest over Spirits.
Yes, Monsieur, I acknowledge Space, Matter and Extension to be the self-same
Thing: I see plainly in that Space, Materials for the Building a New World; and
if you once accomplish so vast and prodigious a Work, from this Time forward I
renounce my Body to live here with you for ever and ever, to the End of the
World, nothing seeming comparable to the Advantage of living with the most Wife
and Puissant Soul, that ever came out of the Almighty's Hands.

You Will be better advised than that, replied M. Descartes; it behooves you to
expect the Orders of the Sovereign Being for an entire Dismission from your
Body; nor is there any Necessity for it, to have all the Satisfaction that you
wish. In less than two Hours Time I Will make you a World, wherein shall be a
Sun, an Earth, Planets, Comets, and every thing you see more Curious and
observable in yours; and since this World I am about to make is not to stand
for good and all, but is only an Essay of another I intend to build at my
Leisure, of far greater Capacity and Perfection; I can easily interrupt and
break the Motions, to let you see in a little Time the different Changes, which
occur not in the Parts of the great World, but in the Process of Years.

Come on then, let us begin, said he, but follow me exactly in the Principles I
lay down, and the Reflections I shall make you observe: Above all interrupt me
not. After these few Words M. Des^artes prepared himself for the executing his
Projection: Which was by the Exposition, or rather Supposition of some of his
most Important Principles, thought necessary to qualify us for the
comprehending the Dispatch of that grand Masterpiece.

Conceive, in the first Place ( said he) that all this vast Space is Matter:
For this Space is extended, and nothing is not capable of being so. This Space
therefore is an extended Substance, or which is the same Thing, Matter. Whoever
can doubt of this Truth, can doubt if a Mountain can be without a Valley.
Conceive in the second Place, That in Nature there are two inviolable Laws: The
first is, That every Body will ever maintain the Post and Capacity it has once
been put in, will never change it till some External Cause shall force it; if
it is in rest, it will be in Rest eternally; if it is in Motion it will
continue eternally in Motion; if it is of a Square Figure it will preserve its
Square Figure always.

The Second is, That a Body always naturally continues its Motion in a right
Line, though the rencounter and justling of other Bodies frequently disturb it
from its Regular Course, and from hence follows an indisputable Principle,
confirmed by infinite Experiments; viz. That a Body, circularly moved,
constantly endeavors to get farther from the Center of its Motion; and if it
fortune to get rid of a Body or Bodies, that constrain it to move circularly,
it is always sure to make its escape by the Tangent of the Circle it described,
in its Motion. The Line A G is the Tangent, the Stone would describe, supposing
it to be freed from the Sling at the Point A.


These Principles are the rich and fruitful Sources of that infinity of
admirable Truths, of which True Philosophy is composed, and the only Rules I
will and ought to follow, in the Production of the World I am about.

This short Speech ended, I was wonderfully edified in seeing M. Descartes fall
to Prayers* and make an humble Acknowledgment to God of all those intellectual
Gifts and Blessings he had vouchsafed him.

Sovereign Being ( said he) thou bear me witness, That never Mortal
acknowledged that absolute Dominion thou have over all thy Creatures, with
greater Respect and Submission than my self: So long as I had my Being in the
Land of the Living, I made it my Business to convince Men of that entire
Dependence they have on thee, having persuaded many of that important Truth,
That thou art the only Being which can produce every thing in the World: That
it is a punishable Pride in Men to conceit themselves capable of causing the
least Motion imaginable in Matter; and that the very Motion their Soul supposes
she influences on the Body, which she animates, is purely the effect of thy
Almighty Power, that in concurrence with the Laws thy Wisdom itself has
confirmed, moves the Members of the Body with such exactness and celerity, on
occasion of the Desires and Inclinations of the Soul, as persuades her, it is
herself that moves them; though at the same Time she confesses her Ignorance of
the manner whereby it must be done. That bright and lively influx, wherewith
thou have enlightened my Understanding, has guided me out of that Laberynth of
common Delusion, and opened me the way and Method I ought to take, in the Study
and Contemplation of thy wonderful Works. Though I at present undertake to work
upon that immense Matter, which thy infinite Bounty seems to have left at my
Disposal, and though I have assumed the Freedom of warranting my Disciples the
Production of a World like that of thy own Making; yet it is wholly in
Dependence on thy Power I have made this account. Yea, Lord, I shall contribute
in no wise to that Operation, but by the Desires of my Will, which thou out of
thy gracious Goodness wilt be pleased to second, by impressing so much Motion
on this Matter as I shall wish for, and by giving this Motion Determinations
necessary to the End which I propose; Reason and Experience having taught me,
That every pure Spirit, such as am I my self, by one of the Universal Rules, to
which thou conformest thy external Actions, has Right and Privilege of so much
Motion as is sufficient to move the Matter of a World. Manifest then, Lord, thy
Power in Condescension to a Spiritual Creature, that makes this humble
Confession of his Weakness, and give us farther occasion to praise and glorify
thy Name.

Having finished his Devotion, M. Descartes marked out a round Space, of about
five hundred Leagues diameter, for the making a little Sampler of his World,
whereupon thus he spoke.

Gentlemen, I shall at present only represent you the Solary Vortex of your
World, and all that is therein; that is to say, the Sun, the Earth, the
Planets, the Elements, the Disposition of its principal Parts, and the
different Relations and Dependences they have on one another; if you will
honor me with a Visit some Years hence, you shall see the Great World finished.

The first thing I shall do is to divide in almost equal Parts all the Matter
comprehended in the Space I have chalked out. All those Parts shall be very
Small, but yet they must be less before I have done with them: They must not
all be of a Spherical Figure, 'cause if they were all so shaped, there must
necessarily be an Interval, or Void betwixt them: But a Void is impossible;
they must therefore be of all Shapes and Figures, but angular for the
generality.

Secondly, whereas the Union of the Parts of Matter purely consist, in that
Repose they are in, one by another; that Division I propose to make, will last
no longer than I shall agitate them several ways, and drive them on every Side.

Thirdly, Since the Fluidity of Matter is nothing but the Motion of its
smallest Parts, agitated different ways; upon my Division and Agitation of it
in that wise, I shall make it fluid, as hard and consistent as it is at present.

Again, this round Space of five hundred Leagues, which I have cut out for the
building of my little World, being once made fluid, I shall divide it into
twenty Parts, or twenty Vortexes, that shall be severally constituted of
infinite insensible Parts of Matter.

S The Vortex of the Sun.
For the comprehending what I mean by this Word Vortex; imagine to your self a
round or oval Space of Matter, which I divide in a thousand or ten thousand
little Parts. Suppose these little Parts, so many little Giggs, each made to
turn about their Axle or their Center; and and bowl'd at the same time about
the Center of that round or oval Space; and this is what I call a Vortex.

Finally, you must conceive each Vortex as a kind of Firmament, at whose Center
will be an Astre or fixed Star; so that in making twenty Vortexes, in the Space
which I have laid out, I shall make twenty fixed Stars: But at these fixed
S^ars you will be surpised, and will have the pleasure of observing, that but one
in twenty will continue, which will represent your Sun: All the rest will
become partly Planets, partly Comets: Nor will there of those twenty, above one
great Vortex remain, which will be that of the Sun, in which will be formed two
little new ones, to represent the Vortex of your Earth, and that of Jupiter.
This will be sufficient, Monsieur, said he, addressing himself to me in
particular, to qualify you for the comprehending the Work I am going to
complete. For the rest of my Principles and Conclusions, which you have seen in
my Physics, I shall more commodiously explain them in the performance it self,
as occasion shall be offered.

With that M. Descartes, Father Mersennus, and my old Gentleman, betook
themselves to three different Stations in the Space, and began to agitate and
churn the Matter with a prodigious Alacrity. The twenty Vortex were come in an
Instant, each having their Motion determined on every side, and being so
ordered that the Poles of one Vortex were terminated at the Eclyptick of an
other. And hence it is that M. Descartes calls the Circle of a Vortex, Part. 3.
P^incip.
that which is remotest from its Poles.

Whereas the parts of every Vortex were seen out of hand to be figured
Angularwise for the generality, and to move round about their Center, there was
a mighty grating and clashing occasioned by the Fraction of Angles, that
necessarily followed the Struggle every Part made to turn its self about its
own Center. And that was the first Reflection M. Descartes occasioned me to
make, for the explaining to me the Origin and Production of the Elements, as
they are distinguished in his Physics. You see, said he, how from the
agitation of Matter necessarily issue the Elements, at which the Philosophers
of your World have blanched and bogled so. From a Cube or any Angular Body
whatsoever, to make a round one, what more is required than the paring off the
Angles and Inequalities that are found in the Surface of it? And what but this
is done in the Motion I have impressed on all the little parts about their
Center? Is it possible they should turn thus without a mutual Unhorning one
another? And can that continual rubbing of one against another, fail to polish
them more exactly than if they had been turned in a Lathe? These little Balls
constitute that kind of Matter which I call my second Element.

But now in the Interim of the shivering of these Angles, you see (and it is
impossible to be otherwise) there is a World of little Filings, prodigiously
less than the Balls of the second Element; and it is that diminutive Dust which
I call the Matter of the first Element. But lastly, among the parts of the
first Element, as minute as they are, there are some less than others, and
whereas they are nothing but the Scrapings of the second Element, they are of
very irr^gular Figures, and full of Angles: Which is the reason they entangle
and fetter themselves with one another, and cake into a ragged and gross Mass,
which I call the Matter of the third Element: And these are my three Elements,
which as you see, I had reason to defy the World to find a fault with.

Here M. Descartes was some Moments without speaking to me, being extraordinary
busy in the management of his Project, and the critical regulation of the first
Motions of his Vortexes. Mean while the little parts of the Matter of every
Vortex, by the means of their turning on their Center and rubbing against each
other, even'd and polished themselves by little and little, and still as they
became perfectly Globular, they lost of their Bulk and decreased in Size. Then
it was that I began to see the Consequences of the Rules of Motion, which M.
Descartes had readily supposed. For seeing these little Balls took up less room
than formerly, and seeing they kept still a turning round, and their Figure
rendered them more fit for Motion, I perceived them presently to quit the Center
of the Vortex, and to gain the Circumference. By that Effort obliging the
Matter of the first Element, that was dispersed through all the Vortex, to fall
down to the Center; and to constitute a Mass of that extremely fine and
powdered Dust, that still whirled round, and attempted to recover the
Circumference from which the Balls of the second Element had chased it: But all
in vain, because the Figure of the parts of the second Element maintained them
in their Post; and all that could possibly be done by the Matter of the first,
was upon occasion to slip into the Intervals, the Balls in the Circumference of
the Vortex, sometimes left betwixt them.

The Satisfaction M. Descartes observed I took at that petty Play, and the
Facility I manifested in perceiving or conceiving whatever he commanded me,
highly pleased him, and engaged him to explain to me one of the most curious
Mysteries in Philosophy. I could wish, said he, you had your Body here, you
would let in those admirable Deductions from the Principles I have laid, with a
greater Gusto and Delight. Now you only see in the Center of the Vortexes a
heap of Dust or of subtle Matter, of the first Element; but had you your Body
and your Organs with you, capable of the Impressions that heap of Dust would
make, you would see for every heap of Dust a Sun. Monsieur (continued he) that very
Sun, whose Splendor and Beauty you so often have admired in your World is
nothing, in affect, but an Amass of that same Dust; but Dust instigated with
such a Motion as I explain in my Philosophy, and you at present see.

To give you a clear Insight in this Matter, I need only suppose one thing;
which I am sure you wont deny me; and which, on occasion, I could show you in
Aristotle himself, to wit, that Vision is caused merely by the vibration, of
the Threads wherewith the optic Nerve is wrought. And it is on Account of that
vibration, that a Man falling rudely on his Head, or who walking in the dark,
runs his Face against a Post, sees a sudden flash of Light like the glaring of
a Candle. It tortures the Naturalists to explain the manner how that vibration
causes us to perceive all luminous and bright Objects. Upon what Hypothesis
soever they proceed, they meet with inconquerable Difficulties: But at the
bottom, and in earnest it is no more than this.

See here the Matter of the first Element; it turns round: And consequently
wrestles to get at a distance from the Center of the Vortex, in which it is; in
making that Attempt to deviate from the Center of the Vortex, it forces the
Matter of the Second Element to circulate, that possesses all the
Circumference, and shoves and pushes it every way imaginable, since there is
not a point in the Circle that the Matter of the first Element describes, in
its Motion, wherein it does not strive, to make its escape from the Center, and
by Consequence does not press against the Balls of the second. Imagine then you
and your Body were in some part of the Circumference* of the Vortex, and that
you cast your Eyes toward the Center. There are an abundance of Lines of the
Matter of the second Element, that terminate in the bottom of your Eye. How
comes that to pass? Why the Lines are driven toward the Circumference, and
consequently forced against the bottom of your Eye, by the subtle Matter, that
is, at the Center, and is endeavoring to make its Exit. Being thus pusht it
presses upon the bottom of your Eye; pressing it in that manner it shakes the
Strings of the Optic Nerve, and from this quavering follows the perception of
the Object; and this is one of the most curious Phaenomena's of my Physics,
where I maintain that the Nature of Light consists in that restless endeavor
of the subtle Matter to remove its self from the Center of the Vortex, whence
succeeds that pressure which causes the most delicate and admirable Sensation
that we have.

He then went on in explaining to me all the Properties of Light, and the
Demonstrations he has given concerning the Reflection and Refraction of its
Rays. He was very large and copious upon that Subject: For that piece of his
Philosophy, together with that where he explains the Phaenomena's of the
Loadstone, is his darling and beloved Theme. I shall not descend to the
Particulars of that Discourse, for fear of wearying my Reader, as also
frightning some, to whom Lines crossing one another with A. B. C. are as
terrible as Magic, and the sight thereof enough to make them shut the Book,
and never open it after. And this is the Reason I will make use of them as
little as possibly I can.

He would not for any thing whatever have forgotten to remark to me those
little ^^annel'd Parts, whose Service is so very necessary to him, nor the way
that they are wrought. Amongst the Parts of the first Element, which are made
of the filings of the Second, there are some, that by reason of their irregular
Figure, are not so rapid as the other. Those of this Nature easily hook
themselves together, and make up little Bodies larger than the other parts of
the first Element; and as in their turning about, they are often obliged to
pass betwixt the Balls of the second Element, Numb 90.
they accommodate themselves for that Passage, and as they squeeze betwixt
them, wrythe themselves into the Shape of a Skrew, or become like little
Pillars chamfer'd with three Furrows, or gutterwork'd and tourn'd as you see
the Shell of a Snail. They are chiefly to be found toward the Poles of the
Vortex, having their Determination toward the Center. Now whereas some of them
enter by way of the Northern Pole, others by the Southern, whilst the Vortex
turns upon its Axis; it is apparent to every Cartesian, that those which
proceed from the North-Coast must be turned Shell-wife a different way, from
those that proceed from the South. And Instance M. Descartes took care to
inculcate thoroughly in me: For it is principally upon that, the Power and
Virtue of the Loadstone do depend: Numb. 91.
But it shall not be long, said he, before you see some particular Effect of
these little channel'd Parts.

Take notice, said he, how things go in that Star that is next you. How some of
the chamf^r'd Parts that come fromward the Poles of their Vortex, mingle
themselves with the Matter of that Star, and not being able to keep pace with
it in Motion, are thrown out of the Star; just as the scummy Parts of a boiling
Liquor are separated from the other, and rise above the Liquor. See how they
link themselves to one another, and by that Union lose the quality of the first
Element, and take on them that of the third. Upon their gathering and
condensing in a very great quantity, it is manifest they must hinder the action
of the first Element, whereby it pushes the Balls of the Second Element to the
Circumference, Fig. Seq.
and consequently must interrupt that Motion and Pressure in which Light
consists. And now you may see exactly what those Stains are which you sometimes
discover on the Face of the Sun of your World. They are nothing else but the
drossy and scummy Parts of the third Element, gathered in Heaps and expanded on
its Surface.

Now the wreek and scattering of those Stains which are still a gathering, and
as easily dissipanated, diffusing it self far and near throughout the
Circumference of the Vortex, will constitute a thin and ra^ify'd Body, like the
Air about your Earth, Numb. 92.
at least, the finest part of it; and I have formerly observed, that that of
the Vortex of your Sun is extended as far as the Sphere of Mercury.

Whilst M. Descartes was thus busied in disclosing to me all his Mysteries,
Father Mersennus and the old Gentleman were diverting themselves, by Vaulting
from Vortex to Vortex, and were but very ordinary Company to Aristotle's
Plenipotentiaries, who star'd confusedly, and were exceedingly out of
Countenance, and who now, and then joined them, now and then came to us;
comprehending not a Syllable all the time, in that Galima^phry of Vortexes, of
the first, second and third Element, of ragged and branched Parts, etc. for
having only Peripatetick Ideas they saw not so much as a Pins Head of all we
saw in that immense Space: And they were much surprised to hear us entertain
our selves seriously, with such idle Fopperies and Chimera's; for such they
reckoned all we said, so far as to believe we merely designed it to expose and
banter them; and doubtless they had highly resented it, had not M. Descartes
forestalled them, by telling them, separate Spirits conceived things only in
reference to some principal Ideas they had formerly been possessed with; and as
they saw no Matter in the Space where we most distinctly behold it, so he
himself with all the Eyes in his Head, was never able to perceive substan^ial
Forms in Bodies, absolute Accidents and intentional Species, though at the same
time the Peripateticks talked of them, as Things they saw as clear as the
Noonday.

Mean time of these Occurrences, the old Gentleman in haste, came and
acquainted Descartes, That on that Coast he had been on, there were three or
four Vortexes that began to jumble and fall to Loggerheads; and that if he did
not speedily come and part them, there needed nothing more to tear and shatter
all his World in pieces.

Poor honest old Gentleman, said M. Descartes: That which makes him so
solicitous for my World, is one of the finest Phenomena's that can possibly be
seen, and by which I Will demonstrate to you how Comets are begot in yours; and
how, in time, a fixed Star may become a Planet. Let us go and cure him of his
Fears.

When we came there we found two Stars, whose Surface was almost wholly
overgrown with Scurf, and whose Vortexes began to be d^ain'd and sucked up by
those round about them. If you have read my Book of Principles, and my Treatise
concerning Light, says M. Descartes to me, you will easily conclude in what
this little bu^tle and disorder ought to end; and I strange, said he to the old
Gentleman, you should be frighted at it. Call to mind then what I there teach,
how that which preserves a Vortex in the midst of several others, is that
impulse caused by the Matter of the Star in its attempt to obtain a remove from
the Center toward the Circumference: For the Star, by that Impulse, pushing
and supporting the Matter of its Vortex keeps the other Vortexes within their
Bounds, and loses no Ground in the Dimensions of its Circuit. For, we must
consider all these Vortexes, as so many Antagonists that dispute it to an Inch,
and so long as their Forces are equally matched, gain no Advantage over each
other; but as soon as one of them is any ways weakened or disabled, it becomes a
Prey to all the rest, each taking in a part of its Space, and at last usurping
it all. Now when a Star begins to be overrun with this Scurf, and crusted with
a mass of the parts of the third Element, it can no longer push with so much
force as it did before, the Matter of its Vortex toward the Circumference; and
then the other that surround it, and whose Matter is endeavoring to get as far
as possible from its Center, finding no longer so much Motion, nor by
consequence so much Resistance, expatiate and stretch themselves out, and
oblige the Matter of that impoverisht Vortex, to circuit along with them, and
by little and little each Enrich themselves. In so much, that some Moments
hence, you shall see those Vortexes increase their Circumference with the
Spoils of this poor Vortex, till at last they come to the Star it self, which
will be made their Sport: That is to say, it will descend toward the Center of
some one of those Vortexes, there to continue in the quality of a Pla^et, to
turn with that Vortex, and to observe the Motions of the conquering Star: Or it
will beconstrain'd by the Motion that shall be given it, to bound from Vortex
to Vortex, and to make a long Pilgrimage in Habit of a Comet, until its Crusts
shall break: And then perhaps it will recover the eminency of a Star, and will
take its revenge on some other, by appropriating its Vortex to its self.

We waited then some Moments, and saw happen what M. Descartes had foretold;
all the the Vortex was drained dry, the Matter of one of the neighboring
Vortexes surrounded the crusted Star, and influencing it with a violent Motion,
carried it clever off: But since that Star, by reason of its Solidity, that
consisted partly in its Figure, most proper for Motion, partly in the close
Connection of the Parts of the third Element, that covered it, and the paucity
of its Pores in the Superficies: I say, since that Star, by reason of its
solidity, was capable of a far greater Motion than the Mass of Celestial Matter
that encompassed it, and carried it along; having by degrees arrived to a
mighty Speed, in the turning of a Hand it gained the Brink of the Circumference
of the Vortex, and out it flew amain, and continuing its Motion by the Tangent
of the Circle it had begun to describe, passed on to another Vortex, and from
that to another, till I knew not what became on^t: For M. D^scartes interrupted
the Attention I was in to pursue it, to instruct me, That the Adventure I had
seen at present usually happened, and would still from Time to Time in our
World: And that what we there call Comets, were nothing else but Stars that
have lost their Vortex and Light by that congealing Matter, and then passed
from Vortex to Vortex, V. Fig. Vor^.
becoming visible to us all the Time they traverse our Solary Vortex, and
ceasing to be seen as soon as they entered in another.

Immediately after the Ruin of the Vortex I have been speaking of, there were
seven others that ran the same Risque, and became seven Comets. Whereupon
Monsieur Descartes pursued: It is not amiss, in order to your better
understanding the Effects that are speedily to follow, to give Names to the
Principal Stars that are left: We have still a dozen of them, but we will
trouble our Heads at present with no more then* eight. That then, continued he,
pointing out the greatest Star of all, and which had the greatest Vortex, we
will call the Sun; that other shall be Saturn; let the next on the Left Hand be
Jupiter; that on the Right shall be named Mars; that other we will name Earth;
and the nearest to us of all shall be christened the Moon: Of these two little
ones, the one shall be Venus and the other Mercury. By and by I will name the
other four. Having for some Time considered the admirable Disposition of all
these Vortexes, that, in spite of their Fluidity, did not at* all mix and
incorporate with one another, a thing no one would believe unless he saw it,
and which cannot be comprehended but by a Cartesian Soul; for no other
Philosopher 'till this Day has been able to conceive it possible. We saw
Mercury and Venus begin to be overspread with the rising Scum, and forthwith
the Vortex of the Sun with the other neighboring Vortexes to get ground
prodigiously on those two Stars, till at last their Heaven or their Vortex
being entirely swallowed up, they fell in with that of the Sun, somewhat near
the Center, and began to turn about him, floating in the Matter of his Vortex.
The same thing happened a little while after to four petty Stars, whose
Vortexes bordered upon that of Jupiter, where they were obliged to descend, and
take the same Lot therein, as Venus and Mercury in that of Sol. M. Descartes
called these four the Satellites of Jupiter, because they represent the four
Planets that turn about Jupiter in our World. Lastly, the Earth in like manner
made herself Mistress of the Moon, and obliged her to attend her in quality of
her Planet; for that is the Name which is given to degraded Stars, because of
their only Employment that is left; which is, to wander in the Zodiac, and to
turn eternally about those that have robbed them of their Vortex.

That which distinguishes their Condition from that of Comets, is nothing but
the Difference found betwixt the Solidity of one and the other; for as they are
less solid than the Comets, in entering the Vortex that receives them, they are
not agitated in their Turning with so strong and violent a Motion, as to toss
themselves out of the Vortex, but swim with the Current of Celestial Matter in
which they are plunged. In like manner, the Disproportion of Solidity that is
betwixt many Planets, carried in the same Vortex, is the cause that some remain
more remote from the Center or Star, and others approach nearer to it; for a
Planet descends toward the Center, as long as the Celestial Matter that is
below it, is better able to mount farther from the Center, the one necessarily
following the other, according to the Laws of Motion. Thus, because Mercury was
less solid than Venus, he came nearer to the Sun than she; and the Celestial
Matter that is above him, forced him to that descent, because it had more
Strength than he to get at a Distance from the Center, and it obliged not Venus
to sink so low, because the Balance betwixt it and Venus was equally poised,
the one having neither more nor less Power to deviate from the Center of their
Motion than the other. But as it sometimes fortunes in our World, that Petty
Princes making War with one another; after having fought some Time, and the
Conquerors as well as the Conquered drained themselves of Men and Money, a
common and powerful Enemy comes thundering upon them, and devours them all: So
here happens a sudden Revolution in M. Descartes's World, that reduced Jupiter
and the Earth to the same Condition they had reduced the other Stars, whose
Vortexes they had demolished: Both the one and the other no less than Mars and
Saturn became Planets, and the Sun, the sole and universal Conqueror, extended
his Vortex over all the Space the other had possessed before, and constrained
them all to turn about himself.

M. Descartes exemplified this Matter by certain Whirl-pools we sometimes see
in Rivers, whereof one great one, that often contains in it many little ones,
represents the great Solary Vortex, and the little ones represent the Vortexes
of Jupiter and the Earth. Those little Whirl-pools are carried along by the
Motion of the greater, and turn about its Center, whilst themselves make every
thing that comes in the Reach of their Circumference, suppose Straws, or little
Chips, to turn about their own: Thus the Earth carries round the Moon in her
Vortex, and Jupiter his Satellites in his.

Having seen so many fine diverting Sights, and so near a Resemblance of this
little World, with our great one, our Curiosity tempted us to a more particular
Enquiry, and thorough Instruction in all Things that concerned the Planet
representing the Earth, which we inhabit. But M. Descartes told us, That in
case we would see all Things in Order and Succession, as they should be, it
would be several Hours Work to put that Planet in the Posture and Circumstances
our Earth is at present in, and besides we should see nothing more occur in it
than he had observed, in the fourth Part of his Book of Principles, in
describing the Formation of the Earth, as he at that Time conceived it. Besides
that Subtle Matter, whereof it was composed, whilst it was yet a Star, which
Matter is lodged in the Center, and besides that Shell, infinitely hard, that
dams it in, I conceived, said he, a kind of third Region, constituted of the
Parts of the third Element, not very strictly united: And I yet farther divided
that third Region into three Stories, before I imagined to my self the Earth in
the Capacity it has at present, and in which I am going to put my own. 1 The
Center of the Earth, full of the Matter of the First Element. M the internal
Shell that covers it. C the Place of Metals. D Water. E Earth, on which we
tread. V Air.


The lowest of these Subordinations was, according to my Position, an Arch of
very Solid and Heavy Matter, and there I place the origin of Metals. The
Second, which I ranged above it, was a Liquid Body, constituted of the Parts of
the third Element, pretty long, very flexible and pliant, as it were little
Eels, tempered with an abundance of the Parts of the second Element, which was
nothing else but what we usually call Water. Lastly, above all this I supposed
a third Vault, made of the most clinging and craggy Parts of the third Element,
whose sensible Parts were only Stones, Sand, Clay and Mud, and which was very
porous: And this is the outward Surface of the Earth, on part of which tread
Mortal Men.

Next, I explained, how in that upper Vault of the Earth, by its being exposed
to the constant Beating of the two first Elements against it, that rushed
through its Pores with Violence; there were made a World of Crevices and
Chinks, which being in Time enlarged by little and little, its structure at
last, all of a sudden failed, and broke in Pieces; whereupon its Ruins fell in
part of the Water below it, of the second Story, and forced it above them,
because it was less weighty; and that is the Water which constitutes the Seas.
Some Parts of the Vault were still upheld, and remained suspended, as it often
happens in the downfall of great Buildings; these were not drowned, and they
were these that made the Plains, and level Parts of the Earth. Lastly, some
Pieces, as they fell, were shelv'd and supported against one another, and
raised above the rest; and thus came the Inequalities of the Earth, which we
call Mountains.

You plainly see then, said M. Descartes, that to show you the Train of all
these Things would demand a great deal of Time: But the Hour of your Departure
hastens on, I remit you therefore to my Book for Satisfaction in all those
Particulars. I am going now to make an Abridgment of all those Motions, and to
show you in as little Time as we are speaking on it, this Earth, exactly like
yours, with Mountains, Valleys, Plains and Seas. No sooner said than done: He
falls to determining the Motion of an infinite Number of those long and
flexible Parts of the third Element, and agitating them, by playing among them
the Parts of the second, in the several Places, where he had heaped them to
gether, we saw presently a kind of Sea diffuse itself over the Face of the
Earth; it was a less Trouble to him to raise Mountains, by only amassing
together an abundance of the branchy Parts of the third Element, and causing
them to link and graple with each other, whereby there stood in many Places
great and mighty Piles, nothing differing from our Mountains. That Earth looked
very bare and naked, without Trees, without Herbs, without Flowers; for to
produce all those Things that are the greatest Ornaments to our Earth, was a
Business that would take up longer Time.

This done, he employed the rest of the Time that we staid with him, in the
consideration chiefly of two Things: First, of the Gravity, or rather of the
Motion of Bodies we call Heavy, toward the Center. And secondly, of the Manner
of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. He began with the first, and explained it
at this rate.

Take notice, said he, that this Earth turns upon its Axis in its Vortex; it
has not that Power of Moving of itself, but it is carried about by the Stream
of the Celestial Matter that surrounds it, which whirling with a more rapid
Motion than the Earth, spends the overplus in making other Motions in all
Parts, and especially in squeezing and pressing Terrestrial Bodies against the
Earth; a Pressure so necessary, that take it but away the whole Earth would
crumble all in Pieces, and all the Men and Animals on the Surface of the Earth
of your World would be hurled into the Fluid Space, according to my grand
Principle of Motion; that every Body that turns circularly, as does the Earth
with all that is upon it flies fromward the Center of its Motion, if not
prevented by the other Bodies that keep it in, as does the Pression of the
Celestial Matter. S the Sun. T the Earth. AB CD the little Vortex of the Earth.
NA CZ the great Orb wherein the Earth is carried round the Sun.


And it is for the same Reason, that a Terrestrial Body forced into the Air, is
obliged to descend toward the Center of the Earth, because it has less Force
to digress from the Center than has the Mass of Air, which it ought to dismount
to get into its Place: And the Reason why it has less Force to digress from
the Center is, because it contains much more Matter of the third Element, and
much less of the second than the Mass of Air equal to it in Bigness. Now the
Matter of the third Element is dull and more unactive, and unable to get rid of
the Center, than the Matter of the second, it must therefore descend. Your
Peripatetick Quality, continued he, and Democritus, and Gassendi's Chains made
of linked Atoms, are not worth a Straw, in comparison of what I say, and with
that he cast a Stone on high, to show us by Experience the Truth of what he had
been Teaching.

The next thing was the Flux and Reflux of the Sea: For the better
understanding this, he bade us first conceive, That the Vortex of the Earth was
of an oval Figure. Secondly, That that of its Diameters, in which was the Moon,
both in the New and in the Full, was the least of them all. Thirdly, That the
Center of the Earth was not the Center of the Vortex, but was a little distant
from it, 'cause of the Moon, that in whatever Part of the Circumference she was
found, made the Space betwixt her and the Earth more strait; and by consequence
hindered the Celestial Matter from flowing in so free a Course betwixt 1 The
Figure of the Vortex of the Earth.
them; and hence it follows, That the Earth, whose Place and Station, is no
otherwise determined, than by the Equality of Opposition, that presses it on
every Side, ought to recoil a little toward that part of the Vortex that is
opposite to the Moon. Fourthly, Whereas the Celestial Matter, that circuits
with far greater Speed than the Earth and Moon, must find the Passage that lies
betwixt them very narrow, in comparison of that Liberty and Room it had before,
it must inevitably flow more rapidly in that Place, and at once press more
violently upon the Air and Water: And to conclude, there ought to be an almost
equal Pressure in the opposite Part of the Vortex, by the same reason of that
Recoiling of the Earth.

He made us forthwith acknowledge the Truth of all those Principles and Effects
that naturally follow them; for upon his placing the Moon perpendicular to the
Equator of the Earth, we immediately saw first the Sea pressed by that Matter
to sink lower, and its Waters thus pressed and crowded hurry toward the Poles,
and spread themselves successively on the Shores, proportionably to their
Distance from the Equator. 2. The Terrestrial Globe rolling on his Axle from
West to East, we beheld the Pressure of the Moon to light on several Places
after one another, according to the Succession of Meridians. 3. That successive
Pressure of the different Parts of the Sea had this necessary effect, viz. to
cause it to swell and fall in several Places, according to the plain and
evident Rules of Staticks, which gave us a most exquisite and natural Idea of
the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, consisting in this, that by how much it is
mounted, by so much it is depressed, and as often as it mounts in one Place it
is depressed in another; all these Motions going on regularly after each other,
and being set, and punctual, as to Space of Time.

Again, since the Diameter of the Vortex, wherein this little Moon must
necessarily be in its Conjunctions and Oppositions, was the least of all; and
on the contrary, that in which it would be found in its quadratures the
greatest, it was evident to us, that the depression and sinking of the Waters
must be far greater in the Conjunctions and Oppositions than in the
Quadratures, and consequently that the Sea must flow with greater impetuosity
and Vehemence toward the Shore, or which is all one, that the Tides be far
greater in the New and Full Moons than at any other Time, and in the Equinoxes
than in the Solstices, as it really happens in our World.

He next observed to us the particular Phenomena's of the Flux and Reflux,
founded on the same Principles, and minded us especially of the Reason, why we
never see any Ebbing and Flowing in Lakes and Ponds, let them be never so
great, unless they have some Communication with the Sea: For if, said he, those
Lakes and Ponds be beyond the Tropicks, they are never at all pressed by the
Moon; and for those that are under the Torrid Zone, within the Tropicks, they
take not up a compass of Ground, enough to cause that one Side of their
Superficies should be more pressed than the other by the Globe of the Moon. Now
that Inequality of Pressure is the only cause of that Vicissitude of Motions,
which we call the Flux and Reflux of the Sea.

I was wonderfully taken with this Explication, and that way of solving the
Flux and Reflux is so handsome, that those that demonstrate to M. Descartes the
Earth cannot have a Vortex, at least an Oval one, ought upon that Consideration
to show themselves a little merciful to him: But these Philosophers are a very
ungentile and brutish sort of Creatures, and know not what it is to be generous
toward their Adversaries.

Mean while all the other Motions were performed in the little World with all
possible exactness, Mercury, Venus, Mars, and the rest of the Planets, having
once obtained their Post in the Vortex of the Sun, were extraordinary punctual
to their Courses. He began to exhale Vapors, and to form them into Clouds,
about the little Earth. To say no more, I was charmed with all these Prodigies:
But we must now resolve on our Departure, and 'twas high Time we were a going.
It was well-nigh four and twenty Hours since we left the Earth, and M.
Descartes, who, as I have noted before, disapproved of their Conduct that
deserted their Body before Death, and the Orders of the Sovereign Being, had
dismissed them, advised us himself to defer the entire Satisfaction of our
Curiosity till another Time. I made him a courteous Acknowledgment and
Resentment of his Favors, assuring him of the vast Esteem I had both for his
Person and Doctrine. I begged the Favor of proposing to him the Scruples that
might occur hereafter upon his Philosophy, whenever I had an Opportunity of
sending a Letter to him. He expressed on his Part a World of Kindness for me,
exhorted me to a most sincere and hearty Love of Truth, and presented me with
two Hyperbolical Glasses to make me a Perspective Glass, wherewith, he assured
me, I might stand on the Earth, and discover all the Curiosities of the Globe
of the Moon, and the Animals themselves, Let. de Descart.
if there were any. He has demonstrated in his Dioptricks the Excellence of
that Figure, for the Glasses of a Telescope, beyond all other. He endeavored
to have them made in Holland, and contrived an Engine for that Purpose, but he
could not find Artists capable of accomplishing his Design and his Idea with
that Exactness as was necessary. He brought us on our Way as far as the second
Heaven, which is that of Stars, and left Father Mersennus with us, to conduct
us Home.

Some distance from the Stars, Aristotle's Ambassadors meeting some
Philosophers of their Country and Acquaintance, desired us not to take it
amiss, that they accompanied them, and took their Leave, but indifferently
satisfied with their Voyage and Negotiation. Seeing we were in great haste, we
stayed no where on the Road, and avoided all Harangues and Disputes with every
Person whatsoever, though we met in diverse Places very many Spirits, that
would willingly have joined Discourse with us. Father Mersennus, as we passed
along, made me observe the Disposition of the Vortexes, and the situation of
the different Elements that composed them, and especially the Balls of the
second Element, that I had no Apprehension of so long as I was stocked with
Peripatetick Notions, but that I saw take up the greatest part of the Universe,
since I was turned Cartesian. In less than six Hours Time we arrived at my
House, where there fell out a most unfortunate Disaster; for in pitching with a
most violent descent, and not considering the Glasses I had with me, as I
passed athwart my Chamber-wall, and my Glasses in Bodily Quality, could not
enter, they were stopped, and dashed in a thousand Pieces, by the reason of the
unaccountable Swiftness wherewith they flew against the Stones; and thus I was
deprived of the Pleasure of making the Experiment, that M. Descartes had
warranted, of seeing from our Earth all the Occurrences in the Globe of the
Moon as distinctly as if I was personally there.

I found my Body somewhat fainty and very feverish, by the reason of a Fast of
above thirty Hours. Before I entered I would have persuaded the little Negro to
reinstate my Brain in its Quondam- capacity, fearing lest he had unhinged some
Clock-work there: For that there must be something more than ordinary in that
Machine, to cause such prodigious Alterations in the Soul of Man; and I had
been very finely served, if having been reunited with my Body, I had found my
self a Fool; but the little arch Devil of a Spirit refused to do it, telling me
withal, That I was highly obliged to him, for setting me right in my Ideas. I
must therefore venture on it for better for worse; so that having thankt Father
Mersennus and my old Gentleman, for the favor vouchsafed me by their Company
in so fine a Voyage, my Soul entered her Body, and failed not in quality of a
Cartes^an Soul, to seat her self in the Pin^al Gland of my Brain.

I had requested Father Mersennus to oblige me so far as to see me again before
he returned to M. Descartes's World, that I might convey a Letter of Thanks by
him to that great Philosopher, that had treated me so generously and gentilely.
He promised me he would, and accordingly returned at a Months end, which he
spent partly in the World, in dispatching some Commissions of M. Descartes,
partly in the several Planets and different Places of the wide Space, which he
traversed i^ search of some old Cartesians, on that Philosopher's Account, to
inform them of his Place of Residence, and of the grand Design he was ready to
put in Execution. I gave him the Letter, which I have joined to this Relation,
and with which i will finish it.

A VOYAGE TO The World of Cartesius.
PART IV.
MY Soul thus seated on the Pineal Gland of my Brain, as a Queen upon her
Throne, to conduct and govern all the Mo^^ons of the Machine of my Body, was
extrea^ly pleased with the change of her Ideas; and complimented her self with
the honorable new Character of Cartesian, wherewith I began to be distinguished
amongst the Learned. I found my self immediately disposed for the Humor and
Spirit of that Tribe of Philosophers; and could not mention, without disdain,
the Philosophy of the Colleges, good only, said I, to corrupt the Mind, and
fill it with empty and confused Ideas, and fit for nothing but to entertain the
vanity of a Pedant. Descartes was the first, and indeed the only Philosopher,
the World has ever known; the re^t in respect of him were mere Children
Wranglers and Legendaries. Being invited some days after to a Thesis of
Philosophy, it cannot be imagined what Violence it was to me to resolve to go.
I could not forbear gaping all the while I staid, looking down from the
exaltation of my Soul, with pity on all I heard. One of the first things I did,
was the degrading the Suarez's, Fonseca's, Smigletius's and Goudin's, etc. in
my Library, cashiering them of the considerable Post they held, and abandoning
them to a moldy Chest of Lumber, there to lie at the Mercy of the Dust and
Vermin, to be succeeded by M. Descartes, bound in a fine Turkey Cover, and all
his illustrious Disciples.

Before my Conversion to Cartesianism, I was so pitiful and Tenderhearted,
that I could not so much as see a Chicken killed: But since I was once
persuaded that Beasts were destitute both of Knowledge and Sense, scarce a Dog
in all the Town, wherein I was, could escape me, for the making Anatomical
Dissections, wherein I my self was Operator, without the least inkling of
Compassion or Remorse; as also at the opening of the Disputes and Assemblies of
the Learned, which I thought good to keep at my House, for the inhancing and
propagating the Doctrine of my Master in the Country; the first Oration I made
before them, was an Invective against the Ignorance and Injustice of that
Senator, the Ar^opagite, that caused a Noble Man's Child to be declared for
ever Incapacitated from entering on the Public Government, whom he had observed
take pleasure in pricking out the Eyes of Jack-Daws, that were given him to
play with.

Notwithstanding, I must ingenuously confess, that as resolved a Cartesian as I
was, I was not insensible of some weighty Scruples, the more Ingenious sort
raised in me, in our Conferences. I perceived also that the farther I went, the
more they increased, and if M. Descartes does not settle and compose the
Fluctuation of my Mind, by a just and clever Answer to the Letter I have wrote
him on that Subject, I have great Fears the Traces of my Brain will change, and
the Animal Spirits resume their wonted Current. This is the Copy of the Letter
I sent to M. Descartes, that contains the principal of those Difficulties,
which I thought not unworthy of the Public.

A Letter to M. Descartes.
Monsieur,
I Cannot sufficiently express my Acknowledgments, of the Honors and
Civilities I received from you, during that transitory Stay I made in your
Parts of the highest Heavens: The few good Qualities and Accomplishments, you
must necessarily find in me, prevented not your treating me as a Person
qualified with the greatest Merit. For you to build an entire World before my
Face, and to give your self the trouble of making me comprehend the whole
Contrivance, to see all the Wheels and Springs of so admirable a Machine, was
an Honor greater in its kind, than what the King vouchsafes Ambassadors,
Princes and mighty Personages, by commanding all the Waterworks to be played
for them at Versailles. You may infallibly reckon from that time, that I am
devotedly at your Service; and that having made your self absolute Master of my
Understanding, by those sublimated Notices you have communicated, you have yet
more irresistibly captivated my Will, by those extraordinary Favors you have
heaped upon me.

The Reverend Father Mersennus, who readily condescended to the trouble of this
Letter, will inform you more at large, both what my real Sentiments are of your
Person and your Doctrine. My Behavior, since my return, has thoroughly
convinced him, that there never was a Disciple more Zealous than my self, for
the Honor, Growth and Advancement of the Sect. In less than a Month, since my
Arrival from your World, I have cast Terror and Confusion in the Face of
Peripateticism throughout the Land. I have inspirited with new Life and
Courage, those few drooping Cartesians that remained, but lived in Obscurity
and Silence, solacing themselves with the private enjoyment of Truth, but were
very remiss in promoting her Interest there, where she had been but ill
received. Twice every Week I hold public Disputes at my House, and endeavor
therein, as much as possible, to give Vogue and Reputation to your Doctrine; I
have already made some Conquests among the Peripateticks, many whereof appear
there, and excepting two or three, who are ungovernably headstrong and
conceited, they will all be my own, as soon as I shall have answered some
pretty substantial Objections, they have proposed against several Points of
your Philosophy. The chief of which respect the general Construction of your
World. And whereas in that Affair, they pretend to destroy your Conclusions by
your own Principles, and some amongst them are Men of Parts, that give a
specious and probable turn to their Arguments, in so much that I have sometimes
been put to it to find the Fallacy, I thought my self obliged to have recourse
unto the Oracle, and that I could do nothing better than consult You your self,
as you gave me Permission, and entreat you to communicate your Thoughts, as
soon as possible thereupon. A Voyage from the third Heaven to this Place, is no
great business for your little Moor. Thus then these Gentlemen, to my best
Remembrance, fell to Work.

They began by proposing two or three trite Arguments, daily made use of in the
Desks, to confute your System; and to show that it is a mere Chymera, and not
to be suffered as a simple Hypothesis, should they grant the Principles you
your self lay down. M. Descartes (say they) supposes, first, That God creates
Matter; secondly, That he divides it into infinite little cubical Parts, and
lastly, determining several great Portions of this Matter, he puts them in a
circular Motion, and at once makes the little cubical Parts, of which the great
Portions, called by him Vortexes, are composed, to turn about their proper
Center. But it is impossible, they adjoyn, to conceive the division and motion
of Matter upon his Principles.

For^ as to the division, it can be conceived but by one of these two ways;
either by supposing betwixt the Parts divided some empty Spaces, or imagining
those Intervals filled up with some Bodies or Matter of a different Nature from
the Parts. And thus though Nature every where is full, we conceive four Dice
laid close to one another, as four distinct cubical Bodies; for though there is
nothing of a void betwixt them, we yet perceive a little Interval filled with
Air, that hinders our Conception of them, as of one single Body: But by the
Principles of Cartesianism, we can conceive it neither one way nor the other.
For we must not suppose a Vacuity betwixt the Parts divided, since a Vacuum is
utterly thrown out of that System. Nor is it easier to conceive a Body of a
different Nature, since the distinction of Bodies, according to the Author of
the System, is not to be conceived, till after the agitation and motion of
Matter. That division therefore is an Absurdity.

As to the business of Motion, that is in a worse Case still; for how is it
possible to conceive that all those cubical Parts, that are universally hard,
impenetrable and incapable of Compression, should turn about their Center, and
break in pieces, unless they find or make a Vacuum? For the diminutiveness of
them will not help us out, since let them be as little as you can suppose them,
they are still hard and impenetrable as Adamant, and all combine together to
desist the Motion of each Particular. That Hypothesis therefore is
indefensible, and Descartes his very first Supposition is denied.

These, Monsieur, were the first Passes these Gentlemen made at me, the first
Blows I was to ward off, in the Defense of the System of your World. They had
been taken out of the Books of very Ingenious Men; and whereas the Gentlemen,
your Disciples (as if it was their Maxim and their Method, never to be put out
of their own Road, which is barely to give an Exposition and a Proof of their
Doctrine) trouble not much their Heads with Objections that are made them, since
they are not obliged to the formal Answer of the Desk; these Arguments passed
for unanswerable, and such as at the very entrance of Dispute baffled the
Cartesian. But the more impregnable my Adversaries appeared in so good
Accoutrements and Arms, the more my Honor was advanced in disabling and
disarming them.

As I had diligently read your Works, and above all, the Book of Principles,
and that Entitled, a Treatise concerning Light, or M. Descartes's World, I
answered the first Argument, by pleading a false Indictment charged on you, for
making a distinction of Instants betwixt the Division and the Motion, as if you
had held that God divided the Matter in one Instant, and moved it another: I
said you never supposed that Matter was divided before its Motion: That the
manner of proposing your System in the third Part of Principles, supposed no
such distinction, and that in the Treatise of Light, where you described the
formation of the World, you said positively the contrary; advertising your
Reader, That that Division of Matter consisted not in God's separating its
Parts, so as to leave a Vacuity betwixt them; but that all the distinction, you
supposed God made in them, consisted in the diversity of Motions that he gave,
causing some from the first instant of their Creation to commence their Motion
one way, some another; so that in this Instance Division and Motion were the
same Thing, or at farthest one could not be without the other. That you would
be as forward as any of them to confess, That nothing was more absurd, in
reference to your other Principles, than to suppose the Parts of Matter still
and in Repose, and yet divided, since, according to you, the Union of the Parts
of a solid Body, such as Matter must be conceived before its Motion, consists
in that Rest they enjoy by one another: And farther, that it was full as easy
to comprehend how Division was made by Motion, and yet cotemporary with the
same Motion, as to understand how I can tear a Sheet of Paper, by dividing it
in two half Sheets, one whereof I hand toward the East, the other toward the
West. I hereupon produced the Books that I had cited, and showed them the very
Places in dispute: They were convinced by plain Matter of Fact, and had no more
to urge against it.

But we had not so soon done with the Motion of Matter; we must necessary still
dispute, though very calmly, without the least Passion or wrangling, since the
generality of those I had to deal with were well bred, honest Gentlemen, that
would submit to Reason. The Question was, to explain, how the Parts of Matter,
which we conceived so closely pressed against one another, as not the least
Interval was left betwixt them, throughout the Mass, and which we also supposed
solid, from a settled Rest could skip into Motion.

After these Gentlemen had copiously discoursed upon the Subject, I asked them,
If as stanch Peripateticks as they were, they were thoroughly convinced, that
the Fludity of Water, for instance, Was an absolute Quality, that when it was
congealed it became Solid, by an absoute Accident, called Solidity, and that
when it was dissolved, it became Liquid by an absolute Accident called
Fluidity? That one of these Accidents made Lead run when heated, and the other
fixed it when it began to cool? And on the contrary, if having read the
Delicate Natural and Intelligible Way of M. Descartes's explaining the Nature
of Fluidity, and the Properties of Fluid Bodies, by the Motion of the
insensible Parts of those Bodies (a Motion which the mere Dissolution of Salts
in common Water, and of Metals in Aqua Fortis evidently demonstrates) they were
not at least come over to us in that Point? The most of them answered, That as
they were persuaded there was no doing without absolute Qualities, in the
explication of an abundance of Phenomenas, that which they could most easily
part with was Fluidity, and that they would not quarrel with me thereupon.

This supposed ( said I) Gentlemen, you shall be speedily satisfied, or more
perplexed than M. Descartes; for in short, in your own System, the World is
full, there is an Abhorrence of a Vacuum through the whole: Motion,
notwithstanding, both is and does continue, the Sensible and Insensible Parts
of Bodies are moved, nor does their Hardness and Impenetrability stop their
Progress. Why may not M. Descartes's Matter, that is no more impenetrable than
yours, enjoy the same Privilege and Charter? Why must his Motion be more
impossible? both you and us suppose the self same Thing, and we have no more
to do than defend our selves against the Epicureans, who think they demonstrate
by Motion, the Necessity of their little insensible Vacuities interspersed
throughout all Bodies. Their pretended Domonstration amounts to this; To the
end a Body may move, it is necessary it disturb another Body from its Place:
That other cannot stir, because it has not where to go, if all is full:
Therefore Motion will be impossible, if there is no Receptacle or a Vacuum. On
the other Hand, supposing a Vacuum among Bodies, they may be compressed in
lesser Room, and consequently may make Way for such as press against them; and
thus Motion will be made. This is a mere Fallacy of theirs, which both you and
we can easily unriddle, by only telling the Epicureans, That to conceive how
Motion is performed without a Vacuum, we need only understand, That a Body is
never moved alone, but that in the same Instant one Body quits its Place,
another crowds in and takes it: And when I conceive one Body may in the same
Moment take the Place another Body leaves, I perfectly conceive Motion, for
there lies all the Mystery.

My Peripateticks seemed surpised to see me come over them thus readily, with
so neat a Conclusion, drawn from a Principle they had so freely granted me, and
doubtless repented them of their Condescension: But I proceeded, by telling
them, I scorned to take an Advantage over them from their Courtesy, though
they were obliged to it by the Evidence of the Truth, and I was unwilling they
should reproach me, as perhaps they did already in their Hearts, for having
used Surprise, and abused their good Nature to ensnare them; and therefore I
would endeavor by their own Principles to enforce to them, at least the
Probability of the Truth I was defending.

Gentlemen ( said I) there are Prejudices in the Case that we are upon,
proceeding from the Imagination more than Reason: We imagine, in the first
Place, That a Body which we fancy in the midst of the Matter of the World, is
far more pressed, if we suppose that Matter Solid, than it would be upon
Supposition it were Fluid, which is manifestly false: For if the World be full,
whether with Solid Matter or with Fluid, there is neither more nor less of it,
but an equal Quantity in each Supposition; and consequently its Parts are no
more close and crowded, supposing it Hard than if you suppose it Fluid. Again,
we are apt to believe, That a Body, whilst it is Liquid, is ever ready to give
way to the Motion of another Body; and on the contrary, whilst it is Solid, it
is incapable of that Compliance, if encompassed with other Solid Bodies. The
first is proved evidently false, by a very common Experiment: Fill a Glass
Bottle with Water, whose Neck is long and slender, then turn the Mouth of it
downwards, placing it perpendicularly upright, the Water by its own Weight is
forced toward the Earth, it meets no other Body in its Way but Air, that is
still more Liquid than it self; yet notwithstanding the Gravity and Propensity
of the Water to put itself in Motion, notwithstanding the Fluidity of the Air
that is below it, its Motion is impossible, and the Air makes as great an
Opposition as could a Solid Body, wherewith you should have firmly stopped the
Orifice of the Bottle: What is it then that thus obstructs the Motion of the
Water? It Is the Air and Water's being in such a Situation, as no Tendency or
Attempt whatsoever of the Water can determine the Air, or any other Body, to
come and fill its Place in the same instant that it leaves it: For as soon as
it can, that is to say, as soon as you shall incline the Bottle a little
Side-ways, and consequently make Way for a little Line of Air, to wind itself
in by the Side of the Water, the Motion will follow proportionably to the Space
that the Air shall fill. We must not then suppose that a Liquid Body is ever
disposed to yield to the Motion of other Bodies: Nor ought we more to imagine,
that when a Body is Solid, and surrounded with other Solid Bodies, it never is
inclinable to be moved, which I thus prove.

Let us suppose an hollow Globe perfectly full, partly with Water, and partly
with a vast many little solid Bodies, of every Make and Figure, dispersed all
over this Mass of Water. Let us conceive all these Bodies settled and at rest;
being that the Water fills all the Spaces betwixt these little Bodies, we
imagine the Parts of this Water of all sorts of Figures, as are the Spaces
which they fill. Thus we conceive in those Spaces your little Globes of Water,
little Triangles, little Cubes, little Hexagons, etc. Let us suppose now, that
Water and all those little Bodies put in Motion.

Making then Reflection on the Figure of the Parts of this Water, before the
Motion, we easily conceive an Alteration in all these Figures, in the instant
of Motion; that is to say, the little Globes of Water are divided in two
half-Globes, the Cubes of Water lose their Angles, and so on. Of these little
Parts, whether Solid or Liquid, some receive more Motion, some less, and
briefly all so determine one another, as not the least empty Space is left, but
upon one's forsaking of a Place another repossesses it in the very instant: And
all this is easily performed by the proneness of the watery Parts to break and
disengage themselves from one another. Thus in the first instant of the Motion,
we imagine that there happened a Change of infinite Figures; that this Change
was made only by the Fraction or Separation of the Parts; that that Fraction
was occasioned by the Motion, and that the Motion was impossible without that
Fraction: That the Impulse that served to put these Bodies in Motion, was the
Cause of both the Motion and Fraction: That the Fraction of a Part was caused
immediately, whether by one of the Solid Bodies, or by another part of the
Water; for instance, the Angle of a Cube was no otherwise separated from the
rest of the Mass, or any other Part to which it was joined, than by another
part that slipped in betwixt them both, or so exactly seized its Place, as to fit
it to an Hair; and finally that nothing could prevent the Motion and Fraction
of the Parts, except such a Situation among themselves, as rendered it
impossible for one Part to take the Place of another in the Moment of
Desertion; For all being full before the Motion, it is necessary in the Motion
all remain full still.

Let us suppose at present, all this Water and all these little Bodies restated
in the same Condition they were in before the Motion: And let us conceive
instead of the parts of Water, that possessed all the Intervals betwixt the
solid Bodies, some other solid Bodies that precisely take up the same Space the
Watery parts took up before: Or let us only suppose the Water congealed, but
without any diminution or augmentation of its Mass. Let us farther suppose,
that God made an attempt to move this Matter; and that he endeavored at once
to divide all its parts exactly in the same manner as the parts of Water, whose
place it fills, were divided in the instant of their Motion. I suppose not any
Motion yet, but only an Effort for the producing it, and there is no
Contradiction in that Effort: But I maintain, that from that Effort or Attempt,
Motion and Fraction must inevitably follow: And thus I argue.

From that Attempt which I suppose, Motion and Fraction must needs follow, if
nothing hinders: But nothing hinders: For the disposition to Motion and to
Fraction is the same in this Hypothesis, wherein I suppose nothing but solid
Bodies, as it was in the foregoing, wherein I suppose liquid Bodies mixed with
solid ones; and if the repugnancy to Motion and to Fraction, which some imagine
in the latter, be invincible, it would be invincible in the former too.

For if in the first Hypothesis of liquid Bodies mingled with solid ones, we
imagine the parts so crowded and determined, as that one going to move another
is unable to gain its place, in the same instant we imagine that the Motion and
Fraction of parts can never be: As it happens in the Experiment of the Bottle
before mentioned: Because an absolute fullness being supposed, all the parts
combine in the resistance of the Motion of each Particular: But whilst we
conceive the parts of this Matter so pushed and determined, that supposing one
to move, another in the same Instant takes its place, and another the place of
that; thus we conceive Motion and Fraction infallibly must follow the
Impulsion. But in the second Hypothesis of solid Bodies, supposing God to force
and determine the parts of those Bodies precisely in the same manner, as the
Parts of Water had been determined in the first Hypothesis, at the first
instant of Motion and Fraction; it is plain, that in case one move, another
must instantly take its place, since it is exactly driven and determined, as
the parts of Water was that took that place. Therefore Motion must follow in
the second Hypothesis as in the first.

All the difference lies in this, that the parts of Water being with the
greatest ease imaginably divided, but a very inconsiderable force is required
to move them; and the parts of solid Bodies being more difficult to be divided,
a far greater impulse would be required to do it: But M. Descartes has liberty,
if he pleases, to suppose this Infinte; and that resistance which God would
find, would not be of all the parts in general, against the division of each in
Particular; a resistance we find insurmountable in Plenitute that is fluid: But
would only be the resistance of each part against its own Division, which we
can most distinctly conceive not to come up to invincible.

In a word, the Motion and Division of solid Bodies is possible in Pleno,
whilst we conceive the different parts of these same Bodies pushed toward all
parts imaginable of the Space, and so determined that upon one's Desertion of a
place another immediately fills it: For without this Proviso, Motion is
impossible even in Fluids, and with it, it is necessary though in solid Bodies.

Although, said I unto them, this Explication seems to me a true Demonstration,
yet I pretend not to recommend it unto you as such. I am satisfied if it only
staggers your Opinion of the certainty of the contrary Arguments, ordinarily
made use of in this matter; and I question not but, that after you have
considered it with Attention, you will grant me more than at present I demand.

In effect my Academicks seemed well enough satisfied with what I said; scarce
above one Scruple more stuck by them proceeding from a Supposal of theirs, that
in the first Instant of division you gave a cubical Figure to all the parts of
Matter. A Circumstance that still blunted their Imagination. To this I
answered, that would they but reflect on what I had been explaining to them,
they would clearly perceive that Circumstance made no particular Difficulty;
but thoroughly to dispossess them of all uneasiness, I assured them, you never
had made that Supposition, as your own Words might easily convince them; that
in your Book of Principles, you suppose no more than this, That all the parts
of Matter were not Spherical; and that in your Discourse of Light, you give
them all imaginable Figures: I farther showed* them the places, and brought
them to confess the little Honesty or Exactness of some Authors, who thus
adapted the Exposition of your Doctrine to their Fancy, and the way that lay
most advantageous to attack you in. Lastly, in two or three Words I gave them
your own Thoughts and Sense thereupon, which I always took to be the same with
this, viz. That God in the first agitation and division of Matter, reduced it
into all kind of Figures, which he forced and determined every way toward all
sides of the Space: That he thereby made a liquid Body; great Portions whereof
he after took to move them circularly and make Vortexes, wherein the generality
of the insensible parts that constitute them, turned round about their Center;
that by this Motion there was made a continual change in the parts of Matter,
some losing their Angles, others uniting and linking themselves to one another.
That I, after you, believed the same thing happened every moment among the
insensible parts of all liquid Bodies; and thence it was that you inferred the
Existence and Distinction of your three Elements. I flatter my self Monsieur,
you will not be much dissatisfied at my Answers, and that you will acknowledge
that how far soever I am behind-hand with the rest of your Disciples in Parts
and Penetration, there are but few that exceed me in the Attention you desire
your Readers to bring with them in entering on your Books, and Application
requisite before they pass their Judgment, and especially before they venture
to oppose them or defend them.

But to pursue in giving you the Account of my Conferences: This I have been
mentioning had two Effects. The first was to break a little our Peripateticks
of that mischievous Opinion, they had admitted of your Doctrine, which they had
till then regarded as full of Contradictions and Absurdities, absolutely
incapable of Defense, and as a System that undermined it self. The other was,
to cause two or three of the most subtle and discerning of them, to apply
themselves closely to the reading and examination of your Books; whereby they
have found Difficulties in earnest, that seem to me to be truly so, and upon
which, as I at first observed to you, I was forced to make my Appeal to you
your self. For I must confess that as Haughty as I was, upon my first Success,
I am now reduced to such a Maze, as makes your Light and Assistance necessary
to extricate me thence.

It Is now a Fortnight that these Gentlemen have desisted to urge any thing
against your Doctrine; and three or four Conferences in the Interim have passed
in the explaining your Sentiments, and resolving some Questions they proposed
to me, upon several particular Passages of your Books, of which they thought,
at least pretended that they thought, they did not rightly take the meaning.
This was only a Stratagem they made use of to trapan me. I was well aware of
that petty Conspiracy, which doubtless would have given me some disturbance,
having to deal with Men of admirable Sense, had not the goodness of the Cause I
managed, bore up my Courage and Resolution. To conclude, two Days since they
braved it at an high rate; and promising or threatening in a short time, to
confute the greatest part of your Metaphysics and your Physics, they told me
they would immediately fall aboard the System of your Vortexes: That that was
to attack you in the main part; and they questioned not but they had upon that
Article, wherewith to ruin your Physics to all Intents and Purposes.

Notwithstanding, whereas they are as Courtly and Obliging, as Ingenuous and
Judicious, and besides were well persuaded of the difficulty of their
Arguments, to save me that Perplexity and Confusion, in the trouble they
foresaw I should be put to, in giving the Solution, they would not oblige me to
answer them on the place: But were content to give them me in Writing, that I
might return my Answer at my leisure: They only read them over to me, to see if
I comprehended their Sense; and I protest to you, though I seemed to Vapor, I
was extraordinary pleased in my Mind, with those little Differences which they
paid me: For they argued only from Matter of Fact and Principles drawn Word for
Word out of your Books, which they turned one against another, and made them
destroy themselves in so plausible and probable a manner, as required M.
Descartes himself, at least one better skilled than I am, to refute them. I
shall transcribe the principal things of their Memoire, and in their own
Expression. They have given it this Title.

Objections offered a Cartesian by some Peripateticks, against the general
System of M. Descartes's World.
FIRST, they pretend to prove that the Posture and Array in which M. Descartes
has marshaled his Matter, or his three Elements in his Vortexes, thwarts and
contradicts his general Rules of Motion, which he gives himself, and the
Properties he attributes to every of those Elements. And thence they will draw
such Consequences as entirely overthrow his Doctrine touching the Nature of
Light.

Secondly, they will show that his manner of explaining Light is no ways
consistent with (not to repeat his Position of the Elements in the Vortexes,
but) the very disposition of his Vortexes amongst themselves.

Thirdly, they will prove, that by the Principles of M. Descartes, the Earth,
no more than any other Planet, can be priviledg'd with a Peculiar Vortex in the
Vortex of the Sun. Which being once more Demonstrated, all M. Descartes's
Astronomy is turned topsy-turvy, and the whole OEconomis of his World utterly
routed and destroyed.

The first Argument.
1. We forthwith take for granted, that Master-Principle of M. Descartes, That
every Body circularly moved constantly endeavors to eccentrick it self, and
escape from the Circle it describes.

2. From that universal Principle immediately follows this particular
Consequence, that in a Vortex, where the Matter of the first, second and third
Element are circularly moved, all three endeavor to acquire a Motion
eccenctrick to the Vortex.

3. We infer yet farther, from the same Principle, another Conclusion, That in
that general Attempt, made by different Bodies thus agitated and confused, to
deviate from the Center of their Motion, those that are most agitated and are
most fit for Motion, those, I say, must have the advantage and ascendent over
the rest, to gain the Circumference of the Circle the Vortex describes, and
consequently to compel the less agitated, and less fit for Motion toward the
Center of the Vortex.

Though this Conclusion should have no visible and necessary Connection with
the Principle, as indeed it has: Yet we might warrant our use of it, by
producing M. Descartes to vouch the same thing, in several places of his Books,
and particularly in his fourth Part of the Book of Principles. Where he gives
the reason for the Motion of heavy Bodies toward the Center by this same
Proposition. Numb. 23.
That it was by virtue of that Principle, that in the Vortex of the Earth,
Terrestrial Bodies are below the Air, and the Air below the Celestial Matter.

To these we only add one more that M. Descartes frequently repeats, especially
in the third and fourth Part of Principles, and in the eighth Chapter of his
Tract of Light, viz. That the first and second Element have much more
agitation, and are far more fit for Motion than the third, whose parts are
ragged and branchy, and of a very irregular Figure.

All this supposed, let us agree with M. Descartes, that Matter having been
created such as he advances, God was able to divide, and actuate it with
Motion, and that he effectively has divided it and moved it. Let us stop now,
and fix our Imagination and our Thoughts upon that great Partition of Matter,
or upon that Vortex, that has the polar Star for its Center. Let us conceive
that portion of Matter, made up of an infinite number of little insensible
Parts it self turned round, whilst all the little Parts are also turned about
their proper Center.

From this Motion must arise the three Elements, that is, the most exquisitely
subtle dust of the first Element, the little Balls of the second, and the
ramous Parts of the third, all which are Parts of the same Matter differing
from one another merely by their Figure and their Bigness.

Whether the third Element be cotemporary with the other two, as M. Descartes
seems in some measure to suppose in his Treatise of Light: Or, whether it be
formed by the Conjunction of several Parts of the first Element hooked to one
another, as he seems to teach in the Book of Principles: That Philosopher
pretends, that in that justling and concussion of Matter, when it has lasted
long enough to break the Angles of most of the agitated Parts, the Matter of
the first Element must be posted in two principal places. First, in the whole
Space of the Vortex, where it ought to be dispersed, to fill exactly all the
Intervals found betwixt the Balls of the second Element, whereof the whole
Substance of the Vortex or the Heaven is composed; Secondly, at the Center,
whither it must be forced by the Balls of the second Element to descend, to
constitute a Spherical and Fluid Body, which is nothing but the Star it self,
that by the circular agitation of its Matter, and the struggle that Matter
makes to procure its Enlargement from the Center of its Vortex, thrusts the
Globules of the second Element that is above it, to all Points imaginable, and
communicating by their means that Impression to our Eyes, produces in them the
sensation of Light.

This is the Sum of all M. Descartes's fine Doctrine on this Subject. But we
offer to demonstrate to him, by the aforesaid Principles, which are all his
own, that it is not the Matter of the first Element, but the third that ought
to constitute the Center of the Vortex; and thus the Stars must not be
luminous, nor the Sun any more than they, but all must be opaque Bodies, as are
the Planets, the Earth, and solid Masses composed of the unactive and almost
motionless Parts of the third Element, entangled and linked with one another.

The Demonstration.
When several Bodies or Parts of Matter are circularly moved together, those
which have the least Agitation, and are least disposed for Motion, are the
least able to make their escape from the Center. And on the contrary, those
that have most agitation, and are best disposed for Motion, are most able to
make their escape, and compel the other downwards to the Center. This is the
third Principle I have supposed, after having deduced it from M. Descartes.

But the Matter of the first and second Element have much more agitation, and
are exceedingly better disposed for Motion than the Matter of the third. This
is the fourth Principle which M. Descartes constantly supposes.

Therefore the Matter of the third Element, not that of the first, ought to
take up the Center of the Vortex. Which is the Proposition to be demonstrated;
and is contradictory to that of M. Descartes, on which he founds his whole
System concerning Light. Therefore the Sun and Stars must be dark, not
resplendent Bodies. We charge nothing upon him here, but what is expressly his
own; and we demand at the same time by which of his Principles, not knowing
what to do with the Fragments of the blotches of the Sun, nor what use to put
them to at the Center, or near the Center of the Vortex where they are gathered
and dispersed, he makes them wrest and force themselves in to the midst of the
Circumference, as branched and incapable of Motion as they are; and constitute
a sort of Air, which, according to him, is extended as far as the Sphere of
Mercury or farther? How comes it to pass that the first or second Element, P.
3. Prin. cip. numb. 100.
that are either at the Center or near the Center, or immediately below these
broken parts, resign so patiently the right they have by Virtue of their
vehement agitation and proneness unto Motion, to the place the others get
possession of toward the Circumference? And if once that irregularity and
disorder, so opposite to the Laws M. Descartes has established in his World be
tolerated toward the Sun; why must a Stone that near our Earth shall be cast
into the Air be violently retorted toward the Center, by the Matter of the
second Element below it, under pretense that the Stone has usurped a place
unbefitting its Quality, and only due to the Matter it has displaced, on
account of its vehement Motion?

And thus it is that M. Descartes's Principles agree. Thus he is so very frugal
as to make them serve for several purposes, even for contradictory Conclusions,
with the assistance of some little Comparisons he can well enough manage, to
the blinding those that read his Works but carelessly, and are commonly designed
for nothing but to disguise his Paralogisms, and put off his Propositions that
Reason cannot justify.

The second Argument.
In order to comprehend this Difficulty, we must suppose with M. Descartes,
that all the fixed Stars are not contained in the Circumference of the same
Sphere, nor equally distant from the Center of the visible World. That some are
sunk deeper in the vast Spaces of the Firmament, others dive nearer to the
Center of the World. We must also remember that each of them have their proper
Vortex, of which they are themselves the Center, and that those Vortexes are so
many different Spheres ranged above, below, and on the sides of one another. As
for Instance, we must conceive the Vortex of the Sun, in which floats our
Earth, with the other Planets, as a fluid Sphere, surrounded with many others
like it, which it touches in several points of its external Superficies, just
as a Bowl encompassed on every side with other Bowls touches them all in
different parts of its Circumference.

S The Vortex of the Sun.
In the third place we must recollect M. Descartes's manner of explaining
Light, which consists in that endeavor the Matter of the first Element makes
at the Center of the Vortex, to get farther from the Center, whence, pressing
on the Celestial Matter, or the second Element in all imaginable Points, that
impulse and that pressure light on all the Lines that reach to the
Circumference of the Vortex; some of which necessarily falling on our Eye, when
directed toward the Star or Sun, make such a Pression and Vibration there, as
determine our Soul to that Perception which goes by the Name of Vision.

This Figure will easily explain it, where the little Points at the Center of
the Circle represent the Matter of the first Element, or the Body of the Star.
The Lines drawn out to the Circumference, represent the Celestial Matter, whose
Rays concenter in the Eye placed at the Circumference of the Vortex.

We presume to affirm, That in this Situation of the Vortexes, we who are in
that of the Sun should not be able to see the Stars, Monsieur Descartes's
Principles supposed.

Let us add to the preceding Figure, four other Vortexes, supposing them the
Vortexes of four Stars that are nearest to that of the Sun.

Let the Eye, placed in the other Figure to behold the Sun, be turned toward
one of these Vortexes, to behold, for Instance, the Star B. we will demonstrate
by M. Descartes's Principles, that it is not possible to be seen.

The Demonstration.
The Eye can no ways obtain the sight of the Star B, but by means of the Rays
or Lines of the Celestial Matter, pushed by that Impulse the Star B. causes in
struggling to get from the Center of its Vortex, which Impulse is communicated
to the Eye, by its pressure and concussion of the Strings of the Optic Nerve.
But this is impossible, supposing the Eye placed in the Vortex of the Sun. And
thus we prove it.

That Impulse must be communicated to the Eye by one of these two ways; either
immediately by a Ray, or Line of Matter drawn from the Vortex of the Star and
Terminating in the Eye; or mediately by a Line of the Solary Vortex, in which
the Eye is placed, retorted on the Eye by the Vortex of the Star. As if the
Line B, A. of the Stellary Vortex, should retort upon the Eye the Line A. C. of
the Solary Vortex. For it is impossible to conceive the Star should cause any
Impression on the Eye but by one of these two ways: But neither the one nor the
other will serve our turn.

Not the first, because the Vortexes, according to M. Descartes, have each
their circumscribed and separate Sphere of activity, and a Motion altogether
different. Insomuch that the Lines of the one are never blended with the Lines
of the other: But end severally at the Circumference of their own Vortex; and
if once that Communication or rather Confusion should be admitted, all would
speedily return, into that confused and disorderly Chaos, from which M.
Descartes will have his World extracted, by the only Laws of Motion; and
farther, since there is no point in the Vortex of the Sun, wherein we cannot
see the Star, the Matter of the Stars Vortex must necessarily possess all the
Space of the Vortex of the Sun; than which nothing can be more absurd.

There remains the second way, which will prove as useless as the former to M.
Descartes, proceeding on his Principles; forasmuch as with him the Vortexes,
though unequal perhaps in Bigness, must be ever equally matched in Power and
Efficacy. For, says he, unless there was that equality betwixt them, they would
infallibly destroy each other. Now that equality proceeds from this, that the
Star of a Vortex moving still uniformly round, presses the Matter of its Sphere
toward the Circumference, and against the neighboring Vortexes precisely with
so much force as the Stars of the other Vortexes press the Matter of their
Sphere in opposition to it. Which is the reason, according to him, that they
always maintain their Ground against each other: But from hence also we
manifestly conclude, That the Matter of one Vortex is incapable of repelling
that of another, or causing it to recoil toward the Center, from whence it
struggles and contends to move with all its force, relieved also with the whole
Posse of the Star that pushes it. Therefore that Effort, the Matter of a Star
makes to get farther off the Center, can make no Impression on our Eye, so long
as it is in the Solary Vortex; since the communication of that Impression is
utterly prevented by the Matter of the Solary Vortex, that with all its might
and main resists it, and consequently hinders that pressure on the Organ, which
is the only cause of Sight. To explain our selves by a comparison much like
that so often made use of by M. Descartes. Let us suppose a blind Man, whose
Hand stirring neither one way nor other, touches the end of a Staff. Let us
again suppose his Hand so capacitated and disposed, that for the Perception of
the Staff it is not sufficient that it be immediately contiguous to it, but
that there be besides that Contact, some pressure of the Staff against the
Hand. Let us in the third place suppose another Hand, pushing it strongly
against that of the blind Man. Lastly, let us suppose that a third Person,
holding the Staff in the middle, endeavors to withhold it from the Hand of the
blind Man, and that this endeavor be exactly equal to that the second Hand
makes the contrary way. In this case the Staff, will advance neither one way
nor other, it will make no pressure on the Hand of the blind Man, and
consequently, according to the first part of the Supposition, he will not be
sensible of it.

Let us apply this to the Case in Dispute: We will imagine a Line of Celestial
Matter reaching from the Eye to the Circumference of the Solary Vortex. The
immediate Conjunction of that Line with the Eye is insufficient to produce the
sensation of Light, unless something more be added. That then which must be
added, is an impulse and pressure of that Line against the Eye, which will
determine it to see; and this is the Doctrine of M. Descartes. But now whence
comes that pressure in the Hypothesis before us? It cannot proceed precisely
from that Line of Celestial Matter, seeing it makes a directly contrary
Attempt, to withdraw it self from the Eye toward the Circumference of the
Solary Vortex. It must then, if at all, proceed from the Line of the
neighboring Star's Vortex, that reflects the aforesaid Line against the Eye.
But this making as forcible an Attempt to get from, as that to press it on the
Eye; it is plain, that Effort and Impulse can no more reach the Eye, than can
the Effort of the Hand that pushes the Staff, arrive to the Hand of the blind
Man; and that the Eye admits no pression from the Celestial Matter requisite to
cause the Perception of Sight: Like as the blind Man's Hand receives no
Impression of the Staff, requisite to excite the Sense of Feeling, or to cause
the Perception of the Staff; and consequently the Eye, placed in the Vortex of
the Sun, will be as far from seeing the Star, as the blind Man from feeling the
Staff.

But for a Confirmation of all this, we must remember, that in the Principles
of Descartes, not only what interrupts that Effort and that Pressure, but also
what ever weakens or curtails one or the other, consequently frustrates the
effect of the luminous Object on the Eye; and thus it is that Philosopher
explains the spots of the Sun, or those defailures of Light, that appear in
several parts of the Unequal of that Luminary. For, according to him, the parts
of the third Element, hookt and engendered with each other on the Surface of the
Sun, keep the Matter of the first Element, of which the Sun is made, from
pushing the Celestial Matter toward my Eye, with so much force as formerly:
Which is the reason that the Lines of the Celestial Matter, which touch my Eye,
and which we suppose extended to that Matter of the third Element flak'd upon
the Body of the Sun, are no longer Rays of Light, that should represent to me
that part of the Sun as bright as all the rest. So that the Light, which I
perceive in all the Sun besides, causes me to perceive in that part of the Sun
a defect of Light, which we call a Spot or Stain. Now it is evident that this
Portion of Matter of the third Element, that only floats upon the Surface of
the Sun, breaks the force, wherewith the Matter of the Sun pushes the Celestial
Matter against my Eye, much less, than if a force equal to that of the Matter
of the Sun stood determined, and fully bent against it, as it happens in this
Case, where the Matter of the Solary Vortex withstands the Effort of the Star,
and consequently hinders it from making any Impression on my Eye. And here let
M. Descartes shuffle and cut, and make what stir he pleases to recover his
Reader, by an Explication of Refractions made in the Rays of the Star, upon
their passage through the Vortex of the Sun; his only Design is to lurk and
secure himself in that Darkness and Obscurity with which he purposely benights
the Question. Let him only tell us what he means by those Rays of the Star that
arrive to the Earth athwart the Solary Vortex. But what we have said will
sufficiently evidence, how groundless and trifling will appear whatever shall
be urged thereupon.

But if it be impossible to conceive the communication of the Effort and
Impulsion of a Star, whose Vortex immediately borders on the Suns, what will
become of the other Stars, whose Vortexes are infinitely distant from that of
the Sun, and which must make a sensible impression on our Eye across a great
many Vortexes, whose Matter is differently moved, and are all so many Obstacles
to that Communication? Doubtless, though all we have been urging amounted not
to a Demonstration, in respect of the Stars situate near the Sun, it would
infallibly, in respect of all the other. So that instead of those infinite
Stars, we see sparkling in the F^rmament by night, we should not discover an
hundred with the best Perspectives.

What now if we should add it were impossible to see the Sun it self? Yet this
may be proved by the same Principles; for no more is requisite for this, than
that the Earth should have a particular Vortex, whose Motion should equalize
and resist that of the Celestial Matter which the Sun pushes toward our Eyes.
But so much is true, according to Descartes himself; for he expressly teaches,
That the Earth has a particular Vortex, whose Matter struggles as much as
possible from the Center. That effort is contrary to the effort of the Matter
of the Solary Vortex on that side which is enlightened by the Sun. That effort
is equal to that of the Matter of the Sun: Otherwise the Vortex of the Earth
would run to ruin. Therefore the Impression of the Sun cannot be communicated
to our Eye.

What shall we say of the Planets and Comets, which are seen by the help only
of the reflected Rays of the Sun, and that consequently are not so strong as if
they were direct? If the Earth's Vortex, arguing on Descartes's Principles, is
able to obstruct the latter, how much easier is it to obstruct the former, and
hinders us from seeing all those Stars?

All this seemed very difficult; and before we turned Cartesians, we had a mind
to be satisfied thereupon. But one thing yet remains, and perhaps something
better than ordinary, upon the particular Vortex of the Earth, which is Matter
of a third Difficulty in us.

The third Argument.
This third Difficulty is well grounded on M. Descartes's Principles, and
brings such weighty Consequences against the System of his World, as though all
the rest were insignificant, would alone unravel the finest Contexture in it.
He supposes the Earth to have a Vortex particular to it self in the great
Vortex of the Sun. A Privilege also he confers on Jupiter, but denies the
Moon. He explains this Supposition in a plain and very familiar way,
exemplifying it by those great Whirl-pools we sometimes see in Rivers. In the
midst of these great Whirl-pools there are several little ones, that attend the
Motion of the bigger, and are carried round their Center, and at once whirl
Chips and Straws about their own. Nothing could be better thought on for the
making us understand how the Earth and Jupiter, when carried about the Sun by
the Matter of the Grand Solary Vortex, at the same time cause the other Planets
to circuit about themselves; how the Moon is forced about the Earth, and four
little Planets about Jupiter. But as Ill-luck would have it, examining that
Hypothesis by the Principles of our Philosopher, we found it absolutely
impossible.

The Demonstration.
Either the particular Vortex attributed to the Earth is the same with what it
had, whilst yet it was a Star; or else it is a new one, made since the
Destruction of the other. We maintain that neither the one nor the other can be
said. Therefore it can have none at all.

It cannot be that it formerly had. For it is M. Descartes's Position that a
Star degenerates into a Planet or a Comet, by the loss only of its Vortex.
According to him, a Vortex is preserved merely by its Matter, having as much
Motion and Resistance as the Matter of those about it; and its Matter loses
that equality of Motion and Resistance, when the Star at the Center can no
longer communicate so much by reason of the Scum that covers it. Now the Earth
is a Star not only covered with a Scum or Dross, but with several thick Crusts
of an unaccountable Depth. So that it was incapable of preserving its Vortex,
which must have been quite and clean destroyed, and swallowed up (as M.
Descartes's Latin Word expresses it) by that of the Sun. Let us see then if the
Earth was able to procure a new one since its removal near the Sun. S the Sun.
T the Earth. A B C D the little Vortex of the Earth. N A C Z the great Orb
wherein the Earth is carried round the Sun.


M. Descartes takes this same course to communicate hi^ Thoughts: He makes this
Figure which represents the Vortex of the Sun, in which the Center S is the Sun
it self. The little Circle or Ellipsis designed with C. D. B. A. represents the
(...) Matter which carries the Planet round the Sun moves far swifter than the
Planet. He explains, I say, this Supposition by the Simily of a Boat falling
down a River, which goes on much slower than the Water that flows under it: A
plausible comparison at first sight, but that has nothing solid in it: Since
the reason of the Boats tardy Motion in respect of the Water that forces it
along, is wanting in the Planet, steered in the midst of the Celestial Matter.
The reason is this, that part of the Boat, which stands above the Water, meets
with the opposition of the Air, which bends its course differently from the
Water, and consequently resists the Motion wherewith the Water influences the
Boat. And the greater that resistance is, as in a contrary Wind, the slower is
the Motion of the Boat, in comparison with that of the Water. And the less the
resistance is, as when the Wind stands fair, the swifter is the motion of the
Boat: But this is not to be found in the Planet, plunged in the midst of the
Celestial Matter: It preserves entirely all that Motion the Celestial Matter
can impress upon it, free from all external Opposition. Besides, being of it
self indifferent to Motion, or to rest, to such or such a degree of Motion, or
this or that Determination, it offers no resistance, as M. Descartes himself
speaks to the Matter of the Heaven.

He gives next the reason of that inequality of Motion of the Celestial Matter,
and of the Planet carried by it; which is ( says he) that though such little
Bodies, as are the insensible parts of the Celestial Matter, conspiring all
together to act confederately against a great one, may be as prevalent as that;
notwithstanding they can never move it in all respects so swift, as they are
moved themselves; 'cause though they are united in some of their Motions which
they communicate unto it, they infallibly disagree in others which they cannot
communicate. Either we are mistaken, or this is a mere Gipsy-talk, at least in
relation to the Business we are upon; and one of these Slights of Hand, we have
observed M. Descartes from time to time to make use of, designedly to blind his
Reader, and to conceal from him the Lameness and Imperfection of a Conclusion
necessary to his System; which he is well aware of, but is unwilling any one
else should see. It Is but bringing some pretty sort of Comparison that may
prepare the Mind, and sooth and tame (if we may so speak) the Imagination of
his Reader, though commonly it never comes up to the stress of the Difficulty;
and then clapping on it for a Confirmation some abstracted Reason, that few
either can or will take pains to understand, and the Business is done;
foreseeing that being half-gain'd already by the Comparison, they will easily
surrender themselves to the least appearance of Truth, which he shall give them
a glimpse of in his reason, that often is a mere fallacy at bottom. And as for
this before us: What matters it, though the little Bodies, that drive on a
great one, should have several Motions? What though they do not communicate all
these several Motions, provided they have still Strength enough to force it on,
that the Body makes no resistance, that they all combine, as we suppose, with
M. Descartes, to communicate the Motion requisite, and that we conceive them
all pressing on its Surface, so as to push it toward the place where they are
pushed themselves? For certainly in all these Circumstances, we must conceive
it going at as great a rate as they.

And yet from a Principle so weakly established as this, he concludes, That the
Celestial Matter ought to move the Planet round its own Center, and constitute
a little Heaven about it, to turn at the same time as the great one. But not
now to controvert that Supposition, as poorly proved as it is, let us pursue
him in his reasoning; and to see if it be good, let us imagine the Earth T. as
it were suspended in a Void, and let us fancy a Circle of Celestial Matter as
thick as the Diameter of the Earth, that viol^ntly rushing like a Torrent,
carries it suddenly away: But as we suppose this Torrent to be swifter than the
Earth, methinks without having puzzled our Heads much with the Rules of the
Determinations of Motion, we might readily conceive it, upon its violent
dashing against the Earth, to be immediately divided in two Parts or Arms,
whereof one should run above, the other below it; and whether we conceive this
Stream of an equal, or a greater depth, than the Diameter of the Earth, it
would diffuse it self round its Surface, above, below, and on every side.
Whence it follows, that it would impress no Motion on it about its own Center,
but would moreover deprive it of that Motion if it had one; all the Lines of
the Torrent counterpoizing one another, and resisting the Determinations they
should meet with in the Earth contrary to their own.

Here ought to be the foregoing Figure, p. 278.

Now methinks in explaining these things thus, it is not a bare Similitude that
we offer, but a perfect Idea of that which ought to happen in the Motion of the
Celestial Matter, wherein the Earth is carried round the Sun,

Wherefore then will Descartes have the Celestial Matter that carries the
Earth, and insists against its Superficies toward A, making greater haste than
the Earth, bend its whole Current from A to B, not suffering half of it to run
from A to D? For it is impossible for things to be, or to be conceived
otherwise. But if it ought to fall out thus, as questionless it ought, the
Earth no longer-has a Vortex; since the Matter flowing from A to D, prevents
that which flows from A to B from returning by C. D. Nothing can be more plain
and evident than this Demonstration.

But let us suppose per impossible, that the Matter when arrived at A, should
entirely make a double, to run toward B. Would it make a Vortex? No by no
means. For advancing from B. to C. and arriving at C. it ought to deviate from
the Center of its Motion, and continue its Progress toward Z. The Reason given
for it in the Principles of Descartes, is, That* this is the very place in all
the little Circle it had begun to describe, where it finds least resistance.
First, because the Matter it meets in that same Point is already on its Motion
toward Z. and freely resigns its place. Secondly, because that which is below
it, that is to say betwixt D. and C. resists it, and hinders its Descent, being
more weighty, according to M. Descartes. And thirdly, because the Circle C Z.
is its natural place, according to the same Philosopher. It will flow therefore
more toward Z. than D. and consequently make no Vortex.

But let us farther suppose a Vortex made, and the Matter continuing its round,
from A. to B. from B. to C. and from C. to A. would this Vortex last? Not at
all. For we must suppose one of these three things: Either that it is stronger
than the Vortex of the Sun, that is, its Matter has a stronger bent and
tendency from its Center, than the Matter of the Sun's Vortex has from his, or
that it is weaker; or that they both are equal. If it is weaker it must be
destroyed by the Vortex of the Sun. If stronger it must ruin his. It remains
then that its Strength be equal with the Suns: And M. Descartes must
unavoidably suppose it: But how will he prove it to us, I say not by a
Demonstration (we will not put him on so hard a Task) but how will he bring the
least Conjecture to give this Supposition a pretense to probability? Cannot we
on the other side produce several Reasons to destroy this Supposition? Cannot
we show, in case the Vortex of the Earth was as strong as that of the Sun, and
the little Globules wrested themselves as forcibly from the Center of their
Vortex, that the Earth it self would appear a Sun* and so would Jupiter to
boot? Since that which makes the Center of a Vortex to us seem luminous, is
only the vehement Motion of its Matter? Though Descartes says the Center would
be drained of all its Matter, might not we however, imitating the Style of that
Philosopher, compare the Vortex of the Sun quite from S. to D. to a vast Ocean,
whose boystrous Tide swelling against the Stream of a little River, by which we
illustrate the Vortex of the Earth, obliges it to fall back again, and adds a
Determination to its Waters quite contrary to its former? But with Descartes
for a Vortex to be destroyed, and for the Matter of the Vortex to take the
Motion and Determination of another, is one and the same thing. Let M.
Descartes but prove his Vortex of the Earth with the least part of the reason
we have brought against it, or by as natural a Comparison as we have used to
demonstrate it a mere Chimera, and he need not fear to stand the Test, Sallies
and Assaults, of the best of his Adversaries.

What now if we should fall to examining the Difficulties that may be gathered
from the little Planet in particular, I mean the Moon considered in the petty
Vortex of the Earth? Should we probably find less Matter of Objection?

Here ought to be the foregoing Figure, p. 278.

We advance no more than this, that supposing the Moon when arrived at A. was
carried on toward B. she ought to deviate from her Vortex in C. For first,
That Is the external Superficies of the little Vortex, as M. Descartes will not
deny. Secondly, She Attempts to leave her Vortex, by his grand Principle of
circular Motion. He pretends she cannot make her escape toward B. because the
Matter of the Solary Vortex in that place is more light and active, and repels
her toward the Center. Nor can she, according to him, make downwards toward
K. for that, says he, the Celestial Matter on that side is heavier than the
Moon, and equally opposes her Descent: But we say she will get out of her
Circle at C. and continue her Progress toward Z. For being in C. she finds no
resistance, since the Matter of C. Z. is that of her own Circle, which is
already on its March, and willing to give up its place. Besides, being in that
place, she actually makes an Attempt to get rid of the Center of her Motion,
that is to say, of T. she therefore will accomplish her escape, since there is
no Obstacle in that as is found in the other Points; and being cast out of her
Circle, she will be obliged to continue her Journey toward Z. by the Matter
placed above, and below her in the Circle, for the self-same Reasons as are
given by M. Descartes.

Yet in spite of all this, it cannot be denied, but that M. Descartes had good
reason to order his Suppositions of these things as he did. His System was too
far advanced to think of stopping at so small an Obstacle as a Moon. All the
Grandee-Planets were placed severally, according to the Quality and Preeminence
their Solidity had given them. Madam Luna too was seated in the Circle of the
Earth. There was only one little Inconvenience in the case, which was, that she
must necessarily take a turn about the Earth, and consequently must be
sometimes in the Earths own Circle, and sometimes out of it. She must therefore
have a little Vortex of her own. And this is the best, as also only reason that
can be given for his making one on purpose: And setting this aside, the Laws of
Staticks alone could never have prevailed with his Frugality, to put it self to
that extraordinary Expense.

We had not insisted so long upon this Article, had not we considered it as the
capital Point in the Cartesian System; and as the Foundation of that prodigious
Edifice, which has been taken in our days by so many, for the compleatest
Mastery of a Human Mind. Let us see the Importance of our Demonstration by the
Corollaries drawn from it.

Consequences of the preceding Demonstration.
The first Consequence belongs to Astronomy and the Phenomena of the Planets.
For first of all, there being no such thing as a Vortex, the Moon turns no
longer round the Earth, since, according to M. Descartes, the only reason of
her circuiting is the Vortex that carries her aloft. Secondly the four
Satellites of Jupiter, must be cashiered of their Dignity and Employment, which
they only enjoy on account of the continual Centry they keep about him, and
that by means of a particular Vortex attributed to that Planet, as well as to
the Earth, in the grand Vortex of the Sun. For all that we have said of the
Vortex of the Earth and of the Moon, ought to be applied to Jupiter and his
guard du Corpse.

These two Particulars in Astronomy are considerable enough to assure us that
the World of M. Descartes is not that of Gods own making, which we live in, but
of a very different Architecture and Contrivance.

The second Consequence respects almost all the principal Phenomena's of the
lower World in general, whereof we will only concern our selves with the most
considerable and easiest to be understood. It Is by the means only of the Vortex
of the Earth, that the Cartesians, following their Master, explain the gravity
of Bodies, and account for the Motion which they have toward the Center of the
Earth. For to instance, say they, when you cast a Stone up in the Air, it
forces below it a Mass of the second Element, and Air equal to its bulk: But
that same Mass has a far greater agitation, and is better disposed for Motion,
and consequently has more power to spring fromward the Center of its Vortex
than the Stone that scarce contains any thing but the Matter of the third
Element; and therefore must be compelled by the Matter of the second, to
descend toward the Center of the Vortex, which is to say, the Center of the
Earth. We may truly say then, that without a Vortex heavy Bodies would not fall
downwards, on the contrary they would naturally fly upwards, and thus we should
see Miracles and Wonders.

According to the new System, the Sun as far out of Gunshot of the Earth as he
is, could not warrant his own Security, in case there should be a People that
enraged at the heat and scorching of his Rays, should sometime join to give him
an innumerable flight of Arrows. For these Arrows shot from the Earth, against
the Sun, would fall in the circumference of his Vortex, and in the midst of the
Matter of the second Element, which struggling all it can to get farther from
the Center of its Motion, would constrain the Bodies less capable of Motion
than it self, to descend toward the Center, that is to say, the Sun. Now these
Arrows would be Bodies far less capable of Motion than the Matter of the second
Element, therefore it would constrain them to fall toward the Sun: Undoubtedly
a very surprising thing. And now we may easily give a reason for the Experiment
that Father Mersennus formerly assured M. Descartes he had made; that in
discharging a Musket perpendicularly toward the Zenith, Let. 3. Tom. 2.
the Bullet never came down again; for it must have infallibly been carried to
the Sun.

According to this System, when we have a mind to make a Voyage, I do not say
to the Globe of the Moon as did Cyrano de Bergerac, but to the Sun it self, it
will be the easiest thing to be accomplished of a thousand. We need but turn
our Head perpendicularly toward the Sun, then give a little Spring to put our
selves in Motion, and to make room for the Matter of the Solary Vortex, that
would come bounce against the Earth, to give our Heels a hoise, and this is
all; For, according to the Principles of Descartes, it would give us such a
flirt, as in a trice would dart us to that Luminary. In short, heavy Bodies
would no longer make toward the Earth, but all would be upon the gallop to the
Sun.

What shall we say of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea; which is one of the
choicest places in all M. Descartes Philosophy, and on which account there is no
one but ought to lament the Misfortune of the Vortex? For by the assistance of
that Vortex, M. Descartes and M. Rohault speak Marvels upon that insearchable
Phenomenon of Nature. Which not only depends upon the Vortex it self, but upon
the very Figure of it, which was made oval on purpose, and singularly for it,
though probably it was not at first in the intention of the Philosopher. For
never did Tragic Poet better and more artificially prepare the Incidents of
his Piece, than M. Descartes has contrived his Conclusions. It would surprise
one to see, in his deducing them, that one word, which he let fall careless by
the way, and one would think without Design, should have been big with such an
Infinity of Delicate Consequences. A Man wonders in the third part of his
Principles, to see the figure of that Vortex, which is no better grounded than
the Vortex is it self: But when in the fourth he sees the necessity M.
Descartes had of it, to explain the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, he cannot
choose but commend his Foresight and Precaution. Not but that, for all these
pretty and specious Explications of the Phenomena of the Flux and Reflux of the
Sea, the Cartesian System may be demonstrated false in that very Particular. We
are convinced of this by those Reflections and Observations we have drawn from
the best Mathematicians since M. Descartes's time. They demonstrate by the
Observations of the Distances of the Moon, determined by her apparent
Diameters, that that Planet is as remote in many of her Conjunctions and
Oppositions, as in some of her Quadratures, and as near in some of her
Quadratures, as in several Conjunctions and Oppositions. Hence it is false that
the Apogy of the Moon is always in her Quadratures, and the Perigy in her
Conjunctions and Oppositions. Wherefore it cannot be supposed that the Moon
being in Conjunction and Opposition, is always in the little Diameter of the
Elliptick Vortex, and in her Quadratures always in the great one.

And yet it is upon this only Supposition that M. Descartes explains, and can
explain, the inequality of the Tides in the Conjunctions and Oppositions, and
in the Quadratures, as also of those we see in the Equinoxes and Solstices.

Again, if when the Moon passed our Meridian, the pressure of the Air was
remarkably so much stronger, than in an other Hour of the Day, it would be
perceivable by the ordinary Experiments of Torricellus his Tube. Yet this
difference has never been observed, though it must be very great: We could
still give many other weighty Reasons against this System: But let it be how it
will, take away its Vortex, and the Flux and Reflux must needs follow it.

Lastly, according to M. Descartes it is the Celestial Matter of this Vortex,
that having more Motion than is necessary to turn in twenty four Hours time
about the Earth, imploys the remainder to diffuse it self all manner of ways,
and together with the Matter of the third and first Element causes that great
variety of Effects and Bodies which we so much wonder at. So the Vortex being
ruined, all goes to Wreck and Confusion, and returns to its Native Chaos.
Wherefore it makes not only for the glory of M. Descartes, but for the Interest
of all Mankind to save this Vortex. For what remains, we protest we should be
wonderful glad to see the Solution of the Difficulties we have proposed against
this and the other Points, upon which we shall resign our selves entire and
sincere Proselytes to Cartesianism.

But in answering us let no one think to put upon us, nor quote a place in M.
Descartes, to convince us he has not contradicted it in another; when it is a
plain and notorions Case. That Wheedle might take with those that have but
perfunctorily read his Works, but must show them the Contradiction in a clearer
Light, that shall take pains to compare the opposite places. We farther desire
succinct and neater Answers, than the generality of those himself has formerly
given to those many Objections, proposed against his Metaphysics. Those very
Answers raise in our Minds more Scruples than they cure: And yet because they
have been Printed, set off and tinsell'd with High-strain'd Praises of the
Author, because he gives them a Magisterial and usually a disdainful Air, and
we never see any Replies affixed to them, many are habituated to reverence them
as second Oracles, wherewith he has confirmed and explained those former of
his own pronouncing. We shall not be such tame Asses, as to be imposed on by M.
Descartes's Reputation and Authority, no more than we would be Vassals to the
esteem we have for some of his Disciples. We praise and highly approve the
Advice he gives those who are on the Inquest after Truth, to beware of
Prejudices, and shall put in Practice. These, Monsieur, are the chiefest of the
things contained in my Peripatetick Memoir. They added some few others by word
of Mo^th, as for Instance; That you would have been most horribly pestered if
any one would have track'd you step by step, in the fourth Part of your Book of
Principles, especially from Number 32. to 45. where you are so particular, in
posturing and disposing those parts of the third Element, of which you form
your Earth: That there were many things there unsatisfactory to the Mind, and
that there was not a Page wherein it might not be reasonably again and again
demanded, why such a thing ought to be rather so than otherwise, without your
being able to give a tolerable Reason for it: That they believed that piece of
your Physics was one of those that had most contributed to make your
Philosophy pass with many for a perfect Fable, ill-digested and not well hung
together: And that your Adversaries, without troubling themselves to refute the
Propositions that you make there, the Discussion whereof must needs be very
tedious, had no more to do, than to refer your Readers to the place, to make
them as ill-satisfied with you as can be wished.

They proceeded farther to say, you used to attribute Properties to your
Elements, which you was sure to take away again when they were not for your
purpose. They gave me an Instance in the Matter of the first Element: You
attribute as a Property to that Matter a great facility of division and
readiness to change its Figure, so as easily to insinuate its self in every
place, and fill all sort of Space whatever. But when it is brought for the
Explication of the Nature of the Loadstone, that Propriety growing
disadvantagious, Descartes thinks fit to change it for a contrary. There is
occasion for a little Vortex of chamfer'd Matter round the Earth, and about
each particular Loadstone, to give a Reason for the Qualities of that
miraculous Stone. Part 3. princip.
These chamfer'd parts belong to the first Element. It formerly was nothing to
them to accommodate themselves with the Figure of a Skrew, to pass and repass
betwixt the Globules of the second Element. And now in issuing from the Earth,
or from a Loadstone, the parts of Air are able to detain them. Instead of
breaking and proportioning themselves to the Figure of the Parts of Air, and
second Element mingled with it, they flock and settle in heaps about the Earth
and about the Loadstone, where they constitute a Vortex. Those that enter by
the Southern Pole are incapable of passing by the Northern, since their Figure
can no longer be adapted to that Passage; and they farther demanded, upon that
occasion, how it was possible those Snail-work'd Parts, confined and stopped thus
in a definite Space, having an intricate and confused Motion, one amongst
another, approaching the Pole of the Earth, or Magnet that was proportioned to
them, could so conveniently turn themselves an end, and present so cleverly
their Point against the Pores, in order to their entrance in those Bodies. They
pretended the contrary was more likely, and that generally the parts would
present themselves across, and thereby make a Confusion capable of stopping all
the rest, and damming up the Pores of the Earth and Magnet, so as to frustrate
all those admirable Effects we see there. They advanced one Paradox more, which
was a good Humor enough. Hitherto, said they, the most rational Philosophers
have acknowledged, that no Physical Argument could be brought against
Copernicus, to prove the Earth was not turned about its Center. But M.
Descartes who sides with that Astronomer in his Hypothesis, has furnished us
with a very conclusive one against that Motion. His topping Principle is, That
every Body circularly moved, attempts to wheel off the Center of its Motion:
This Principle is true: He thence concludes, that the Earth turning on its
Axle, would fly in Pieces, unless the Bodies, of which it is composed, were
closely pressed, and squeezed against one another by the Matter of the second
Element. This Consequence is moreover evident in his System: But now let us see
if that pressure of the Matter of the second Element is strong enough to
overpower the Effort which the Parts of the Earth make to disengage themselves
and get further from their Center. This difficulty, said they, falls only on M.
Descartes: For the School-Opinion is so far from owning such a Propensity in
the parts of the Earth, to deviate from the Center, as to suppose a quality and
inclination that naturally buckles them unto it. Now upon comparing the
pressure of Terrestrial Bodies one against another, by the Matter of the second
Element, with the Effort Terrestrial Bodies make to get far off the Center, the
Effort must surmount the pressure: For the Effort is as great as the Motion
that causes it, and the Motion is very great indeed, that can carry the Earth
several Leagues each Minute; and on the contrary, Experience shows there needs
but a very little Effort for the conquering the pressure, since no greater is
requisite, than that a Child of four years old imploys in Walking, to lift his
Foot and separate it from the Ground, whereto the pressure of the second
Element did fasten it. Wherefore it seems to be reasonably concluded, That the
Earth turns not on its Axis, since if it did, we should all be hurled in the
Air, pursuant, to M. Descartes's Principle, which yet at bottom is true in
sound Philosophy. Thus this System affords an excellent Argument against that
of Copernicus.

They yet farther observed to me some peculiar Places and Points of your
System, of the greatest Importance, which you advance, as they pretend, not
only stripped and naked of all Proof, but against all Reason in the World; they
particularly entreated me to read considerately and without prepossession, the
second Number of the fourth Part of your Book of Principles, where having
explained how the Vortex of the Earth was destroyed, and how there grew round
that cak'd and crusted Star, a spacious Fleece of Air, you not only plunge it a
great depth in the Solary Vortex, but also make that Sphere of Air keep pace,
and wait upon it thither, and ever incompass it as it still descends. They
pretend that Supposition which you throw in Gratis, and without all
Confirmation, is inconceivable; and yet if it be false, it were impossible at
present to have Air about our Earth: It is inconceivable, say they: For,
according to M. Descartes, the Air is nothing but an heap of the Parts of the
third Element, exceeding small, and very loose and disunited from each other,
and extraordinary obsequious to the Motions impressed on them by the Globules
of the second Element, in which they swim. But this being so, how comes it to
pass the Earth, traversing those immense Spaces quite from its setting out, at
the brink of the Solary Vortex, to the place in which it is, should still so
preserve all the Air about it? How by the Principles of that Philosopher could
that Mass of Air, being far less solid than the Mass of Earth, have the same
Motion, the same Determination, and same Swiftness as the Earth? How chance
those little Parts so loose and independent of each other, and so obedient to
the Motions of the Celestial Matter, have not been dispersed by the rapidness
of that Matter, which they stemmed, as the Dust is scattered by the Wind? But
added they, how is this Mass of Air at present driven along with the Earth by
the Celestial Matter? How has it all the same Motions? Is it against the Body
of the Earth, or against the Globe of Air the Celestial Matter presses, to give
both one and the other a Diurnal and an Annual Motion? Would not a Copernical
Cartesian be hard put to it to unperplex himself of this Affair?

I omit, Monsieur, many other Difficulties whose Solution probably I may find
in the Answers your Goodness will, I hope, vouchsafe the others I have already
noted in this Letter. But for what remains, I desire you to take the
earnestness wherewith I write to you, as an effect of that passionate Love you
have inspired me with, of Truth, and especially to put a favorable
Construction on my meaning. I have only transcribed your Adversaries Memoire in
their own proper Terms and Language, and I presumed the respect I owed you,
could not warrant my concealing or dissembling their insulting way of arguing.
Which will serve to let you know how much it is for my Interest, and the Honor
of our Sect, not to suffer them to triumph long.

The great and important Business, the production of a new World at present
finds you, joined to the indifference you have always had, and still have more
than ever, for the Opinions and Thoughts of Men, might reasonably make you
neglect and despise these mean and trifling Things. But those extraordinary
Instances you have given me of your Favor, encourage me to hope you will have
some Consideration of my Honor, and will not deny me your Hand to raise me
from the Ground, where I must own my self a little foiled and disheartened. I
desired the Reverend Father Mersennus to employ his Credit with you, to obtain
this Favor, and at once to assure you, as I here do, with all the Submission
and respect I am capable of, that I am with all my Heart and Soul,

MONSIEUR, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, and most zealous
Disciple.

The INDEX.
PART I.
THE different Relations given of the World of Cartesius. Page 1 The
Conversation of the Author with an old Cartesian, and the occasion of his
Voyage to the World of Cartesius. 5 Cartesius his Design of finding out the
Secret of the Soul and Body's Union, as also that of separating and reuniting
them when he pleased. 9 Cartesius his Progress in the Study and Knowledge of
Man. 10 The Mystery of the union and separation of the Soul and Body, found out
by Cartesius. 16 The use of the Mystery. 19 That Cartesius is not dead. 25 The
Secret of the union and separation of the Body and Soul known long before
Cartesius. 30 Cartesius retires into the indefinite Spaces, and makes
preparation for the building of a World there like this of ours. 31 The Author
is invited by the old Cartesian and the Spirit of Father Mersennus to come to
the building of Cartesius his World. 37 The Author's discourse with the Soul of
Father Mersennus. 39 An Explication of the manner of the Apparition of Spirits.
42 The adventure of a little Moor-Page to Regius Physician of Utrecht, formerly
a Friend, but afterward an Enemy of Cartesius. 45 The Author's Soul is
separated from his Body, by the secret of Cartesius. 51 How according to the
Principles of Cartesius all Bodily Operations may be performed as well in the
absence as presence of the Soul. 53
PART II.
THE setting out of the Author with the old Cartesian and Father Mersennus, for
the World of Cartesius. 56 What the Air is, and of what parts it is composed.
57 Wherein consists the fluidity of liquid Bodies. ibid. Motion naturally and
of it self is perpetual. 61 The falsity of Cartesius's Axiom, that there is
ever an equal quantity of Motion in the World, taking the word Motion according
to Cartesius's definition. 62 The way that Spirits converse with one another.
67 The Travelers meet upon their Road Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, and upon
what occasion. 68 Their discourse with those Philosophers, with some notable
Particulars of their History. 71 Aristotle refutes Cartesius his Method and
Meditations. 79 The old Cartesian and Father Mersennus railly upon the Sphere
of Fire that Aristotle imagined. 86 The Contradictions of Cartesius. 89 His
Disciples have endeavored to smother one of them in the French Translation of
his Works. 90 A Suit commenced formerly against the Cartesians, relating to the
Sphere of Fire. 94 A description of the Globe of the Moon. 97 Cyrano de
Bergerac banter'd by Socrates his familiar Spirit in the Globe of the Moon. 98
The inequalities observed in the Moon are partly Seas and partly Lands, shared
among the most famous Mathematicians and Philosophers, as they are to be seen
in the Maps of that Country ibid. The Traveller's descent into Gassendus, and
from thence to Mersennus 99 They Traverse the Hemisphere of the Moon that is
opposite to our Earth 100 They are denied Admission at Plato, and why 101 They
arrive at Aristotle, which they find strictly g^^rded, as a Town under
Apprehensions of a Siege 102 The Author finds there, and knows again, his
Regent in Philosophy, an old Profess^r of the University of Paris 103 A
Description of the Lyceum of the Moon 105 The old Cartesian likewise remembers
Voetius, the greatest Enemy Cartesius had in Holland 108 Some particulars of
the Life of Cartesius, and his Adventures whilst he staid in Holland 109 The
Character of Voetius 112 The Travelers Negotiation with Voetius for the
reunion of the Peripateticks and Cartesians 119 A Project of Accommodation
presented the Travelers by Voetius 122 They continue their Voyage with two
Peripatetick-Souls, that Voetius had deputed to accompany them to the World of
Cartesius ibid. In their Way they light upon the Souls of Hermotimus and Ainia,
a Roman Praetor, and Duns Scotus 123, etc. The Dispute of the Peripatetick Souls
with Father Mersennus and the old Cartesian, concerning absolute Accidents, 127
Cartesius his Explication of the Mystery of the Eucharist, not Catholic 130
They meet with Cardan in the Globe of the Moon, in the Peninsula of Dreams; the
reason of his Melancholy 132 The Travelers return to Mersennus 133 Their
reading the Project of Accommodation given them by Voetius, containing a
Confutation of a great part of the Cartesian Philosophy 134 Cartesius's
Demonstrations of the Existence of a God, refuted by a Mandarin of China 158
The Arrival of the Voyagers to the World of Cartesius 172
PART III.
CArtesius his Reception of the Travelers 174 The Discourse of the Author with
Cartesius concerning the present State and Condition of the Cartesian
Philosophy in our World 174, etc. Cartesius his Thoughts of that famous
Experiment of the Gravity of the Air, said to be M. Paschal's whereof Cartesius
pretends to be the Author 181 His Sentiments formerly of the Book of Conick
Sections, said to be wrote by M. Paschal at sixteen Years of Age 182 The
Extravagant Praises of M. Paschal's Panegyrists, and of the Preface to the Book
concerning the equilibration of Liquors 185 Cartesius his Projects for
propagating his Philosophy, whilst he was in our World 190 How he designed to
get the Jesuits on his Side, and then the Fathers of the Oratory and M. Arnauld
ibid. Decrees of the Congregation of the Oratory against Cartesianism and
Jansenism 193 The great Contest betwixt Malbranche Father of the Oratory and M.
Arnauld. The Character of the former 196 M. Arnanld compared with Admiral de
Chatillon. 201 Cartesius builds his World before the Travelers, and as he
builds it explains to them the chiefest Points of his System 207 The Confusion
of Aristotle's Ambassadors 221 The Return of the Travelers, and Arrival to our
World 238 In what Condition the Author's Soul found his Body; she is seated in
quality of a Cartesian Soul, upon the Pineal Gland of his Brain 239
PART IV.
THE Zeal of the Author, converted to Cartesianism, to promote the Sect, and
which he expresses in a Letter he wrote to Cartesius after his Return 242 He is
much perplexed by the Ingenious Peripateticks 243 The Ordinary Arguments
against Cartesius his System proposed and refuted 244 The Author sometimes
sides with Cartesius, to refute him more easily 246 Motion of Matter seems not
impossible in the Cartesian System 248 A new Method of proving it possible 250
Other Difficulties drawn from Cartesius his own Principles, proposed by the
Peripateticks to the Author, whose solution he desires of Cartesius 259 The
first Argument: That by the Principles of Cartesius, the Sun and Stars may be
proved opaque Bodies, as are the Planets of the Earth 260 Argument 2. That by
Cartesius his Principles we could not see the Stars nor the Sun it self 265
Argument 3. That Cartesius his Principles supposed, it is impossible for the
Earth to have a particular Vortex in the great Vortex of the Sun 276 The
Consequence of the preceding Demonstration in Astronomy and Physics. The Moon
could no longer turn about the Earth; nor the Satellites of Jupiter about him
287 Heavy Bodies would not descend to the Center of the Earth, but would fall
toward the Sun ibid. There would be no flux or reflux of the Sea 289 The
General Principle of all the Physical Effects of the lower World quite
over-turned 291 Cartesius his Inconstancy concerning the Properties of his
Elements 293 The Physical Arguments that are weak against Copernicus, touching
the Motion of the Earth, are strong against the Cartesians 294 Propositions of
very great importance in Physics, advanced without Proof, and supposed against
all Reason by Cartesius 296 The Author importunes Cartesius to send him the
Solution of all these Difficulties 297
The END.

