A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable The Lord Mayor Of the CITY of
LONDON, AND THE Court of ALDERMEN.

At BOW-CHVRCH, on the FEAST of S. MICHAEL, 1682.

The Day for the Election of a Lord Mayor.

By HENRY DOVE, D. D. One of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXII.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN MOORE, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of London;
And to the COURT of ALDERMEN.
MY LORD,
MY design in Preaching this Sermon was to recommend the Duty of Obedience; and
lest I should confute it first my self, it is now Printed. I could easily have
declined both with the ordinary excuses, The difficulty of the task and of the
times, The censoriousness of the Age, or my own unfitness, and might slily seek
applause by framing an Apology: But as Obedience makes no delays, so it admits
of no Excuses, especially where the Authority is good, and the thing not
unreasonable: And therefore, such as it is, I have exposed it to Public View
under your Patronage, hoping it may in some measure edify the Readers as it
pleased the Hearers.

And I am bold to prefix your Lordships Name to it, because you countenance the
Doctrine by your Example, being Eminent in those Virtues which commend a Pious
Christian, an Upright Magistrate and a Loyal Subject. That the King may never
want such Faithful Subjects, nor this Famous City such Magistrates, as are true
to the real Interest of the People by their Immovable Fidelity to the Crown,
and Conformity to the Established Laws, is the hearty Prayer of

Your Lordships most Obedient Servant, HEN. DOVE.

A SERMON ON
TITUS III. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to
obey Magistrates. --
When S. Paul had converted the Cretians to the Faith of Christ, and was
constrained to leave the Island that he might Preach the Gospel to other
Countries; he left Titus behind him with full Commission to set such things in
order as his short stay there would not allow him to reform, and to ordain
Presbyters in every City, that so the whole Island might be furnished with able
Pastors, chap. 1. 5.

And to the end, both He and They might discharge their duty to the benefit of
the Church, he gives him instructions in this Epistle how he should govern
himself and those committed to his charge: what Doctrine he should Preach, and
what Discipline he should use throughout his Province; and that not only with
an eye to the general duties of the Gospel, which are here compendiously laid
down for all orders and degrees of men; but with a special regard to those
errors and vices, which the Apostle had observed most rise among 'em.

There are many (says he) unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, who subvert
whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake: And
their mouths must be stopped; chap. 1. 10. There are others notorious for Lying,
Luxury and Sloth; for which they are branded by one of their own Poets; and I
am also able to attest the same from the little experience I had of 'em: This
witness is true; wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the
Faith, ver. 13. There are some that give heed to Jewish Fables, and Pharisaical
Traditions, teaching the commandments of men for the doctrines of God, and so
turning themselves and others from the Truth, ver. 14. men of defiled minds and
consciences, Christians in name, but Heathens in manners, filling up their
iniquity with the leven of Hypocrisy, For they profess indeed that they know
God, but in works they deny him, ver. 16. There are others given to brawling,
contention, and evil speaking, chap. 3. 2. and they were probably such as were
taxed before for idleness, such as spent their time like the men of Athens in
hearing or talking of some new matter; idle in their own, and busy in other
men's affairs, doing any thing but what they should, or nothing to the purpose,
or that which is worse than nothing: For idleness we know is the teeming mother
of Vice and Mischief, and was indeed the epidemical sin of that people; and
therefore he charges 'em again and again, that they take upon themselves some
honest profession, and abide in the station allotted to them, and perform the
duties of their own calling; which is the importance of those phrases, Be
careful to maintain good works, ver. 8. and let ours learn to maintain good
works for necessary uses, ver. 14. This is the way to preserve Unity in the
Church, and Peace in the State; and 'twill dispose 'em in time to maintain the
works of their heavenly calling too: For when men keep to their own station,
and do the works of their proper calling, they are in God's way, and have the
promise of his blessing; But when they are idle, they lie open to all the wiles
of Satan; and hence they are usually contentious, turbulent and mischievous:
when they will needs be meddling where they have nothing to do, and thrusting an
Oar into every Boat, when they leave their own station, and invade an other
man's office, there is confusion and every evil work; there is railing and
reviling, slander and backbiting, rancor and spite; there the heart is filled
with malice, and the tongue with deadly poison, and the hand with violence or
blood.

And to name no more, for the Country was full of the like disorders; there
were others addicted to Faction and Sedition, especially those of the Jewish
party; repining at the Government under which they lived, and ready upon every
occasion to stir and foment tumults: For of all the Nations under heaven the
Jews were most impatient of a Foreign Yoke, and having been once Gods peculiar
people under his immediate government and care, (though by the just judgment of
God upon 'em they had now forfeited that high Prerogative) they could not
endure to think of submitting themselves to Strangers, nor brook subjection
unto Heathen Governors. Nay, there was one Sect among 'em infatuated with the
error of Judas of Galilee, Acts 5. 37. who in the days of taxing had drawn away
much people under this pretense, that the children of Abraham ought not to be
subject to the Pagan Emperors, because they were aliens from the loins of
Abraham, and the Commonwealth of Israel.

These were scattered up and down in most quarters of the Empire, and doubtless
they swarmed in that rich and populous Island, renowned for no less than an
hundred Cities, since they were likely to gain most Proselytes and Abettors in
such places. Hence S. Hierom tells us, that the reason why the Apostle so often
inculcates the doctrine of subjection and obedience, and particularly here in
the Text, was to cure the scandal which the seditious practices of these men
had brought upon other Christians, who were generally traduced as evil doers,
and sometimes suffered Persecution upon this score, and to vindicate the honor
of Christianity it self, which was blasphemed among the Gentiles for their
sakes.

This was the state of the Cretians in those early days of the Gospel, when S.
Paul commanded Titus to teach and exhort, and rebuke 'em with all authority;
And if there be any in these last and perilous times, to whom their character,
either in part or in the whole is suited, sure we have so much the more reason
now, to warn the unruly and to animate the good Subject, by how much the
Government under which we live, (blessed be God for it) is incomparably more
easy, just and good, than that of the first Ages. And therefore I beseech you
to hearken with meekness, while I speak the words that become sound doctrine,
not to exasperate or accuse any, unless their own hearts condemn 'em, but to
show the reasonableness and equity of our dutiful Obedience to the Established
Government. And for so doing, not only the Doctrine it self, but the discretion
of the choice, is sufficiently warranted from this Apostolical Commission. Put
them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates.

In which words we may observe three general parts.

I. Public Authority presupposed. Principalities and Powers. II. Subjection
and obedience enjoined. To be subject and to obey. III. The duty of Ministers
inculcated. Put them in mind.
Of these briefly in their order as they plainly lie before us: To which I
shall add such reasons and motives as may endear the duty to us; and then
conclude with a word in season, to the occasion that brought us hither.

1. Public Authority presupposed under the words [(...)] Principalities and
Powers: For Magistrates are not expressed in the Original, but seem to be added
in our Translation to explain the other, as by an usual Figure in Holy Writ.
The Power it self is put for the Persons endued with it; the abstract for the
concrete, Luke 12. 11. Romans 8. 38. And to save me the labor of Quotations, it
is twice together in one Verse, Romans 13. 3. For Rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil; will thou then not be afraid of the Power? do that
which is good. Where Rulers and Power interpret each other; and by good and
evil works is plainly meant, the doers of such works. To be subject therefore
to the Power, is to submit to the Persons invested with it; as S. Peter also
enjoins in that known place, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves unto every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; to every humane creature, so it is
literally translated, though our Mother Tongue does scarce reach the importance
of it: For it is an Idiom originally derived from the Hebrew Language, wherein
(...) or creature is often put for Man, because he is the most excellent of all
the visible Creation, Mark 16. 15. And hence the Syriac renders it, To all the
sons of men, that have the preeminence among you; to all that excel in Dignity
and Authority, Subordinate or Supreme: For so, to put all out of doubt, the
Apostle interprets himself, ver. 14. Whether it be to the King as supreme, or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. And this I note by the way,
because the Papists on one hand, and the Sectaries on the other have made such
a stir about this phrase, and are glad of any appearance from Holy Writ, that
they may lessen or invalidate the Authority of Kings, while one side would have
'em derive it from the Pope, the other from the People; and tho they manage the
Argument by different mediums, yet they both agree in the conclusion, which is
to bring 'em under, or to pull 'em down, as it best serves their turn. For tho
it be styled here, an Ordinance of man, because it is ordained among men, and
chiefly respects them, yet by S. Paul it is expressly called, The Ordinance of
God, because it is derived from him alone. Romans 13. 2. Whosoever resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. And here again our submission to the King is required for
the Lord's sake; and why for his? but because the Lord has ordained him as his
Vicegerent upon Earth for the administration of Public Justice, in dispensing
Rewards and Punishments according to men's deserts. And because he is God's
Creature, not only as he is a man, but as he is a Magistrate, Be obedient to
him in well doing; for so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men, ver. 15. That you may stop the mouths
of the Heathens, who will judge of your Religion by your actions, and think that
no better than your selves; for if you disturb the peace of the world, reason
it self will bid 'em conclude, Surely that Religion is not from God, which
teaches men to break the Civil Peace, and perverts the ends of Government.
There is no way to answer the Argument, or avoid the Reproach, but by your
dutiful Obedience, and therefore submit your selves; for so is the will of God:
were it not his Ordinance, he would never will it. Which brings me to the
second.

2. Subjection and Obedience enjoined, (...). The first imports Subjection and
Subordination in a regular way, where some are above, and others gradually
below: The second denotes properly Obedience to the just Laws and Commands, by
which I mean such, as do not interfere with Gods. For in every public and
great Community, there is of necessity a Supreme Power, whether it be lodged in
few or more: and in every Kingdom where the Crown is Imperial, a Supreme
Governor next under God, to whom all the rest are subject by Gods appointment.
There is a (...) on Gods part, and an (...) on ours; the Ordinance and Command
is Gods, the Submission and Obedience ours, according to the will of God. And
the Rule of our Obedience is as plain as the Command is positive, whether we
respect Liberty, or Conscience, or both together, which are the usual pleas
against it: If that pass into a Law, which is not repugnant or inconsistent
with the Laws of God, we must needs obey it; if it be repugnant we must needs
submit under it, tho we must not comply with it; for here that antecedent Rule
takes place, To obey God rather than man. The reason of which is unalterable
and eternal, because God is higher than the highest, the Almighty Sovereign and
Lawgiver. And this is employed in the words immediately following the Text,
lest men should think the Apostle requires it right or wrong, Put them in mind
to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work: intimating to us, that we
must show our Obedience by our ready compliance in good works; for if the
Magistrate command what is evil, there is no obligation to perform it, because
nothing can oblige us to do evil. But what if the thing commanded be neither
good nor evil, but of an indifferent nature; what must we do in that case? why
then we must undoubtedly obey it; for otherwise there will be nothing left
wherein the Magistrate may use his Power: What is good or evil in it self, must
be done or avoided for Gods sake: what is not so in it self, but only in regard
of the end for which it is enacted, being judged so by the Magistrate for the
good of the Community; this must be observed, both for God's sake, and his too,
because God requires our Obedience to him in these things. But what then
becomes of our Liberty, if another must judge for us? It is where it was before;
we must obey, and yet we are as Free as Christ has made us; nay, I doubt not
to add, we are most Christ's Freemen, when we duly obey our Governors just
Laws; for seeing Christ has commanded us to be subject not only for wrath, but
for conscience sake, that so we may avoid the guilt of sin, that Obedience
which keeps us from sin, (which is the only vassallage of a Christian) can by
no means infringe, but does rather advance our Christian liberty. As free (says
the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 16. and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God. As though he had said, Don't urge
your liberty for (...) a pretense to cover your craftiness; as if that would
excuse your Disobedience; you are free indeed from sin, but not from your
Obedience; Servants of God and yet Subjects to your Prince; and so much the
better Servants, by how much the more you are good Subjects.

Another pretense of near a kin to the former is that of Private Conscience;
for here again it is pleaded, if I judge the thing commanded to be evil, I cannot
be free from sin; for to me at least it is sin if I comply with the command
during that persuasion, because the Apostle assures me, Whatever is not of
Faith is sin. But what if that persuasion be false and erroneous, do thou not
in cur a greater sin? What if it be not assuredly grounded on the clear word of
God, but only in thine own Opinion? must a private Opinion weigh down the
balance against the public good, the laws of the Community, the conscience of
thy Governors, and the great Rule of Faith and Conscience, which is the Word of
God? That Word commands thee to Obey, and so binds thy Conscience; thy
Conscience bids thee not, and so binds thee; which of these in reason shall
take place? must the Word be nulled by the Conscience, or the Conscience guided
by the Word? What a sad condition is that man in, who brings himself into these
straits, where Conscience which should be his guide becomes his greatest snare?
For such is the nature of an erroneous Conscience, that it unavoidably betrays
a man to sin, whether he follows it, or whether he resists it; if he follows
his Conscience, he sins, because it is erroneous; if he resists it, though it
be erroneous, he sins against his Conscience. What then shall be done, or which
way shall he turn him in these perplexities? Why, I know no expedient but one,
that he speedily burst his shackles which himself has fastened and not God, by
ridding himself of such a Conscience. And the way to do it is this;

That he be not overwise in his own conceit, nor lean too much to his own
understanding, but allow the possibility at least of his being in an arrear,
that he is but a man, and not infallible: That he lay by Passion and Prejudice,
Partiality and Interest, and sincerely examine the grounds of his persuasion,
not as pleasing men, but God, who tries our hearts: That he humbly consult
better judgments, whose Office it is to inform and ease his Conscience, namely
his lawful Pastors, whose lips preserve knowledge, and are set over him in the
Lord for that purpose: That he believe his Governors have a conscience too, for
which they must answer as well as himself; and seriously consider whose plea is
most likely to be admitted at Gods high Tribunal: And above all, that he
earnestly pray for the spirit of meekness and humility, the spirit of wisdom,
discretion and holy fear, while he compares his Conscience with the Rule of
Gods Word impartially, and God himself has promised that he will not deny his
Spirit to such an humble Petitioner and Enquirer.

To these we may add in the last place the pretense of both together, I mean
liberty of Conscience. To which I shall only say two things, and I leave 'em to
your sober thoughts: First, that Liberty of Conscience, if it be well weighed,
sounds like a contradiction; for Liberty imports Freedom without restraint, but
Conscience was always bound ever since it was placed in humane souls; and
though I am free indeed in regard of my actions which proceed from my
Conscience, yet my Conscience is not freed from the antecedent rule of my
actions, which is the law of God; for by that it is always bound. The second is
this, There is no such phrase throughout the Bible as Liberty of Conscience,
not one place in Scripture where these words are joined together, but for
Obedience to our Governors there are twenty. I speak to knowing men, judge ye,
what I say.

3. The Duty of Pastors and Teachers inculcated; (...), Put 'em in mind,
admonish 'em often of it, and bring it to their remembrance: as S. Peter does
twice together in another case, 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13. I will not be negligent to
put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be
established in the present truth. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this
tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance. There are some
Duties we are apt to forget, or very unwilling to remember; and some people
there are who care not for a Preacher, that tells 'em often of their duty;
insomuch that a moral Preacher is made a byword to fright the ignorant, and to
render 'em averse, since they know no better, to their Parish Guide. If he rub
up their memories, and touch 'em in a sore place, they have a present remedy
for it, by hearing him no more, and think it sufficient excuse for their
absence or going astray, to say, They do not like his way. But if a man set up
a separate Congregation in opposition to the Established Laws and Worship, if
he fill their heads with aerie Speculations instead of practical and searching
Truths, if he daub with untemper'd mortar, or sow pillows under their elbows,
and can but help 'em to an evasion from this Duty of Obedience, he shall have
followers enough. This is a certain sign, that tho men know their Duty, yet
they do not love to hear it, since they forsake the Assemblies where they are
honestly told of it. But (my Brethren) I am persuaded better things of you,
though I thus speak, and things that accompany salvation: For certainly
Obedience to Magistrates is one of those things, and if they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation, then surely we may safely affirm, and that
without any breach of Charity, or stretching beyond our line, That they who
oppose 'em in lawful things, or refuse to obey 'em in the same, without a
timely Repentance and Reformation, are in great danger of it. Suffer me
therefore, as the Apostles lead the way both by Precept and Example, to put you
in remembrance of these things, though you know 'em as well as I, and to
inculcate a little further this Duty of Obedience, you cannot forget that you
are Subjects, and you cannot but know that Subjects are bound in conscience to
obey their lawful Governors.

Now that you may perform this Duty, not grudgingly or barely of necessity, but
with cheerful and loyal hearts, let me commend these following motives to your
serious consideration and conscientious practice.

1. Let us consider, That Obedience to Magistrates is a prime Duty of Piety and
Religion, wherein the Honor and Authority of God are particularly concerned;
not only because he requires it by manifold Precepts, but because magistrates
are his Officers and Ministers, by whom he governs the world, and administers
his Providence toward men, and to whom he has given part of his own Power for
that purpose. He removes Kings, and sets up Kings, says Daniel, 2. 21. by
him they reign, and by him they decree Justice, Prove. 8. 15. They are the
Ministers of God to us for good, says S. Paul, Romans 13. 4. In his name and
behalf they act, and him they represent, being God's visible Deputies upon
Earth by his own Commission, and instruments of his Power and Providence for
our benefit: Hence he joins 'em with himself, and sometimes styles 'em by his
own name, I have said, ye are Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. Jo. 10. 34. and frequently
also by his Sons title, Mine Anointed. I have found David my Servant, with my
Holy Oil have I Anointed him. Psalm. 89. 20. An Emblem of their Sovereignty, and
a Security also of their Persons. And again, Touch not mine Anointed. Psalm.
105. 15. Which was a Prohibition given in Charge, before that Oil was used, to
render both, sacred and inviolable. So that by obeying their Laws, and
honoring their Persons, we own the Authority of God, and submit to it, but in
the violation of either, God himself is slighted and affronted, and his
Dominion in effect disowned. This was that which influenced David's heart, and
tied up his hands from offering Violence toward Saul; and though he was next
Heir to the Crown, and already anointed to it; though Saul thirsted for his
blood, and persecuted him by force and fraud; though he had the hearts of the
people, and Saul was given up into his hands, so that he could as easily have
slain him, as he cut his skirt; I say, though he had all these plausible
incitements, and a whole combination of pretenses, yet this was that which kept
him from so great Iniquity. [1 Samuel 24. 6.] The Lord forbid that I should do
this thing unto my Master the Lords Anointed, to stretch forth my hand against
him, seeing he is the Lords Anointed. But here you will say, Had Saul his Power
from God? does God trust his Authority in the hands of Evil Kings? So the
Scripture tells us; For the Authority is still from God, though it be placed in
the hands of a sinful man, and it loses not its essence by the accession of
personal miscarriages: For these, he must stand or fall only to his own Master,
and there is no Tribunal upon Earth can judge him. Hence Daniel acknowledges
the Power of Nebuchadnezzar to be given him of God. [ Dan. 2. 37.] The God of
Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, Power and Strength, and Glory: Our Savior
owned the Authority of Pilate, even when he Condemned him, to be from above,
Joh. 19. 11. Thou could have no Authority at all against me, except it were
given thee from above. And Nero was Emperor when Saint Paul wrote to the
Romans, and yet observe in that Chapter of Loyalty and Allegiance, Romans 13. 1.
The Powers (says he) that be [(...) that are now in being] are Ordained of God,
ver. 4. and to him he Exhorts 'em to pay Tribute and Custom, Fear and Honor,
ver. 7. So that you see the sins of the person do not destroy the Power, but
that it has still the same Original, For he that ordained David did also set
up Saul, Solomon, and Jeroboam, Ezekias and Ahab, Manasses and Josias, Nero and
Constantine, Julian and Theodosius, alternately good and bad; and he that has
said in one place, By me Kings Reign, Prove. 8. 15. has said also in another, I
gave 'em a King in mine Anger, Hosea 13. 11. And from Elihu in Job, we gather,
That he makes an Hypocrite to Reign, when he is minded to scourge a sinful
People. Job. 34. 30. The Authority therefore of both is immediately from God,
To him alone they are subject, and to him they must give an account, how they
use or abuse his Authority; But all the rest are subject next under God to
them, and must give an Account to both how they discharge this Duty of
Obedience.

2. The exigence of our Civil Affairs, and the Preservation of the Public does
exact this Duty from us: For the Execution of Justice between man and man, the
safe and quiet Enjoyment of Gods Blessings, and the Welfare and Peace of the
whole Community, are extremely concerned and advanced by it. Now as Peace,
which is an inestimable good in it self, and sweetens all other Blessings, can
never be preserved without Government, so neither can Government subsist
without Obedience to it. If every man should have his will, and do that which
is right in his own Eyes, as they did when there was no King in Israel. Jud.
17. 6. there would be as many Wills and Affections as there are men: infinite
competitions and endless quarrels would arise, for every man would strive to
draw all to his own Net, and Peace would be quite banished from the face of the
Earth. No man could enjoy any thing quietly or safely but must deliver it up to
a stronger than himself; he that can kill his Neighbor, will take his
Possessions too, and the World would soon become a Den of Thieves. The only
Remedy against this intolerable inconvenience is being determined by Laws under
a common Judge and Arbitrator of differences, who is equally concerned and
indifferently affected toward all, endued with Authority to decide emergent
Cases, and armed with force to suppress Violence and Rapine. To which therefore
all men should, not only in duty and reason, but also in point of interest
refer and submit their pretenses; and he that endeavors to enervate or defeat
this excellent Provision for Public Peace, may justly be reputed an Enemy to
the whole Community, and ought to be punished as a disturber of it.

3. Obedience to our Governors is founded in the highest Equity and Reason: For
day by day we receive invaluable benefits by the influence of their Government
and Conduct; Protection of our Lives and Estates, of our Privileges,
Properties and Religion; secure Possession of the Gifts of God, and Liberty to
increase our substance by Trade and Traffic, and to eat the fruit of our
Labor, every man under his own Vine, while there is no breaking in, nor going
out, no leading into Captivity, and no just complaining in our streets. Happy
are the People that are in such a case, if we had but hearts to be thankful for
it; and if we compare our condition with other Nations, we cannot but
acknowledge our own happiness: Yea, Blessed are we of this Island who enjoy
these things in Peace, and may the Blessing of God rest upon them who promote
and preserve our Peace. Wherefore let us unanimously show forth our
thankfulness by our Obedience, and cheerfully endeavor in our several stations
to uphold and maintain that Government that maintains and secures us: it is but
an equal and just return, in regard of the benefits we receive from it; By that
we enjoy great quietness and plenty; and therefore we ought to accept it
always, and in all places, with all thankfulness. And if it be Equity to uphold
the Government because it upholds us, what is it but great Iniquity to oppose
or disturb that to which we stand so much indebted?

4. Obedience to our Governors is a duty incumbent on us in point of ingenuity
and gratitude. For in preserving the Peace and Prosperity of the Nation, they
do not only preserve ours, but for our advantage also they undergo many cares
and troubles, great toil and labor, attending continually for this very thing,
Romans 13. 6. It is a great mistake in those that judge only by appearances, to
think the Lives of our Governors more pleasant and easy than other men's;
whereas indeed they are of all most difficult and full of Trouble. Their
splendour and Attendances, their Riches and affluence of outward things, and
whatever else is necessary to support their State and Grandeur, does not half
countervail their continual sollicitudes and cares from within, their crosses
and disappointments from without, the censures and obloquies of querulous and
peevish persons, the want of ease and liberty they sustain, and all for our
sakes that we way live in quiet. In regard of what they do and endure for us,
watching early and late for our good, they are deservedly styled Parents of
their Country: and therefore it is an ungrateful thing to add to their burden,
and increase their trouble by our frowardness and disobedience; it is not only
disingenuous but unjust, not to render 'em freely what may encourage and
comfort 'em in the discharge of their arduous Office, that they may do it with
joy and not with grief. Obedience will make their Office easy, and our own
condition safe.

5. No man can disobey his Governors without breaking the most Sacred Laws of
Justice and Honesty; without downright Perjury toward God, and perfidiousness
toward man. Every one as soon as he is born, is under the Protection of the
Government, and becomes a Subject to his Natural Liege Lord; and therefore when
he comes to exercise his senses, and to discern between good and evil, as
Religion and Reason will engage him to Fear God in the first place, who has
given him Life and Being, so in the next, it will teach him, to Honor the King
and submit to the Government, by which under God he enjoys his Well-being; and
he cannot but conceive himself under a natural obligation of Obedience to the
Laws of the Community, of which Providence and Nature have made him a Member.
And in pursuance of this, as well as the Law of God, the Government has a Right
to tie the Consciences of men by the firmest bonds it can; and to exact Oaths
of Allegiance, and Promises of Fidelity and Loyalty, that so it may secure and
sustain it self, and be better enabled to Protect them. In which Promises and
Oaths being once engaged, it is horrible impiety and wickedness to violate 'em;
for nothing can excuse us from the obligation of an Oath, but the plain
unlawfulness of the matter to which we are sworn: Now this can never take place
when we swear Allegiance only to our Lawful Governors, according to the will
of God, the dictates of Nature, the reason of the thing, the Example of all
Ages, and the known Laws of our own Nation. Wherefore I counsel thee to keep
the Kings Commandment, and to live in Obedience to his Government, and that in
regard of the Oath of God, It Is the Counsel of the Preacher Eccl. 8. 2. and
it is my Duty to mind you of it.

These things being seriously considered, it will easily appear, That
Disobedience has all that is base in it, and that Rebellion contains a whole
conjugation of Wickedness: of which there seems to be an undeniable sense in
all men's minds, since even they who love the thing, do usually hate the name of
Rebels, and such as are conscious of the guilt would gladly avoid the reproach
of it; a plain indication of guilt, as guilt is a manifest Argument of Sin and
Wickedness. And therefore it is well compared by the Prophet Samuel to
Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and
stubborness is as Iniquity and Idolatry. It Is a Sin next to Blasphemy to speak
evil of dignities, a degree of profaneness to disobey 'em, and intolerable
Iniquity to Rebel against 'em. It is as bad in its own nature as Murder or
Theft, being as expressly forbidden as these, and in its consequence it is far
more mischievous: Witness the dreadful miseries that usherd in and ensued the
dissolution of a flourishing Monarchy within our own memories, when prosperous
wickedness prevailed, and Rebellion rid in Triumph. For to rifle one man of his
goods, is not so bad or hurtful, as to rob the Public of its Peace; to set an
House on fire is not so pestilent and heinous, as to be an Incendiary of the
State, to make combustions in the Nation, and to blow up the Foundations of
Public Quiet: To poison or assassinate one private Person is not so horrid as
to stabb a Commonwealth, to sow the seed of Sedition in the Peoples minds, and
to raise intestine commotions in it; in a word, to wrong one man is nothing in
comparison to the injuring of a Prince, and in Him the whole Commonweal; for
in Him you wrong me and my Neighbor, and every one that is protected by Him,
who are concerned in him, and ought to defend him as a Common Father. I might
proceed to show, how Rebellion debauches the Conscience, and hardens men in
impiety, and opens a gap to all sort of Villainy; till at length they grow
seared and senceless of the evil of Sin, and Conscience leaves off to rebuke
'em for it: For when Subjects have drawn the Sword against their Sovereign,
they usually throw away the Scabbard, and it is rare very rare to find a
Repenting Rebel. How it is directly opposite to the Spirit and Power of
Christianity, which is as its Author, holy and harmless, calm and gentle, meek
and peaceable; and no less destructive to the practice of it, while it lets
loose the Reins, and opens the floodgates of Ungodliness, gives vent to men's
Passions, Lusts and Outrage, cancells all the endearments of Love and
Affection, and violates all Obligations Sacred and Civil: How it makes the very
Profession of Religion odious and despicable, and exposes it to contempt and
reproach, as the great Cause of mischief and disturbance to the world; And this
Experience has sadly shown, for there is nothing has prejudiced and
disparaged Religion among unconcerned lookers on, more than the Factions and
Seditions it has caused; I mean the false pretenses and shadow of Religion:
for the Power of it has no such thing: Woe be to them by whom such scandals
come. And in brief, How it is contrary to the Example of Christ, the Blessed
Apostles, and the Primitive Saints and Christians; who copyed out the precepts
of the Gospel by their practice, and did never oppose or disturb the Government
under which they lived. And if my time were not almost spent, I might also
examine the pretenses that have been made for Disobedience and Resistance, and
the evasions men have found to elude (if possible) those glorious patterns: For
one has even libelled the Primitive Christians, ascribing their meekness and
submission to necessity, rather than their Religion or their Virtue, as though
they wanted sufficient Forces to resist or perhaps Courage. [So Bellarmine.]
Another sticks not to say, that the Apostles themselves in Prescribing
Subjection and Obedience, did it only to flatter the Emperors, and curry
favor with them. [So Salmeron] A third has Taught, That the Doctrine of
Resistance was a Mystery hid indeed from the first Ages, and reserved for the
last days of greater Light. [ Jo. Goodwin, Anticav. Sect. 6.] But what will not
some men say, when they are put to a plunge, and pinched with the Evidence of a
Plain Truth? The Blessed Apostles shall be called Parasites and Daubers, rather
than a Jesuit will confess himself in the wrong; and the Gospel it self belied
to countenance that which it every where condemns.

But of all the Artifices which seditious spirits have taken up, there have
been none more made use of, than the pretense of Religion and Zeal, which has
been thought so creditable a Cause to engage in, that it could once convert the
infamous title of Rebel or Traitor, to that of Patriot or Saint; and among
those that are easily blinded by their interest or success, it has quite
smothered the Odium of such Engagements: Besides which, it has had this
advantage, That it always makes Conscience of its Party, for fear it should
condemn it self, and so stifles all doubts and scruples that might otherwise
discourage the undertaking: and as some men have told a lie so often till they
believe it to be true, so have some biggoted zealots enured their minds so much
to Rebellious Principles, that they think at last they are bound in Conscience
to put 'em in execution. We have had so many, and such costly evidences of
this, in this our Nation, that they transcend the most tragical description.
From hence have sprung those dangerous Positions whereby Treason has been
defended, and Rebellion openly maintained; hence those pernicious maxims, at
once destructive of Religion and Conscience, of Laws and Government, That no
Faith is to be kept with Heretics, and That Dominion is founded in Grace; I
mention both together, not only because they were both broached in the same
School, but chiefly because we of this Nation have smarted so deeply from both:
The Jesuits first set 'em on foot, and the Anabaptists, Fifth-Monarchists and
other Sectaries followed their steps. And as it is the common Fate of Truth to
suffer from both Extremes, while one side has pleased to call us Heretics,
and the other to style themselves Saints, they have combined together, though
they would never own the Confederacy, to disturb an happy and well-setled
Government, and to ruin (as much as in them lay) the best Constitution of
Reformed Religion in the whole world. But ( blessed be God, and again I say
blessed) they are both still in being; and they mutually strengthen and uphold
each other: The Defender of the Faith of Christ is the Shield and Buckler of
his Church amongst us* and by the Divine Protection of him we are also secured
in the quiet enjoyment of our Lives and Fortunes, of our Laws and our
Immunities, and in the free and open Profession of Gods true Religion; Let us
not forfeit so great blessings by our Ingratitude to God and the King, by our
evil Lives and froward tempers, and disobedience to those Laws, which secure
these things to us. We have an excellent Government, to which Foreigners flee
for Refuge, and stand in admiration at our happiness; and they cannot imagine
what those People aile who murmur and complain in such a state, unless they be
surfeited and sick of Ease and Peace and Plenty. We have a Church whose
Doctrine, Discipline and Government, is Apostolical and Primitive; defective in
nothing so much as the Obedience of her Members, unless it be the Exercise of
her Discipline; The hatred and terror of the Romish Party, because they know
whereon we bottom, having prescription from the purest Ages against all their
intolerable Innovations and Corruptions, maintaining Order and Decency
according to the first Pattern, and most earnestly contending for that Faith
which was once delivered to the Saints; And if we be malign'd both by them and
others for adhering most firmly to the Government, it ought to be our joy, it
is our glory; For this Church was always famous for her untainted Fidelity and
Loyalty to the Crown. Oh that our Lives were as good as our Religion, that our
conversation were such as becomes the Gospel of Christ, in Purity and
Peaceableness, in Gentleness and Meekness, in Brotherly Love and Charity; and
that we were all united in consulting our Interest as well as Duty, by a
dutiful Obedience to the Established Laws: For believe me, among all the
Proposals which the various fancies of private men can project, you will find
this above all, The truest Expedient for Peace and Union: where men cannot
agree the Law decides the difference, let us therefore agree at least in This,
To be decided by the Laws. And if our Divisions arise chiefly from men's
breaking the Laws, then it naturally follows, and the consequence is so plain,
that it needs no proof, the best way to Unite us all is To keep the Laws.
Brethren, keep your Laws, and your Laws under God will keep your Liberties,
Properties and Religion safe. And more particularly I beseech you, For the sake
of God and his Church, the Kings and your own, That you would all as becomes
good Subjects give a special Instance of this Duty, while you transact the
business of this day, That so God may be glorified, the Government
strengthened, and the City credited.

THE END.
Page 13. lin. 3. for arrear, read error. Page 18. lin. 22. after God, add He
calls him twice in one verse the Minister of God.


