THE Leviathan HERETICAL: OR The Charge Exhibited in Parliament against M.
Hobbs, justified by the Refutation of a Book of his, Entitled The Historical
Narration of Heresy and the Punishments thereof. By JOHN DOWEL, Vicar of
Melton-Mowbray in Leicester Shire.

OXON Printed by L. Lichfield, and are to be sold by A. Stephens Bookseller
1683.

THE PREFACE.
THE Author of this Tract may thus be reproached Are not the Corpse of dead men
Sacred? To violate Tombs and Graves is Sacrilegious, why does the Author intend
to disturb the Manes of this universal Scholar? Will he not be permitted to
sleep quietly in the Grave? How unworthy a thing is it to insult over a dead
Lion, and write against him who rests in the dust? The Author hears these words
with a quiet mind; Certainly if to answer the works of those who are dead be so
Criminal, how heinous offenders have so many writers in all ages been? and how
Capital a Delinquent is Mr. Hobs, who has by writeing endeavored to render
the sentiments of the best and most learned men ridiculous. This Treatise
discourses with his Ghost; He dyed in 1679, and the Treatise came out in 80.
It Is his umbra, it carries his own lineaments, and speaks his own language. A
Reverend Neighbor Minister, a Learned Friend of the Authors, acquainted him
with the language of Mr. Hobs in private discourse, exactly agreeing with this
Tract, and we find the most of it cap 1, and 2. de Heresi app. ad Leviath. Ed.
Latina. I will acknowledge him a Gentleman of great parts, of a wonderful
vivacity to his old age; that he had so fine a Pen, that by the clearness, and
propriety of his Style, and exactness of his method, he gained more Proselytes
than by his Principles: few exceed him in both languages, but these aggrandize
his Crimes; he ought not to have abused such excellent qualifications, he has
so managed his Pen, that many believe him unanswerable, yet let this Tract be
considered whether he be not fully refuted, as to the Contents of his
Narrative. I will appeal to the Learned World, whether Mr. Hobs has not thrown
dirt and ugly expressions upon the Christian Religion, the best of Councils,
the whole Christian Clergy, and has abused the English Laws.

It may be again objected, This Author durst not write whilst he was a live:
Whom did Mr. Hobs ever answer, but the clear Pen of the Arch-B. of Armagh, and
the Great Professor Dr. Wallis? In the Verses which he made of himself he
vaunts a Victory, the world is the Judge, if what he says be true, That there
is an Eternal Fate and Necessity: Why can he commend himself and discommend
others; If in these Lines the Author does a thing ill, what reproof does he
deserve, he is hurried to it by a fatal Necessity. On this account his praising
himself, and dispraising others is groundless, he is charged with
contradictions from a great one, of which he endeavors to vindicate himself;
but it is in vain, his artifices are fruitless.

One of his Moral and Political Principles is, That whatsoever is just or
unjust, or to be received as true or false, is by the approbation or rejection
of the Supreme Power. He writes his Ieviathan, in which this is asserted and
defended, yet in the same eviathan he delivers those doctrines for true, which
are judged Heretical by the Church of England, and Laws of the Kingdom: To
evade this he uses all Art and Industry.

In the First part of this Answer some Doctrines which he propagated in that
Book are proved Heretical. In the Latter part is proved, That these Doctrines
are Criminal, and the persons that maintained them are liable to be punished by
the Civil Majestrate. His Book being An Historical Narrative, the Author is
forced to have recourse to Books. Mr. Hobs gives us several Histories, but
Quotes no Author; whereupon the Answerer is compelled to cite the place whence
he has taken them. No Memory, Reading, Understanding or Observation is
infinite, therefore the Author sometime uses this or the like expression, so
as to him it occurs; he abstaines from all virulent language; the hardest word,
and that but once used, is Notoriously false. Mr. Hobs gives occasion to
dispute a great part of his Leviathan, but the Answerer prosecutes his design,
to make good the Contradiction; as for Instance, Mr. Hobs averrs That God has
Parts; here is a just occasion to dispute The Nature of Spirits, but the
Author waves it, it is sufficient to prove That the Church of England has
judged that Proposition Heretical, and thereupon has contradicted himself: He
asserts, That they who embr^ce the Liberty of the Will are allied to the
Manichees. This gives a fair opportunity to discourse of Liberty and Necessity:
and he that seriously considers himself will find, the freedom of his Will
arises not from the flexibilty of the Understanding, flowing from various
impressions upon that faculty, but from the Dominion which the Will has over it
self, which the Greeks excellently express by (...), but the Author does not
meddle with that Controversy, contenting himself with the Demonstration of the
absurdity of Mr. Hobs his Imputation, and that it is contrariant to the
Doctrine of the Church of England. The Doctrine of the Sacred Trinity is
religiously embraced and entertain*d by the Church of England, as it was by the
Church of Christ in all ages; hence Lucian in his Philopatris jeered the
Primitive Christians for believing such an incredible opinion, That (...)
should be (...), and (...), (i. e.) Tres Unus, and Unus Tres, Three Persons and
One God, which scoff shows sufficiently the Faith of the Primitive Church. The
Author does not therefore dispute the Doctrine of the Trinity, but wipes off
all that Varnish with which Mr. Hobs uses to bide the deformity of his
sentiments, and makes him appear in his proper Colors; proves him Heretical,
in being an enemy to the Faith, and Doctrine of the Church of England. The like
may be said of other things which the Author treats of, the charge being made
good, that Mr. Hobs has notoriously contradicted himself: His book is answered,
and his great Postulatum demonstrated to be false, in that he is forced to
acknowledge those things which are contrary to it.

A DISCOURSE OF HERESY.
A (...) is a Greek word, and the derivations that are given of Heresy from
other words then (...), Greek or Latin, are fond and spurious. It was a word
amongst the Philosophers, Greek and Latin, used for any Sect promiscuously,
and so the acception is indifferent; but it is otherwise in sacred Scripture, in
Ecclesiastical Writers, Fathers, and Historians, amongst whom it is always used
in an evil sense, the Acts of the Apostles being excepted, where (...) is
always translated Sect, only Acts 24. 14. it is probable it is used in an ill
sense. The Reason may be this, The Catholic Church being one, what opinion was
broached by any, contrary to the Catholic Church, received an ill stamp, and
was called Heresy. The several opinions of the Philosophers were not branded
with an ill name, they were not so fixed to one School, that it should be
impious to be of another: but it is otherwise in the Church of Christ (which
owneth the Holy Jesus to be her Master, and Founder, and glorying that she is
the Pillar and ground of Truth) whosoever sets up for himself, and divulgeth to
the world an opinion contrary to the doctrine of the Church, he himself was
judged an Heretic, and his opinion, an Heresy: On this account in the Church
of Christ, in all ages the word Heresy was not a word of a middle, or
indifferent sense, but of an evil, and reproachful acceptance.

It Is granted, that the Roman Empire was full of Philosophers when the Gospel
was preached, and that some, not many, were converted: but it is denied that
most of the Pastors of the Church were chosen out of these Philosophers: The
primitive Christians had a mighty jealousy of them, and the greatest
Philosophers which were Christians, were not Bishops: such were the Professors
and Masters in the School of Alexandria, as Pantaenus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Origin, etc. The Heathens objected against the Christians, that few of them
were Learned, which caused St. Jerome to write his Book De Viris Illustribus.

It Is a gaeat attestation to the truth of Christianity, that it appeared when
Philosophy so much flourished in the world. Those great Wits, which were so
vastly furnished with Oratory, Learnning, and the Tongues, if there had been
any cheat acted by the Christians they would easily have detected it: therefore
when Christ professed that by his works he might be known, he and his Apostles
wrought those Miracles which gave a clear attestation to his doctrine. No
doubt, but some of these Philosophers were converted, but that (by reason of
their great skill in Oratory and Philosophy) most of the Primitive Church were
chosen out of the number of these Philosophers; It Is denied. In the Primitive
Church for the three first Centuries, there was not a Philosopher made a Bishop.

When Christians became numerous, they sent their Children to be instructed in
Philosophy and the Liberal Sciences, who became brave persons. But I am
ignorant if any Philosopher converted was made a Bishop. What Hobbs averrs,
that these Pastors retaining their Philosophical Dogma's, interpreting
Scriptures according to their own Sect, that thus at first Heresy entered into
the Church, is not true; for Heresy was crept into the Church in the Apostles
time, St. Paul commands Christians to beware of Heresies, and St. Peter says
there are those who shall privily bring in damnable Heresies. I do ackowledge
Tertullian wrote smartly and truly, when he termed Philosophers the Patriarchs
of Heretics. De praescriptione. Irenaeus Lib. 2. Cap. 19. gives us an account
from what Philosophers the Valentinian and Gnostick Heresies borrowed their
absurd and monstrous opinions, But then we must say, that these Heretics were
not Pastors in the Church. The first that broach't those prodigious opinions
was Simon Magus, who was only baptized. In the first Century, there was not
one Heretic, which was a Pastor or Bishop in the Church of Christ. The Heresy
of the Nicholaitans took its rise from Nicholas one of the Seven Deacons: he
did not broach that Heresy, but some who misinterpreted a passage of his, were
the Authors of it. Nor any of the Christian Clergy was the Author of any
Heresy in the second Century. Tatius was a great Orator converted by Justin
Martyr, and was the Author of the Heresy of the Encratites, but he was not of
the Clerical order. In the third Century. Novatus a Roman Presbyter broach't
his Heresy (I speak according to the best knowledge I have in the Church
history) viz. concerning the not receiving the Lapsi into Communion, but he was
not a Philosopher, nor was his opinions any wise a kin to the Dogma's of the
heathen Philosophers. Nepos was an Egyptian Bishop, not a professed Philosopher;
a person of great excellency in many things, the Author of the opinion of
Christ's reigning a 1000 years upon Earth, which opinion is founded, not upon
any of the Principles of Philosophy, but upon some passages in the Revelations.
Paulus Samosatenus made Bishop of Antioch, was the broacher of many evil
Doctrines, but he was not a Philosopher.

The design of Mr. Hobbs easily appears, he every where casts severe
Reflections upon Christianity, and its Professors. The Apostle condemns vain
Philosophy, Col. 2. which in the sense of Cl Alexandrinus is the Epicurean
Philosophy, from which Hobs borrows his Principles, Moral, Natural, and
Political. "Upon the rising of a new opinion, the Pastors of the Church
assemble themselves, if the Author of that Novelty persisted contrary to the
determination of the Church, he was laid aside, and considered as an heathen
man ( i. e.) they excommunicated him, other punishments they could inflict
none." This shall be easily granted, but what he subjoyns is utterly to be
refused: That all the punishments the Church could inflict, was only ignominy;
by this one stroke of his pen he has canceled the New Testament. To say, that
excommunication, or casting a man out of the Church, or esteeming him as an
heathen man, was but Infamy, it is to deny Christianity. One of the great
offices of the Church was Ecclesiastical discipline and the divine censures, of
which excommunication was the severest, and is still, if duly managed, the
greatest puishment. To be thrown out of the Church, to be deprived of the
Prayers of the Church, to have no part in those offices of Religion, by which
the Grace and Favor of God is obtained, and to be delivered to Satan, is this
Infamy only? To be outlawed, whereby a person is deprived of the benefit and
liberty of the law; he is deprived of the liberty of his Country, he enjoys
not a free air, house, nor harbor, and by reason a Capital penalty is inflicted
on those who afford him any reception or give him any relief, he is exposed to
the utmost peril of ruin except the outlawry be reverst. Is this only Infamy?
The Calamity that Excommunication involves a person in, is far greater. For
Excommunication acording to the Doctrine of the Primitive Church was reputed a
sentence excluing the Excommunicated Persons from the Kingdom of Heaven: and
hence by Tertullian in his Apology called futuri judicij praejudicium. Is this
only Infamy? He might have said, that Christianity is nothing, the promises and
threatenings contained in it are mere Chimaera's: thence, tho they that embrace
it, do entertain such a belief, it is but a fancy, therefore all the evil which
attends by excommunicationis only Infamy. Excommunication was not only for
Heresies, but likewise for immoralities; and excommunication did not brand a
man for an Heretic, but the person being rendered infamous for his Heresy was
(if in the bosom of the Church) cast out. That Heretic and Catholic became
not Relatives by this excommunication, nor by this did Heretic become a name,
and a name of disgrace both together. A Person by becoming an Heretic was
excommunicated, this name did preceed, not follow excommunication. It must be
acknowledged, that the Heresies concerning the Trinity were very troublesome in
the Church, but not so vexatious during the ten Persecutions, as in
Constantines time, and after; but what is the cause, that when he proposes the
Troubles arising from the Doctrine of the Trinity, he would mix those doctrines
which were wholly alienated from the doctrine of the Trinity, as those of the
Manichees.

"For, says he, according to the usual Curiosity of Natural Philosophy, they
could not abstain from disputing the first principles of Christianity, into
which they were Baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Some
there were who made them Allegorical; others would make one Creator of Good
another of Evil. This was the principal Tenet of the Manichees, who took their
Names from one Manes. This Monstrous opinion, that there were two Eternal
Principles, Light and Darkness, these were two Contrary Gods, the one the
Author of Good, the other of Evil. What is this to the Trinity?" That which he
adds is not to be endured, "From which doctrine they are not far distant that
now make the first cause of Sinful actions to be every man as to his own Sin."
Is this great Truth Manichism? To say man by his free will is the Author of
Sin. In commendation of himself in his own life thus? "I Printed then two
treatises that stung the Bishop Bramhal in his Mother Tongue. The question at
the time was, and is still, whether at Gods, or our own choice we will:" Can we
will evil at Gods choice? We therefore do affirm expressly contrariant to Mr.
Hobs, that the causation of Evil cannot be attributed to God without Impiety.
He mentioning our late fatal Wars thus -- Such Crimes and Sufferings I will not
impute unto the Deity.

I have no Sense if this be not a Repugnancy, in this Tract he affirms that
those who assert, that the causation of Evil cannot be attributed to God are
allied to the Manichees.

And yet when in the Verses, which respect his life, he recounts the English
Evils and Calamities during the Wars, he dares not impute them to the Deity.
Truly how far this Opinion is from Manichaism, let the World Judge. Can any man
have sense to believe, that if Sin flows from God the first Cause, but it must
be attributed to him? The Manichees believe an Eternal being the Author of all
Evil. Take their Monstrous opinion from themselves. There was an Epistle which
they in St. Austin called the Fundamentum, and thus begins. Manichaeus
Apostolus Jesu Christi, Providentia Dei Patris, haec sunt salubria verba de
vivo ac perenni Font. Manichaeus the Apostle of Jesus Christ by the Providence
of God the Father these are sound and wholso^e words flowing from a Liveing and
Perpetual Fountain. In this Epistle, thus, In exordio fuere duae substantiae a
se divisae etc. In the beginning there were two substances divided from one
another. God the Father had the command of Light; and then he proceeds to
describe that kingdom, he then goes to the Kingdom of Darkness, which was at
the side of Light, giveing a wild description of that Kingdom of Darkness. He
gives an account of the Black King of it, that he with his hideous Train
assaulted God the Father, the King of Light; who being afraid of him, sent
some of his Troops, who mixing with the Black Regiments, formed his World. That
what is Good must come from the King of Light, what is bad from the King of
Darkness. These frenzies of him who was (...) bewitched once that great man,
who by the Grace of God being enlightened fell from them to the Catholic Church.

St. Augustine a Presbyter in Hippo disputes Fortunatus a Manichaean Presbyter
of that City. Both dispute about the Original of the Evil of Sin, he assigns it
to the Black Prince, and quitting the Cause, affirmed, it could have no other
Original then from the Evil Nature of the Prince of Darkness. The like we find
in his second dispute with Felix the Manichaean. Saint Austin assigns rightly
this to the Free will of man. It cannot enter into my head, why Mr. Hobs should
give this assertion, my understanding is too shallow to fathom this depth.

Nothing farther to be reproved till we come to the 6 page, only this passage
may receive a little Censure page 6 " Constantine the great was made by the
valor and assistance of the Christian Soldiers sole Emperor." He not much
regarding the peculiar Providence of God, takes nonotice of that great miracle
of ye Cross appearing at Noon, with this inscription (...). The whole Army of
Constantine was inferior to Magnentius his Forces, a small number of his
Soldiers were Christians, it was more the peculiar action of the Arm of
Heaven, which dissipated the Army of Magnentius, and gave the Eagles to
Constantine. "In the latter end of his time their arose a dispute between
Alexander the Bishop, and Arrius the Presbyter of that City." Here the
Philosopher has erred in his Chronology, for for the quarrel between them
began before the Licinian Persecution, in the Tenth of Constantin's; who
commanded the Empire 37 years. Would this was the worst Error! "This
Controversy between the Inhabitants and Soldiers, presently became a quarrel,
and was the cause of much bloodshed in and about the City. This so far
concerned the Emperors Civil government, that he thought it necessary to call a
general Council of all the Bishops and other eminent Divines throwout the Roman
Empire, to meet at the City of Nice." Indeed I read in the Time of Constantius,
the Aarrians prosecuted the Catholics with the greatest fury imaginable. The
lamentable Tragedy of which is given us by an Alexandrian Synod, in their
Letters to Julius Bishop of Rome. But that any murders were committed during
the Reign of Constantine, I do not observe; but to lessen the honor of
Christian Religion, he assigns the calling of that Council to the Peace of the
Empire. The prime reason was the Establishing the Peace of the Church, and the
Uniformity in Doctrine, which will be manifested, he said to the Fathers in his
Exhortation to them, "That they would fall in hand with the Articles of Faith,
and whatsoever they should decree therein, he would cause to be Observed:" On
which he thus Animadverts, "This may perhaps seem a great indifferency, then
would in these Days be approved off." I know not the sense of this reflection,
for what could be more desired by a Council of the Emperor, then to assure them
that he would ratify those Canons which they decreed, cencerning the things
they were called for. The main of the discourse is concerning his
animadversions on this Article, Begotten, not made, being of one Substance with
the Father. Thus he: "In this they condemn the doctrine of Armus, for this
word, of one Substance, in Latin Consubstantialis in Greek (...) was put as a
touchstone to discern an Arrian from a Catholic, and much ado their was about
it." Thus far it is true, but the verity of he subsequent discourse must be
considered.

" Constantine himself at the passing of it took it for an hard Word, but yet
approved it:" The account is given by Eusebius in his Epistle to his flock, in
Caesarea. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 12. he acquaints them what a form of sound words
he presented to the Synod at Nice, which the Emperor and Synod allowed and
approved: but the Synod was not satisfied except this one word (...) was
inserted; whereupon the Synod entered into a long debate, and it past (...)
etc. we did not admit without enquiry, which was after this manner. That word,
of one substance was not to be understood according to any Corporeal passion;
That it was not a Subsistence by any division or abscission from the Father.
For an immaterial, intellectual, and incorporeal Nature cannot be the subject of
Corporeal passions, it behooved that such things ought to be expressed in divine
and arcane words. Thus our most wise and religious Emperor did Philosophise.
And Theoderet, cap. 13. says that word (...) was not invented by the Fathers,
but received from former ages, and devolved from Fathers to Children. "
Constantine calling that word Divine not because it was in the divine
Scripture," for it was not there, This is acknowledged. "But because it was to
him an Arcanum not sufficiently undeistood," Mr. Hobs takes all the occasion to
cast a contempt upon the Council; it is fit their should be suitable words, for
tho the mystery cannot be rightly understood, yet the sense of the word may
very well be understood. This word (...) may well enough be known, yet how the
son of God should be of the same substance with the Father, is not so
intelligible, his reflection upon the Emperor is unworthy a Gentleman. "And in
this appeared the indifferency of the Emperor, and that he had for his end in
calling the Synod, not so much the Truth as the Uniformity of the doctrine, and
the Peace of his People yet depended on it."

This is a most notorious scandal; What! the famous Constantine, who put a
period to persecution, restored peace to Christians, and made Christianity to
flourish, what this Constantine to play the Hypocrite? Constantine did desire
the Uniformity in Doctrine, but not in an evil Doctrine, and the Peace of his
people, but he would not build this upon the foundation of Sin and and Heresy.
Before that celebrated Emperor convened the Council, he was convinced of the
true Faith, which appeared by his Discourse with Arrius, and his large letter
to the Churches in Romania. They who read the letters of Constantine concerning
Arrius before the Council was called Constantines Edict, for the Convening of
the Fathers, and his pious and sweet Orations to the Council, will find, that
Constantine's Design was, that so great an Assembly of the best Divines should
settle the Church upon the Foundation of Truth and peace. Further, "the cause
of the obscurity of this word (...) proceeded clearly from the difference of
the Greek and Roman dialect in the Philosophy of the Peripateticks,", what
should cast Mr. Hobs into this sentiment I cannot understand; all his
subsequent discourse is of Essence or (...). As to this I know no difference in
the Greek and Latin Dialect. Both Greek and Latin in the Sense of that
agreed. The Arrians and Catholics were Harmonious.

As to the (...), why Mr. Hobs should make their difference to consist in that
which they did agree, is to me unintelligible. The difference lay in the
Adjective; there is one letter ((...)) that makes it; all Schools agree in
this, that like is not the same; the Arrians would allow the (...), of a
substance like to the father, but not this (...) of the same Substance with the
Father. It manifestly appears to be a wild excursion of Mr. Hobs to discourse
and quible upon the Sense of this (...) Essence, and Substance, when the
dispute did not lie in that; yet if there be a connection in his discourse, in
that, according to him, it did consist: but we will follow him in the Chase.
"The first principle of all Religion in all Nations is, God is. This is a
truth. That is to say, that God really is something, and not a mere fancy."
This is not well said, It is with a diminution, for when we understand the
Notion of a God, then we must have a conception of a being which is infinitely
wise, Good, Powerful, Eternal. etc. "but that which is really something is
considerable alone by it self, as being somewhere, so the Earth, the Air are
all of them things real; whatsoever is in any place has dime^sion, that is to
say Magnitude, and this which has Magnitude whether it be visible or invisible
is called by all the learned a Body, If it be finite, and body or Corporeal, if
it be infinite, it follows, that all real things in that they are somewhere,
are corporeal," which Paragraph gives occasion of these 2 considerable things.
1. Whether there be any real being but that which is a body, and has
magnitude? 2. Wherein the Nature of Infinity consists? As to the first we will
grant, that all learned men say whatsoever has Magnitude is a Body; yet it
must be affirmed, that the most and best of the Literati affirm, that there
are real Beings, which are not bodies, and have no Magnitude, The chief of which
we say is God, and it is impossible to have any conception of a God, but he must
remove from him the conception of a Body; A Body must of necessity be divisible
and have such parts which cannot be competent to a Deity, so that great Attribute
of God's Immutability is lost, He being a thing that may be changed; nor can
this consist with Gods Omnipotency; how can we think matter can be omnipotent,
if we seriously cast our Eyes upon this world to contemplate its beauty, order
and greatness; Is It possible to conceive, that it is the product of Matter? No,
the notion of a God must include in its self the Notion of Infinity. An
Infinite cannot consist of finite parts; several finites cannot amount to one
infinite, therefore God cannot have parts, wherefore it must be acknowledged,
that there is a being which is not corporeal, and farther it is most certain that
Hobs contradicts his own great principle, that the supreme Power is the sole
Judge of Good and Evil, Truth and Falsehood. He is a Subject to the King of
England by whose law the Nicene Council was ratified, which decreed that God is
an immaterial and incorporeal Substance, and by his own Law has declared that
God has no parts.

2. As to the Nature of a Thing infinite, there can be but two just acceptions
of it.

It signifies a being which includes in it self all perfections, and so it
connotes the great God, the Eternal Majesty, and this infers, there cannot be
two Infinites, for there must not be two of all perfections. 2. Or a being that
is boundless, or has no term. The name Infinite may be given to other things,
as an Infinite Sea because it cannot be exhausted, take what water out of it
you please, the Sea remains as full as before; Infinite words, Infinite
Numbers, yet there are bounds to them, the Sea may be fathomed, Words have
their Numbers, none can imagine a line drawn to such a length but it may be
drawn longer, fancy any number, there may be an addition, these are not
properly Infinites, as a little Stick we see bounded, yet divided it may be
into Infinite parts ( i. e.) it will be still capable of division, for nothing
is material, but each part will be material. It Is clear that nothing can be
esteemed infinite but Space, in my apprehension. Space simply conceived is
nothing, it is a mere imagination, so it appears, that nothing Corporeal is
Infinite. That which he subjoyns concerning Essence, and Deity shall be
considered, what he says of Whiteness and Blackness will be granted but what he
intends by it, shall, be presently examined. "These Real things, are called by
the Latin Philosophers Entia, subjecta, substantiae, and by the Greek
Philosophers: (...) The other which are Incorporeal, are called by the Greek
Philosophers, (...) but most of the Latin Philosophers use to convert (...)
into substantia, and so confound real and corporeal things with incorporeal
which is not well. For Essence and Substance signify diverse things." To which
it is thus returned; why does Mr. Hobs call any thing Incorporeal, when he
asserts there is nothing but what is a Body?

2. What philosophers say substantiae are (...), other things are so called
which are not substantiae; and who says that White and Black are substantia
and subjecta, seeing white and black have their substrata, which are different
from them, and they are separable, for that substratum which is now white, may
anon be black.

3. By the Greek Philosophers Incorporeal things are not called (...), for
these are accidentia; nor (...), for the spectra are subjects of the eye, and
what is the object of sense is material, but they are by them called (...).

The Latin Authors do well in translating (...) sometimes Substantia,
sometimes Essentia, Essence and Substande do differ, but the Greek is copious*
(...) signifies Essence and Substance, expressly Arist lib. 4. cap. 9. gives
these two significations of (...), that it signifies both Essence and
Substance. The Latins take their measures from the Greeks. They confound not
Essence and Substance, who give the just Translation according to the true
sense, it having diverse acceptations, and therefore this (...) is truly
rendered One of the same Substance.

'And this mistake is received, and continues still in these parts, in all
disputes both of Philosophy and Divinity; for in truth Essentia signified no
more than if we should talk ridiculously of the Isness of the thing, that is,
(By whom all things were made) this is proved out of St. John, Cap. 1. Verse 1,
2, 3. and Heb. Cap. 1. Ver. 3. and that again out of Genesis 1.' To make those
expressions which Philosophers used ridiculous he thus formed this word Isness
St. Jerome upon these words of the wise man, There Is no new thing under the
Sun, quotes his Master Donatus, reading upon Terence, Nil dictum, quod non
prius dictum, Despereant qui nostra ante nos dixerunt. That great Rhetorician,
and Gramarian might be the Inver^ or of some new words, or new explanation of
the same thing but not else Mr. Hobbs is the sole Inventor of the word Isness,
but his Leviathan principles were prepared to his hands by fanciful and not
thinking men, words mightily prevail. The reverend Mr. Calvin against the
Anabaptists, and other wild persons, used the word Phanatick. The Great Monk in
his Southern Journey which he managed with as curious and fine Stratagems as
ever a General did, to expose his adversaries (the Army abounding with such
sort of Creatures) he called them Phanaticks, which was of great efficacy;
perhaps it is Mr. Hobbs his imagination by this odd word Isness to render
Essentia, used by the Philosophers, contemptible ere long (it may be) on the
Stage. And this Isness amongst Drolls may serve to make a Conceit more
pleasant: If He would have recollected what he said of Speech. Cap. 40.
Leviathan; that words signify as they are usually understood, then if Isness
had been used in a common vogue to denote the same with Essence who would have
reproved it. He quarrels with the Father^ and Divines of Note for confounding
the Concrete with the Abstract, Deus with Deitas, Ens with Essentia, Sapiens
with Sapientia, Aeternu^ with Aeternitas: In my apprehension, the Philosophers
do not confound themselves, for they suppose a distinction, which to me thus
appears: Essentia the Nature, Ens the thing it self. I may have apprehensions
of a thing, and the Nature of a thing; the Philosophers make no confusion, none
of them say that Sapiens is Sapientia; if they did so, they might truly say,
that Covetousness is a Covetous man, and Holiness is a Holy man etc. as he by
this would render them contemptible: by a Concrete they understand a Thing
compounded of Substance* and Forms, by an abstract they conceive a Form without
the Subject; as Wisdom, not considering the man that is Wise. I may at the
same time have a conception of Wisdom, and not have the conception of a wise
man. No Philosopher does say that wisdom, and a wise man are the same, nor
Covetousness, and a Covetous man are the same. The Schools and Philosophers in
speaking of the Deity do fear to speak of God with any irreverence, and
therefore upon just ground admit not any composition in God amongst them.
Deitas and Deus are the same, and by reason that there is nothing Eternal, but
God, in Him aeternus and aeternitas are the same: For when we concieve a
distinction in the mind of man, it is concerning created beings; but we have
none such in God. Essence and Existence of created beings afford two different
modes of concieving, but the contrary is of God. There is but one conception of
the Essence and Existence of a God, and of them there is no sort of
distinction: The Abstract and Concrete, and Concrete and Abstract are the same,
therefore it must be ill said of him: For if Deitas abstracted be Deus, we make
two Gods of one. Must then no such word as Essence be used? only Body (...)
surely the word Nature may be used? what is this Corporeal? by that means I may
use the word Essential His aim is higher, that is, as the Trinity, from that
mystery of Faith he takes all his Grandeur. Thus Mr. Hobs, The Attributes
therefore of God in the abstract, when they are put for God, are put
Metonymically, which is a common thing in Scripture; as for Example. Prove. 8.
25. Before the Mountains were settled, before the Hills brought forth was I. The
Wisdom there spoken of being the wisdom of God, signifies the same with the
wise God. In the sacred Scripture by the Wisdom of God, is sometimes meant the
Son of God, the (...), the Eternal Word, and this is not denied by the Arrians
themselves. They acknowledging that Wisdom mentioned by Solomon is Christ the
Son of God, do endeavor to prove him not (...), because he is said to be
according to the greek fundata sum, and as cited by Fulgentius contra object.
Arrianorum obj. Creavit me Initium viarum suarum. A Creature is not of the same
substance, tho the Arrians falsely applied those words, yet it is certain that by
the wisdom of God mentioned in that chapter, was not as Mr. Hobs says
Metonimically by them taken for the wise God, but a being subsistent by it
self; what he thinks of the other part of the Creed is not amiss, but to say
that it was never questioned amongst Christians (except by the Arrians) that
Christ was God Eternal is an huge mistake. Before Arrius appeared, several
Heretics denied it, and Arrius according to this word (...), as appears by his
Letters and Confession would not scruple to call Christ the Eternal God.

He adds, That no man can be made an Heretic by consequence this shall not
create any dispute but what means he when he says because that form was not
put into the body of the Creed, but directed only to the Bishops, there was no
reason to punish any Lay-person that should speak to the contrary; I cant find
his meaning: for the form (...) was in the Creed, and by the Authority of that
Council every person who did not receive it was anathematized. Perhaps he means
this, that God has no Parts is not in the form of the Creed. This is
acknowledged, that the Council did not put that into the form of the Creed,
yet it was determined by the Council. The Letters which Eusebius wrote were
Synodical.

By the super scriptions it appears, that the Contents of those Epistles did
not concern only the Bishop, but all the People. Socrates, Lib. 1. Cap. 5.
gives a full account of this; he wrote an Epistle of the Decrees and Acts of
which Eusebius sent by order of the Council. (...), and this same Epistle says
Socrates Eusebius sent (...), to the Church of Alexandria, to those of Lybia,
Egypt and Pentapolis. What the Synod by a common suffrage past, when the
conciliary decrees were sent to all the Churches: Mr. Hobs would make the World
believe that they being directed by the Bishops were only obligatory of them*
The Contrary in Theodoret. Lib. 1. Cap. 5. Cap. 12. The Synodical Epistles of
the Nicene Fathers were directed not to the Bishops, for the Bishops were
present in Council but to the Church of Alexandria, and to all our beloved
brethren in Egypt, Libia and Pentapolis. These being thus directed there was a
reason to punish any Lay-person which should speak to the contrary. 'But what
was the meaning of this Doctrine, that God has no parts? Was it made Heresy to
say that God who is a real Substance, cannot be considered or spoken of as here
or there, or any where which are parts of places? Or that there is any real
thing without length every way, that is to say which has no magnitude at all
Finite or Infinite? Or is there any whole Substance, whose two halves or three
thirds are not the same with that whole? Or did they mean to condemn the
Argument of Tertullian, by which he confuted Apelles and other Heretics of his
time, namely whatsoever was not corporeal, was nothing but phantasm, and not
Corporeal for Heretical?' no certainly, No Divines say that, What is the
meaning of this, that God has no Parts?

To explain this he adds several questions, whether God considered or spoken
of, as here and there, or that there is any real thing without length every way
i. e. has magnitude at all Finite or Infinite: it is returned to those
questions. God is an Infinite substance without magnitude* nor can it be said,
that a magnitude is infinite, it is impossible to think that to be infinite, to
which there can be an addition. His third captious question is frivolous; It Is
true if that substance be material, but it is not true in an immaterial
substance. To the Fourth let any Divine be produced who says that what is not
Corporeal is a Phantasme. This is the question, whether all beings which have
areal Substance be Corporeal, the Epicureans affirm it, other Philosophers and
Christians wholly deny it, indeed it must be affirmed, that sometimes by Corpus
or a Body is meant any real being, or whatever has any real being; and this it
is by some conceived to be the sense of Tertullian; Thus St. Augustine
vindicates Tertullian de Genesi ad Literam Lib. 10. Cap. ult. Tertull. de Anima
Cap. 7 Omne Corporale est passibile. Upon that St. Augustine, debuit ergo
mutare sententiam. He ought therefore to change his opinion; which he mentions
in another place, God is a body, ad, vernis Praxeam. I cannot believe that he
was so Childish as to believe the Nature of God is passible; but that by this
Argument, whatsoever was not Corporeal was nothing, should be the argument
whereby he confuted Apelles, and other Heretics in his times is a Conclusion
above the reach of my understanding. He disputes against Hermogenes who
asserted an Eternal matter coexistent with God, who out of that created this
Universe What Argument can be used against Hermogines taken from proposition,
Omne quod est Corpus est. There is nothing but Body. In Cap. 35. Tertullian
explains himself; he takes an Argument from Hermogines his contradicting
himself, prima facie materia videtur esse incorporalis; at the first sight
matter seems to be incorporeal: but having seriously pondered what he says,
Matter will be found neither Corporeal, nor Incorporeal. That I grant, some
substance is only Incorporeal, for the Substance it self is the Body of every
thing when Corporeal and Incorporeal are mentioned; nothing else will be
admitted. Thus he explaining his sense of Corpus that it is Substantia, he
confutes Hermogines not from the recited proposition, but his own contrarietys;
the same may be applied to what he disputes against Marchiaean Apelles and
Praxeas. Therefore against Mr. Hobs I may be confident to averr that Tertullian
never attempts the refuting Apelles, or any other Heretic in his time, from
this Topic, whatsoever was not Corporeal was a Phantasme. It Is true the Nicene
Fathers went to establish one Individual God in Trinity, to abolish the
diversity of Species in God: and it is not true, that they did not intend to
destroy the distinction of here and there, for the Council in explaining the
word did say, that it could not be understood of God, (...) not (...), for the
Essence of God was (...), the discourse is not concerning the intent of the
Council. Since the Council judged the nature of God to be Immaterial and
Incorporeal, they did conclude that an Incorporeal Substance was not a
contradiction; therefore the holy Fathers must needs have thought that God had
no extended parts; nor any sort of parts; and therefore not be considered as
here and there. What a force is don by him to the Apostles question; St. Paul
asks the Corinthians, Is Christ divided? which he thus interprets. 'He did not
think, they thought him impossible to be considered as having hands and feet,
but that they might think him (alluding to the manner of the Gentiles) one of
the sons of God, but not the only begotten. Thus expounded in Athanasius his
Creed, Not Confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance, i. e. God is
not divided into 3 Persons Peter, James and John, nor are the 3 Persons one and
the same Person.' It Is granted, that the Fathers intended the last, but it is
denied that they had any such intent, by not dividing the Substance, to have a
respect unto various Individuals, for in that division, the Persons and
substances are divided, the Substances are different and not the same; but in
the persons of the Individual Trinity, the Substance is the same. And in
created beings the Persona of every Individual is really distinct, not only
from the essence and person of another Individual, but from the Substance in
which it does subsist; which appears in the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who assumed not the Person but Nature of Man: but the mystery being
great above all the understanding and apprehension of man; it is rather the
object of Faith, than Reason. My main undertaking against Mr. Hobs in this
Tract is not to illustrate or prove the meaning, but to manifest that he has
not cleared himself of the contradiction, and that in his attempts he throws
himself into new absurdities, one of which is this Paragraph.

'But Aristotle, and from him all the Greek Fathers, and other learned men,
when they distinguish the general latitude of a word, they call it division, as
when they divide the Animal into Man and Beast, they call these (...), Species,
and when they again divide the Species Man into Peter and John, they call these
(...) parts individuae. And by this confounding the division of the Substance
with the distinction of words, diverse men have been led into Error of
attributing to God a name, which is not the name of any Substance at all, viz.
Incorporeal' It Is true that the Philosophers, when they divide Animae or the
Genus into Men or Beasts, they call these (...) Species, but when they again
divide the Species Man, into Peter and John, they never call these (...) Parts
Individuae, for (...) are parts dividuae, therefore Individua are called
(...); but what sense there is in his deduction, I Will give, when I understand
it. There is a substance, which is Incorporeal; the Philosophers were led into
that truth by observing the operations of some beings which are not Corporeal,
where it must needs follow, that these essences are Incorporeal; and by some
other Arguments: but that they should be led into this, which he calls an Error
by confounding the division of Substance with the distinction of words, is a
thing far from Truth, and any conception of mine.

'Many Heresies which were Antecedent to the first general Council were
condemned, as that of Manes (he might have added Marcion) by the first article
I believe in one God.' This was not directed only against them, but also
against the polutheisme of the Heathens, 'tho to me it seems still to remain in
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which so attributes a liberty of the will
to men, as that their will and purpose to commit sin uot should proceed from
the cause of all things God, but originally from themselves or from the Devil.'
Indeed Marcion and Manes attributed Sin to an evil God, but the Church of
Rome, the Church of England, and all other Churches look upon that Opinion as
Heretical: why this Doctrine of the Liberty of the will is to remain in the
Church of Rome, this is to palliate. This Doctrine continues in the Church of
England, and in all the Churches of Christ. The Devil does vehemently tempt to
sin, but he is not the cause of sin; hence that good Axom is received by all
knowing men, No body is injured but by himself, that which is properly an Evil
is the Evil of Sin, which our selves only can inflict upon us; but how comes it
to pass that this Doctrine of the Liberty of the Will should be opposed by this
Article, I believe in one God? they who maintain that Doctrine firmly believe
this Article, They say that the one true God is infinitely glorious in all
perfections, amongst which is the Liberty of his will, he created all things,
amongst which he created Rational beings which he endowed with the Liberty of
Will, whereby they are made capable of being virtuous, and so to be rewarded,
or vicious, and so to be punished; where is there by this sentiment a setting
up another God? by God he means one first Cause which necessarily moved from
all eternity, from which necessary cause there flows an infinite concatenation
of necessary causes, whence if any say, that there is a Liberty of the Will, he
must assign another first Cause, and from thence oppose this Article I believe
in one God; we say there is but one first Cause, and that a free Agent, whence
springs the Liberty of Rational Beings. By the account which Mr. Hobs gives of
God, and by several of his opinions it must be concluded, that he believes
there is no God. One of his sayings is, He that says there is no mind in the
World, has no mind. This is a gingling quibble, besides many gross absurdites
with which his opinion is charged, this is no mean one; God is the Author of Sin;
to which he replys Leviath. cap. 46. by this distinction God is not the Author
of Sin, but he is the cause. The Author is he who commands, the Cause by whose
Power a thing is done. This with many other distinctions he frames, which are
more subtle, perplexed, and remote from sense, then any of the School-mens, for
which he so much condemns them, certainly every cause is the Author of a thing.
He that commands, is by that a moral cause. But he that is a cause by enabling
to do, is a Physical cause of Sin, God cannot be such a cause; but it may be
queried whether God, according to Mr. Hobs, ever gave any laws to mankind, for
unquestionably if the rule of Justice, and Injustice Good and Bad, true and
false be the will of the supreme power; God never gave laws to man kind,
'perhaps (says he) the Anthropomorphites were then condemned, but this cannot
be for they appeared not until the time of Valens.' This is no great matter,
It is certain that the Council did condemn all those who ascribed any parts to
God, which the Anthropomorphites did, yet if Epiphanius be credited, heret, 70.
Audianus a Mesopotanican the Author of this Heresy of the Anthropomorphites
flourished in the time of Arrius, when the Nicene Council was convened.

'No other punishment was ordained by Constantine than Deprivation and
Banishment; and that not only of Bishops and Pastors who refused to subscribe
to the Faith; thus did Heresy (which at first was the name of a private
opinion, and no crime, was by virtue of a law of the Emperor, made only for
the Peace of the Church) become a Crime in a Pastor and punishable.' How many
Errata's in this Paraptaph? Heresy in the Church of Christ was always a Crime,
and never the name of an opinion. This I proved before; let it be granted, that
every Sin is not a Crime, and that every Crime is that which is punishable; it is
a trisle to be lirigious in words, every sin is certainly punishable; some Sins
are greater than others, so there is a difference in Crimes, there are Crimes
which are only discernable by Almighty God, and so punishable at his tribunal;
but that Heresy should be a Crime only because the civil power inflicts a
corporal punishment, cannot be understood by any, but such a person, who bids a
defyance not only to the Christian Religion, but to all other Religions which
assert a future retribution, or concludes that the great God does punish evil
men in this life by some extraordinary methods. But that Heresy after this
decree of the council became only a Crime punishable in the Bishops and
Pastors, whether it be true or not, is not much material. In the Pastors the
People were always punished, for they followed their Pastors in banishment.
Basil with a curious pen delineating the miserys and calamitys under which the
Orthodox Bishops and Pastors groaned, likewise gives us the description of
those dreadful sufferings, with which the people were oppprest.

Eusebius giveing us an account of an Edict of Constantine against Heretics,
in that not only Bishops and Pastors, but all sorts of Heretics were
involved. de vita Constant. lib. 3 cap. 62. And having proved before that
Arianisme was decreed an Heresy not for the peace of the Church, but likewise
that there might be an agreement in the same faith, which was necessary to
salvation, we may justly say that every line of that Paragraph is notoriously
untrue. To lessen the Esteem of the Nicene and the 4 General Councils, says he,
'There arose new Heresies about the Interpretation of the Creed, and partly
about the Holy Ghost, of which the Nicene Council had not determined, And
afterward concerning the Holy Ghost. Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople and
some others denied the divinity thereof.' The Pneumatomachi appearing after the
Council of Nice had pretended for themselves the silence of the Nicene Fathers;
to which Basil, Nazianzen, Theoderet, Epiphanius answer, there being no
question moved concerning it, the Council acquiesed in the opinion, and right
Faith of the Universal Church, concerning the Divinity of the Holy Ghost.

Why should the Fathers confirm that truth which was not questioned, but taken
for granted, or condemn that for Heresy which was not preached, yet if not in
a set form of words decreed, yet in truth and by good consequence, the sense
of the Fathers as to that Article was given. For St. Basil Epist. 78. Hieronom.
Epist. 65. Epip. haeresi 74 take off, and answer that objection; Epiphanius and
Athanasius prove it thus, that the same glory which is given to the Father, and
to the Son, is likewise given to the Holy Ghost; for the Symbol is, I believe
in God the Father, and in God the Son; and I believe in the Holy Ghost. This
Divine Faith, fixed upon the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, as one and the same
God, gives the true sense of the Council.

The great mistake concerning Nestorius must only be attributed to Mr. Hobs his
animadversion: for it was not Nestorious, but Macedonius who denied the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost. Nestorius was a great adversary to the (...),
therefore in Socrates Lib. 7. Cap 31, we find that Nestorius was so great an
Enemy to the Macedonians that when he was Bishop of Constantinople he drove the
Macedonians out of all their Churches in that City, and in the Hellespont.

'Concerning the Parts established there arose disputes about the Nature of
Christ, and the word Hypostasis. (i. e.) Substance, for of persons there was
yet no mention made, their Creed being written in Greek, in which Language
there is no word that answers to the Latin word Persona; and the Union, as
the Fathers called it, of the Humane and Divine Nature in Christ Hypostolical
caused Eutyches, and after him Dioscurus to affirm there was but one Nature in
Christ, thinking that whenever two things are united, they are one.'

It Is true the Latin word Persona is used in the Latin Church, which Church
embraced likewise the word Hypostasis, and all differences concerning those
words were within a while composed, and all Orthodox Christians in that Church
who know the Greek Language do receive the word Hypostasis in the same sense
which the Latins use Persona. The famous Nicene Councils having decreed, that
there were two Natures in Christ, and one Hypostasis which signifies
Subsistence, this exactly answers to the Latin Persona. Nestorius Bishop of
Constantine broch'd this Heresy that in Christ there were two distinct persons,
and so Mary the Mother of Christ was not (...) the Mother of God: against him
Eutyches excellently disputed in the Fourth Action, in the Council of
Constantinople; Eutyches declining the one, fell into another Heresy, asserting
that there was but one Nature in Christ, yet the humane Nature was swallowed up
by the Divine, and was not of the flesh of the Virgin, but descended from God.
A great promoter of this impiety was Dioscurus Bishop of Alexandria, a wicked
and lewd person, a Monster rather than a Bishop. These were condemned in the
Chalcedonian Council. I will grant that the Disciples of Eutyches did say, If
two Natures there would be two hypostases, I will say it was an Heretical
illation, and affirm, that the Latin word Persona answers to the Greek (...),
according to the Sense of the Churches both East and West. (...) is not
Substance but Subsistence, to which Persona directly answers. But (says he) in
the Nicene Creed there is no mention of Hypostasis or Hypostatical Union, nor of
Corporeal, nor Incorporeal, nor of parts; but this was acknowledged by the
Fathers in that Council, there was the (...) which necessarily infers it: after
a dispute concerning the sense of these words, they all agreed in the same
Faith, and that Hypostasis is as well as Persona, entertained by the universal
Church; not signifying Substantiam as usally; but Subsistentiam; from the
Nicene decree must of n^cessity flow the Hypostatical Union. Tho the word
Incorporeal was not used in the Nicene Creed, yet it is used in Eusebius his
Synodical Episties, who styles God (...) and (...), Immaterial and Incorporeal,
as before asserted: but invidiously to throw dirt upon the Fathers; 'such
Points (says he) were not necessary to Salvation, but set a broach for
ostentation of learning, or else to dazzle men with design to lead them toward
some ends of their own.' By which he charges the most humble persons with
pride, the most sincere with Hypocrisy, and the most unbiased with secular
aims. It Is true that it was not judged necessary to Salvation, that vulgar
persons should know what Hypostasis and Persona intended, as appears by that
Council held at Alexandria by Athanasius Bishop of that See; Eusebius of
Vercelles, and Lucifer of Calaris, Two Western Bishops, who after they had
contended about these words, were united in this Nicene article, that Christ
was the Eternal Son of God, and really God, and that it was an Article of the
Christian Faith, and necessary to Salvation. What he says concerning St.
Cyprian is nothing to my design, nor shall I make any remarks upon his
discourse of the Usurpation of the Bishop of Rome, or take cognizance of what
he says of the punishment ordained against Heretics in the Reign of K. Rich.
the 2. and succeding Princes, for this is nothing to my purpose; my whole
design is to make good the contradiction with which he is charged. I must
therefore have no regard to any penal statures in Causes Ecclesiastical, until
the Reign of Queen Elisabeth. I charge him with these heretical propositions,
contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England, to whom he is obliged by the
laws of the King to be Subject. 1. That God has parts. 2. That Christ is not
of the same Substance with the Father. 3. That the Persons in the sacred
Trinity are temporal; All which are declared Heretical by the laws, and
Church of England. But Mr. Hobs would evade the two last Heretical
propositions, by saying he believes the Doctrine of the Trinity as the Church
has explained it in the Catechism. When the Minister asks the Catecumene,
what do thou chiefly lear in these Articles of thy Belief. He answers, I
learn first to believe in God the Father, who created me and all the World. 2.
I God the Son who has redeemed me and all Mankind. 3. I God the Holy Ghost who
has Sanctified me and all the Elec^ People of God. What is then intended but
this, tha^ God in his own person-did create all things, in the Person of his
Son did redeem Mankind, in the person o^ the Holy Ghost did Sanctifi^ the
Church: What clearlie concerning the Divine persons, or more consentaneous to
the Faith can be said? Appendix ad Leviath. Cap. 1. On the contrary I will
pronounce that nothing is more obscure nor distentaneous to the Faith: Tully
said properly, Ego tres sustineo personas, mei Judicis adversarij; yet it must
be granted, that the same word may have diverse significations, peculiarly in
various sciences, else the great and famous Northern Constellations may note
the greatest Bear in the Muscovian Snowes. The Latin Fathers, and after them
the Schools, and Divines, take not the word Persona in the same sense that
Orators and Philosophers do; I believe that Bellarmine did know the meaning of
the Latin word persona as well as Mr. Hobs. Let common sense be appealed, can
the Mystery of the Trinity be explained according to Cicero's use of the word
Persona For according to the Church of England in the Athanasian Creed, which
is part of the Liturgy established by Law, and ratified in the 8 Article, in
which are these words, the Three Creeds, the Nicene Creed, the Athanasian
Creed, and that commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought to be thoroughly
received and believed. In the Athanasian, the Eternity is not only of the
Essence, but of the Persons, not as the Father Eternal, the Son Eternal, and
the Holy Ghost Eternal, but according to Mr. Hobs the Persons were Temporal (
i. e.) God became a Father, when he created the World, A Son when he redeemed
Mankind, and the Holy Ghost when he Sanctifies; which is absolutely contrary to
the Faith: for upon the Impious account of Mr. Hobs the Persons were not
eternal, by reason the Actions of God in creating the World, by which there was
the parsonality of the Father, and of the Son in redeeming the World, and of
the Holy Ghost in Sanctifying the Elect People of God, were temporal. Let this
be Queried, What Sense is this? God redeemed Mankind in the person of his Son,
Persona mei is Tully himself, but Persona Judicis is Tully reprensenting a
Judge; did God represent another in the redeeming of the World? This leads to
the making good this Heresy concerning the Incarnation of the Son of God, for
he utterly denies the eternal Filiation, and says that Christ being the Son of
God was an eternal God, but as being begotten extraordinarily in time he
acknowledges that expressly and frequently in the Scriptures Christ is said to
be begotten; that he was God born of the Father before the World; when Christ
is said to be begotten, it is meant, that he was begotten of God himself, the
Father of the Matter of the Virgin, Mat. 1. verse. 20. that which was begotten
of the Virgin Mary was of the Holy Ghost, and should be called the Son of God,
'But some perhaps will say that the eternal generation differs from that which
was made in the Womb of the Virgin.'

To which he thus answers, where does the Holy Scripture or Synod thus
distinguish? this Question is a certain demonstration that he denis the eternal
generation and that he by a strange passion resolves to deny those things which
for certain he knows to be true, if a stou denial serves his design* The
sacred Scripture in several places is express for the eternal generation,
making it distant from the temporal. The scriptures were wrested and false
Glosses put upon them; Arrius did not deny the praeexistence of the Son of God,
who was Incarnate, the difference was not concerning the Eternal Generation,
but the Consubstantiality.

Having thus proved, that his Leviathan contains certain Haeretical
propositions; It remains, that I prove these Heresies Criminal, and thus I
state the Question and pursue it.

It Is one of Mr. Hob's great Artifices to avoid those absurdities into which
his own sentiments casts him. Mr. Hobs percieving that he is justly charged
with this imputation, writes the book called The Historical Narrative of
Heresy. The Parliament complained, That in it were contained several Heretical
Opinions, ( i. e.) Opinions declared Heresy by the Church and Laws of England:
he being a Subject to the King, is obliged to obedience to the Laws of his
Sovereign. By this therefore he does manifestly contradict himself, and
opposes these his great Moral and Political Postulata's. 'Nothing is Just or
Unjust, but what is made so by Law, and that nothing is Criminal, but what a
Penal Law prohibits.'

From this his most just charge he would free his Leviathan; to show that his
attemts are frivolous, it must be proved, that his Leviathan does contain
Heretical Opinions. To which he returns, That there is no opinion that opposes
a Penal Statute; or that no Person can be justly by the Civil Magistrate
punished for any Opinion contained in the Leviathan. For (says he) 'All the
Penal Laws against Heretics were repealed in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth. To
remedy the Inconvenience which might arise by Novel Dogma's, She appointed a
Court* called the High Commission, to declare what was Heresy. But that High
Commission never declared what was Heresy, or if they did, it was to no
purpose, for they were not empowered to inflict any punishment upon an
Heretic. Withal the Parliament abolishing that Court* nothing could be
accounted Heresy: Besides the Leviathan was Printed in 1651. when it was
lawful to Write or Preach any thing in matters of Religion.' To which I suppose
that some, nay many things contained in the Leviathan are Heretical, and so
judged by the Church, and punishable by the Civil Majestrate. Not to mention
many, I will assign these Two. The Nature of God, and the Mystery of the
Individual Trinity are by him Heretically and Impiously explicated. He
Blasphemously avers God has parts, and makes the Persons of the Holy Trinity
to be Temporal, not Eternal; both which are declared Heretical by the first
Article,) and by the three Creeds. The Athanasian Creed is imbodyed into the
Common Law, and that his opinion concerning the Trinity is Heretical is
indubitable, waveing the Contests he strives violently to maintain, that
Nothing in matters of Faith is declared Criminal by the Law, or punishable by
the Civil Magestrate. For faith he 'the Lady Elizabeth in her first year
repealed all the Laws Ecclesiastical of Queen Mary, and all other Laws
concerning the punishing of Heretics, nor did She enact any other punishment
in their place.' These lines he could not deliver without that same arrogance
by which he explodes the Universityes, and accounts most of the Learned men in
the World, Fools. For the Writs de Heretico Comburendo and de excommunicato
capiendo were in force, he adds in the 2 place, it was enacted 'That the Queen
by her Letters Patents should give a Commission to the Bishops with several
other Persons in her Majesty's name to execute his Power ecclesiastical, this
is granted, (he proceeds) In which Commission the Commissioners were forbidden
to adjudge any thing to be Heresy which was not declared to be Heresy by some
of the four first General Concils, nor was there any thing in that Commission
concerning how Heretics ought to be punished. But it was granted to them to
declare, or not declare to be Heresy or not Heresy as they pleased, any of
those Doctrines which had been condemned in the four first general Councils for
Heresy.' To refute this, and what he subjoyns, it is requisite that I give the
words of the Statute. 'They shall not (meaning the High Commissioners) have
Authority or Power to order determine or adjudge any matter or cause to be
Heresy, but only such as heretofore have been determined, ordered or adjudged
to be Heresy by the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the first four
general Councils, or any of them, or by any other General Council, wherein the
same was declared Heresy by the express and plain words of the said Canonical
Scriptures, or such as hereafter shall be ordered, determined or adjudged to be
Heresy by the High Court of Parliament of this Realm, with the assent of the
Clergy in their Convocation.' By this it appears what a lame and false account
he gives of the Statute, for the Queen, and her Parliament did not leave it
indifferent to the High Commission to determine what was or what was not
Heresy, but limits them (to declare what was Heresy or not Heresy) not only to
the four first general Councils (as he seems falsely to insinuate) but likewise
to the express words of Scripture, and to the Parliament) which he seems to
exclude, for he omits the mentioning of them; 'Nor was there (he adds) in that
Commission any thing concerning how Heretics ought to be punished.' The High
Commission could not inflict capital punishment. I hope Mr Hobs will not say
there is no crime, but it was capital. That the High Commission had power to
punish persons in case of Heresy is evident both by the Law of England, and
practice of that Court. By the Law of England expressly by the Act Elizab. that
Court was Invested with all Ecclesiastical power before the Cancelling of the
High Commission, the Bishops had a Power to Imprison persons, and the Writ de
excommunicato capiendo still continues. The words of the Act are that 'the
Queen, or any of her Successors should nominate one or more persons to use,
exercise, and occupy, all manner of jurisdictions, privileges or preeminences
in any wise touching, or concerning any spiritual or Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and to visi^ reform, redress, order, correct and amend all such
Errors, Heresies, Schisms etc.' It was perfect nonsense for a Parliament to
enable the English Sovereign to erect a Court to punish and amend Errors and
Heresies, if the Law of England had not declared what was an Heresy, and
likewise not to Invest them with power to accomplish such ends, which they had
not, if they could not inflict punishments, he returned, 'The jurisdiction was
only spiritual:' but to that was annexed a civil punishment. Upon
excommunication there lay a Writ de excommunicato capiendo; that a Person
excommunicated for Heresy or Errors in Doctrine, by that Writ might be
Imprisoned, is clear as the day. Certainly imprisonment is a civil Punishment.
This Writ lay against those who were obstinate Offenders in Causes
Ecclesiastical is evident by 5 Eliz. Cap. 23* with the significavit to be added
to the Writ, and in that Significavit it is joined that the Excommunication does
proceed upon some cause of some Original matter of Heresy, or Error in Religion
or Doctrine, now received and allowed in the said Church of England, whereby it
appears that Persons for Heresy might be Imprisoned, and so Heresy to become
Criminal. For it was to be punished by the civil Magistrate with Corporal
Mulcts; and farther lay a Writ de Heretico comburendo; if nothing was declared
Heresy, why did their lie such a Writ. That such a Writ was in force, is clear
by the annulling of it, when this fetal Plot was detected, then the Parliament
made an Act to Cancel it, either it was in force, or not; if in force, the
Parliament was Prudent in making it void, if not it casts a reproach upon the
Two Houses to annul that which was exploded. That these Writs were in force is
declared, and that the Writ de excommunicato capiendo retains its Vigor, is
evinced by the usage of the Kingdom of England. As for the Writ de Heretico
comburendo, it was put in execution in King James his time. Legate and Wightman
were Burnt, the one in Smith-field, and the other in Litchfield, for the Arrian
Heresy. He says, that they which approve such executions may peradventure know
better grounds for them then I do. But grounds are very well worthy to be
enquired after: but he might very well know the just grounds for them. He that
affirms the Law to be the Sole rule of just and unjust could not be ignorant
that by the common Law of England, the Writ de Heretico comburendo was valid,
and thereupon an Heretic might legally be Burnt. My Lord Cook part 3. cap. 5.
affirms that by the Books of the common Law the King Issuing our his Writ de
Heretico comburendo, an Heretic ought to be Burnt. That Heresy might be
punished by Corporeal and pecumiary Mulcts, is clear by the Queens Letters
Patents, authorized by the 1. Statute of her Reign. She did give to the Arch
Bishop of Cant. the Bishop of London, and diverse others, any Three or more of
them, full Power and Authority to reform, redress, order, correct, and amend
etc. and to have full Power and Authority to order and award, to every such
offender by Fine, Imprisonment, Censure of the Church, or otherways, or all or
any of the said ways. Cawdrys Case. and in that same case it is resolved by the
Judges, that the Statute of the First of Queen Elizabeth did not introduce any
new Law, but declared an ancient one. The Title of the Statute being an Act
restoring to the Crown the Ancient jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical
and Spiritual. The Sovereign, being the Supreme head of the Church, without
whose Authority no person can or ought to exercise any Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, or proceed to any Censure; it demonstrates that by the Royal
Power an Heretic might be punished with a Civil and Corporeal Mulct. Farther
the Star Chamber was an ancient Court grounded upon the common Law of England,
and confirmed by Act of Parliament. Which Court took cognizance not only of
Civil Crimes but also of Ecclesiastical, and did punish Heretics by
Imprisoning, Fineing and Stigmatizeing, as appears by the Records of that
Court; and that famous Instance of Thrask, who in the 16. year of King James
for spreading of Judaical Heresies, he was cited into the Court and being
obstinate was sentenced to be set in the Pillory, Whipped to the Fleet, Fined and
Imprisoned, all which was executed: by which it appears what truth there is in
this assertion of Mr. Hobs* During the Time the High Commission was in being,
there was no Statute by which an Heretic might be punished otherwise than by
the ordinary Censure of the Church, for it is proved that by the Common Law of
England and the Statute Law during the time of the High Commission, Heretics
might suffer in their Bodies and Purses: hence it follows that Heresy was
criminal, and he has not vindicated himself from that contradiction with which
he stands charged. He farther proceeds. 'That no Doctrine could be accounted
Heresy, unless Commissioners had actually declared and published, that what was
made Heresy by the Four first general Councils should be Heresy:' but I never
heard yet there was any such declaration made either by Proclamation, by
Recording in Churches, or by Printing, as is requisite in Penal Laws. We have
before proved that the High Commission was not the Sole Judges of Heresy. That
which the Church and Law of England condemns for Heresy, is as fully divulged
as can be expected. The 39. Articles are sufficiently known, and those
Doctrines which the Four first general Councils received as Orthodox, or
condemned as Heretical, are ratified by the Law and Church of England, and
sufficiently promulged: The Nicene Creed which was completed by the Fourth
general Council is read in every Church on Sundaies and Holy days: The
Athanasian Creed is to be read at peculiar Festivals, both which Creeds, as
also the Apostles, are part of the Liturgy of the Church, which is imbodyed
into the Laws of the Land, and that the opinions which are contrary, are made
Heretical appears by these Clauses of the Athanasian Creed, He therefore that
will be saved must thus think of the Trinity. Furthermore it is Necessary to
Everlasting Salvation that he also believe rightly the Incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ: and this Clause ends the Creed, This is the Catholic Faith which
except a man believe Faithfully he cannot be saved. The Doctrines therefore
declared to be Heretical are sufficiently, by Printing and Recording in
Churches, divulged. To alleviate his Crime, or at least to vindicare himself
from Heresy, he reflects upon our late sad distractions, which to me administers
matter of horror. 'Before arms were taken up, says he, the King abolished the
High Commission, but the Parliament pursued the Rebellion, and put down both
Episopacy and Monarchy, erecting a power, by them called a Common wealth, by
others the Rump, which men obeyed not out of Duty but Fear,' those actions were
dreadful, and are the fontinels of all those fears which now afflict us. The
just principles by which Government is formed and established, and reasonable
laws are enacted, deservedly reprove and condemn those actions, perpetrated in
our late confusions, which gave a scandal to our Religion and Nation: But how
can he cast an odium upon those actions his sentiments justify. Says he,
'there were no humane Laws left in force to restrain any man from Preaching, or
Writing any Doctrine concerning Religion that he pleased. And in this time it
was, that a book called the Leviathan was writ in defense of the Kings Power
Spiritual or Temporal, without any word against Episcopacy, or against Bishop,
or against the public Doctrine of the Church.' To which it is thus Replied, 'the
Leviathan was impressed 1651, and come out in Latin upon his Majesty's
return. In 48 England was totally subdued to the Power of the Rump, Ireland in
49. Scotland in 51. was almost reduct by the Rump, and his Majesty's Army
totally routed at Worcester, in this year the Leviathan was published, was this
Book in defense of the Kings Power, Spiritual and Temporal, when his Majesty
was in Banishment?' His Majesty was then divested of all his lawful Power and
Authority, and forced into Exile; This Leviathan, if the Principles were
admited, justfied the Actions of his Enemies; he casts this Imputation on the
Rump, that they were obeyed only for fear; in the same book he endeavors to
prove that man is not by Nature a lover of Society, but at his original is in a
state of War; The dread of the Evils which are incident to that condition,
makes him to enter into a Society with others; and let it be considered,
whether, if Fear be the great inducement to Government, they according to his
Principles are to be condemned who out of the same fear obeyed the Rump, and
that the fundamental law of Nature is self Preservation, and for fear that end
should not be attained, pacts are entered into, but if after those pacts that
design cannot beaccomplished, then pacts are void: and therefore if people have
a suspicion that the Prince will destroy them, they may take up Arms. And if
the Prince be divested of his Government, the People are no longer obliged to
obey him, and upon this account of Self-Preservation, they are to submit to
those who can protect them. Upon this reason the taking the Engagement was
lawful, and it was his honor to present to the English Nation those Principles
which induced many to take the Engagement.

Oliver gaining the Protectorship, was so pleased with him on those accounts,
that the great place of being Secretary was proffered him. If these things be
true, (as unquestionably they are) let it then be considered, whether any Sober
man can believe that the Book called the Leviathan was writ in defense of the
Kings Power, Temporal and Ecclesiastical; since it manifestly asserts the cause
of Usurpers. It must be granted that Mr. Hobs does give to the Sovereign all
illimited power in things just and sacred. But this he gives to all sorts of
Government, to Aristocracy and Democracy as well as Monarchy.

A Book to be penned and published by him, when all the Kings Dominions were in
the Power of those who took up Arms against him* which contains these
Docttines. Page 112. 'But in case a great many men have already resisted the
Sovereign Power unjustly, or committed some Capital Crime, for which every one
of them expects Death, whether have they not the Liberty then to join
together, and assist, and defend one another? certainly they have: for they but
defend their lives, which the Guilty man may as well do, as the Innocent. There
was indeed Injustice in the first breach of their Duty; Their bearing of Arms
subsequent to it, tho it be to maintain what they have done, is no new unjust
Act; and if it be only to defend their persons it is not unjust at all. Page
114. The Obligation of Subjects to the Sovereign is understood to last as long
and no longer than the power lasts, by which he is able to protect them. For
the Right men have by nature to protect themselves, when none else can protect
them, can by no covenant be relinquished; The Sovereignty is he Soul of the
Commonwealth, which once departed from the body, the members do no more
receive their motion from it. Page 174. When in a War (foreign or intestine)
the Enemies get a final Victory, so as the forces of the Common Wealth keeping
the Field no longer) there is no there protection of Subjects in their Loyalty;
then is the Commonwealth dissolved, and every man at liberty to protect
himself by such causes as his own discretion shall suggest unto him. For the
Sovereign is the public Soul, giveing Life and motion to the Commonwealth,
which expiring, the Members are governed by it no more, than the Carcass of a
man by his departed (tho immortal) Soul. For tho the Right of a Sovereign
Monarch cannot be extinguished by the Act of another, yet the Obligation of the
members may. For he that wants protection may seek it any where, and when he
has it, is obliged (without fraudulous pretense of having submitted himself
out of fear) to protect his Protector as long as he is able.' It was so far
from defending His Majesty's Authority, that without Command they plainly
justify the actions of his usurping Enemies. No person that has sucked in Hobs
his Principles, can be a loyal Subject, and hence likewise it appears, that he
did not ingeniously with his Majesty, when he averts in his Apology for his
Leviathan, in an Epistle dedicated to the King, before Problemata Phisica, nec
vitio vertant quod contra Hosts pugnans etc. Let none account me a Criminal,
that fighting against your Enemies I took what Arms I could, and Brandished a
two Edged Sword; certainly those Propositions Fought against his Majesty, and
defended the Cause of of his Enemies; That in the same book he did write
against Bishops and the Doctrine of the Church of England is manifestly proved
before. In the Common Prayer book are contained several Doctrines of the Church
of England, to oppose or deny which (as Mr. Hobs does in the aforesaid book) is
made Criminal, that is to be punished by the Civil magistrate, by the first of
Queen Eliza. Cap. 2. The Title of which is, That there be Uniformity of Prayer
and Administration of the Sacraments, in which there are these words.

'Be it enacted, that every Per son or Persons whatsoeverthat shall in any
Interludes Plays, Songs, Rhymes, or by any other open words declare or speak
any thing depraving or despiseing the same Book, or any part thereof, or any
thing therein contained, then the party convicted shall forfeit to the Queen
for the first Offense an Hundred Marks.' He concludes this Tract with casting
an odious and false Scandal upon the whole Christian Clergy; Down from the
whole Council of Nice to this present time, in these words;

'So fierce are men for the most part in dispute, where either their Learning
or Power is debated, that they never think of the Laws, but as soon as they are
offended they cry out Crucify, forgetting what Paul says, even in case of
obstinate holding of an Error. 2. Tim. 24. 25. The Servant of the Lord must not
strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to Teach, Patient, in Meekness
Instructing those that oppose, if God peradventure may give them Repentance to
the acknowledging of the Truth.' It Is true both the Bishops and the
Presbyterians did accuse that Book (in the Parliament) of Heresy: why could
they be fierce, their learning and their power being not disputed, when he
professes in that book he meddled not with them, their power, or learning. Those
things make not the Clergy fierce; it is the Person, the Religion, the Faith of
the Holy Jesus for which the Clergy have been and are still so Zealously
contending; they are, and were piously fierce in opposing profane Heresies,
and Blasphemous Impieties; the Zeal of the Lord of Hosts has eaten up those
holy Divines; their zealous defense of the Doctrine of their master has not
violated the Apostles direction given to the Pastors of the Church 2. Tim. that
reaches only those who erred through infirmity, not obstinacy. Contumacious
Heretics they are bound to oppose withal Holy Zeal and Indignation. Did not
he blush to averr that they cried Crucify, when they knew not the Law. Could
they be ignorant of that Law which they themselves put in execution: Their
ignorance of the Law did not make them cry Crufie, but knowing the Law and
Gospel became professed Enemies to those who by their Antichristian opinions
Crucify again the Lord of Glory.

What Reproach casts he upon Religion when he loads the Christian Divines with
such imputations. Those that are verst in Ecclesiastical History, and have read
the Fathers, cannot but conclude that the Basil's, the Gregory's etc. were men
as great for Learning and Goodness as the World ever produced; their fervent
opposition of Heretics was not contrariant to that Apostoliocal Precept. The
Holy Christian Divines (obeying the Apostolical Commands Titus 3. 10. An
Heretic after the first and second Admonition reject, 2 Pet. 2. 1. If any one
bring another Doctrine, receive him not into your house, nor bid him good
speed.) down from the Apostles time to this day have and will be till Christ
come to Judgment, Zealous and Pious opposers, of those who privately bring in
damnable Heresies denying the Lord that bought them.

FINIS.

