A PHOENIX, OR, The Solemn LEAGUE and COVENANT.

Whereunto is annexed, I. The Form and manner of His Majesty's Coronation in
Scotland. With a Sermon then preached on that occasion, by Robert Douglas of
Edinburgh. II. A Declaration of the Kings Majesty to all His loving Subjects of
the Kingdoms of Scotland, etc. in the Year 1650. III. The great Danger of
Covenant Breaking, etc. Being the substance of a Sermon preached by Edm. Calamy
the 14. of Jan. 1645. before the then Lord Mayor of the City of London, Sir
Tho. Adams, together with the Shieriffs, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
said City: being the day of their taking the Solemn League and Covenant at
Michael Basenshaw, London.


EDINBVRGH, Printed in the year of Covenant Breaking.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THou may expect some Reasons (by way of Preface) why these things thus
collected are presented to thy consideration, the principal part thereof
having been the occasion of so much contest and trouble in these Nations, and
therefore desired by many it should have been buried in its own ashes. But for
that things of such public concernment, have been acted by the Heads of these
Nations, and in so solemn a manner, in the presence of Almighty God, it cannot
so soon be forgotten, but ought to be weighed, and laid to heart, with the good
or evil consequences that have or shall accrue thereby, it is therefore left to
thy serious consideration.

A solemn League and Covenant: For Reformation and defense of Religion: the
Honor and Happiness of the King, and the Peace and Safety of the three Kingdoms
of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
WE the Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of
the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the providence of God living under one King and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our Eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Honor and Happiness
of the Kings Majesty, and his Posterity, and the true Public Liberty, Safety
and peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included;
and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts,
and Practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion, and Professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms, ever since the
Reformation of Religion, and how much their Rage, Power, and Presumption are of
late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable estate
of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, are present and public Testimonies. We have now at last (after other
means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings,) for the
preservation of our Selves and our Religion from utter ruin and destruction,
according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and
the example of Gods people in other Nations, after mature deliberation,
resolved and determined to enter into a Mutual and Solemn League and Covenant,
wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with our hands lifted
up to the most high God, do swear:

1. THat we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed
Churches: And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in religion, confession of
faith, form of Church Government, Directory for worship and catechizing: That
we and our posterity after us may as brethren live in faith and love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

2. That we shall in like manner without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of popery, prelacy, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) superstition, heresy, schism, prophanness, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and therein be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

3. We shall with the same sincerity, reality and constancy, in our several
vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the
rights and privileges of the parliaments, and the Liberties of the kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
Preservation and Defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the World may bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just Power and
Greatness.

4. We shall also with all Faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from His People, or
one of the three Kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties among
the People, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public Trial, and receive condign Punishment, as the degree of their Offenses
shall require or deserve, or the Supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others having power from them for that effect shall judge
convenient.

5. And whereas the Happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of God
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both the
Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest,
endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all
Posterity, and that Justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the precedent Articles.

6. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
combination, persuasion, or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the
honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives, zealously, and
constantly continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same
according to our power, against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and what
we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make
known, that it may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in
the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof: We profess and declare before God and the world
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of our sins and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us; and our true and unfeigned purpose,
desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power and
charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and Man to
amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a real
Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and
establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almighty God the Searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at the great Day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed: Most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches, groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian tyranny: to join in the same or like Association and
Covonant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

Will. Lenthal, Speaker Beuchamp St. John Gilbert Gerrard Walter Earl James
Cambel Thomas Cheek. Robert Nicholas Benjamin Rudyard John Gurdon Robert
Harley Francis Knollis Edward Master John White Anthony Sapley Dennis Bond
Lawrence Whitaker Michael Noble ^ere. Hoby Richard Barwis Edward Baynton
William Cawley John Moyle John Pyne George Searle Henry Vane senior Nevil Pool
John Young Henry Herbert Thomas Sandys William Iesson Philip L. Herbert Thomas
Bartington Martin Lumley John Trevor Francis Godolphin Thomas Arundell Edward
Stephens Gilbert Piekering John Greve Oliver Cromwell Henry Vane junior William
Cage Richard Erisey Philip L. Lisle Will. Heveningham Isaac Pennington Richard
Cresheld Thomas Pelham Thomas Parker John Leigh John Harris Augustine Skinner
John Venn William Strickland John Franklin Samuel Brown Robert Scawen Roger
Hill John Button John Meyrick Ambrose Brown Richard Winn Edward Owner Charles
Pym Charles L. Cranborn Ben. Weston Dudley North John Nut John Corbet Roger
Burgoyne Peter Temple Benjamin Valentine Thomas Walsingham Oliver Luke William
Alenson Humphrey Salwey Richard Moor William Ashurst Thomas Moor Thomas
Fountain William Else Henry Shelley Rich. Shuttleworth Henry Ludlow George
Gallop Robert Wallop Arthur Hesilrige Oliver Saint-John Thomas Grantham Francis
Barnham Will. L. Fitz Williams Edmund Dunch Henry Mildmay Hugh Rogers Thomas
Hatcher John Wray Simonds D'Ewes Anthony Bedingfield John Ash William L.
Munson Martin Lister Robert Goodwin Edward Thomas Henry Lucas Miles Corbet
Philip Smith Cornelius Holland William Spurflowe John Lowry Peter Wentworth
Henry Chomley Philip Stapleton William Pierrepoint Roger North Alexander Popham
Thomas Hodges John Maynard Samuel Vassal Anthony Irby John Clotworthy John
Br^^^^lme Richard Jervoyse John Blackiston Walter Long John Roll Robert Jennor
John Waddon William Masham John Lisle Edmund Fowel Edward Ash Thomas Pury
Richard Whitehead Richard J^nyns Humphrey Tufton Thomas Da^res Thomas Earl John
Downs John Goodwyn Francis Drake William Waller Samuel Luke Francis Buller
Richard Harman George Buller Arthur Onslowe Richard Wynwood Robert Pie H. L.
Gray of Ruthin Richard Knightley John Pym Christoph. Yelverton Anthony Nicoll
Peter Wroth Robert Reynolds Not. Barnardiston Henry Heyman William Purefoy
Valentine Walton Michael Oldesworth William Wheeler Hall Ravenscroft T. L. Gray
of Groby Thomas Middleton Edw. Hungerford Christopher Wrey Richard Lee Herbert
Morley Thomas Lane Robert Cecil William Bell Thomas Some Herbot. Grimstone
Simon Snow John Nash Herbot. Grimstone Ralph Asheton Edward Ayshcoghe John
Wild John Trenchard Thomas Jervoyse Richard Brown William Plaiters Nathaniel
Stephens Richard Rose Francis Rous Gilbert Millington Walter Young John Brown
John Hippisley Edward Poole Henry Pelham William Hay John Driden Nathaniel
Fyennes; William Lewis Giles Grene William Lytton John Harvey. Edward Dowce
William Strode Edmond Prideaux Thomas Hoyle Edward Exton Francis Popham Zouch
Tate John Curson Alexander Bence Squire Bence John Seldom John Glyn Richard
Onslow John Coke Tho. L. Wenman Bulstrode Whitlock George Montague Edward
Partheriche Henry Campion William VVhittaker Denzel Holles Edward VVingate
James Fennys Poynings Moore Edward Bisse, junior. William Jephson Edward
Montague Norton Knatchboll Thomas Eden Edward Baynton Jo. Evelin Jo. Potts Sam.
Rolls Ralph Ashton William Drake Pereg. Pelham William Brereton Thomas
VViddrington Natha. Hallows Joh. Bamfield Symond Thelwall. Hen. VVorsley Phil.
Parker Edw. Boys John Alford.
Die Veneris, 29 Januar. 1644.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Solemn League and
Covenant be on every day of Fast and Public Humiliation, publicly read in
every Church and Congregation within the Kingdom: And that every Congregation
be enjoined to have one of the said Covenants fairly Printed in a fair Letter,
in a Table fitted to hang up in some public place of the Church to be read.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Pail. Dom. Com.

The Form and Order of the CORONATION OF CHARLES II. King of Scotland, England,
France and Ireland. As it was acted and done at Scoon, the first day of January
1651.
By Robert Douglas Minister at Edinburgh.
FIrst the Kings Majesty in a Princes Robe, was conducted from his Bedchamber,
by the Constable on his right hand, and the Marshal on his left, to the Chamber
of presence; and there was placed in a Chair, under a cloth of State, by the
Lord of Angus, Chamberlain appointed by the King for that day; and there, after
a little repose, the Noblemen, with the Commissioners of Barons and Buroughs,
entered the Hall, and presented themselves before his Majesty.

Thereafter the Lord chancellor spoke to the King, to this purpose, Sir, your
good Subjects desire You may be crowned, as the righteous and lawful Heir of
the Crown of this Kingdom; that you would maintain Religion, as it is
presently professed and established; conform to the National covenant, League
and Covenant, and according to your Declaration at Dumferling in August last:
Also that you would be graciously pleased to receive them under Your Highness
Protection, to govern them by the Laws of the Kingdom, and to defend them in
their Rights and Liberties, by Your Royal power; offering themselves in most
humble manner to Your Majesty, with their vows, to bestow land, life, and what
else is in their power, for the maintenance of Religion, for the safety of Your
Majesty's sacred Person, and maintenance of Your Crown, which they entreat Your
Majesty to accept, and pray Almighty God, that for many Years You may happily
enjoy the same.

The King made this Answer; I do esteem the affections of my good people, more
than the Crowns of many Kingdoms, and shall be ready by Gods assistance, to
bestow my life in their Defense; Wishing to live no longer, than I may see
Religion and this Kingdom flourish in all happiness.

Thereafter, the Commissioners of Buroughs and Barons, and the Noblemen,
accompanied his Majesty to the Kirk of Scoon, in order and rank, according to
their quality, two and two. The Spurs being carried by the Earl of Eg^ington.
Next, the Sword by the E. of Rothes. Then the Scepter, by the E. of Crauford
and Lindesay. And the Crown by Marq. of Argyle, immediately before the King.
Then came the King, with the great Constable on his right hand, and the great
Marshal on his left; his train being carried by the L. Freskine, the L.
Montgomery, the L. Newbottle, and the L. Machlene, ^our Earls eldest sons,
under a Canopy of crimson Velvet, supported by six Earls sons; to wit, the L.
Drummond, the L. Carnegie, the L. Ramsey, the L. Johnstoun, the the L Brechin,
L. Yester; and the six Carriers supported by six Noblemens sons. Thus the Kings
Majesty entered the Kirk.

The Kirk being fitted and prepared, with a Table, whereupon the Honors were
laid, and a Chair set in a fitting place for his Majesty's hearing of Sermon,
over against the Minister, and another Chair on the other side where he
received the Crown; before which there was a Bench, decently covered; as also
for seats about, for Noblemen, Barons, and Burgesses. And there being also a
Stage in a fit place erected, of 24 foot square, about four foot high from the
ground, covered with Carpets, with two stairs, one from the West, another to
the East; upon which great stage, there was another little stage erected, some
two foot high, ascending by two steps; on which the Throne, or Chair of State
wa^ set.

The Kirk thus fittingly prep^red, the Kings Majesty entre^ the same,
accompanied as afor^ said, and first sets hims^^^ in his chair for hearing
of Se^mon.

All being quietly compose unto attention, Mr. Robert Douglas, Moderator of the
Gener^^ Assembly, after incalling upon God by prayer, preached the following
Sermon.

A Sermon preached at Scoon, Jan. 1. 1651. At the Coronation of Charles the
Second, King of Seotland, England, France and Ireland.
By Robert Douglas, Minister at Edinburgh, Moderator of the Commission of the
General Assembly.
2 KINGS 11. Verse. 12.17. And he brought forth the Kings Son, and put the Crown
upon him, and gave him the Testimony; and they made him King, and anointed him,
and they clape their hands and said, God save the King.

And Jehojada made a Covenant between the Lord, and the King, and the People,
that they should be the Lords people, between the King also and the people.


IN this Text of Scripture, you have the Solemn Enthronizing of Joash, a young
King, and that in a very troublesome time; for Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah
ha^ cruelly murdered the Royal Seed* and usurped the Kingdom, by the space of
six years. Only thi^ young Prince was preserved by Iehosheba the sister of
Ahaziah, and wife to Jehojada the high Priest, being hid with her in the house
o^ the Lord all that time.

Good Interpreters do conjecture* though Joash be called the son of Ahaziah,
that he was not his son by nature, but by succession to the Crown. They say,
that the race of Solomon ceased here, and the Kingdom came to the posterity of
Nathan the son of David. Because 2 Chronicles. 22.9. it is said, The house of
Ahaziah had no power to keep the Kingdom; which they conceive to be for the
want of children in that house; And because of the absurdity and unnaturalness
of the fact, that Athaliah the Grandmother should have cut off her sons
children. I shall not stand upon the matter, only I may say, if they were
Ahaziah his own children, it was a most unnatural and cruel fact of Athaliah to
cut off her own posterity.

For the usurpation, there might have been two motives. 1. It seems that when
Ahaziah went to battle, Athaliah was left to govern the Kingdom; and her son
Ahaziah being slain before his return, she thought the Government sweet, and
could not part with it; and because the Royal seed stood in her way, she
cruelly destroyed them, that she might reign with the greater freedom. 2. She
was earnest to set up a false worship, even the worship of Baal, which she
thought could not be so well done, as by cutting off the Royal race, and
getting the sole power in her hand, that she might do what she pleased.

The business you are about this day, is not unlike: You are to invest a young
King in the Throne, in a very troublesome time: and wicked men have risen up,
and usurped the Kingdom, and put to death the late King most unnaturally. The
like motives seem to have prevailed with them. 1. These men by falsehood and
dissimulatio^ have gotten power in their hand^ which to them is so sweet, that
th^^ are unwilling to part with it; A^^ because the King and his seed stoo^ in
their way, they have made awa^ the King, and disinherited his chi^dren, that
the sole power might b^ in their hand. 2. They have (...) number of damnable
errors, and false worship to set up, and inten^ to take away the Ordinances o^
Christ, and Government of hi^ Kirk. All this cannot be done, unless they have
the sole power i^ their hands, and this they cannon have till the King and his
posteri^^ be cut off. But I leave this, an^ come to the present solemnity*
There is a Prince to be inthroned, good Jehojada will have the crown put upon
his head.

It may be questioned, why they went about this Coronation in a time of so
great hazard, when Athaliah had reigned six years? Had i^ not been better to
have defeated Athaliah, and then to have crowned the King? Two reasons may b^
rendered, why they delay not the ^oronation. To crown the King ^as a duty they
were bound to, ^azard should not make them leave their duty. They did their
duty, and left the success to God. (...). They crowned the young King, ^o
endear the peoples affections to their own native Prince, and to ^lienate their
hearts from her that had usurped the Kingdom. If they had delayed, the King
being known to be preserved, it might have brought on, not only comply^nce with
her, but also subjection to her government, by resting in it, and being content
to lay aside the righteous heir of the Crown.

The same is observed in our Case, and many wonder that you should Crown the
King in a dangerous time, when the usurpers have such power in the land, the
same reasons may serve to answer for your doing. 1. It is our necessary duty to
crown the King upon all hazards, and to leave the success to God. 2. It
appears now, it has been too long delayed. Delay is dangerous, because of
the com^^^ance of some, and treachery of others. If it shall be delayed long it
is to be feared, that the m^^^ part shall sit down under the sh^dow of the
Bramble, the destroyi^^ usurpers.

I come to the particular han^ling of this present Text, and (...) speak from
it to the present ti^^ I have read the 12. and 17. v. (...) cause of these two
which meet t^gether, the Crowning of a Kin^ and his renewing the Covena^^
Amongst many particulars whi^^ may be handled from the Text, shall confine my
self to these fiv^ 1. The Crown, He put the Cro^^ upon his head: 2. The
Testimon^ He gave them the Testimony. 3. T^^ Anointing, They Anointed hi^ These
three are in the 12. vers^ As for that which is spoken of t^^ peoples joy, we
shall give it a tou^^ when we come to the peoples dut^ The covenant between God
an^ the King, and the people, Jehoja^^ made a covenant between God an^ the King
and the people, that the should be the Lords people. 5. The Covenant between
the King and the people, Between the King also and the people; both in the 17.
verse.

First, the Crown is put upon his Head. A Crown is the most excellent badge of
Royal Majesty. To discourse on Crowns in a Stateway, I shall leave unto
Statesmen, and lay only these three before you of the Crown.

I. In putting on of the Crown, it would be well fastened, for Kings Crowns are
often times tottering; and this is a time wherein they totter. There are two
things which make Kings Crowns to totter; great sins, and great commotions and
troubles; take heed of both.

1. There are many sins upon our King and his Family. Sin will make the surest
Crown that ever men set on to totter. The sins of former Kings have made this a
tottering Crown. I shall not insist here, seeing there has been a solemn day
of humiliation through the Land, on Thursday last, for the sins of the Royal
Family. I wish the Lord may bless it; and desire the King may be truly humbled
for his own sins, and the sins of his fathers house, which have been great,
beware of putting on these sins with the Crown; For if you put them on, all the
well-wishers to a King in the three Kingdoms will not be able to hold on the
Crown, and keep it from tottering; yea, from falling. Lord, take away the
controversy with the Royal Family, that the Crown may be fastened sure upon
the Kings head, without falling or tottering.

2. Troubles and commotions in a Kingdom, make crowns to totter. A Crown at
the best, and in the most calm times, is full of trouble, which if it were
well weighed by men, there would not be such hunting after Crowns. I read of a
Great man, who considering the trouble and care that accompanied a Crown, said,
he would not take it up at his foot, though he might have it for taking. Now if
a Crown at the best be so full of troubles, what shall one think of a Crown at
the worst, when there are so great commotions, wherein the Crown is directly
aimed at? Surely it must be a tottering crown at the least, especially when
former sins have brought on these troubles. As the remedy of the former is true
humiliation, and turning unto God; so the remedy of the latter, is Psalm. 21.3.
(speaking of David's crown) Thou set a crown of pure gold upon his head. God
set on David's crown, and therefore it was settled, notwithstanding of many
troubles. Men may set on crowns, and they may be thrown off again; but when God
sets them on, they will be fast. Enemies have touched the Crown of our King,
and casten it off in the other Kingdom, and have made it totter in this
Kingdom, both the King who is to be crowned, and you who are to crown him,
should deal earnestly with God, to set the Crown on the Kings head, and to keep
it on against all the commotions of this generation. 2. A King should esteem
more of the people he reigns over, than of his crown, Kings use to be so
taken up with their Crowns, that they despise their people. I would have a King
following Christ, the King of his people, who says of them, Isa. 62.3. Thou
shall be a crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadene in the
hand of thy God. Christ counts his people his Crown and Diadem; so should a
King esteem the people of the Lord, over whom he rules, to be as his Crown and
Diadem; take away the people, and a Crown is but an empty symbol. 3. A King
when he gets his Crown on his head, should think at the best, it is but a
fading Crown. All the Crowns of Kings are but fading Crowns: therefore they
should have an eye upon that Crown of Glory, that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4.
And upon a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. that Crown and Kingdom
belongs not to Kings as Kings, but unto believers; and a believeing King has
this Comfort, that when he has endured a while, and been tried, he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

II. The second thing in this Solemnity, is the Testimony, by this is meant the
Law of God; so called because it testifies of the mind and will of God. It was
commanded, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. when the King shall sit upon the throne of his
kingdom, he shall write a copy of the book of the Law, and it shall be with
him, that he may read therein all the days of his life. The King should have
the Testimony for these three main uses.

1. For his information in the way of God, Deuteronomy. 17.19. This use of the Kings
having the Book of the Law, is expressed, That he may learn to fear the Lord
his God; the reading of other books may do a King good for Government, but no
book will teach him the way of salvation, but the book of God. Christ bids
search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they
testify of me, Joh. 5.39. He is a blessed man who meditateth in the Law of the
Lord, Psalm. 1.1, 2. King David was well acquainted herewith, as appears,
Psalm. 119. Kings should be well exercised in Scripture. It is reported of
Alphonsus King of Aragon, that he read the Bible fourteen times, with glosses
thereupon. I recommend to the King, to take some hours for reading holy
Scripture: It will be a good means to make him acquainted with Gods mind, and
with Christ as a Savior.

2. For this direction in government, Kings read books that may learn them to
govern well, which I condemn not, but all the books a King can read, will not
make him govern to please God, as this book. I know nothing that is good in
government, but a King may learn it out of the book of God. For this cause
Joshua is commanded, Josh. 1.8. That the book of the law shall not depart out
of his mouth, and he is commanded to do according to that is written therein.
He should not only do himself that which is written in it, but do and govern
his people according to that is written in it; King David knew this use of the
Testimony, who said, Psalm. 119.24. Thy Testimonies are my delight and my
Counselors. The best counsels that ever a King gets, are in the book of
God; yea the testimonies are the best and surest Counselors, because although
Kings Counselors be never so wise and trusty, yet they use not to be so free
with a King as they ought: but the Scripture will tell Kings very freely both
their sin and their duty. 3. For preservation and custody, the King is Custos
utriusque tabulae; the keeper of both tables. Not that he should take upon him
to dispense the Word of God, or to dispense with it; But that he should
preserve the Word of God, and the true Religion, according to the Word of God,
pure, entire, and uncorrupted within his dominions, and transmit them to
posterity, and also be careful to see his subjects observe both tables, and to
punish transgressors of the same.

III. The third thing in this solemnity is the anointing of the King. The
anointing of Kings was not absolutely necessary under the Old Testament, for we
read not that all the Kings of Judah and Isral were anointed. The Hebrews
observe that anointing of Kings was used in three cases.

1. When the first of a Family was made King, as Saul, David. 2. When there was
a question for the Crown, as in the case of Solomon and Adoniah. 3. When there
was an interruption of the lawful succession by usurpation, as in the case of
Joah, there is an interruption by the usurpation of Athaliah; therefore he is
anointed. If this observation hold, as it is probable, then it was not
absolutely necessary under the Old Testament, and therefore far less under the
New.

Because it may be said, That in our case there is an interruption by
usurpation, let it be considered; That the Anointing under the Old Testament
was Typical, although all Kings were not Types of Christ; yet the Anointing of
Kings, Priests, and Prophets, was typical of Christ; and his Offices: but
Christ being now come, all these Ceremonies cease. And therefore the Anointing
of Kings, ought not to be used in the New Testament.

If it be said, Anointing of Kings has been in use among Christians, not only
Papists, but Protestants, as in the Kingdom of England, and our late King was
Anointed with Oil. It may be replied, they who used it under the New Testament
took it from the Jews, without warrant. It was most in use with the Bishops of
Rome, who to keep Kings and Emperors subject to themselves, did swear them to
the Pope, when they were Anointed, (and yet the Jewish Priests did never swear
Kings to themselves) as for England although the Pope was casten off, yet the
subjection of Kings to Bishops was still retained, for they Anointed the King,
and swear him to the maintenance of their Prelaticall dignity. They are here
who were witnesses at the Coronation of the late King. The Bishops behoved to
perform that rite, and the King behoved to be sworn to them. But now by the
blessing of God, Popery and Prelacy are removed: the Bishops as limbs of
Antichrist, are put to the door; let the Anointing of Kings with oil go to the
door with them, and let them never come in again.

The Anointing with material oil, makes not a King, the Anointed of the
Lord, for he is so without it. He is the Anointed of the Lord, who by the
divine Ordinance, and appointment is a King, Isa. 45.1. God called Cyrus his
Anointed; yet we read not that he was Anointed with oil. Kings are the Anointed
of the Lord, because by the Ordinance of the Lord, their Authority is sacred
and inviolable. It is enough for us to have the thing though we want the
Ceremony, which being laid aside, I will give some Observations of the thing.

1. A King being the Lords Anointed, should be thinking upon a better unction,
even that spiritual unction, wherewith believers are Anointed, which you have,
1 John: 2.27. The Anointing ye have received of him abides in you: And 2 Cor. 1
21. He that has Anointed us, is God who has also sealed us, This Anointing is
not proper to Kings, but common to believers. Few Kings are so Anointed. A King
should strive to be a good Christian, and then a good King: The Anointing with
Grace, is better then the Anointing with oil. It is of more worth for a King
to be Anointed of the Lord with Grace, then to be the greatest Monarch of the
world without it.

2. This Anointing may put a King in mind of the gifts, wherewith Kings should
be endued, for discharge of the Royal calling. For Anointing did signify the
gifts of Office. It is said of Saul, when he was Anointed King; As 1 Samuel 10 9.
God gave him another heart And Cap. 11.6. The spirit of God came upon him it is
meant, of a heart for this calling, and a spirit of ability for Government. It
should be our desire this day, that our King may have a spirit for his calling,
as the spirit of Wisdom, Fortitude, Justice, and other Princely indowments.

3. This Anointing may put Subjects in mind of the Sacret due of the Authority
of a King. He should be respected, as the Lords Anointed. There are diverse
sorts of persons, that are Enemies to the Authory of Kings; As 1. Anabaptists,
who deny there should be Kings in the New Testament. They will have no Kings,
nor civil Magistrate. 2. The late Photinians, who speak respectively of Kings,
and Magistrates, but they take away from them their power, and the exercise of
it in the administration of Justice. 3. These who rise against Kings in open
Rebellion, as Absalom and Sheba, who said, what have we to do with David, the
son of Jesse? To your Tents, O Israel 4. They who do not rebel openly, yet they
despise a King in their heart, like the sons of Beliall, 1 Samuel 10. last, who
said of Saul after he was Anointed King, shall this man save us? And they
despised him, and brought him no presents.

1. All these meet in our present age. 1. Anabaptists who are against the being
of Kings are very rife: you may find, to your great grief, a great number of
them in that Army that have unjustly invaded the Land, who have trampled upon
the Authority of Kings. 2. There are also of the second sort, who are secretly
Photinians in this point, they allow of Kings in profession, but they are
against the exercise of their power in the Administration of Justice. 3. A
third sort in open Rebellion, even all that Generation which are risen up not
only against the person of the King but Kingly Government. 4. There is a fourth
who profess they acknowledge a King, but despise him in their heart saying,
Shall this man save us? I wish all had David's tenderness, whose heart smote
him when he did but cut off the lap of Saul's garment, that we may be far from
cutting off a lap of that just power and greatness which God has allowed to
the King, and we have bound our selves by Covenant not to diminish.

I have gone through the three particulars contained in ver. 12. I come to the
other two in v. 17. which appertain also to this said work; for our King is not
only to be crowned but to renew a covenant with God and his people, and to make
a covenant with the people; Answerable hereto there is a twofold covenant in
the words, one between God and the King, and the people; God being the one
party, the King and the people the other. Another between the King and the
people, the King being the one party, the people the other. The covenant with
God is the fourth particular propounded to be spoken of. The sum of the
covenant ye may find, 2 King. 23.3. in Josiah his renewing the covenant, To
walk after the Lord, and keep his commandments and testimonies with all thy
heart, and to perform the words of the covenant. The renewing of the covenant
was after a great defection from God, and the setting up of false worship. The
King and the people of God bound themselves before the Lord, to set up true
worship, and to abolish the false. Scotland has a preference in this before
other Nations. In time of defection they have renewed a covenant with God to
reform all: And because the King after a great defection in that family is to
renew the covenant, I shall mention some particulars from the League and
Covenant.

1. We are bound to maintain the true Reformed Religion in Doctrine Worship,
Discipline and Government established in this kingdom, and to endeavor the
Reformation of Religion in the other two kingdoms according to the word of God
and the best reformed Kirks. By this Article the King is obliged not only to
maintain Religion as it is established in Scotland, but also to endeavor the
reformation of Religion in his other kingdoms: The King should consider well,
when it shall please God to restore him to his Government there, that he is
bound to endeavor the establishment of the work of Reformation there, as well
as to maintain it here.

According to the second article, the King is bound without respect of persons
to extirpate Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Scheism and Profaneness,
and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of
godliness; and therefore Popery is not to be suffered in his Royal family, nor
within his Dominions; Prelacy once pluck up by the root is not to be permitted
to take root again; all Heresy and Error whatsoever must be opposed by him to
the utmost of his power; and by the covenant the K. must be far from
tolleration of any false Religion within his Dominions.

3. As the people are bound to maintain the Kings person and authority in the
maintenance of the true Religion and liberties of the kingdom: So the King is
bound with them to maintain the rights and privileges of the Parliament, and
liberties of the subjects, according to the third article.

4. We are bound to discover, and to bring unto condign punishment all such as
have been or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil instruments, in
hindering the reformation of Religion, dividing the king from the people, or one
of the kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties amongst them,
hereby the king is bound to have an eye upon such, and neither allow them, nor
comply with them, but to concur according to his power to have them censured
and punished, as is expressed in the fourth article. I shall sum up all this,
That a K. entering in covenant with God, should do as the kings did of old when
they entered into covenant, they and their people went on in the work of
Reformation, as appears there, verse. 8. And all the people of the Lord went to
the house of Baal, and brake it down, etc. And godly Josiah when he entered in
covenant made a through reformation. There is a fourfold reformation in
Scripture, and contained in the League and Covenant. 1. A personal Reformation.
2. A Family reformation. 3. A reformation of Judicatories. 4. A reformation of
the whole Land: Kings have had their hand in all the Four, and therefore I
recommend them to our King.

1. A personal Reformation, A King should reform his own life, that he may be a
pattern of godliness to others, and to this he is tied by the Covenants. The
godly reformers of Judah were pious and religious men. A King should not follow
Machiavell his counsel, who requires not that a Prince should be truly
religious, but says, that a shadow of it, and external simulation are
sufficient: A divellish counsel, and it is just with God to bring a King to the
shadow of a Kingdom, who has but the shadow of Religion. We know that
dissembling Kings have been punished of God; and let our King know that no King
but a religious king can please God. David is highly commended for godliness;
Hezekiah a man eminent for piety, Josiah a young king, commended for the
tenderness of his heart when he heard the law of the Lord read; he was much
troubled before the Lord when he heard the judgments threatened against his
Fathers house and his people, it is earnestly wished that our Kings heart may
be tender, and be truly humbled before the Lord for the sins of his Fathers
house, and of the land; and for the many evils that are upon that Family and
upon that Kingdom.

2. A Family Reformation. The King should reform his Family, after the example
of godly kings; Asa when he entered in covenant, spared not his Mothers
Idolatry. The house of our king has been much defiled by Idolatry. The king is
now in covenant, and to renew the covenant, let the Royal Family be reformed;
and that it may be a religious Family wherein God will have pleasure. Let it be
purged not only of Idolatry but of prophanity and looseness, which has abounded
in it. Much has been spoken of this matter, but little has been done in it.
Let the king and others who have charge in that family think it lies upon them
as a duty to purge it. And if you would have a Famiy well purged and
constitute, take David for a pattern, in the purgation and constitution of his
Psalm 10. The froward heart, wicked persons, and slanderers he will have far
from him; but his eyes are upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell
with him. Ye may extent this Reformation to the Court. A profane Court is
dangerous for a king; it has been observed as a provoking sin in England,
which has drawn down judgment upon King and Court, as appears this day. It
is to be wished that such were in the Court as David speaks of in that Psalm.
Let the King see to it and resolve with David, Psalm. 101.7. That he who works
deceit shall not dwell within his house; and he who tells lies shall not
tarry in his sight.

3. Reformation in Judicatories. It should be carefully seen to, that
Judicatories be reformed; and that men fearing God, and hating covetousness,
may be placed in them: a King in covenant should do as Jehoshaphat did, 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6 7. He set Judges in the land, and said, Take heed what you do:
ye judge not for men, but for the Lord, who is with you in judgment: wherefore
now let the fear of the Lord be before you, etc.

4. The Reformation of the whole land: the Kings eye should be upon it, 2 Chronicles. 19.4. Jehoshaphat went out through the people, from Beersheba to mount
Ephraim, and brought them back to the Lord God of their fathers. Our land has
great need of reformation; for there is a part of it, that has scarce ever yet
found the benefit of it; they are lying without the Gospel. It will be a work
of a covenanted King to have a care that the Gospel may be preached through the
whole land: care also would be taken that they who have the Gospel may live
suitably thereto.

If a king would be a through Reformer, he must reformed himself, other ways
he will never lay reformation to heart. To make a king a good Reformer, I wish
him these qualifications according to the truth, and in sincerity, wherewith
they report Trajan the Emperor to have been endued. He was 1. Devote at home.
2. Courageous in War. 3. Just in his Judicatories. 4. Prudent in all his
affairs. True Piety, Fortitude, Justice, and Prudency are notable
qualifications in a Prince, who would reform a kingdom, and reform well.

5. I come now to the fifth and last particular, and that is the Covenent made
between the king and the people. When a king is Crowned, and received by the
people, there is a Covenant or mutual contract between him and them,
containing conditions, mutually to be observed. Time will not suffer to insist
upon many particulars, I shall only lay before you three. First, it is clear
from this Covenant, That a king has not absolute power to do what he pleases,
he is tied to conditions, by virtue of a Covenant. Secondly, it is clear from
this Covenant, that a people are bound to obey their king in the Lord. Thirdly,
I shall present the king with directions, for the Government of the people, who
are bound to obey.

1. It is clear, That the kings power is not absolute, as kings and flattering
Courtiers apprehend, a kings power is a limited power, by this Covenant. And
there is a threefold limitation of the kings power.

1. In regard of subordination. There is a power above his, even Gods power,
whom he is obliged to obey; and to whom he must give an account of his
administration. Ye heard yesterday the Text, By me Kings Reign, Prove. 8.15.
kings have not only their Crowns from God, but they must Reign according to his
will, which is clear from Romans 8.13. He is called the Minister of God He is but
Gods servant. I need not stay upon this, kings and all others will acknowledge
this limitation.

2. In regard of Laws, a king is sworn at his coronation to rule according to
the standing received Laws of the kingdom. The Laws he is sworn to, limit him
that he cannot do against them, without a sinful breach of this Covenant
between the king and the people.

3. In rgard of government: The total government is not upon a king. He has
Counselors, a Parliament, or Estates in the Land, who share in the burden of
government. It was never the mind of these who receive a king to rule them, to
lay all their government upon him, to do what he pleases, without
controlement. There is no man able alone to govern all. The kingdom should not
lay that upon one man, who may easily miscarry. The Estates of the Land are
bound in this contract to bear a burden with him.

These men who have flattered Kings, to take unto them an absolute ^ower, to do
what they please, have wronged Kings and kingdoms. It ^ad been good that Kings
of late had carried themselves so, as this question of Kings power might never
have come in debate; for they have been great loosers thereby, Kings are very
desirous to have things spoken and written to hold up their arbitrary and
unlimitted power; but that way does exceedingly wrong them. There is one, a
learned man, I confess, who has written a book for the maintenance of the
absolute power of Kings called Defensio Regia whereby he has wronged himself
in his reputation, and the King in his Government. As for the fact of taking
away the life of the late King (whatever was Gods justice in it) I do agree
with him to condemn it, as a most unjust and horrid fact, upon their part who
did it: But when he comes to speak to the power of Kings, in giving unto them
an absolute and illimited power, urging the damnahle Maxim, Quod libet licet,
he will have a King to do what (...) pleases impune, and without co^trolement.
In this I cannot bu^ dissent from him.

In regard of subordination, some say, That a King is countable to none but
God: Do what he will, let God take order with it; This leads Kings to
Atheism, let them do what they please, and take God in their own hand, in
regard of Laws, they teach nothing to Kings but Tyranny: And in regard of
Government, they teach a King to take an arbitrary power himself to do what he
pleases without controlement. How dangerous this has been to Kings, is clear
by sad experience. Abuse of Power and Arbitrary Government, has been one of
Gods great controversies, with our kings and Predecessors; God in his Justice,
because power has been abused, has thrown it out of their hands. And I may
confidently say, that Gods controversy with the kings of the Earth, is for
their Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government.

It is good for our king to learn to be wise in time; and know, that he
receives this day a power to govern; but a power limited by contract; and
these conditions he is bound by Oath to stand to. Kings are deceived, who think
that the people are ordained for the king; and not the king for the people. The
Scripture shows the contrary, Romans 13.4. The king is the Minister of God,
for the Peopes good. God will not have a king in an arbitrary way, to encroach
upon the possessions of Subjects Ezekiel 45.7.8. A portion is appointed for the
Prince. And it is said, My Princes shall no more oppress my people; and the
rest of the Land shall he give unto the House of Israel, according to their
Tribes. The king has his distinct possessions and Revenues from the peoples;
he must not oppress and do what he pleases, there must be no Tyranny upon the
Throne.

I desire not to speak much of this Subject. Men have been very tender in
meddling with the power of kings; yet seeing these days have brought forth
debates concerning the power of kings, it will be necessary to be clear in the
matter. Extremities should be shunned. A king should keep within the bounds of
the Covenant made with the people, in the exercise of his power: concerning the
last, I shall propound these three to your consideration.

1. A king abusing his power, to the overthrow of Religion, Laws and Liberties,
which are the very fundamentalls of this contract and Covenant, may be
controled and opposed: and if he set himself to overthrow all these by Arms,
then they who have power, as the Estates of a Land, may and ought to resist by
Arms; Because he does, by that opposition, break the very bonds, and overthrow
the essentials of this contract and Covenant. This may serve to justify the
proceedings of this kingdom against the late king, who in an hostile way set
himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments, Laws and Liberties.

2. Every breach of Covenant wherein a king fails, after he has entered in
Covenant, does not dissolve the bond of the Covenant. Neither should Subjects
lay aside a king for every breach, except the breaches be such as overthrow the
Fundamentals of the Covenant with the people. Many examples of this may be
brought from Scripture. I shall give but one. King Asa entered solemnly in
Covenant with God and his People, 2 Chronicles. 15. After that he falls in gross
transgressions and breaches, 2 Chronicles. 16. He associates himself and entered in
League with Benhadad king of Syria, an Idolater, he imprisoned Hanani the Lords
Prophet, who reproved him, and threatened judgment against that association;
and at the same time he oppressed some of the people: and yet, for all this,
they neither lay aside, nor count him an Hypocrite.

3. Private persons should be very circumspect about that which they do in
relation to the Authority of kings. It is very dangerous for private men to
meddle with the power of kings, and the suspending of them from the exercise
thereof. I do ingeniously confess, that I find no example of it: The Prophets
taught not such doctrine to their people, nor the Apostles nor the reformed
kirks. Have ever private men, Pastors, or Professors, given into the Estates
of a Land, as their judgment, unto which they resolved to adhere, That a king
should be suspended from the exercise of his power? And if we look upon those
Godly Pastors who lived in king James his time, of whom one may truly say,
more faithful men lived not in these last times: For they spared not to tell
the king his faults to his face: Yea, some of them suffered persecution for
their honesty and freedom; Yet we never read, nor have heard, that any of those
godly Pastors joined with other private men, did never remonstrate to
Parliament or Estate, as their judgment, that the king should be suspended
from the exercise of his Royal power.

2. It is clear from this Covenant, that people should obey their King in the
Lord: for as the king is bound by Covenant to make use of his power to their
good: so are they bound to obey him in the Lord in the exercise of that power.
About the peoples duty to their King take these four Observations.

1. That the obedience of the people is in subordination to God; For the
Covenant is first with God, and then with the King. If a King command any thing
contrary to the will of God, in this case Peter says, It is better to obey God
then man. There is a line drawn from God to the people they are lowest in the
line, and have Magistrates superior and supreme above them, and God above all.
When the King commands the people that which is lawful and commanded by God,
then he should be obeyed, because he stands in the right line under God, who
has put him in his place. But if he command that which is unlawful, and
forbidden of God, in that he shall not be obeyed to do it; because he is out of
his line. That a King is to be obeyed with this subordination, is evident from
Scripture; take one place for all, Romans 13. at the beginning, ye have both
obedience urged to Superior Powers at the ordinance of God, and damnation
threatened against those who resist the lawful power.

It is said by some, that many Ministers in Scotland will not have King Jesus,
but King Charles to reign. Faithful men are wronged by such speeches. I do not
understand these men. For if they think that a King and Jesus are inconsistent;
then they will have no King. But I shall be far from entertaining such thoughts
of them. If they think the doing of a necessary duty for King Charles is to
prefer his Interest to Christ's, this also is an error. Honest Ministers can
very well discern between the interest of Christ and of the King. I know no
Ministers that setting up King Charles with prejudice to Christ's in erest.

3. The third particular about this Covenant rests to be spoken of, to wit,
some directions to the King, for the right performing of his Duty, whereof I
shall give seven.

1. A King, meeting with many difficulties in doing of duty, by reason of
strong corruption within, and many tentations without; he should be careful to
seek GOD by Prayer for grace to overcome these Impediments, and for an
understanding heart to Govern his people. Solomon having in his option to ask
what he would, he asked an Understanding Heart, to go out and in before his
people: knowing that the Government of a people was a very difficile work, and
needed more then ordinary understanding. A King also has many enemies (as our
King has this day) and a Praying King is a Prevailing King. Asa when he had to
do with a mighty enemy, 2 Chronicles. 14. prayed fervently and prevailed.
Jehoshaphat was invaded with a mighty enemy, 2 Chronicles. 20. He prayed and did
prevail. Hezekiah prayed against Senucherib's huge Army and prevailed, 2 Chronicles.
32.

Sir, you have many difficulties and oppositions to meet with; acquaint your
self with Prayer; be instant with GOD, and he will fight for You. Prayers are
not in much request at Court; but a Covenanted King must bring them in request.
I know a King is burdened with multiplicity of affairs, and will meet with
many diversions: But, Sir, you must not be diverted; and take hours and set
them apart for that exercise; men being once acquainted with your way way, will
not dare to divert you. Prayer to God will make your affairs easy all the day.
I read of a king of whom his Courtiers said, He spoke oftener with God, then
with men. If you be frequent in Prayer you may expect the blessing of the most
high upon your self, and your Government.

2. A king must be careful of the kingdom which he has sworn to maintain We
have had many of too private a spirit, by whom self-interest has been
preferred to the public. It becomes a king well to be of a public spirit,
to care more for the public then his own interest. Senates and States have had
Motto's written over the doors of the Meeting-places; Over the Senates house at
Rome was written, Ne quid Republica detrimenti capiat; I shall wish this may be
written over your Assembly-houses: But there is another which I would have
written with it, Ne quid Ecclesia detrimenti capiat. Be careful of both; let
not kirk nor State suffer hurt; let them go together. The best way for standing
of a kingdom, is a well constitute kirk: They deceive kings who make them
believe that the Government of the kirk, I mean Presbyterial Government, cannot
suit with Monarchy. They suit well, it being the Ordinance of Christ, rendering
to God what is Gods, and to Caesar what is Caesar's.

Sir, kings who have a tender care of the kirk, Isa. 41.3. are called Nursing
Fathers. You would be careful that the Gospel may have free passage through the
kingdom, and that the Government of the kirk may be preserved entire,
according to your Solemn Engagement. The kirk has met with many enemies, as
Papists, Prelates, Malignants, which I pass as known enemies. But there are
two sorts more, who at this time would be carefully looked on.

1. Sectaries, great enemies to the kirk, and to all the Ordinances of Christ,
and more particularly to Presbyterian Government, which they have and would
have altogether destroyed. A king should set himself against these, because
they are enemies as well to the king as to the kirk, and strive to make both
fall together.

2. Erastians, more dangerous snares to kings, than Sectaries; because kings
can look well enough to these, who are against themselves and their power, as
Sectaries, who will have no king: But Erastians give more power to kings than
they should have, and are great enemies to Presbyterial Government: For they
would make kings believe that there is no Government but the Civil, and derived
from thence; which is a great wrong to the Son of God, who has the Government
of the kirk distinct from the Civil, yet no ways prejudicial to it, being
spiritual, and of another nature. Christ did put the Magistrate out of
suspicion, that his kingdom was prejudicial to Civil Government, affirming, My
Kingdom is not of this world. This Government Christ has not committed to
kings, but to the Office-bearers of his house; who in regard of civil
subjection, are under the civil power as well as others; but in their spiritual
administration they are under Christ, who has not given to any king upon
earth, the dispensation of spiritual things to his people.

SIR, You are in covenant with God and his people, and are obliged to maintain
Presbyterial Government, as well against Erastians as Sectaries. I know this
Erastian humor abounds at Court. It may be some endeavor to make your
reproach upon that, for which God has punished your Predecessors. Be who he
will that medleth with this Government to overturn it, it shall be as heavy to
him as the burdensome stone to the enemies of the kirk, They are cut in pieces
who burden themselves with it, Zach. 12.

3. A King in Covenant with the people of God, should make much of those who
are in Covenant with him; having in high estimation the faithful Servants of
Christ, and the godly people of the Land. It is rare to find kings lovers of
faithful Ministers, and pious people. It has been the fault of our own Kings
to persecute the godly.

1. Let the King love the Servant^ of Christ, who speak the truth. Evi^ Kings
are branded with this, tha^ they contemned the Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 25. when
Amaziah had taken the gods of Seir, and set them up for his gods, a Prophet
came to him and reproved him, unto whom the King said, Who made thee of the
King counsel, forbear lest thou be smitten This contempt of the Prophets
warning, is a forerunner of following destruction. Be a careful hearer o^ Gods
Word; take with reproof, esteem of it as David did, Psalm. 141.5. An excellent
oil which shall not brea^ the head. To make much of the faithful Servants of
Christ, will be an evidence of reality.

2. Let the King esteem well o^ godly Professors. Let Piety be in account. It
is a fault very common, that pious men, because of their conscientious and
strict walking, are hated by the Profane, who love to live loosely. It is
usual with profane men to labor to bring kings unto a distaste of the godly;
especially when men who have professed Piety becomes scandalous; whereupon they
are ready to judge all pious men to be like them, and take occasion to speak
evil of Piety. I fear at this time when men who have been commended for Piety,
have fallen foully, and betrayed their trust; that men will take advantage to
speak against the godly of the Land. Beware of this, for its Satan's policy to
put piety out of request. Let not this move any, Fall who will, Piety is still
the same, and pious men will make conscience both of their ways and trust.
Remember, they are precious in Gods eyes, who will not suffer men to despise
them, without their reward. Sir, let not your heart be from the godly in the
Land, whatever has fain out at this time. I dare affirm that there are very
many really godly men, who by their prayers are supporting your Throne.

4. A king should be careful whom he puts in places of trust, as a main
thing for the good of the kingdom. It is a Maxim that Trust should not be put
in their hands who have oppressed the people, or have betrayed their trust.
There is a passage in story, meet for this purpose. One Septimius Arabmus, a
man famous or rather infamous for Oppression was put out of the Senate but
readmitted. About this time Alexander Severus being chosen to the Empire, the
Senators did entertain him with public salutations and congratulations,
Severus espying Arabinus, amongst the Senators, cried, O Numina! Arabinus non
solum vivit, sed in Senatum venit. Ah! Arabinus not only lives, but he is in
the Senate. Out of just indignation he could not endure to see him As all are
not meet for places of trust in Judicatures, so all are not meet for places of
trust in Armies. Men would be chosen who are godly and able for the charge.

But there are some who are not meet for trust. 1. They who are godly, but have
no skill nor ability for the place; a man may be a truly godly man, who is not
fit for such a place, and no wrong is done to him, nor to godliness, when the
place is denied to him. I wonder how a godly man can take upon him a place
whereof he has no skill. 2. They who have neither skill nor courage are very
unmeet, for if it be a place of never so great moment, faint-heartedness will
make them quit it. 3. They who are both skillful and stout, yet are not honest,
but persidious, and treacherous should have no trust at all.

Of all these we have sad experience which should not move you to make choice
of profane, and godless men, by whom a blessing is not to be expected, but it
should move you to be wary in your choice, I am confident such may be had, who
will be faithful for religion, king and kingdom.

There has been much debate about the exercise of the kings power, yet he is
put in the exercise of his power, and this day put in a better capacity to
exercise it by his Coronation. Many are afraid that the exercise of his power,
shall prove dangerous to the cause, and indeed I confess there is a ground of
fear, when we consider how this power has been abused by former Kings
therefore Sir, make good use of your power, and see that you rather keep within
bounds, then exceed in the exercise of it. I may very well give such a counsel,
as an old Counselor gave to a king of France. He having spent many years at
Court, desired to retire into the Country for enjoying privacy fit for his age;
and having obtained leave, the King his Master required him to set down and
write some advice of Government, to leave behind him, which he out of Modesty
declined. The King would not be denied, but left with him Pen and Ink, and a
sheet paper. He being alone after some thoughts, wrote with fair and legible
Characters in the head of the sheet, Modus, in the middle of the sheet, Modus,
and in the foot of the sheet, Modus, and wrote no more in all his paper which
he wrapped up and delivered to the King, meaning that the best counsel he could
give him, was, that he should keep temper in all things. Nothing more fit for a
young King, then to keep temper in all. Take his Counsel Sir, and be mod^rate
in the use of your power. The best way to keep power is moderation in the use
of it.

6. The King has many Enemies, even such as are enemies to his Family, and to
all Kingly Government, and are now in the bowels of this kingdom wasting and
destroying: bestir your self according to Vows and Oaths that are upon you, to
be active for the relief of Christ's kingdom born down by them in all the three
kingdoms; and for the relief of this kingdom grievously oppressed by them. We
shall earnestly desire, that God would put that spirit upon our King, now
entered upon public Government, which he has put upon the Deliverers of his
people from their cruel oppressors.

In speaking of the Kings behavior to Enemies. One thing I cannot pass. There
is much spoken of a Treaty with his Enemy, I am not of the judgment of some,
who distinguish a Treaty before invasion, and after invasion, and say, treating
is very lawful before invasion; because it is supposed there is little wrong
done; but after invasion when a kingdom is wronged, and put to infinite
losses, then say a Treaty is to be shunned: but in my judgment a Treaty may be
lawful after invasion, and wrongs sustained. The end of war is peace, neither
should desire of revenge obstruct it, providing it be such a Treaty, and Peace,
as is not prejudicial to Religion nor to the safety of the Kingdom, nor to
the undoubted right of the King, nor the League and Covenant whereunto we are
solemnly engaged.

But I must break off this Treaty with a story related in Plutarch. The City of
Athens was in a great strait, wherein they knew not what to do. Themistocles in
this strait said, he had something wherein to give his opinion, for the behoof
of the State; but he thought it not fit to deliver himself publicly:
Aristides, a man of great trust, is appointed to hear him privately, and to
make an account as he thought meet. When Aristides came to make his report to
the Senate, he told them that Themistocles his advice was indeed profitable,
but not honest: Whereupon the people would not so much as hear it. There is
much whispering of a Treaty, they are not willing to speak publicly of it.
Hear them in private, and it may be the best advice shall be profitable, but
not honest. If a Treaty should be, let it be both profitable and honest, and no
lover of peace will be against it.

7. Seeing the King is now upon renewing of the Covenants, it would be
remembered, that we enter into Covenant, according to our profession therein,
with reality, sincerity, and constancy, which are the qualifications of good
Covenanters. Many doubt of your reality in the Covenant: Let your sincerity and
reality be evidenced by your steadfastness and constancy; for many have begun
well, but have not been constant.

In the sacred History of Kings, we find a note put upon Kings according to
their carriages. One of three sentences written upon them. 1. Some Kings have
this written on them, He did evil in the sight of the Lord. They neither begin
well, nor end well. Such an one was Ahaz King of Judah, and diverse others in
that History. 2. Others have this written on them, He did that which was right
in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart. Such a one was Amaziah
King of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. He was neither sincere nor constant: when God
blessed him with victory against the Edomites, he sell foully from the true
worship of God, and set up the gods of Edom. 3. A third sentence is written
upon the godly Kings of Judah, He did right in the sight of the Lord, with a
perfect heart; as Asa, Hezekiah, Jehosaphat and Josiah. They were both sincere
and constant. Let us neither have the first nor the second, but the third
written upon our King, He did right in the sight of the Lord, with a perfect
heart. Begin well, and continue constant.

Before I close, I shall seek leave to lay before our young King two examples,
to beware of; and one to follow, the two warning examples one of them is in my
text, another in our own History.

The first example of Joash, he began well, and went on in godly Reformation
all the days of Jehojada; but it is observed 2 Chronicles. 2.17. after the days of
Jehojada, the Princes of Judah came, and did obeisance to the King, and he
hearkened unto them, ver. 18. It appears they had been at wait till the death
of Jehojada; and took that opportunity to destroy the true worship of God, and
set up false worship, flattering the King to that effect: For it is said, They
left the house of the Lord, and served groves and Idols, and were so far from
being reclaimed by the Prophet of the Lord, that was sent unto them, that they
conspired against Zechariah the son of Jehojada, who reproved them mildly for
their Idolatry, and stoned him with stones, and flew him at the Kings
commandment. And ver. 22. it is said, Joash remembered not the kindness that
Jehojada his Father had done to him, but slew his Son.

Sir, Take this example for a warning: You are obliged by the Covenant, to go
on in the work of Reformation, it may be some great ones are waiting their
time, not having opportunity to work for the present, till afterward they may
make obeisance, and persuade you to destroy all that has been done in the work
of God these diverse years. Beware of it, Let no allurement of persuasion
prevail with you to fall from that, which this day you bind your self to
maintain.

Another example I give you, yet in recent memory, of your Grandfather King
James. He fell to be King very young, in a time full of difficulties; yet there
was a godly party in the Land, who did put the Crown upon his head. And when he
came to some years, He and and his people entered in a Covenant with God, he was
much commended by godly and faithful men, comparing him to young Josiah
standing at the Altar, renewing a Covenant with God; and he himself did thank
God that he was born in a reformed Kirk, better reformed then England; for they
retained many Popish ceremonies: yea, better reformed then Geneva; for they
keep some holy days: charging his people to be constant, and promising himself
to continue in that Reformation, and to maintain the same. Notwithstanding of
all this, he made a foul defection: He remembered not the kindness of them who
had held the Crown upon his head; yea, he persecuted faithful Ministers, for
opposing that course of defection. He never rested till he had undone
Presbyterial Government, and Kirk Assemblies, setting up Bishops, and bringing
in ceremonies, against which he had formerly given large testimonies. In a
word, he laid the foundation, whereupon his Son our late King did build much
mischief in Religion all the days of his life.

Sir, I lay this example before you the rather, because it is so near you, that
the guiltiness of the transgression lies upon the Throne and Family, and it
is one of the sins for which you have professed humiliation very lately. Let it
be laid to heart, take warning, requite not faithful men's kindness with
persecution; yea, requite not the Lord so, who has preserved you to this time,
and is setting a Crown upon your head. Requite not the Lord with apostasy and
defection from a sworn Covenant, but be steadfast in the Covenant, as you would
give testimony of your true humiliation for the defection of those that went
before you.

I have set these two examples before you as Beacons to warn you to keep off
such dangerous courses, and shall add one of that godly man's adherence to God.
The example is of Hezekiah, who did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, 2 Kings 18.6, 6. It is said of him, he trusted in the Lord God of Israel,
and he clave unto the Lord, and departed not from following him, but kept his
Commandments. And ver. 7. The Lord was with him, and he prospered whithersoever
he went forth.

Sir, follow this example, cleave unto the Lord, and depart not from following
him, and the Lord will be with you, and prosper you whithersoever you go. To
this Lord, from whom we expect a blessing on this days work, be glory and
praise for ever. Amen.

Sermon being ended, Prayer was made for a blessing upon the Doctrine delivered.

The King being to renew the Covenants first the National Covenant, then the
solemn League and Covenant were distinctly read.

After the reading of these Covenants the Minister prayed for grace to perform
the contents of the Covenants, and for faithful stedfastness in the Oath of
God; and then (the Ministers, and Commissioners of the General Assembly,
desired to be present, standing before the Pulpit) he ministed the Oath unto
the King who kneeling, and lifting up his right hand, did swear in the words
following.

I CHARLES King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, do assure and declare
by solemn Oath, in the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of hearts, my
allowance and approbation of the National Covenant, and of the solemn League
and Covenant above written, and faithfully obliege my self, to prosecute the
ends thereof in my Station and Calling; And that I for my self and Successors,
shall consent and agree to all Acts of Parliament enjoining the National
Covenant, and of the Solemn League and Covenant, and fully establish
Presbyteriall Government, the Directory of Worship, Confession of Faith, and
Catechisms in the Kingdom of Scotland, as they are approved by the General
Assemblies of this Kirk and Parliament of this Kingdom: And that I shall give
my Royal assent to Acts and Ordinances of Parliament passed or to be passed,
enjoining the same in my other Dominions: And that I shall observe these in my
own practice and Family, and shall never make oppositon to any of these, or
endeavor any change thereof.

After the King had thus solemnly sworn the National Covenant, the League and
Covenant, and the Kings Oath subjoyned unto both being drawn up into a fair
Partchment; the King did subscribe the same in presence of all.

Thereafter the King ascends the Stage, and sits down in the Chair of
State.

Then the Lords, great Constable, and Marshall, went to the four corners of the
Stage with the Lion going before them; who spoke to the people these words;
Sirs, I do present unto you the King, Charles, the rightful and undoubted Heir
of the Crown and Dignity of this Realm; this day is by the Parliament of this
Kingdom appointed for his Coronation. And are you not willing to have him for
your King, and become Subjects to his Commandments.

In which action, the Kings Majesty stood up, showing himself to the people in
each corner, And the penple expressed their willingness, by cheerful
acclamations, in these words, God save the King, Charles the Second.

Thereafter the Kings Majesty supported by the Constable and Marshall, comes
down from the Stage, and sits down in the Chair, where he heard the Sermon.

The Minister, accompanied with the Ministers before mentioned, comes from the
Pulpit toward the King; and requires, If he was willing to take the Oath,
appointed to be taken at the Coronation.

The King answered, he was most willing.

Then the Oath of Coronation, as it contained in the eighth Act of the first
Parliament of King James, being read by the Lion, the Tenor whereof follows:

Because, that the increase of Virtue, and suppressing of Idolatry, craveth,
That the Prince and the people be of one perfect Religion, which of Gods mercy
is now presently professed within this Realm: Therefore it is statuted and
ordained, by our Sovereign Lord, my Lord Regent, and three estates of this
present Parliament: that all Kings, Princes, and Magistrates whatsoever,
holding their place which hereafter at any time shall happen to Reign, and bear
rule over this Realm, at the time of their Coronation, and receipt of their
Princely Authority, make their faithful promise in the presence of the eternal
God: That enduring the whole course of their lives, they shall serve the same
Eternal God, to the uttermost of their power, according as he has required in
his most holy Word, revealed and contained in the New and Old Testaments; And
according to the same Word, shall maintain the true Religion of Christ Jesus,
the preaching of his Holy Word, and due and right Ministration of the
Sacraments now received, and preached within this Realm. And shall abolish and
gainstand all false religions, contrary to the same: and shall rule the people
committed to their charge, according to the will and command of God revealed in
his foresaid Word, and according to the Loveable Laws, and Constitutions
received in this Realm, no ways repugnant to the said Word of the Eternal
God, And shall procure to the uttermost of their power, to the Kirk of God and
whole Christian people, true and perfect peace, in time coming. The right, and
^ents, with all just privileges of the Crown of Scotland, to preserve and keep
inviolated: Neither shall they transfer, nor alienate the same. They shall
forbid and repress in all Estates, and degrees, reaf, oppression, and all kind
of wrong; In all judgments they shall command and procure that justice, and
equity be kept to all creatures, without exception, as the Lord and Father of
Mercies, be merciful unto them: and out of their Lands and Empire they shall
be careful to root out all Heretics, and enemies to the true worship of God,
that shall be convict by the true Kirk of God, of the aforesaid crimes; and
that they shall faithfully affirm the things above written, by their Solemn
Oath.

The Minister tendered the Oath unto the King, who kneeling, and holding up his
right hand, swore in these words. By the Eternal and Almighty God, who lives
and reigns for ever, I shall observe and keep all that is contained in this
Oath.

This done the Kings Majesty sits down in his Chair, and reposeth himself a
little.

Then the King arises from his chair, and is dis-robed by the Lord great
Chamberlain, of the Princely robe, wherewith he entered the Kirk, and is
invested by the said Chamberlain in his Royal Robes.

Thereafter, the King being brought to the Chair on the North side of the Kirk,
s^pported as formerly, the Sword was brought by Sir William Cockburn of
Langtown, Gentleman ush^r, from the table, and delivered to the Lion King of
Arms, who gives it to the Lord great Constable, who puts the same in the
Kings hand, saying, Sir, Receive this Kingly Sword, for the defense of the
Faith of Christ, and protection of his Kirk, and of the true Religion, as it is
presently professed within this Kingdom, and according to the National
Covenant, and League and Covenant, and for executing Equity and Justice, and
for punishment of all iniquity and injustice.

This done, the great Constable receives the Sword from the King, and girdeth
the same about his side.

Thereafter the King sits down in his Chair; and then the Spurs were put on
him by the Earl Marshal.

Thereafter, Archibald Marquis of Argyle having taken the Crown in his hands,
the Minister prayed to this purpose:

That the Lord would purge the Crown from the sins and transgressions of them
that did reign before him: That it might be a pure Crown; That God would settle
the Crown upon the kings head: and since men that set it on, were not able to
settle it, that the Lord would put it on, and preserve it. And then the said
Marquis put the Crown on the Kings head.

Which done, Lion King of Arms, the great Constable standing b^ ^im, causes
an Herald to call the whole Noble men, one by one, according to their ranks;
who coming before the King, kneeling, and with their hand touching the Crown on
the Kings head, swore these words; By the Eternal and Almighty God, who lives
and reigns for ever, I shall support thee to my utmost. And when they had
done, then all the Nobility held up their hands, and swear to be loyal and true
subjects, and true to the Crown.

The Earl Marshal, with the Lion, going to the four corners of the Stage, the
Lion proclaims the Obligatory Oath of the people. And the people holding up
their hands all the time, did swear, By the Eternal and Almighty God, who
lives and reigns for ever, we become your liege men, and Truth and Faith
shall bear unto you, and live and dye with you, against all manner of folks
whatsoever, in your service, according to the National Covenant, and solemn
League and Covenant.

Then did the Earls and Vicounts put on their Crowns, and the Lion likewise
put on his.

Then did the Lord Chamberlain loose the Sword wherewith the King was girded,
and drew it; and delivered it drawn into the Kings hands, and the King put it
into the hands of the great Constable, to carry it naked before him.

Then John Earl of Crawford and Lindesay took the Scepter and put it in the
Kings right hand, saying, Sir, Receive this Scepter, the sign of Royal power of
the Kingdom, that you may govern your self right, and defend all the Christian
people committed by God to your charge, punishing the wicked, and protecting
the just.

Then did the King ascend the Stage, attended by the Officers of the Crown, and
Nobility, and was installed in the Royal Throne by Archibald Marquis of Argyle,
saying, Stand, and hold fast from henceforth, the place whereof you are the
lawful and righteous heir, by a long and lineal succession of your Fathers,
which is now delivered unto you by authority of Almighty God.

When the King was set down upon the Throne, the Minister spoke to him a word
of Exhortation, as follows.

Sir, You are set down upon the throne in a very difficil time: I shall
therefore put you in mind of a Scriptural expression of a Throne, 1 Chronicles.
29.23. It is said, Solomon sat on the Throne of the Lord. Sir, you are a King
and a King in Covenant with the Lord, if You would have the Lord to own you to
be his king, and his Torone to be your Throne, I desire you may have some
thoughts of this expression.

1 It is the Lords Throne; Remember you have a King above you, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, who commands Thrones: He sets kings and Thrones,
and dethroneth them at his pleasure: Therefore take a word of advice; be
thankful to him, who has brought you through many wanderings to set you on
this Throne: kiss the son lest he be angry, and learn to serve him with fear,
who is terrible to the kings of the earth. 2. Your throne is the Lords throne,
and your people the Lords people; Let not your heart be lifted up above your
brethren, Deuteronomy. 17.20. They are your brethren, not only flesh of your flesh,
but brethren by Covenant with God; let your Government be refreshing unto them,
as the rain on the mowen grass. 3. Your Throne is the Lords Throne; beware of
making his Throne a Throne of iniquity: There is such a throne, Psalm. 94.20.
Which frames mischief by Law; God will not own such a throne, it has no
fellowship with him. Sir, there is too much iniquity upon the throne by your
predecessors, who framed mischief by a Law; such laws as have been destructive
to Religion, and grievous to the Lords people: You are on the Throne, and have
the Scepter, beware of touching mischievous laws therewith. But as the Throne
is the Lords Throne, let the laws be the Lords laws, agreeable to his Word,
such as are terrible to evil doers, and comfortable to the godly, and a relief
to the poor and oppressed in the Land. 4. The Lords Throne puts you in mind
whom you shall have about the throne; wicked Counselors are not for a King
upon the Lords Throne: Solomon knew this, who said, Prove. 25.5. Take away the
wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established in
righteousness. And Prove. 20.8. A King upon the Throne scatters away all evil
with his eyes. 5 The Lords throne puts you in mind, that the judgment on
the throne should be the Lords. Take the exhortation Jer. 22. from the
beginning, the Prophet has a command to go to the house of the King of Judah,
and say, Hear the word of the Lord, O King of Judah, that sits upon the
Throne, and thy servants, and thy people, execute ye judgment and
righteousness, and deliver the spoil out of the hand of the oppressor: and do
no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow,
neither shed innocent blood in this place. If ye do this thing indeed, then
shall there enter by the gates of this house, Kings sitting upon the throne of
David. But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by my self, says the Lord,
this house shall become a desolation. And ver. 7. I will prepare destroyers
against thee.

Sir, Destroyers are prepared for the injustice of the Throne, I entreat you
execute righteous judgment; if you do it not, your house will be a desolation:
But if you do that which is right, God shall remove the destroyers, and you
shall be established on your Throne: and there shall yet be Dignity in your
house, for your servants and for your people.

Lastly, If your Throne be the Throne of the Lord take a word of encouragement
against Throne-adversaries. Your enemies are the enemies of the Lords Throne:
Make your peace with God in Christ, and the Lord shall scatter your enemies
from the Throne, and he shall magnify you yet in the sight of these Nations,
and make the misled people submit themselves willingly to your government.
Sir, if you use well the Lords throne, on which you are set, then the two words
in the place cited, 1 Chronicles. 29.23. spoken of Solomon sitting on the Throne of
the Lord, He prospered, and all Israel obeyed him, shall belong unto you, your
people shall obey you in the Lord, and you shall prosper in the fight of the
Nations round about.

Then the Lord Chancellor went to the four corners of the Stage, the Lion King
of Arms going before him, and proclaimed his Majesty's free pardon, to all
breakers of penal Statutes, and made offer thereof. Whereupon the people cried,
God save the King.

Then the King supported by the great Constable, Marshal, and accompanied with
the Chancellor, arose from the Throne, and went out at a door prepared for that
purpose, to a Stage, and shows himself to the people without, who clapped
their hands, and cried with a loud voice a long time, God save the King.

Then the King returning, and sitting down upon the Throne, delivered the
Scepter to the Earl of Crawford and Lindsay, to be carried before him:
Thereafter the Lion King of Arms rehearsed the Royal Line of the Kings
upwards, to Fergus the first.

Then the Lion called the Lords one by one, who kneeling, and holding their
hands betwixt the Kings hands; did swear these words; By the Eternal and
Almighty God, who lives and reigns for ever, I become your liege man, and
Truth, and Faith shall bear unto you, and live and die with you, against all
manner of folks whatsoever, in your service, according to the National
Covenant, and Solemn League and Covenant.

And every one of them kissed the Kings left cheek.

When these Solemnities were ended, the Minister standing before the King on
his Throne, pronounced this blessing.

The Lord bless thee, and save thee, the Lord hear thee in the day of trouble;
the Name of the God of Jacob defend thee: the Lord send thee help from the
Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Sion, Amen:

After the blessing pronounced, the Minister went to the Pulpit, and had the
following exhortation, the King sitting still upon the Throne. Ye have this day
a King Crowned, and entered into Covenant with God, and his people, look, both
King and people, that ye keep his Covenant, and beware of the breach of it:
that you may be the more careful to keep it, I will lay a few things before you.

I remember when the solemn League and Covenant was entered by both Nations, the
Commissioners from England being present in the East Kirk of Edinburgh, a
passage was cited out of Nehe. 6.13. Which I shall now again cite, Nehemiah
required an Oath of the Nobles and people, to restore the morgaged Lands, which
they promised to do; after the Oath was tendered, in the 13. ver. he did shake
his lap, and said, So God shake out every man from his house, and from his
labor, that performs not his promise, even thus be he shaken out and
emptied, and all the Congregati^ns said, Amen. Since the time many of those who
were in Covenant are shaken out of it, yea, they have shaken off the Covenant
and laid it aside. It is true they are prospering this day, and think that they
prosper by laying aside the Covenant; but they will be deceived, that word
spoken then, shall not fall to the ground, God shall shake them out of their
possession, and empty them for their perfidious breach of Covenant.

The same I say to King and Nobles, and all that are in Covenant. If you break
that Covenant, being so solemnly sworn, all these who had touched your Crown,
and sworn to support it, shall not be able to hold it on; but God will shake it
off, and turn you from the Throne: and ye Noble men, who are assistant to the
putting on of the Crown, and setting the King upon the Throne, if ye shall
either assist, or advise the King to break the Covenant, and overturn the work
of God, he shall shake you out of your possessions, and empty you of all your
glory.

Another passage I offer to your consideration, Jer. 34.8. after that Zedekiah
had promised to proclaim liberty to all the people, who were servants, and
entered in a Covenant he and his Princes to let them go free, and according to
the Oath had let them go, afterward they caused the Servants to return, and
brought them in subjection, ver. 11. What follows upon this breach? ver. 15,
16. Ye were now turned and had done right in my sight in proclaiming liberty,
but ye turned and made them servants again. And therefore, verse 18, 19, 20,
21. I will give the men who have transgressed my Covenant, who have not
performed the words of the Covenant, which they made before me, when they cut
the Calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof, I will even give them
into the hands of their enemies, into the hand of them that seek their life,
even Zedekiah and his Princes. If the breach of a Covenant made for the liberty
of Servants was so punished, what shall be the punishment of the breach of a
Covenant for Religion, and liberty of the people of God? There is nothing more
terrible to Kings and Princes then to be given into the hands of enemies, that
seek their life. If ye would escape this judgment, let King and Princes keep
their Covenant made with God: Your enemies who seek your life, are in the land,
if you break the Covenant, it may be feared, God will give you over unto them
as a prey: but if ye yet keep Covenant it may be expected, God will keep you
out of their hands.

Let not the place ye heard opened be forgotten; for in it ye have an example
of Divine justice against Joash and the Princes for breaking that Covenant, 2 Chronicles. 24.23. The Princes who enticed that breath, are destroyed: and in the
24. ver. it is said: The Army of the Syrians came with a small company of men,
and the Lord delivered a very great Host into their hands: because they had
forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers: so they executed judgment aagainst
Joash. And ver. 25. His own servants conspired against him, and flew him on his
bed, etc. The conspiracy of Servants or Subjects against their King, is a
wicked course: But God in his righteous judgments suffers Subjects to
conspire and rebel against their Princes, because they rebel against the
Covenant made with God. I may say freely that a chief cause of the judgment
upon the Kings house, has been the Grandfathers breach of Covenant with God,
and the fathers following steps, in opposing the work of God, and his Kirk
within these Kingdoms; They broke Covenant with God, and men have broken
Covenant with them: yea, most cruelly and perfidiously have invaded the Royal
Family, and trodden upon all Princely dignity.

Be wise by their example; you are now sitting upon the Throne of the Kingdom,
and your Nobles about you there is one above you even Jesus the King of Sion;
and I, as his Servant dare not but be free with you; I charge you Sir in his
Name, that you keep this Covenant in all points; if you break this Covenant,
and come against this cause, I assure you the controversy is not ended between
God and your Family, but will be carried on to further weakening, if not the
overthrow of it; but if you shall keep this Covenant, and befriend the Kingdom
of Christ, it may be from this day God shall begin to do you good, although
your estate be very weak, God is able to raise you, and make you to Reign,
maugre the opposition of all your Enemies; And howsoever it shall please the
Lord to dispose, you shall have a peace toward God, through Christ the
Mediator.

As for you who are Nobles and Peers of the Land, your share is great in this
day of Coronation ye have come and touched the Crown, and sworn to support it,
ye have handled the Sword and Scepter, and have set down the King upon his
Throne.

1. I Charge you keep your Covenant with God, and see that ye never be moved
your selves to come against it in any head or article thereof, and that ye give
no counsel to the King to come against that Doctrine, Worship, Government and
discipline of the kirk, established in their Land as you would eschew the
Judgment of Covenant-breakers. If the King and ye who are engaged to support
the Crown, conspire together against the kingdom of Christ, both ye that do
support and he that is supported, will fall together. I press this the more,
because it is a rare thing to see a King and great men for Christ; in the long
Catalogue of Kings which ye have heard recited this day, there will be found
few to have been for Christ.

2. I Charge you also, because of your many Oaths to the King, that you keep
them invoylably. Be Faithful unto him according to your Covenant; the Oaths of
God are upon you, if directly or indirectly, you do any thing against his
standing, God, by whom ye have sworn will be avenged upon you for the breach of
his Oath.

And now I will close up all in one word more to You, Sir, You are the only
Covenanted King with God and his people in the world: Many have obstructed your
entry in it: now seeing the Lord has brought you in over all these
Obstructions, only observe to do what is contained therein; and it shall prove
a happy time for You and Your House. And because you are entered in times of
great difficulty, wherein small strength seems to remain with you in the eyes
of the world for recovering your just power and greatness. Therefore take
counsel which David when he was dying gave to his Son Solomon, 1 Kings 2.2,
3. Be strong and show thy self a man, and keep the charge of the Lord thy God:
to walk in his ways, and keep his Commandments, that thou may prosper in
all that thou do, and whithersoever thou turnest thy self.

After this Exhortation the Minister closed the whole action with prayer, and
the xx. Psalm being sung, he dismissed the people with the Blessing.

Then did the Kings Majesty descend from the Stage with the Crown upon his
head, and receiving again the Scepter in his hand, returned with the whole
Train in solemn manner to his Palace, the Sword being carried before him.

FINIS.
A Declaration by the Kings Majesty, to all His Subjects of the Kingdoms of
Scotland, England, and Ireland. Printed at Edinburgh, 1650.
Sect. 1. HIs Majesty taking in consideration, that merciful Dispensation of
Divine Providence, by which he has been recovered out of the snare of Evil
Counsel; and having attained so full persuasion and confidence of the Loyalty
of his People in Scotland, with whom he has too long stood at a distance; and
of the Righteousness of their Cause, as to join in one Covenant with them, and
to cast himself and his Interests wholly upon God; and in all matters Civil, to
follow the Advice of his Parliament, and such as shall be entrusted by them;
and in all matters Ecclesiastic, the Advice of the General Assembly, and their
Commissioners; and being sensible of his duty to God, and desirous to approve
himself to the consciences of all his good Subjects, and to stop the mouths of
his and their enemies and Traducers, does in reference to his former
Deportments, and as to his Resolutions for the future, Declare as follows.

Sect. 2. Though his Majesty, as a dutiful Son be obliged to honor the memory
of his Royal Father, and have in estimation the person of his Mother; yet does
He desire to be deeply humbled and afflicted in Spirit before God, because of
His Fathers harkening to, and following evil Counsels, and His opposition to
the Work of Reformation, and to the Solemn League and Covenant, by which so
much of the blood of the Lords People has been shed in these Kingdoms; and
for the Idolatry of his Mother, the Toleration whereof in the Kings House, as
it was matter of great stumbling to all the Protestant Churches; so could it
not but be an high provocation against him who is a jealous God, visiting the
sins of the Fathers upon the Children: And albeit HIs Majesty might extenuate
His former Carriages and Actions, in following of the advice, and walking in
the way of those who are opposite to the Covenant, and to the work of God, and
might excuse His delaying to give satisfaction to the just and necessary
desires of the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland, from his education, and age, and
evil Counsel, and Company, and from the strange and insolent proceedings of
Sectaries against his Royal Father, and in reference to Religion, and the
ancient Government of the Kingdom of England, to which He has the undoubted
Right of Succession; yet knowing that he has to do with God, He does
ingeniously acknowledge all His own sins, and all the sins of his Fathers
House, craving pardon, and hoping for mercy and reconciliation through the
blood of Jesus Christ. And as he does value the constant Addresses that were
made by his people to the Throne of grace on His behalf, when He stood in
opposition to the work of God, as a singular Testimony of Long-suffering,
Patience and mercy upon the Lords part, and Loyalty upon theirs; so does He
hope, and shall take it as one of the greatest tokens of their love and
affection to Him and to His Government, That they will continue in Prayer and
Supplication to God for Him; That the Lord who spared and preserved Him to this
day, notwithstanding of all His own guiltiness, may be at peace with Him, and
give him to fear the Lord His God, and to serve him with a perfect heart, and
with a willing mind all the days of his life.

Sect. 3. And his Majesty having, upon full persuasion of the Justice and
Equity of all the Heads and Articles thereof, now Sworn, and subscribed the
National Covenant of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the Solemn League and
Covenant of the three Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland, does
declare, That He has not sworn and subscribed these Covenants, and entered into
the Oath of God with his People, upon any sinister Intention and crooked
Design, for attaining His own Ends; but, so far as Humane Weakness will
permit, in the truth and sincerity of His heart: And that He is firmly Resolved
in the Lords strength, to adhere thereto, and to prosecute to the utmost of his
power, all the Ends thereof, in his Station and Calling, really, constantly and
sincerely, all the days of his life. In order to which, He does in the first
place profess and Declare, That He will have no Enemies, but the Enemies of
the Covenant; and that He will have no Friends, but the Friends of the
Covenant: And therefore, as He does now detest and abhor all Popery,
Superstition and Idolatry, together with Prelacy, and all Errors, Heresy,
Schism and Profaneness, and resolves not to tolerate, much less allow any
of these in any part of His Majesty's Dominions, but to oppose Himself thereto,
and to endeavor the Extirpacion thereof to the utm^st of his power; so does He
as a Christian Exhort, and as a King require, That all such of his Subjects,
who have stood in Opposition to the Solemn League and Covenant, and Work of
Reformation, upon a pretense of Kingly Interest, or any other pretext
whatsoever, to lay down their Enmity against the Cause and People of God, and
to cease to prefer the Interest of Man to the Interest of God; which has been
one of those things which has occasioned many Troubles and Calamities in these
Kingdoms, and being insisted into, will be so far from Establishing of the
Kings Throne, that it will prove an Idol of Jealousy, to provoke unto wrath
him who is King King of kings, and Lord of lords. The King shall always esteem
them best Servants, and most loyal Subjects, who serve Him, and seek His
Greatness in a right line of subordination unto God; Giving unto God the
things that are Gods, and unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's: And
Resolves, not to love or countenance any who have so little Conscience and
Piety, as to follow his Interests with a prejudice to the Gospel and Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, which He looks not upon as a duty, but as flattery, and
driving Self-Designes, under a pretense of maintaining Royal Authority and
Greatness. Secondly, His Majesty being convinced in Conscience of the
exceeding great Sinfulness and Unlawfulness of that Treaty and Peace made with
the Bloody Irish Rebels, who treacherously shed the Blood of so many of His
Faithful and Loyal Subjects in Ireland, and of allowing unto them the Liberty
of the Popish Religion; for the which He does from His heart desire to be
deeply humbled before the Lord: And likewise considering how many Breaches have
been on their part, Does Declare the same to be void, and that His Majesty is
absolved therefrom; being truly sorry that He should have sought unto so
unlawful Help for Restoring of him to His Throne, and resolving, for the time
to come, rather to choose Affliction than Sin. Thirdly, As His Majesty did in
the late Treaty with His people in this Kingdom, agree to recall and annull all
Commissions against any of His Subjects who did adhere to the Covenant and
Monarchical Government in any of His Kingdoms: So does He now Declare, That by
Commissionating of some persons by Sea against the people of England, He did
not intend Damage or Injury to His oppressed and harmless Subjects in tha^
Kingdom, who follow their Trade of Merchandise in their lawful Callings, but
only the opposing and suppressing of those who had Usurped the Government; and
not only bar Him from his just Right, but also exercise an Arbitrary Power over
his people, in those things which concern their Persons, Consciences and
Estates: And as since His coming into Scotland He has given no Commissions
against any of His Subjects in England or Ireland, so He does hereby Assure and
Declare, That He will give none to their prejudice or damage; and whatever
shall be the Wrongs of these Usurpers, That He will be far from avenging these
upon any who are free thereof, by interrupting or stopping the liberty of Trade
and Merchandise, or otherwise, That He will seek their good, and to the utmost
employ His Royal Power, That they may be protected and defended against the
unjust Violence of all men whatsoever. And albeit His Majesty desires to
construct well of the Intentions of those (in reference to his Majesty) who
have been active in Council or Arms against the Covenant; yet, being convinced
that it does conduce for the Honor of God, the Good of his Cause, and His Own
Honor and Happiness, and for the Peace and Safety of these Kingdoms, That
such be not employed in Places of Power and Trust, He does Declare, That He
will not employ, nor give Commissions to any such, until they have not only
taken, or renewed the Covenant, but also have given sufficient evidences of
their Integrity, Carriage and Affection to the Work of Reformation, and shall
be declared capable of Trust by the Parliament of either Kingdom respective:
And His Majesty, upon the same grounds, does hereby recall all Commissions given
to any such persons; conceiving all such persons will so much tender a good
Understanding betwixt Him and His Subjects, and the settling and preserving a
firm Peace in these kingdoms, That they will not grudge nor repine at His
Majesty's Resolutions and proceedings herein, much less upon discontent act any
any thing in a divided way, unto the raising of New Troubles, especially since
upon their ^ious and good deportment, there is a Regresse left unto them in
manner above expressed.

Sect. 4. And as His Majesty has given satisfaction to the just and necessary
Desires of the kirk and kingdom of Scotland, so does He hereby assure and
declare, That He is no less willing and desirous to give satisfaction to the
just and necessary Desires of his good Subjects in England and Ireland: and in
token thereof, if the Houses of Parliament of England, sitting in Freedom
shall think fit to present unto Him the propositions of Peace, agreed upon by
both kingdoms, He will not only accord to the same, and such alterations there:
anent, as the Houses of Parliament, in regard of the Constitution of affairs,
and the good of his Majesty and His Kingdoms shall judge necessary, but do what
is further necessary for prosecuting the ends of the Solemn League and
Covenant, especially in those things which concern the Reformation of the
Church of England, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government; That not
only the Directory of Worship, the Confession of Faith and Catechism, but also
the Propositions and Directory for Church Government, accorded upon by the
Synod of Divines at Westminster, may be settled; and that the Church of England
may enjoy the full Liberty and Freedom of all Assembles, and power of
Kirk-Censures, and of all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, according to the Rule
of his own Word: And that whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven, may be
diligently done for the House of the God of Heaven; and, whatever heretofore
has been the suggestions of some to him to render his Majesty jealous of His
Parliament, and of the Servants of God: Yet as He has declared, that in
Scotland He will hearken to their Counsel, and follow their Advice in those
things that concern that Kingdom and Kirk; So does he also declare His firm
Resolution to manage the Government of the Kingdom of England by the Advice of
His Parliament, consisting of an House of Lords, and of an House of Commons
there; and in those things that concern Religion, to prefer the Counsels of the
Ministers of the Gospel, to all other counsels whatsoever. And that all the
world may see how much he tenders the safety of his people, and how precious
their blood is in his sight, and how desirous he is to recover his Crown and
Government in England by peaceable means; as he does esteem the service of
those who first engaged in the Covenant, and have since that time faithfully
followed the ends thereof, to be Duty to God, and Loyalty to Him; so is he
willing in regard of others, who have been involved in these late commotions in
England, against Religion and Government, to pass an Act of Oblivion,
excepting only some few in that Nation, who have been chief Obstructers of the
work of Reformation, and chief Authors of the change of the Government, and of
the Murder of his Royal Father. Provided, That these who are to have the
benefit of this Act, lay down Arms, and return unto the obedience of their
lawful Sovereign.

Sect. 5. The Committee of Estates of the Kingdom, and General Assembly of the
Kirk of Scotland, having declared so fully in what concerns the Sectaries, and
the present Designs, Resolutions, and Actings of their Army, against the
Kingdom of Scotland: And the same Committee and Assembly having sufficiently
laid open public Dangers and Duties, both upon the right hand and the left; It
is not needful for His Majesty to add any thing thereunto; except, That in
those things He does commend and approve them, and that He Resolves to live and
dye with them, and his loyal Subjects, in prosecution of the Ends of the
Covenant.

Sect. 6. And whereas that prevailing party in England, after all their strange
Usurpations, and insolent Actings in that Land; Do not only keep His Majesty
from the Government of that Kingdom by force of Arms, but also have now
invaded the Kingdom of Scotland, who have deserved better things at their
hands, and against whom they have no just quarrel; His Majesty does therefore
desire and expect, That all his good Subjects in England, who are, and resolve
to be faithful to God and to their King, according to the Covenant, will lay
hold upon such an opportunity, and use their utmost endeavors to promote the
Covenant, and all the ends thereof; and to recover and re-establish the Ancient
Government of the Kingdom of England, (under which for many Generations, it
did flourish in peace and plenty at home, and in Reputation abroad) and
Privileges of the Parliament, and Native and Just Liberty of the People. His
Majesty desires to assure himself, That there does remain in these so much
confidence of their duty to Religion, their King and Country, and so many
sparkles of the ancient English Valor, which shined so eminently in their
Noble Ancestors, as will put them on to bestir themselves for the breaking the
Yoke of those men's Oppressions from off their Necks. Shall men of Conscience
and Honor set Religion, Liberties and Government at so low a rate, as not
rather to undergo any hazard, before they be thus deprived of them? Will not
all generous men count any Death more tolerables than to live in servitude all
their days? And will not Posterity blame those who dare attempt nothing for
themselves, and for their Children, in so good a Cause, in such an Exigent?
Whereas if they gather themselves, and take courage, putting on a Resolution
answerable to so Noble and just an Enterprise, they shall honor God, and gain
themselves the Reputation of Pious men, worthy Patriots, and loyal Subjects,
and be called The Repairers of the Breach, by the present, and succeeding
Generations; and they may certainly promise to themselves a Blessing from God
upon so just and honorable undertaking for the Lord, and for his Cause, for
their own Liberties, their Native King and country, and the unvaluable good
and happiness of their Posterity. Whatever has formerly been his Majesty's
guiltiness before God, and the bad success that these have had who owned his
Affairs, whilst he stood in opposition to the Work of God; yet the state of the
question being now altered, and His Majesty having obtained Mercy to be on Gods
side, and to prefer Gods Interest before his Own, He hopes, That the Lord will
be gracious and countenance his own Cause, in the hands of weak and sinful
Instruments, against all Enemies whatsoever. This is all that can be said by
His Majesty at present, to those in England and Ireland, at such a distance;
and as they shall acquit themselves at this time in the active discharge of
their necessary Duties, so shall they be accepted before God, endeared to his
Majesty, and their Names had in remembrance throughout the World. Given at Our
Court of Dunfirmlin, the sixteenth day of August, 1650. and in the second year
of Our Reign.

FINIS.
The great danger of Covenant-refusing, and Covenant Breaking.
2 Timothy 3.3. -- Truce Breakers; or, Covenant-breakers.
IN the beginning of the Chapter, the Apostle tells us the condition that the
Church of God should be in, in the last days. This know also, that in the last
days perilous times shall come. In the second Verse he tells us the reason why
these times should be such hard and dangerous times; For men shall be lovers of
themselves, covetous, etc. The reason is not drawn from the miseries and
calamities of the last times, but from the sins and iniquities of the last
times. It is sin and iniquity that makes times truly perilous. Sin and sin
only, takes away Gods love and favor from a Nation, and makes God turn an
enemy to it. Sin causes God to take away ^^e purity and power of his
Ordinances from a Nation. Sin makes all the creatures to be armed against us,
and makes our own conscience to fight against us. Sin is the cause of all the
causes of perilous times. Sin is the cause of our civil wars, 2 Samuel 12.11.
Sin is the cause of our divisions, Jam. 4.1. Sin is the cause why men fall into
such dangerous errors, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. Sin brings such kinds of judgments
which no other enemy can bring. Sin brings invisible, spiritual, and eternal
judgments. It is sin that makes God give over a Nation to a sense, Romans 1.24.
Sin makes all times dangerous. Let the times be never so prosperous, yet if
they be sinful times, they are times truly dangerous. And if they be not
sinful, they are not dangerous, though never so miserable. It is sin that makes
Afflictions to be the fruits of Gods revenging wrath, part of the curse due to
sin, and a beginning of Hell. It is sin, and sin only, that imbitters every
affliction. Let us for ever look upon sin through these Scripture spectacles.

The Apostle in four verses reckons up 19 sins, as the causes of the miseries
of the last days. I may truly call these 19 sins, Englands Looking-glass,
wherein we may see what are the clouds that eclipse Gods countenance from
shining upon us: the Mountains that lie in the way to hinder the settlement of
Church Discipline. Even these 19 sim which are as an Iron whip of 19 strings,
with which God is whipping England at this day; which are as 19 Faggots with
which God is burning and devouring England. My purpose is not t^ speak of all
these sins: Only let me propound a Divine project how to make the times happy
for soul and body. And that is, To strike at the root of all misery, which is
sin and iniquity. To repent for, and from all these 19 sins, which are as the
Oil that feeds, and increases the flame that is now consuming of us. For
because men are lovers of themselves, Vsque ad contemptum Dei and Reipublicae.
Because men drive their own designs not only to the neglect, but contempt of
God and the Commonwealth. Because men are covetous, lovers of the world more
then lovers of God. Because they are proud in head, heart, looks and apparel.
Because they are unthankful, turning the mercies of God into instruments of
sin, and making Darts with Gods blessing* to shoot against God. Because men are
unholy and beady, and make many covenants, and keep none. Because they are (as
the Greek word (...) signifies) Devils, acting the Devils part in accusing the
brethren, and in bearing false witness one against another. Because they have
a form of godliness, denying the power thereof, etc. hence it is that these
times are so sad and bloody. These are thine enemies, O England, that have
brought thee into this desolate condition! if ever God lead us back into the
wilderness, it will be because of these sins. And therefore if ever you
would have blessed days, you must make it your great business to remove these
19 mountains, and repent of these land-devouring, and soul-destroying
abominations.

At this time I shall pick out the first, and the tenth sin to speak on. The
first is self-love, which is placed in the forefront as the cause of all the
rest. Self-love is not only a sin that makes the times perilous, but it is the
cause of all those sins that makes the times perilous. For because men are
lovers of themselves, therefore they are covetous, proud, unholy, etc. The
tenth sin is truce-breaking, and for fear lest the time should prevent me, I
will begin with this sin first.

The tenth sin then is truce breakers; or, as Romans 1.33. Covenant-breakers. The
Greek word (...), which signifies three things. First such as are foederis
nescii, as Beza renders it; or as others, infoederabiles; that is, such as
refuse to enter into Covenant. Or secondly, such as are foedifragi, qui pacta
non servant, (as Estius has it) or sine fide, as Ambrose; that is, such as
break faith and Covenant. Or thirdly, such as are implacabiles; or as others,
sine pace; that is, such as are implacable, and haters of peace.

According to this threefold sense of the word, I shall gather these three
observations.

Doct. 1. That to be a Covenant-refuser, is a sin that makes the times
perilous. Doct. 2. That to be a Covenant breaker, is a sin that makes the times
perilous. Doct. 3. That to be a peace hater, or a truce-hater, is a sin that
makes the times perilous.
To begin with the first.

Doctrine the first. That to be a Covenant-refuser, is a sin that makes the
times perilous. To be foederis nescius, or indefoederabilis. For the
understanding of this, you must know that there are two sorts of Covenants.
There are divellish and hellish Covenants, and there are godly and religious
Covenants. First, there are divellish Covenants, such as Acts 23.12. and Isaiah
28.15. such as the holy league (as it was unjustly called) in France against
the Hugonites, and that of our Gunpowder Traitors in England.

Now to refuse to take such Covenants, is not to make the times perilous, but
the taking of them makes the times perilous. Secondly, there are godly
Covenants; such as Job 31.1. I have made a Covenant with mine eyes, why then
should I think upon a maid? Such as Psalm. 119. I have sworn I will perform it,
that I will keep thy righteous judgments; such as 2 Chronicles. 15.14. And such as
this is, which you are met to take this day. For you are to swear to such
things which you are bound to endeavor after, though you did not swear. Your
swearing is not solum vinculum, but novum vinculum, is not the only, but only
a new and another bond to tie you to the obedience of the things you swear
unto; which are so excellent and so glorious, that if God give those that take
it a heart to keep it, it will make these three Kingdoms the glory of the
world. And as one of the Reverend Commissioners of Scotland said when it was
first taken in a most solemn manner at Westminster, by the Parliament and the
Assembly; That if the Pope should have this Covenant written upon a wall over
against him sitting in his chair, it would be unto him like the handwriting to
Belshazzar; causing the joints to loose, and his knees to smioe one against
another. And I may add, that if it be faithfully and fully kept, it will make
all the Devils in Hell to tremble, as fearing lest their Kingdom should not
long stand. Now then for a man to be an Anticovenanter, and to be such a
Covenant-refuser, it must needs be a sin that makes the times perilous.

And the reason is,

Reason 1. Because you shall find in Scripture that when any Nation did enter
into a solemn religious Covenant, God did exceedingly bless and prosper that
Nation after that time; As appears 2 Chronicles. 15.19. 2 Kings 11.20. And we have a
promise for it, Deuteronomy. 21.12, 13. That thou should enter into covenant with
the Lord thy God, etc. That he may establish thee to day for a people unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, etc. And therefore to be a
Covenant-refuser, is to make our miseries perpe^ual.

Reason 2. Because as it is the highest act of Gods love to man, to vouchsafe
to engage himself by Oath and Covenant to be his God, so it is the highest
demonstration of man's love to God, to bind himself by Oath and Covenant to be
Gods. There is nothing obliges God more to us, then to see us willing to tie
and bind our selves fast unto his service. And therefore they that in this
sense are Anti-covenanters, are sons of Belial; that refuse the yoke of the
Lord, that say, as Psalm 2.3. Let us break his bands asunder, and cast away his
cords from us; such as Oderunt vincula pietatis, which is a soul-destroying,
and land-destroying sin:

Reason 3. Because that the union of England, Scotland, and Ireland, into one
Covenant, is the chief, if not the only preservative of them at this time You
find in our English Chroniclers, that England was never destroyed, but when
divided within it self. Our civil divisions brought in the Romans, the Saxons,
Danes, and Normans. But now the Anti-covenanters, he divides the Parliament
within it self, and the City within it self, and England against it self; he is
as a stone separated from the building, which is of no use to it self, and
threatens the ruin of the building. Jesus Christ is called in Scripture the
cornerstone, which is a stone that unites two ends of a building together;
Jesus Christ is a stone of union, and therefore they that sow division, and
study unjust separation, have little of Jesus Christ in them. When the ten
tribes began to divide from the other two tribes, they presently began to war
one against another, and to ruin one another. The Anti-covenanter he divides,
and separates, and disunites; and therefore he makes the times perilous.

My chief aim is at the second Doctrine; which is,

Doct. 2. That for a Covenant-taker to be a Covenant-breaker, is a sin that
makes the times perilous.

For the opening of this point, I must distinguish again of Covenants. There
are civil, and there are religious Covenants. A civil Covenant, is a Covenant
between man and man; and of this the Text is primarily, though not only to be
understood. Now for a man to break promise and Covenant with his brother, is a
land-stroying, and soul-devouring abomination. We read 2 Samuel 21. that because
Saul had broken the Covenant that Joshua made with the Gibeonites, God sent a
famine in David's time of three years continuance: To teach us, that if we
falsify our Word and Oath, God will avenge covenant breaking, though it be
forty years after. Famous is that text, Jer. 34.17, 18, 19, 20. Because the
Princes and the People brake the covenant which they had made with their
servants (though but their servants) God tells them. Because ye have not
hearkened unto me in proclaiming liberty every one to his brother, etc. Behold,
I proclaim liberty for you, says the Lord to the sword, to the pestilence, and
and to the famine: and I will make you to be removed into all the Kingdoms of
the Earth; etc. We read also Ezekiel. 17.18, 19, 20. That God tells Zedekiah
because he brake the covenant he had made with the King of Babylon, that
therefore he would recompense upon his head the oath that he had despised, and
the covenant that he had broken, and would bring him to Babylon, and plead with
him there for the trespass which he had trespassed against the Lord. David
tells us, Psalm. 15.4. that it is a sin that shuts a man out of heaven. The
Turkish histories tell us of a covenant of peace made between Amurath the great
Turk and Ladislaus King of Hungary, and how the Pope absolved Ladislaus from
his oath, and provoked him to renew the war. In which war the Turk being put to
the worst, and despairing of victory, pulls out a paper which he had in his
bosom wherein the league was written; and said, O thou God of the Christians,
if thou be a true God, be revenged of those that without cause have broken
the league made by calling upon thy name. And the story says, that after he
had spoken these words, he had as it were a new heart and spirit put into him,
and his soldiers, and that they obtained a glorious victory over Ladislaus.
Thus God avenged the quarrel of man's covenant. The like story we have of
Rodolphus Duke of Swevia, who by the Popes instigation waged war with Henry the
fourth Emperor of Germany, to whom he had sworn the contrary. The Pope sent a
Crown to him with this Motto, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho; but
in the fight it chanced that Rodolphus lost his right hand; and falling sick
upon it he called for it, and said, Spectate hanc dextram legitima ^upplicia
expendentem, quae fidem sacramento munitam, and Henrico Domino meo datam, vobis
urgentibus, praeter aequum and ^us temere violavit. Behold this right ^and with
which I subscribed to the Emperor, with which I have violated my ^ath, and
therefore I am rightly punished. I will not trouble you in rela^ing the gallant
story of Regulus, that those rather to expose himself to a cruel death, then to
falsify his oath to the Carthaginians. The sum of all is, if it be such a
crying abomination to break covenant between man and man; and if ^uch persons
are accounted as the offscouring of men, not worthy to live in a Christian, no
not in a heathen Commonweal; If it be a sin that draws down ven^eance from
heaven, and excludes a man from heaven; much more for a man to ^nter into a
covenant with the great Jehovah, and to break such a religious engagement; this
must needs be a destroying and soul-damning sin. And of such religious
covenants I am now to speak.

There are two covenants that God made with man, a covenant of nature, and a
covenant of grace. The covenant of nature (or of works) was made with A^am, and
all mankind in him. This covenant Adam broke, and God presently had a quarrel
against him for breaking of it, Genesis 3.8, 9. And to avenge the quarre^ of the
covenant, he was thrust out of Paradise; and there was a sword also placed at
the East end of the Garden of Eden, to avenge covenant breaking. And by nature
we are all children of wrath, heir^ of hell, because of the breach of tha^
covenant. And therefore we should never think of original sin, or of the
sinfulness and cursednesse of our natural condition, but we should remember
what a grievous sin Covenant Breaking is.

But after man was fallen, God wa^ pleased to strike a new covenant, which i^
usually called a covenant of grace, or o^ reconciliation; a copy of which you
sha^ read, Ezekiel. 16.7 8, 9. This was first propounded to Adam by way of promis^
Genesis 3. The Seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head. And then to Abram
by way of Covenant, Genesis 17. In thy seed shall all the nations of the world be
blessed. And then to Moses by way of Testament, Ex. 33. It is nothing else but
the free and gracious tender of Jesus Christ, and all his rich purchases to all
the lost and undone sons of Adam, that shall believe in him; or as the phrase
is Isai. 56.4. that shall take bold of the covenant. Now you must know that
Baptism is a seal of this covenant, and that all that are baptized, do
sacramentally at least, engage themselves to walk before God, and to be
upright; and God likewise engages himself to be their God. This covenant is
likewise renewed when we come to the Lords Supper, wherein we bind our selves
by a sacramental oath unto thankfulness to God for Christ. Add further, that
besides this general covenant of grace whereof the Sacraments are seals, there
are particular and personal, and family, and national covenants. Thus Job had
his covenant, Job. 20. and David, Psalm. 119.106. And when he came to be King,
he joined in a covenant with his people to serve the Lord. Thus Asa, Jehoiada,
and Josiah, etc. Thus the people of Israel had not only a covenant in
circumcision, but renewed a covenant in Horeb, and in Moab; and did often again
and again bind themselves to God by vow and covenant. And thus the Churches of
the Christians, besides the vow in Baptism, have many personal and national
engagements unto God by covenant, which are nothing else but the renovations,
and particular applications of that first vow in Baptism. Of this nature is
that you are to renew this day, etc.

Now give me leave to show you what a sword-procuring and soul-undoing sin,
this sin of Covenant Breaking is; and then the reason of it. Famous is that
text, Levit. 26.25. And I will send my sword which shall avenge the quarrel of
my covenant. The words in Hebrew run thus; I will avenge the avengement. In
Greek (...). The Latins ulciscar, ultionem; which imports thus much. That God
is at open war and at public defiance with those that break his covenant, he
is not only angry with them, but he will be revenged of them. The Lord has a
controversy with all covenant-breakers, Hos. 4 1. or as it is Lev. 26.23. The
Lord will walk contrary to them. In the 29 of Deuter. first God takes his
people into covenant, and then he tells them of the happy condition they should
be in if they did keep the covenant. But if they did break covenant, he tells
them, verse. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. That the Lord will not spare him; but the
anger of the Lord and his jealousies shall smoke against that man, and all the
curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall
blot out his name from under heaven. And the Lord shall separate him, etc. And
when the nations shall say, Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this land?
What means the heat of this anger? Then shall men say, Because they have
forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers, etc. This was the sin
that caused God to send his people of Israel into captivity, and to remove the
candlestick from the Asian Churches. It is for this sin that the sword is now
devouring Germany Ireland and England, etc. God has sent his sword to avenge
the quarrel of his covenant.

The reasons why this sin is a God-provoking sin, are,

Reas. 1. Because that to sin against the covenant, is a greater sin than to
sin against a Commandment of God, or to sin against a promise, or to sin
against an Ordinance of God. First, it is a greater sin than to break a
Commandment of God. For the more mercy there is in the thing we sin against,
the greater is the sin. Now there is more mercy in a covenant, then in a bare
Commandment. The Commandment tells us our duty, but gives no power to do it.
But the covenant of grace gives power to do what it requires to be done. And
therefore if it be a hell-procuring sin to break the least of Gods
Commandments, much more to be a Covenant-breaker, Heb. 10.28, 29. Secondly, it
is a greater sin then to sin against a promise of God; because a Covenant is a
promise joined with an oath, it is a mutual stipulation between God and us.
And therefore if it be a great sin to break promise, much more to break
covenant. Thirdly, it is a greater sin than to sin against an Ordinance,
because the covenant is the root and ground of all the Ordinances It is by
virtue of the covenant that we are made partakers of the Ordinances. The word
is the book of the covenant, and the Sacraments are the seals of the covenant.
And if it be a sin of an high nature to sin against the book of the covenant,
and the seals of the covenant much more against the covenant, it self. To break
covenant is a fundamental sin, it raseth the very foundation of Christianity,
because the Covenant is the foundation of all the privileges and prerogatives,
and hopes of the Saints of God. And therefore we read, Ephesians. 2.12. that a
stranger from the covenant is one without hope. All hope of heaven is cut off
where the Covenant is willingly broken. To break covenant is an universal sin,
it includes all other sins. By virtue of the Covenant we tie our selves to the
obedience of Gods Commandments, we give up our selves to the guidance of Jesus
Christ, we take him for our Lord and King. All the promises of this life and
that that is to come, are contained within the Covenant. The Ordinances are
fruits of the Covenant. And therefore they that forsake the Covenant, commit
many sins in one, and bring not only many, but all curses upon their heads. The
sum of the first Argument is, If the Lord will avenge the quarrel of his
commandment, if God was avenged upon the stick-gatherer for breaking the
Sabbath, much more will he be avenged upon a covenant breaker. If God will
avenge the quarrel of a promise, if the quarrel of an Ordinance: if they that
reject the Ordidinances shall be punished; Of how much severer punishment shall
they be thought worthy, that trample under their feet the blood of the
Covenant? If God was avenged of those that abused the Ark of the Covenant, much
more will he punish those that abuse the Angel of the Covenant.

The second Reason why covenant breaking is such a Land-stro^ing sin is,
because it is a solemn and serious thing to enter into covenant with God; a
matter of such great weight and importance, that it is impossible but God
should be exceedingly provoked with those that slight it and dis-respect it.
The Vow in Baptism is the first, the most general and the solemnest vow that
ever any Christian took, says Chrysostom; wherein he does not only promise,
but engage himself by covenant in the sight of God and his holy Angels to be
the servant of Jesus Christ, and therefore God will not hold him guiltless that
breaks this Vow. The solemnity and weightinesse of covenant-taking consists
in three things.

1. Because it is made with the glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth, who will
not be trifled and baffled withal. And therefore what Jehoshaphat said to his
Judges, 2 Chronicles. 18.6. Take heed what you do, for ye judge not for men, but
for the Lord, who is with you in judgments; wherefore now let the fear of the
Lord be upon you, etc. The like I may say to every one that enters into
covenant this day. Take heed what you do, for it is the Lords covenant, and
there is no iniquity with the Lord, wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be
upon you. For our God is a holy God, he is a jealous God, he will not forgive
your transgressions, nor your sins, as Joshua says, Josh. 24.19.

2. Because the articles of the Covenant are weighty and of great importance.
In the Covenant of grace God ingageth himself to give Christ, and with him, all
temporal, spiritual, and eternal blessings, and we engage our selves to be his
faithful servants all our days. In this Covenant we oblige our selves to do
great matters that nearly concern the glory of God, the good of our own souls,
and the happiness of three Kingdoms. And in such holy and heavenly things
which so nearly concern our everlasting estate, to dally and trifle must needs
incense the anger of the great Jehovah.

3. The manner used both by Jews, Heathen, and Christians, in entering into
Covenant, does clearly set out the weightinesse of it, and what a horrible sin
it is to break it. The custom amongst the Jews will appear by diverse texts of
Scripture: Jer. 34.18. it is said, And I will give the men that have
transgressed my covenant which they had made before me, when they cut the Calf
in twain, and passed between the parts thereof. The words they used when they
passed between the parts where, So God divide me, if I keep not covenant. Neh.
5.12. Nehemiah took an oath of the Priests, and shook his lap and said, So God
shake out every man from his house, and from his labor, that performs not
this promise, even thus be he shaken out and emptied. And all the Congregation
said, Amen. In the 15. of Genesis Abraham divided the Heifer, and she-Goat, and
a Ram, etc. And when the Sun was down a smoking furnace and burning lamp
passed between these pieces. This did represent Gods presence, says Clemens
Alexandrinus, and it was as if God should say: Behold, this day I enter into
covenant with thee, and if thou keep covenant, I will be as a burning lamp
to illighten and to comfort thee: But if thou breakest covenant, I will be like
a smoking furnace to consume thee. Thus also Exodus 24.6. Moses makes a
covenant with Israel, and offers sacrifices, and takes the blood of the
sacrifice and divides it, and half of it he sprinkles upon the Altar, (which
represented Gods part) and the other half he sprinkled upon the people, as if
he should say, As this blood is divided, so will God divide you if you break
covenant. This was the custom amongst the Jews. Amongst the Romans, Caesa
firmabant foedera porca. And when it was divided, the Feciales gave one half to
one party, and the other half to the other, and said, So God divide you asunder
if you break this covenant, and let God do this, so much the more by how much
he is the more able. Hinc foedus a foedo animali (scilicet porco) diviso.
Sometimes they make covenants by taking a stone in their hands and saying, If I
make this covenant seriously and faithfully then let the great Jupiter bless
me. If not, so let me be cast away from the face of the gods as I cast away
this stone This was called Jurare per Jovem lapidem. All these things are not
empty notions, and metaphorical shadows, but real and substantial practices,
signifying unto us, That God will, and must (for it stands with his honor to
do it) divide and break them in pieces that break covenant with him. This day
you are to take a Covenant by the lifting up of your hands unto the most high
God, which is a most emphatical ceremony, whereby we do as it were call God to
be a witness and a judge of what we do, and a rewarder or a revenger,
according as we keep or break the Covenant. If we keep it, the lifting up of
our hands will be as an Evening sacrifice; if we break it, the lifting up of
our hands will be as the lifting up of the hands of a Malefactor at the Bar,
and procure woe and misery and wringing of hands at the great day of appearing.

The third reason why God will be avenged of those that are Covenant-breakers,
is, because that a Covenant is the greatest obligation, and the most forcible
chain that can be invented to tie us to obedience and service. God may justly
challenge obedience without covenanting by virtue of creation, preservation,
and redemption; he has made us, and when lost, he has purchased us with his
blood. But being willing more abundantly to manifest his love, and that we
might be the more fastened to him, he has tied himself to us, and us to him by
the strong bond of a Covenant; as if God should say, Oh ye sons of men, I see
you are rebellious, and sons of Belial, and therefore if it be possible, I will
make you sure. I will engage you unto me, not only by creation, preservation
and redemption, but also by the right of covenant and association. I will make
you mine by promise and oath. And surely he that will break these bonds, is as
bad as the man possessed with the Devil in the Gospel, whom no chains could
keep fast. When we enter into covenant with God, we take the oath of Supremacy,
and swear unto him that he shall be our chief Lord and Governor, and that we
will admit no foreign power or jurisdiction, but that God shall be all in all.
We likewise take the oath of Allegiance to be his servants and vassals, and
that he shall be our Supreme in spirituals and temporals. Now for a Christian
that believes there is a God, to break both these oaths of allegiance and
supremacy, it is cursed treason against the God of heaven, which surely God will
be avenged of. Amongst the Romans, when any Soldier was pressed, he took an
oath to serve the Captain faithfully, and not to forsake him, and he was called
Miles per sacramentum. Sometimes one took an oath for all the rest, and the
others only said, The same oath that A. B. took, the same do I. And these were
called Milites per conjurationem, or milites evocati. And when any soldier
forsook his Captain, he had Martial law executed upon him. Thus it is with
every Christian: He is a profess;ed soldier of Christ, he has taken
press-mony, he has sworn and taken the Sacrament upon it to become the Lords,
he is miles per sacramentum, and miles per conjurationem. And if he forsake his
Captain and break covenant, the great Lord of Hosts will be avenged of him, as
it is written, Jer. 11.3. Cursed be the main that obeys not the words of this
covenant. To break covenant is a sin of perjury, which is a sin of high nature;
and if for oaths the land mourns, much more for breach of oaths. To break
covenant is a sin of spiritual adultery; for by covenanting with God we do as
it were join our selves in marriage to God, as the Hebrew word signifies, Jer.
50.5. Now to break the marriage knot is a sin for which God may justly give a
Bill of divorce to a Nation. To break covenant is a sin of injustice; for by
our covenant we do enter as it were into bond to God and engage our selves as a
creditor to his debtor. Now the sin of injustice is a land destroying sin.

The fourth Reason why God must needs be avenged of those that are
covenant-breakers, is, because it is an act of the highest Sacrilege that can
be committed. For by virtue of the Covenant the Lord lays claim to us as his
peculiar inheritance, Ezekiel. 16.8. I swear unto thee, and entered into covenant
with thee, and thou becamest mine. Jer. 31.33. I will be their God and they
shall be my people. It is worthy observation, that in the Covenant there is a
double surrender, one on Gods part, another on our part. God Almighty makes a
surrender of himself, and of his Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Behold, says
God, I am wholly thy God; all my power, and mercy, and goodness, etc. is all
thine, my Son is thine, and all his rich purchases. My spirit is thine and all
his graces. This is Gods surrender. On our parts, when we take hold of the
Covenant, we make a delivery of our bodies and souls into the hands of God, we
choose him to be our Lord and Governor, we resign up our selves into his
hands. Lord we are thine at thy disposing; we alienate our selves from our
selves, and make a deed of gift of our selves, and give thee the lock and key
of head, heart, and affections, etc. This is the nature of every religious
Covenant, but especially of the Covenant of grace. But now for a Christian to
call in as it were his surrender, to disclaim his resignation, to steal away
himself from God and to lay claim to himself after his alienation; to fulfill
his own lusts, to walk after his own ways, to do what he lists, and not what
he has Covenanted to do, and so to rob God of what is his, this is the highest
degree of Sacrilege, which God will never suffer to go unpunished. And surely
if the stick-gatherer, that did but alienate a little of Gods time; and Ananias
and Sapphira, that withheld but some part of his estate: and if Belshazzer for
abusing the consecrated vessels of the Temple were so grievously punished; how
much more will God punish those that alienate themselves from the service of
that God whom they have sworn to be obedient? It is observed by a learned
Author, of three famous Commanders of the Romans, that they never prospered
after they had defiled and robbed the Temple of Jerusalem. First, Pompey the
great, he went into the Sanctum Sanctorum, a place never before entered by any
but the High Priest, and the Lord blasted him in all his proceedings after that
time. Vt illi qui terram non habuit ante ad victoriam, de esset illi terra at
sepulturam: That he that before that time wanted earth to overcome, had not at
last earth enough to bury him withal. The next was Crassus, who took away
10000 talents of gold from the Temple, and afterward dyed, by having gold
poured down his throat. The third was Cassius, who afterward killed himself.
If then God did thus avenge himself of those that polluted his consecrated
Temple; much more will he not leave them unpunished that are the living temples
of the Holy Ghost, consecrated to God by a Covenant, and afterward proving
sacrilegious, robbing God of that worship and service which they have sworn to
give him.

The fifth reason why this sin makes the time perilous is, because
covenant-breakers are reckoned amongst the number of those that have the mark
of reprobation upon them. I do not say that they are all Reprobates; yet I say
that the Apostle makes it to be one of those sins which are committed by those
that are given up to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28.31. The words are spoken of
the Heathen, and are to be understood of Covenants made between man and man.
But then the Argument will hold a fortiori. If it be the brand of a reprobate
to break covenant with man, much more a covenant made with the great Jehovah by
the lifting up of our hands to Heaven.

The last reason is, because it is a sin against such infinite mercy, such
bowels of Gods unexpressible mercy. It is said, Jer. 31.22. Which covenant they
brake, although I was a Husband to them. That is, although I had chosen them
for my Spouse, and married my self unto them with an everlasting Covenant of
mercy, and intailed heaven unto them, yet they have broken my Covenant. This
was a great provocation. Thus Ezekiel. 16 4, 5, When thou wast in thy blood and no
eye pitied thee to have compassion upon thee, I said unto thee when thou were
in thy blood, Live; yea, I said unto thee Live. It is twice repeated. As if God
should say, Mark it O Israel, when no eye regarded thee, then I said unto thee,
Live. Behold, says God, ver. 8. thy time was the time of Love. Behold and
wonder at it, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea,
I swear unto thee, and entered into covenant with thee, says the Lord, and
thou becamest. mine. And yet for all this thou have sinned grievously against
me. Woe woe unto thee, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 16.23. There is fivefold mercy
in the covenant, (especially in the covenant of grace) that makes the sin of
covenant breaking to be so odious.

1. It is a mercy that the great God will vouchsafe to enter into covenant with
dust and ashes. As David says in another case, is it a slight matter to be
the son in law of a King? so may I say, is it a slight matter for the Lord of
heaven and earth to condescend so far as to covenant with his poor creatures,
and thereby to become their debtors, and to make them as it were his equals?
When Jonathan and David entered into a Covenant of friendship, though one was a
Kings Son, the other a poor Shepherd, yet there was then a kind of equality
between them. But this must be understood warily, according to the the text, 2
Cor. 2 9. Blessed be God who has called us into the fellowship of his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord. He is still our Lord, though in fellowship with us. It
is a Covenant of infinite condescension on Gods part, whereby he enters into a
league of friendship to with his people.

2. The mercy is the greater, because this covenant was made after the fall of
Adam; after we had broken the first covenant. That the Lord should try us the
second time, is not only an act of infinite goodness of God, but of infinite
mercy. There is a difference between the goodness and the mercy of God.
Goodness may be showed to those that are not in misery: but mercy supposes
misery, and this was our condition after the breach of the first covenant.

3. That God should make this covenant with Man, and not with Devils.

4. This sets out the mercy of the covenant, because it contains such rare and
glorious benefits, and therefore it is called a covenant of life and peace,
Mal. 2.5. an everlasting, covenant even the sure mercies of David, Esa. 54.3.
It is compared to the waters of Noah, Esa. 54.6. Famous are those two Texts,
Exodus 19.5, 6. Jer. 32.40, 41. Texts that hold forth strong consolation. By
virtue of the covenant, Heaven is not only made possible, but certain to all
believers, and certain by way of oath. It is by virtue of the covenant that we
call God Father, and may lay claim to all the power, wisdom, goodness and
mercy, etc. that is in God. As Jehoshaphat told the King of Israel, to whom he
was joined in covenant, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as
thy horses: So does God say to all that are in covenant with him; My power is
thine, my goodness is thine, etc. By vettue of this covenant, whatsoever thou
want God cannot deny it thee, if it be good for thee. Say unto God, Lord,
thou have sworn to take away my heart of stone, end to give me a heart of
flesh. Thou have sworn to write thy law in my heart, thou have sworn to
circumcise my heart, thou have sworn to gave me Christ to be my King, Priest,
and Prophet, etc. And God cannot but be a covenant-keeper. By virtue of this
covenant, God cannot but accept of a poor penitent sinner laying hold upon
Christ for pardon, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Jer. 3.14. Promissa haec tua sunt, Domine;
and quis falli timet cum promittit ipsa veritas? In a word, we may challenge
pardon, and heaven by our Covenant; 1 John 1.9. God is not only merciful, but
just to forgive us. We may challenge Heaven through Christ out of justice.

5. Add lastly, that the conditions of the Covenant on our parts should be upon
such easy terms, therefore it is called a covenant of Free Grace. All that God
requires of us, is to take hold of this Covenant; Isa 56 to receive this gift
of righteousness, Rom 5. to take all Christ as he is tendered in the Covenant.
And that which is the greatest consolation of all, God has promised in his
Covenant to do our part for us, Jer. 31.33, 34. Therefore it is called a
Testament rather then a Covenant. (In the new Testament the wore (...) is
always used by the Apostle, and not (...)) Heaven is conveyed unto the Elect
by way of Legacy; It is part of Gods Testament to write his Law in our hearts,
and to cause us to walk in his ways, etc. Put these things together. Seeing
there is such infinite mercy in the Covenant. A mercy for God to enter into
covenant with us, to do it with us and not the Angels, with us fallen, with us
upon such easy terms; and to make such a Covenant, that contains so many,
and not only so, but all blessings here and hereafter in the womb of it; it
must needs be a land-destroying, and soul-destroying sin to a Covenant-breaker.

The use and application of this doctrine is fourfold.

Use 1. Of information. If it be such a Land-devouring sin to be a
Covenant-breaker, let us from hence learn the true cause of all the miseries
that have happened unto England in these late years. The womb out of which all
our calamities are come. England has broken Covenant with God, and now God is
breaking England in pieces, even as a Potter breaks a vessel in pieces. God
has sent his sword to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant. As Christ whipped the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, with whips made of the cords which they
brought to tie their oxen and, sheep withal. A Covenant is a cord to tie us to
God, and now God has made an iron whip of these cords which we have broken
asunder to whip us withal.

We are a Nation in Covenant with God, we have the books of the covenant, the
Old and New Testament; we have the seals of the covenant, Baptism and the
Lords Supper. We have the Messengers of the covenant, the Ministers of the
Gospel. We have the Angels of the covenant, the Lord Jesus Christ fully and
clearly set out before us in the Ministry of the word. But alas, are not these
blessings amongst us, as the Ark was amongst the Philistines rather as
prisoners then as privileges; rather in testimonium and ruinam quam in
salutem, rather for our ruin then for our happiness? May it not be said of
us, as Reverend Moulin said of the French Protestants; While they burned us
(says he) for reading the Scriptures, we burnt with zeal to be reading of
them: now with our liberty is bred also negligence and disesteem of Gods word?
So is it with us. While we were under the Tyranny of the Bishops, oh how sweet
was a Fasting-day! how beautiful were the feet of them that brought the Gospel
of peace unto you? How dear and precious were Gods people one to another, etc.
But now how are our Fasting-days slighted and vilified? how are the people of
God divided one from another, railing upon (instead of loving) one another? And
is not the godly Ministry as much persecuted by the tongues of some that would
be accounted godly, as heretofore by the Bishops hand? Is not the Holy Bible by
some rather wrested then read? wrested I say by ignorant and unstable souls, to
their own destruction. And us for the seals of the covenant. 1. For the Lords
Supper; H^w often have we spilt the blood of Christ by our unworthy approaches
to his Table? and hence it is that he is now spilling our blood. How hard a
matter is it to obtain power to keep the blood of Christ from being profaned by
ignorant and scandalous Communicants? and can we think that God will be easily
entreated to sheath up his bloody sword, and to cease shedding our blood? 2.
For the Sacrament of Baptism; how cruel are men grown to their little infants,
by keeping of them from the seal of entrance into the Kingdom of heaven, and
making their children (their own children) to be just in the same condition
with the children of Turks and Infidels? I remember at the beginning of these
Wars, there was a great fear fell upon godly people about their little
children, and all their care was for the preservation, and their safety; and
for the continuance of the Gospel to them etc. But now our little children are
likely to be in a worser condition then ever. And all this is come upon us as a
just punishment of our Baptismall covenant breaking. And as for Jesus Christ
who is the Angel of the covenant: are there not some amongst us that un-god
Jesus Christ? and is it not fit and equal that God should un-church us, and
un-people us? are there not thousands that have sworn to be Christ's servants,
and yet are in their lives the Vassals of sin and satan? and shall not God be
avenged of such a nation as this? these things considered, is no wonder our
miseries are so great, but the wonder is, that they are no greater.

The 2d. use, is an use of examination.

Days of humiliation ought to be days of self-examination. Let us therefore
upon such a day as this, examine whether we be not amongst the number of those
that make the times perilous, whether we be not covenant-breakers? Here I will
speak of three Covenants: 1. Of the covenant we made with God in our Baptism.
2. Of the covenant we have made with God in our distresses. Thirdly, and
especially of this covenant you are to renew this day.

First, of the covenant which we made in Baptism, and renew every time we come
to the Lords Supper, and upon our solemn days of fasting. There are none here,
but I may say of them, The vows of God are upon you. You are servi nati, empti,
jurati,; you are the born, bought, and sworn servants of God, you have made a
surrender of your selves unto God and Christ. The question I put to you is
this: how often have you broke covenant with God? it is said, Isa. 33.14. The
sinners of Sion are afraid: who shall dwell with everlasting torments? who
shall dwell with devouring fire etc. When God comes to a Church-sinner, to a
sinner under the Old Testament, much more to a Christian sinner; a sinner under
the new Testament: and lays to his charge his often covenant breaking fear
fullness shall possess him, and he will cry out, oh! woe is me, who can dwell with
everlasting burnings? our God is a consuming fire, and we are as stubble before
him. Who can stund before his indignation? (Nah. 1.6.) who can abide in the
fierceness of his anger? when his fury is poured forth like fire, and the rocks
are thrown down before him. Who can stand? of all sorts of creatures, a sinful
Christian shall never be able to stand before the Lord, when he comes to visit
the world for their sins. For when a Christian sins against God, he sins not
only against the commandment, but against the covenant. And in every sin he is
a commandement-breaker and a covenant-breaker. And therefore whereas the
Apostle says, Tribulation and anguish upon every soul that sins, but first
upon the Jew, etc. I may add; First upon the christian, then upon the Jew, and
then upon the Grecian; because the Covenant made with the Christian is called a
better covenant; and therefore his sins has a higher aggravation in them.
There is a notable passage in Austin, in which he brings the devil thus
pleading with God against a wicked christian at the day of judgment.
Aequissime judex, judica quod aequum est, judica meum esse qui tuus esse noluit
post renunciationem; Vt quid invasit pannos meos? Quid apud eum lascivia,
incontinentia, etc. quibus ipse renunciaverit? Quid intemperantia, quid gula,
quid fastus, quid caetera mea? Haec omnia mea post renunciationem invasit. Meus
esse voluit, mea concupivit; Judica, aequissime judex, quoniam quam tu non
dedignatus es tanto pretio liberare, ipse mihi postmodum voluit obligare. That
is, Oh thou righteous Judge, give right judgment! Judge him to be mine, who
refused to be thine even after he had renounced me in his Baptism; What had he
to do to wear my Livery? What had he to do with gluttony, drunkenness, pride,
wantonness, incontinency; and the rest of my ware? All these things he has
practiced since he recounced the Devil and all his works. Mine he is, judge
righteous judgment; For he whom thou have not disdained to dye for, has
obliged himself to me by his sins, etc.

Now what can God say to this charge of the Devils, but, take him Devil, seeing
he would be thine, take him, torment him with everlasting torments? Cyprian
brings in the Devil thus speaking to Christ at the great day of judgment, Ego
pro istis quos mecum vides nec alapas accepi, nec flagella sustinui, nec crucem
pertuli, nec sanguinem fudi, sed nec regnum coeleste illis promitto, nec ad
paradisum evoco and tamen se mihi suaque omnia consecrarunt. I have not said
(says the Devil) been whipped and scourged, and crucified, neither have I shed
my blood for these whom thou see with me. I do not promise them a kingdom of
Heaven, etc. And yet these men have wholly consecrated themselves to me and my
service. Indeed if the Devil could make such gainful covenants with us, and
bestow such glorious mercies upon us as are contained within the covenant, our
serving of Satan and sin might have some excuse. But when as his covenant is a
covenant bondage, death, hell, and damnation: and Gods covenant is a covenant
of liberty, grace, and eternal happiness, it must needs be a sin inexcusable,
to be willing and wilfully such a covenant-breaker.

2. Let us examine concerning the vows which we have made to God in our
distresses: in our personal distresses, and our National distresses. Are we not
like the children of Israel of whom it is said, Psalm. 78 34. When he slew them,
then they sought him, and they returned and enquired early after God, etc.
Nevertheless they did but flatter him with their mouth, etc. For their heart
was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant? Are we not
like unto little children, that while they are whipping will promise any thing,
but when the whipping is over will perform nothing? Or like unto Iron that is
very soft and malleable while it is in the fire, but when it is taken out of
the fire, returns presently to his former hardness? This was Jacobs fault: He
made a vow when he was in distress Genesis 28.22. But he forgot his Covenant, and
God was angry with him, and chastised him in his Daughter Dinah, Genesis 34.5. and
in his two sons Simeon and Levi. And at last God himself was fain to call to
him from heaven to keep covenant. And after that time God blessed Jacob
exceedingly, Genesis 35.9, 10, 11, 12. We read of David, Psalm. 56.13, 14, 15. that
he professes of himself, that he would go into Gods house, and pay the vows
which his lips had uttered, and his mouth had spoken when he was in trouble.
But how few are there that imitate David in this thing?

Thirdly, Let us examine our selves concerning ihis solemn League and Covenant
which we are to renew this day. And here I demand an answer to this question.

Q. Are we not covenant-breakers? do we not make the times perilous by our
falsifying of our oath and covenant with God?

In our Covenant we swear to six things.

1. That we will endeavor to be humbled for our sins and for the sins of the
kingdom. But where shall we find a mourner in England for his own abominations
that are committed in the midst of us? it is easy to find a censurer of the
sins of the Land, but hard to find a true mourner for the sins of the land.

2. We swear that we will endeavor to go before one another in the example of
a real reformation. But who makes conscience of this part of the Oath? What
sin have thou left, or in what one thing have thou been reformed since thou
tookest this Covenant? We read, Ezra. 10.7. That they entered into covenant, to
put away their wives and their children by them: which was a very difficult and
hard duty and yet did they it. But what bosom sin, what beloved sin, as dear
to thee as thy dear wife and children, have thou left for Gods sake since thou
tookest this Oath? I read Nehem. 5.13. that the people took an Oath to make
restitution, which was a costly duty, and yet they performed it, says the
Text. But alas! where is the man that has made restitution of his ill gotten
goods since he took this Covenant? I read 2 Chronicles. 15.16. that King Asa deposed
his Mother Maachah, her, even her, from being Queen, after he had entered into
Covenant: and that the people, 2 Kin. 11.18. after they had sworn a covenant,
brake in pieces all the Altars of Baall thoroughly. But where is this thorough
Reformation, this thorough amendment of life? Indeed here is much talk of a
Reformation, but little practice of a Reformation. We say we fight for a
Reformation; but I fear lest in a little time we should fight away our
Reformation: or if not fight it away, yet we should dispute it away. For now
all our religion is turned into Vtrum's, into Questions, insomuch as that there
are some that call all religion into question, and in a little while will loose
all religion in the crowd of questions. Inter disputandum veritas, and religio
amittitur. There was a time not many years ago, when God did bless our
Ministry in the City, to the conversion of many people unto God; but now there
are many that study more to gain parties to themselves, then to gain souls to
God. The great work of conversion is little thought on. And never so few (if
any at all) converted as in these days wherein we talk so much of Reformation.
And is this to keep Covenant with God?

3. We swear to endeavor to amend the lives, and reform not only our selves,
but also those that are under our charge. But where is this Family-reformation?
indeed I read of Jacob, that when he went to perform his vow and covenant, he
first reformed his family, Genesis 35.3 And that Joshua resolved (and per^ormed
it) for himself and his family to serve the Lord. And so did Josiah, 2 Chronicles.
34. And ^h that I could add, And so do we! but the wickednesses committed in
our families, proclaim the contrary to all the world. What Noblemans, what
Aldermans, what Merchants family is more reformed since the Covenant, th^n
before? we speak and contend much for a Church-reformation; but how can there
be a Church-reformation, unless there be a Family-reformation? What though the
Church-worship be pure, yet if the worshippers be impure, God will not accept
of the worship? And if families be not reformed, how will your worshippers be
pure.

4. We swear to endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms,
to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, confession of Faith,
form of Church Government, Directory for worship and catechizing, etc. But are
there not some that write against an Uniformity in religion, and call it an
Idol? Are there not many that walk professedly contrary to this clause of the
covenant? There are three Texts of Scripture that people keep the quite
contrary way. The first is Mat. 6.34, 31, 25. Take no thought what you shall
eat, etc. take no thought for to morrow And most people take thought for
nothing else. The second text is Mat. 6.33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God
and his righteousness, etc. And most people seek this last of all. The third
text is, Joh. 6.27. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for the meat
that endures for ever, etc. And most people labor not for the meat that
endures for ever, but for the meat that perishes. As these three texts are
kept, so do many people keep this part of the Oath; for there were never more
divisions and differences in the Church, never more difformity, and pleading
against uniformity, then now there is.

5. We swear to endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition,
Heresy, Schism, etc. And yet notwithstanding there are some that have taken
this Oath, that contend earnestly for a Toleration of all Religions.

6. We swear against a detestable indifferency and Neutrality in this cause
which so much concerns the glory of God, etc. And yet how many are there
amongst us that are like unto Gallio, that care not what becomes of the cause
of God, so they may have peace and quiet? That will not be the backwardest of
all, and yet will be sure not to be too forward, for fear lest if the times
turn, they should be noted amongst the chief of the Faction? That are very
indifferent which side prevail, so they may have their trading again? That say
as the Politician, that they would be careful not to come to near the heels of
Religion, lest it should dash out its brains: And as the King of Arragon told
Beza, that he would wade no further into the sea of Religion then he could
safely return to shore?

In all these six particulars let us seriously search and try our hearts,
whether we be not amongst the number of those that make the times perilous.

The third use is for Humiliation. Let the consideration of our
Covenant Breaking, be a heartbreaking consideration to every one of us this
day. Let this be a mighty and powerful Argument to bumble us upon this day of
humiliation.

There are five considerations that are exceedingly soul-humbling, if God bless
them unto us.

1. The consideration of the many commandments of God that we have often and
often broken

2. The consideration of the breaking of Jesus Christ for our sins, how he was
rent and torn for our iniquities.

3. The consideration of the breaking of the bread, and the pouring out of the
wine in the Sacrament, which is a heartbreaking motive and help.

4. The broken condition that the Kingdom of England, Scotland and Ireland,
and that Germany is in at this time.

5. The many Vows and Covenants that we have broken; our Sacrament-covenants,
our Fasting-covenants, our Sick bed-Covenants. And especially the consideration
of our often breaking of our Nationall-covenant which you come this day to
renew. This is a sin in Folio, a sin of a high nature: and if ever God awaken
conscience in this life, a sin that will lie like a heavy Incuba upon it. A
greater sin then a sin against a Commandment, or against an Ordinance. A sin
not only of disobedience, but of perjury. A sin of injustice, of spiritual
Adultery. A sin of Sacrilege, A sin of great unkindnesse. A sin that makes us
not only disobedient, but dishonest. For we account him a dishonest man that
keeps not his word. A sin that not only every good Christian, but every good
Heathen does abhor. A sin, that not only brings Damnation upon us, but casts
such into horrible disgrace and reproach upon God, that it cannot stand with
Gods honor not to be avenged of a Covenant-breaker. Tertullian says, that
when a Christian forsakes his Covenant, and the colors of Christ, and turns
to serve as the Devils soldier, he puts an unspeakable discredit upon God and
Christ. For it is as much as if he should say; I like the service of the Devil
better then the service of God. And it is just as if a soldier that has waged
war under a Captain, and afterward forsaking him turns to another, and after
that leaves this other Captain and returns to his former Captain. This is to
prefer the first Captain before the second. This makes God complain, Jer. 24.
What iniquity have your Fathers found in me that they are gone far from me,
etc. And in the 11 ver. Has any Nation changed their God, which are yet no
Gods? but my people have changed their glory for that which does not profit.
Basil brings in the Devil insulting over Christ, and saying, I never created
nor redeemed these men, and yet they have obeyed me, contemned thee, O Christ,
even after they have Covenanted to be thine And then he adds Equidem ego istam
futuram adversus Christum gloriationem hostis insolentem gravius long esse
statuo quam Geheimae supplicia. That is, I esteem this insulting of the Devil
over Jesus Christ at the great day, to be more grievous to a true Saint, then
all the torments of hell. A saying worthy to be written in letters of gold.
Seeing then that covenant breaking is so great an abomination, the Lord give us
hearts to be humbled for this great abomination this day. And this will be a
notable preparation to sit you to the renewing of your Covenant. For we read
that Nehemiah first called his people to fast, before he drew them into a
Covenant. According to which pattern you are here met to pray, and humble your
souls for your former covenant breaking; and then to bind your selves anew
unto the Lord our God. As wax when it is melted will receive the impression of
a seal, which it will not do before: so will your hearts, when melted into
godly sorrow for our sins, receive the seal of God abidingly upon them, which
they will not do when hardened in sin.

Is every man that sins against the covenant to be accounted a
covenant-breaker, and a perjured sacrilegious person?

By no means. For as every failing of a Wife does not break a Covenant between
her and her Husband; but she is to be accounted a Wife till she by committing
adultery break the Covenant. So every miscariage against the covenant of grace,
or against this National-covenant, does not denominate us in a Gospell-account
covenant-breakers. But then God accounts us according to his Gospel to break
Covenant, when we do not only sin, but commit sin against the Covenant, when we
do not only sin out of weakness, but out of wickedness; when we do not only
fail, but fall into sin; when we forsake and renounce the Covenant, when we
deal treacherously in the Covenant, and enter into League and covenant with
those sins which we have sworn against. When we walk into Anti-covenant paths,
and willingly do contrary to what we swear: then are we perjured and unjust,
and sacrilegious, and guilty of all these things formerly mentioned.

The fourth Use presents unto you a Divine, and therefore a sure project to
make the times happy. And that is, Let all Covenant-takers labor to be
covenant-keepers. It has pleased God to put it in your hearts to renew your
Covenant. The same God enable you to keep Covenant It is said, 2 Chronicles. 34 31,
32. The King made a covenant before the Lord, etc. And he caused all that were
present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. And 2 Kings 23.3. The King
stood by a pillar and made a covenant before the Lord, etc. and all the people
stood to the covenant. This is your duty, not only to take the covenant, but to
stand to the covenant; and to stand to it, maugre all opposition to the
contrary. According as we read, 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13. And they entered into
covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers, etc. That whosoever would not
seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great,
whether man or woman. For it is not the taking, but the keeping of the Covenant
that will make you happy. God is styled, A God keeping covenant, Deuteronomy. 9.4.
Neh. 1.5. O that this might be the honor of this City! That we may say of it,
London is a City keeping covenant with God. Great and many are the blessings
entailed upon Covenant-keepers. Exodus, 19.5, 6. Now therefore if you will obey
my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then you shall be a peculiar treasure
unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: And ye shall be unto me a
Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation, etc. Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the
Lord, are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant, etc. Psalm. 15.4.

There are three Covenants I shall persuade you in an especial manner to stand
to.

1. The covenant you made with God in Baptism. A Christian (says Chrysostom)
should never step out of doors, or lie down in his bed, or go into his closet,
but he should remember that word Abrenuncio; that is, He should remember the
time when he did renounce the Devil and all his works. Oh let us not forget
that which we ought always to remember! Let us remember to keep that Covenant,
as ever we desire God should remember us in mercy at the great day.

2. The covenants which we make unto God in our afflictions. Famous is that
passage of Pliny in one of his Epistles to one that desired rules from him how
to order his life aright. I will (says he) give you one rule which shall be
instead of a thousand; Vt tales esse perseveremus sani, quales nos futuros esse
profitemur infirmi. That we should persevere to be such when we are well, as we
promise to be when we are sick. A sentence never to be forgotten. The Lord help
us to live accordingly.

3. The covenant which you are to take this day. The happiness or misery of
England does much depend upon the keeping or breaking of this Covenant. If
England keep it, England by keeping covenant shall stand sure, according to
that text, Ezekiel. 7.14. If England break it, God will break England in pieces.
If England slight it, God will slight England. If England forsake it, God
will forsake England. And this shall be written upon the Tomb of perishing
England: Here lies a Nation that has broken the covenant of their God.
Remember what you have heard this day. That it is the brand of a Reprobate to
be a Covenant-breaker, etc. It is the part of a Fool to vow, and not to pay his
vows. And God has no delight in the sacrifice of fools. Better not vow, then
to vow and not to pay, Eccl. 5.4, 5. It is such an high profanation of Gods
Name, as that God cannot hold a Covenant-breaker guiltless. It is perjury,
injustice, spiritual adultery, sacrilege, etc. And the very lifting up of our
hands this day (if you do not set heart and hand on work to keep covenant) will
be sufficient witness against you at the great day. We read, Genesis 31.44, 45,
46, 48, 49, 52, 53. That Jacob and Laban entered into a covenant, and ^ook a
heap of stones, and made them a witness, and said, This heap is a witness,
etc. And they called the name of the place Mizpah: The Lord watch between me
and thee, etc. The God of Abraham judge betwixt us, etc. Such as your condition
this day. You enter into Covenant to become the Lords, and to be valiant for
his truth, and against his enemies. And the very stones of this Church shall be
witness against you, if you break covenant. The name of this place may be
called Mizpah. The Lord will watch over you for good, if you keep it, and for
evil, if you break it. And all the curses contained in the book of the Covenant
shall light upon a willing covenant-breaker. The Lord fasten these meditations
and soul-awaking considerations upon your hearts. The Lord give you grace to
keep close to the Covenant; and in keeping of it to keep God and a good
conscience, which are both lost by covenant breaking.

There are 4. things which I shall persuade you unto in pursuance of your
Covenant.

1. To be humbled for your own sins, and for the sins of the K^ngdome; and more
especially, Because we have not as we ought valued the inestimable benefit of
the Gospel, that we have not labored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to
walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us. Gospel-sins are greater then
legal sins, and will bring Gospel-curses, which are greater then
legall-curses. And therefore let us be humbled according to our Covenant for
all our Gospel abominations.

2. You must be ambitious to go before one another in an example of real
reformation. You must swear vainly no more, be drunk no more, break the Sabbath
no more, etc. You must remember what David says, Psalm. 50.16. But unto the
wicked God says, What have thou to do to take my covenant in thy mouth? seeing
thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee. To si^ willingly
after we have sworn not to sin, is not only to sin against a Commandment, (as
I have said) but to sin against an Oath; which is a double iniquity, and will
procure a double damnation. And he that takes a Covenant to reform, and yet
continued unreformed, his Covenant will be unto him as the bitter water of
jealousy was to the woman guilty of adultery, which made her belly to swell
and thigh to rot, etc. Numb. 5.22.

3. You must be careful to reform your families according to your covenant, and
the example of Joshua, and Jacob, and the godly Kings forementioned.

4 You must endeavor according to your places and callings to bring the
churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and
uniformity in religion, etc. O blessed Unity! how come it to pass that thou
art so much slighted and contemned? Was not unity one of the chief parts of
Christ's prayer unto his Father when he was here upon earth? John 17.11. Is not
unity amongst Christians one of the strongest arguments to persuade the world
to believe in Christ. John 17.21. Is it not the chief desire of the holy
Apostles, that we should all speak the same things, and that their should be no
divisions amongst us, etc. 1 Cor. 1.10. Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, etc. Is not unity the
happiness of heaven? Is it not the happiness of a City to be at unity within
it self? Is it not a good and pleasant thing for brethren to dwell together in
unity? how comes it then to pass that this part of the Covenant is so much
forgotten? The Lord mind you of it this day! And the Lord make this great and
famous City a City of holiness, and a City at unity within it self! For if
unity be destroyed, purity will quickly also be destroyed. The Church of God is
una as well as sancta. It is but one church as well as it is a holy church. And
Jesus Christ gave some to be Apostles, etc. till we all come to the unity of
the faith. The goyernment of Christ is appointed for the keeping of his Church
in unity as well as purity. Those things which God has joined together, let no
man put asunder. That government which does not promote unity as well as
purity, is not the government of Christ. Oh the misery of that Kingdom where
Church-divisions are nourished and fomented! A kingdom or a church, divided
against it self cannot stand. Would it not be a sad thing to see twelve in a
family, and one of them a Presbyterian, another an Independent, another a
Brownist, another an Antinomian, another an Anabaptist, another a Familist,
another for the Prelatical government, another a Seeker, another a Papist and
the tenth it may be an Atheist, the eleventh a Jew and the twelth a Turk? The
Lord in his due time heal our divisions, and make you his choice instruments
according to your places, that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the
three Kingdoms!

Q. But some will say, How shall I do to get up my heart to this high pitch
that I may be a Covenant-keeper?

I will propound these three helps.

1. Labor to be always mindful of your Covenant, according to that text, 1 Chronicles. 15.16. God is always mindful of his Covenant. It was the great sin of
the people of Israel, that they were unmindful of the Covenant, Neh. 9.17. They
first forgot the Covenant, and afterward did quickly forsake it. He that
forgets the Covenant, must needs be a Covenant-breaker. Let us therefore
remember it, and carry it about us as quotidianum argumentum, and quotidianum
munimentum. First, let us make a Covenant a daily argument against all sin and
iniquity, and when we are tempted to any sin, let us say, I have sworn to
forsake my old iniquities: and if I commit this sin, I am not only a
Commandment-breaker, but an Oath-breaker; I am perjured, I have sworn to reform
my fami^y, and therefore I will not suffer a wicked person to tarry in my
family I have sworn against neutrality, and indifferency, and therefore I will
be zealous in Gods cause, etc. Secondly, let us make this Covenant a daily
muniment, and armor of defense, to beat back all the fiery darts of the devil.
When any one tempts thee to promise of preferment to do contrary to thy
Covenant, or by threatening to ruin thee for the hearty pursuing of thy
Covenant, here is a ready answer; I am sworn to do what I do, and if I do
otherwise, I am a perjured wretch.

This is a wall of brass to resist any dart that shall be shot against thee for
well doing according to thy Covenant. Famous is the story of Hannibal, which he
told to King Antiochus, when he required aid of him against the Romans. When I
was nine years old (said he) my Father carried me to the Altur, and made me
take an Oath to be an irreconcilable foe to the Romans. In pursuance of this
Oath, I have waged war against them 36 years. To keep this Oath I have left my
country, and am come to seek aid at your hands, which if you deny, I will
travel all over the world to find out some enemies to the Roman state. Odi,
odioque sum Romany. If an Oath did so mightily operate in Hannibal, let the
Oath you are to take this day, work as powerful upon you; and make your Oath an
argument to oppose personal sins, and family sins, and to oppose Heresy,
Schism, and all profaneness, and to endeavor to bring the Churches of God in
the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction, and uniformity, etc. And let
this Oath be armor of proof against all temptations to the contrary. And know
this one thing, that if the Covenant be not a daily argument and muniment
against sin, it will be^ome upon your breaking of it, quotidianum testimonium,
and aeternum opprobrium. A daily witness against you, as the book of the law
was, Deuteronomy. 31.26. and an everlasting shame and reproach unto you and yours.

2. Let us have high thoughts of the Covenant. Actions, and affections follow
our apprehensions. If thy judgment be beleapred with a corrupt opinion about
the Covenant, thy affections and actions will quickly be beleapred also. And
therefore you ought to endeavor according to your places, that nothing be
spoken, or written, that may tend to the prejudice of the covenant.

3. You must take heed of the cursed sin of self-love, which is placed in the
forefront as the cause of all the Catalogue of sins here named; because men
ar^ ^e^s of themselves, therefore they are covetous, etc. and therefore they
are covenant-breakers. A self-seeker cannot be a covenant-breaker; this is a
sin that you must hate as the very gates of hell.

And this is the second sin that I promised in the beginning of my Sermon to
speak on: but the time and your other occasions will not permit. There is a
natural self-love, and a divine self-love, and a sinful self-love. This sinful
self-love is when we make our selves the last end of all our actions, when we
so love our selves, as to love no man but our selves, according to the Proverb,
Every man for himself, etc. when we pretend God and his glory, and the common
good: but intend our selves, and our own private gain and interest; when we
serve God upon politic designs; Of this sinful self-love the Apostle speaks,
Phil. 2.21. For all seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ. And if
we had a window to look into the hearts of most people, we should find their
hearts made up all of this Idolatrous self-love. All their designs are for to
promote themselves. They monopolize and ingrosse all to themselves, as if made
for themselves Where his sinful self-love dwells, there dwells no love to God, no
love to thy brother, no love to Church nor State. This sinful self-love is the
Caterpillar that destroys Church and Commonwealth. It is from this sinful
self-love that the public affairs drive on so heavily, and that
Church Government is not settled, and that our Covenant is so much neglected Of
this sin I cannot now speak: but when God shall offer opportunity, I shall
endeavor to uncase i^ ^or you. In the mean time, the Lord give you grace to
hate it as hell it self.

F^^^^

