(...).

Or, A CHRISTIAN and SOBER TESTIMONY AGAINST Sinful Compliance.

WHEREIN, The Unlawfulness of Hearing the present Ministers of England, is
clearly demonstrated. Several weighty Queries proposed; Objections impartially
weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and found wanting.

By Christophilus Antichristomachus, a Mourner in Sion, waiting for the day of
her Salvation, and coming of her King.

Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. If any man worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive
his Mark in his forehead, or in his hand; the same shall drink of the Wine of
the Wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his
Indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence
of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. And the smoke of their
torment ascended up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day nor night, who
worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the Mark of his Name.
Acts 2. 40. Save your selves from this untoward generation. John 10. 3. The
Sheep hear his Voice -- v.5. and a stranger they will not follow. 1 John 4. 5.
They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears
them. Printed for the Author, in the Year 1664.

To the READER.
Candid Reader,
WE are almost at the end of these Paper-Contests, which are daily preaching
their own Funeral. It Is in another way that Jehovah will shortly appear (for he
has already sent his Harbingers before him) to convince the world, and worldly
Church of their Wickedness, and Adulteries, whereby they provoke the pure eyes
of his glory. For behold, the Lord comes with Fire, and with his Chariots like
a Whirle wind, to render his Anger with Fury, and his Rebuke with flames of
fire; For by Fire, and by Sword, will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the
slain of the Lord shall be many. Happy art thou, if in the number of those that
shall be able to live, when the Lord does this. Alas! Who may abide the day of
his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? Men (as men) will be at
their wits ends, when they behold the Earth to reel to and fro, like a drunken
man, (its foundatious being out of course) the Mountains to Smoke, and the
Hills to melt away, because of the terribleness of his Anger: The Kings of the
Earth (who now (as Pharaoh of old) are with delight drinking the blood of the
Saints, as sweet Wine, and refuse to let them go, from under their bonds to
Sacrifice to the Lord, according to his appointment) and the Great men, and the
Rich men, and the Chief Captains, and the Mighty men, and every Bondman, and
every Freeman, will then hide themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the
Mountains, and cry to them, to fall upon them, and hide them, from the Wrath of
the Lamb. The day of whose Wrath is ready to spring forth (though the wicked
world think not so) all the signs of the near approach thereof, are already
visibly fulfilled. What Wars, and rumors of Wars? (Nation fighting against
Nation) what strange Signs in the Heavens, and in the Earth, with great
Earthquakes in many places? what a spirit of Persecution and Offense, (Brother
even betraying Brother to death) what declension, and decaies of love to Jesus
Christ, amongst not only a professing, but an once, Zealous professing People,
do we daily see, and hear of? how does Iniquity abound? so that the Worlds
fields are even white unto the harvest: the Voice of the Daughter of Sion is
louder than than ever, crying out, My flesh and my blood, be upon the Daughter
of Babylon; the souls under the Altar are groaning, How long, O Lord God, Holy
and True, will it be ere thou avenge our blood upon them that dwell on the
Earth? and will the Lord refrain himself, and shut out the Prayers of his
Prisoners of Hope? I tell you nay; but as a Lion, and as a young Lion roaring
on his prey, when a multitude of Shepherds is called forth against him, he will
not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them: so
shall the Lord of Hosts come down, to fight for Mount Sion, and for the Hill
thereof; Utterly to dethrone the Antichristian Beast, and Whore, who have made
themselves drunk with the blood of the Saints (for which he will make them
drunk with blood (even their own blood) for they are worthy) and to cause his
poor oppressed ones, to inherit the Throne of Glory, in despite of their
Oppressors! Reader, whoever thou art, into whose hand this little Tract may
come, I cannot but crave thy stay, out of pure love, to speak a few things to
thee in the Portal. If thou art one that art a Scorner, Derider, Persecutor of
the Saints (under what denomination soever) if thou art glad in thy heart (as
was wicked Edom and Ty^us of old) at the sufferings of the People of the Lord,
yea; if thou art but a civilized person, or a mere outside Professor, without
any acquaintance with the work of Regeneration upon thy spirit, and the Power,
and Mystery of Christianity, and Godliness; whatever thy enjoyments, comforts,
hopes, or confidences be, know of a certainty, that this day of the Lord's
Wrath, will sweep them away all, and thou will utterly perish in the flames of
his Indignation. Oh then thou will cry out, I Fool accounted their life
madness, and their end to be without honor, but now they are numbered among the
Children of God, and crowned with glory; but I am cast out to be tormented,
millions of millions of ages: O that I could prevail with thee, seriously to
consider of thy state, (art thou able to meet, and contend with the Most High?)
to proceed no further in rebellion, treasuring up wrath against the day of
wrath, and the revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. O fling away thy
Weapons, kiss the Son, that he be not angry with thee, and thou perish in the
way! Content not thy self, in being accounted a Christian, that thou have
escaped the pollutions of the World, nor in the performance of some dead,
formal, sapless and spiritless service to the Lord, which profits nothing:
Get an Interest in Christ, freely tendered in the Gospel, deep humiliation for
thy former iniquities, a spirit of Grace and Supplication, inward Purity and
Heart-uprightness, or perish for ever. Oh see that thou have Oil in thy vessel,
as well as in thy lamp, or thou will not be able to dwell with devouring fire,
and everlasting burnings! If thou art a Child of Light, indeed begotten of the
Lord, acquainted, and holding communion with him in his Ivory Palaces; O what
cause have thou to triumph in God, for his wonderful, wonderful Grace to thee!
O how should thou love him? how should thou praise him? with what
eagerness should thou be prosecuting the concerns of his Glory? how tenderly
should thou be affected with his dishonor? how full of Supplications and
heart-groans for him, to arise thoroughly to plead his Cause? how ready to sell
all for his Glories sake, and follow him whither soever he goes? O take heed of
giving way to a spirit of slumber (the temptation of this day of the
Bridegrooms tarriance) do not say a confederacy, with those that say a
confederacy, against the Lord; receive not the Mark of the Beast in thy
forehead, or hand: Keep thy Virginity, in respect of Worship, that thou may
be found without fault before the Throne of the Lamb: Hold fast thy
beginning-confidence, that has so great a recompense of reward: it is but a
very little while, and thy God will come with Vengeance, even God with a
Recompense, he will come and save thee. Stand fast, and keep thy ground, within
a small moment thou shall be singing, The Winter is past, the Rain is over and
gone -- Keep faithful to God, and while thou art in the Wilderness thou shall
not be without thy springs of living Water, he will speak comfortably to thy
heart, and give thee thy Vinyards from hence, and the Valley of Achor for a
door of Hope; and he will bring thee safe (yea the right way) to Canaan, where
thou shall see thy King in his beauty, hunger no more, neither thirst any more,
nither shall the Sun light on thee, nor any heat, for the Lamb which is in the
midst of the Throne shall feed thee, and shall lead thee unto living Fountains
of Waters, and God shall wipe away all Tears from thy eyes. O blessed Day! O
royal State! do not your hearts sing under the thought of it? who would refuse
(if the Lord would strengthen him) to swim through a Sea of blood (though his
own blood) to follow JESUS who will assuredly crown us, with its Enjoyment? If
thou art one who (through the power of Temptation) art turned aside by the
Flock of the Companions, and art worshipping with the Nations, waiting at the
posts of an Antichristian Ministry for teachings, I do assure thee my bowels
are troubled for thee, and with a Pen dipped in my own Tears could I write to
thee. O why will thou forsake the Fountain of Living Waters, for broken
Cisterns that will hold no water? will thou change thy glory for that which
will not profit? Is it because there is not bread enough in thy Fathers house,
that thou go a begging to the doors of strangers? Is it nothing to thee to
cast contempt upon the pure Institutions of Christ, to provoke the Lord to send
leanness into thy soul? Is it a small matter to be an occasion of grief, and
stumbling to thy Brethren, to pour contempt upon the Offices, Wisdom and
Faithfulness of Christ, to harden persons in a false way of worshipping of God,
to their eternal ruin, to disobey the Heavenly Voice, calling aloud to thee,
to come from the Lions dens, and mountains of the Leopards, to come out of
Babylon? O arise, depart hence, this is not your rest, it is polluted, hasten
thine escape, be like the He-Goat before the Flocks, in thy retreat from the
Tents of these False-worshippers, lest being partaker of their sin, thou
receivest of their plagues, that are even ready to be poured forth! Who knows
but this may be the last Warning thou may have from God? I could easily
expatiate (for great is my pity toward thee) were I not sensible how far I
have already exceeded the limits of an Epistle, to so small a Treatise, which I
willingly submit to thy censure (through the importunity of many judicious
Christians) with this request That thou read it with seriousness and
impartiality. It has m(...)mes been given up to the Lord, and the service of
his poor People, for above this year that it has lain by me: if thou art any
way advantaged or bettered by it, give God the glory; and let him have a share
in thy Prayers, when nearest the Throne, who accounts it his glory to be.

A Servant to the weakest of the Lord's Lambs. C. A.

(...): OR, A Christian and Sober Testimony against Sinful Compliance.
The PREFACE to the ensuing Discourse.
BEing to treat of one part of the instituted Worship of Christ, under the
Gospel, with respect unto the duty incumbent upon the Saints, in order
thereunto, it may seem to any indifferent person, but a reasonable Postulatum
in the present Enquiry, that the whole thereof be divolved upon the Scriptures
of the New Testament; and those Royal Laws, that Christ (the alone King and
Lawgiver of his Church) has given forth for Saints under the
New-Testament-Dispensation to walk by, until they arrive unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. not
perplexing our selves, nor the consciences of any, with the judgments of men in
generations past, (wherein they cannot aquiesce, though to take off the
prejudices of some against Truth, upon the account of its seeming novelty, we
may here and there manifest their harmony with us, in the main Principles of
the ensuing Structure) nor what was (or may be supposed to be) permitted, unto
the Saints, before the time of Reformation, whilst the worldly Sanctuary was
yet standing, the carnal Ordinances appertaining thereunto in being, at least
by the Providence of God, not fully dissolved, as afterward, both it and they
were, being buried in the ashes and ruins of that Temple, to which they were
inseparably annexed. Yet, inasmuch, as some beams of Light may be communicated
unto the present Enquiry, by a retrospection into the state of things in the
time of the old Law, it shall not be grievous to us, (nor will it be altogether
unprofitable to the Reader) briefly to remark, so far as may concern the matter
in hand, the state and management of affairs, under that Economy and
Dispensation. Not to mention the Administration of holy things in the time of
the Ante-Deluvian Fathers, not the general Apostasy from the pure ways of God,
in the days of Seth, (when according to their duty the faithful Remnant (the
Sons of God) separated from the wicked (or the daughters of men) and solemnly
joined themselves together, to worship God according to his holy Appointments,
Genesis 4. 26.) Let us take a brief view of things, with relation unto the People
of God, after the giving of Moses's Law, when a Standard was set up for them to
repair unto, and they became (being gathered into one) as a City on an Hill,
conspicuous unto all.

First then, that the Lord gave unto the People of the Jews (whom he had chosen
out of all the Nations of the World, to be a People near to him, his peculiar
treasure above them all) Statutes and Ordinances to walk by, both with relation
to Civils and Ecclesiastics, which they were indispensibly bound to conform
to, without adding to, or detracting therefrom: That the management of all
their affairs was singly to be bottomed upon, and conform to, these Statutes
and Judgments, is very frequently asserted in Scripture, Exodus 21. 1. Lev. 18.
4. and 19. 37. and 20. 22. and 25. 18. and 26. 15, 43. Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 5, 8. and 5.
1. and 7. 11. and 11. 1, 32. and 12. 1. and 26. 16. and 30. 16. 1 Chronicles. 16.
12. and 28. 7. Psalm. 89. 30. Ezekiel. 5. 6. and 36. 27. Dan. 9. 5.

2ly. That persons were appointed by the Lord, to be chosen by the
Congregation, for the public administration of Ordinances and Worship, cannot
be denied: Thus were the Livites, Exodus 13. 2, 12, 13. and 22. 29. Numb. 3. 12.
called therefore the Wave-Offering of the Children of Israel, Numb. 8. 9, 10,
11. because given up by them to the Lord as their Offering, by solemn
Ordination and Imposition of hands.

3ly. That persons thus invested into the Office of Priesthood were not left to
the liberty of their own wills, nor had they any dependence upon the Will or
Authority of the sons of men (one, or other of them) either in respect of the
matter or manner of their Worship, the whole whereof was purely of Sovereign
Institution, and Divine Appointment, Exodus 25. 9, 40. Numb. 8. 5. Heb. 8. 5. 1 Chronicles. 28. 11. Exodus 8. 27. Lev. 10. 1. Exodus 39. 1, 5, 7, 21, 26, 31, 43. and
40. 23, 25, 27, 29. Levit. 8. 9, 13, 17, 21, 29. Numb. 8. 3* Exodus 35. 10, 29.
and 36. 1, 5. Isa. 29. 13.

Fourthly, That this Church, gathered by the Lord, and wonderfully separated
from the rest of the world (though they had him nearer to them than any people,
had his Law made known amongst them) did notwithstanding quickly depart from
his pure Institutions, mingling therewith the Inventions of men, and Customs of
the Nations (after which they went a whoring) is frequently remarked in the
Scripture: Of this the Lord sorely complains, Deuteronomy. 32. 18. Jer. 2. 32. and 13.
25. and 18. 15. and 23. 27. Hos. 4. 6. and 8. 14. and 13. 6. 2 Chronicles. 13. 10.
Isa. 1. 4. Jer. 1. 16. and 2. 17, 19. and 9. 13. and 15. 6. Deuteronomy. 29 25. 1
Kings 11. 33. and 18. 18. and 19. 10. 2 Kings 22. 17. Ezra. 9. 10. for this he
severely threatens and punishes them, Deuteronomy. 29. 25. Judge. 10. 10. 1 Samuel 12.
10. 2 Chronicles. 12. 5. and 24. 20. and 34. 25. Jer. 16. 11. and 19. 4. the very
truth is, the Contests of God with that People from first to last, are to be
bottomed upon this foot of account.

Fifthly, That notwithstanding their dreadful Apostasy from God, they were
usually confident, That they were the only People, Had not forsaken the Lord,
nor done any evil, and could not bear the Prophecies and Rebukes of the
Prophets and Servants of the Lord against their abominations: Whom they
persecuted and put to death (as at last they did the Prince of Life and Glory)
for no other cause, but for telling them the truth, and bearing testimony
against their Innovations, and Apostasy from God (the usual practice of persons
degenerated from the Way and Spirit of the Lord) Mal. 1. 6. Jer. 7. 4. Luke 3.
8. John 8. 39. Matthew. 5. 12. Act. 7. 52.

Sixthly, That they had all along their corruption in Worship, and degeneracy
from the pure Ways of God, false Prophets, (who ran before they were sent,
prophesying smooth things to them in the Name of the Lord, seeing lying
vanities for them, according to the desires of the hearts of them and their
Rulers, who were therefore in great esteem amongst them) Isa. 9. 15. and 28. 7.
Jer. 6. 13. and 23. 11, 28. and 28. 10. Hos. 9. 8. Jer. 2. 8, 26. and 5. 31.
and 14. 14. and 23. 13, 21. Ezekiel. 13. 2. and 22. 25, 28. Mic. 3. 5, 6, 7. Zeph.
3. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 1.

Seventhly, That in the height of their Apostasy, God left not himself without
a Witness, having one or other extraordinarily raised up and spirited by him,
to testify for his Name and Glory, against all their Abominations and
self-invented Worship, reserving also a Remnant unto himself, that were not
carried away with the spirit of Whoredoms and Delusions, 1. Kings 19. 14, 18. 2
Kings 17. 13. Romans 11. 3, 4. Jer. 18. 11. and 25. 5. and 35. 15.

Eighthly, That it was the sin of that People, to hearken unto the teachings of
such as were not sent by the Lord (though they pretended never so much to be
sent by him) and the unquestionable duty of the Lord's persevering Remnant, to
separate from them, as also from all the false, self-devised Worship of that
day, though commanded by their Kings and Rulers, 2 Kings 17. 21, 22. Hos. 5.
11. The former is evident, such Prophets were to be cut off from the midst of
them, Deuteronomy. 18. 20. and they are expressly forbidden to hear them, Deuteronomy. 13. 3.
Jer. 27. 9, 16. So is the latter, their devised Worship being a breach upon the
Sovereign Authority of God, must needs be a grievous sin, as the names of
Adultery, Whoredom, Idolatry, Fornication, by which the Spirit of the Lord does
frequently set it forth, abundantly demonstrates; Psalm. 73. 27. Isa. 57. 3, 8.
Jer. 9. 2. Ezekiel. 23. 45. Hos. 3. 7. and 7. 3. Lev. 20. 5. Jer. 13. 27. Ezekiel.
16. 17, 20, 30. Hos. 1. 2. Rev. 14. 8. and 18. 9, 19, 20. which without
controversy, the People of God were to separate from, and have no communion
with any in, upon what pretense soever: Which is solemnly charged upon them as
their duty in the Scripture, Hos. 4. 15. Amos 5. 5. Prove. 4. 14. and 5. 8.
Cant. 4. 8.

What may rationally be inferred from these Positions, so evidently comprised
in the Scripture, and by way of analogy at least, be argued from them, is
evident to any ordinary understanding; for our parts being resolved (as was
said) to try out the matter in controvesie, from such Rules and Sovereign
Institutions, as our dear Lord has left his New Testament Churches to walk by,
we shall not stand to make that improvement of them, as else otherwise we
might: A few Queries upon the whole that has been offered, shall put a close
to this Preface.

1. Whether since the Apotomie, or Unchurching the Nation of the Jews, the Lord
has ever since so espoused a Nation or People to himself, as that upon the
account thereof, the whole body of that People or Nation may be accounted his
Church? whether there be any National Church under the Oeconomie of the Gospel?
if so, let it be showed when, and where it was instituted by the Lord; what is
produced by some to this purpose, is (but upon a slight view thereof) of no
moment, it is Isa. 49. 21. Kings shall be your Nursing-fathers, etc. which
Prophecy waits the time of its accomplishment; hitherto, both before and since
the rise of Antichrist (being made drunk by the Whores intoxicating-cup) they
have been, for the most part, cruel Butcherers of the Saints: and were we under
its accomplishment, a National Church would be far enough from being its
result. Of a Nations being born at once, we shall not sure hear pleaded in this
matter, it being a Prophecy expressly relating to the Jews, and their miraculous
Conversion: if there be no such thing as a National Church of the Institution
of Christ, as most certain it is there is not (the Assertion whereof is wholly
destructive of Gospel-Administrations) Then,

2. Whether National Ministers are the Ministers of Christ, or whether there
can be a true Ministry in a false Church, as a National-Church must be, if not
of Divine Institution, upon what pretense soever it be so denominated?

3. Whether God does not bear as much love to, and exercise as much
faithfulness over, his New-Testament-Churches, as over the National-Church of
the Jews? If so, Then,

4. Whether he has not (as of old he did, with reference unto the then Church)
determined the whole of the Worship, appertaining unto them, to whose
Institutions, without any humane additions, its the duty of souls soley to
conform? Yea,

5. Whether he has not now (as then) designed the several Officers, and
Offices, his Wisdom thought sufficient for the management of the affairs of his
House, so that the invention of new ones by the sons of men, is not only
needless, but a daring advance against the Sovereignty, Care and Wisdom of God
over his Churches?

6. Whether the Privileges of Saints, be not every way as great and extensive
under the Gospel, as those under the Law? if so, then Whether the solemn
deputation of men, signally pointed out by the Lord, for the administration of
holy things in his House, by the Body of his Church, be not now (as then) their
peculiar Privilege?

7. Whether any Church in the World (we speak of a visible, instituted Church)
has greater security against Apostasy from God, and that sore Judgment of
having its Candlestick removed (and being unchurched) than that People of the
Jews had? if not, then whether, supposing a National Church to be of the
Institution of Christ, it may not so come to pass, that it may be so
overspread with corruptions, that it may lose the Essence of a Church, and
justly be disrobed of that appellation?

8. Whether the Ecclesiastic and Spiritual Rulers, Governors, and Officers
of such a Collapsed Church, may not righteously, as of old, be accounted and
esteemed as false Prophets that go about to cause the people to forget the Name
of the Lord (or his pure Worship) by their Lies (or unscriptural Traditions,
Innovasions, and Ceremonious Pageantries.)

9. Whether Separation from such a Collasped Church, in respect of its
Worship, Ministers and Ministry, be not only justifiable, but, as of old, the
duty of the Lord's faithful Remnant, that desire to worship him according to
his Appointments? Yea,

10. Whether, supposing a Church (so called) thus dreadfully, as aforesaid,
departed from the pure Institutions of Christ, never to be according to Truth,
a visible instituted Church of Christ, and the Lord's poor People living in the
Nation, never by their free consent Members thereof, as it is on the pretended
Churches part, most unheard-of-Cruelty to compel them, so it be not on the part
of the freeborn Children of God, most stupendous folly, and disvaluation of the
Institutions of Christ, and ingratitude to God, for the Light and Liberty from
the Yokes of men, received, imaginable, to join affinity with it in Worship, or
attend upon the self-invented Ministry that appertains thereunto? Many more
Questions of the like nature and importance might unto these be added.

CHAP. I.
The great care of Souls in their Accesses to God, should be to sanctify his
Name. Divine Institution to be heeded in the whole of our Worship. The Question
proposed. That it is lawful to hear the present Ministers of England, denied:
one Argument proposed to consideration. Nothing may be practiced in instituted
Worship, but what is warranted by the Scripture: The Testimonies of the
Ancients produced. That Hearing is part of instituted Worship, proved.

THis is that which the Lord has said, I will be sanctified in all that draw
nigh me, and before all the People will I be glorified: The great care of
Saints in matter of Worship, is to sanctify the Name of the Lord therein: This
is the great thing that God looks at, the omission whereof he often severely
punishes the children of men for: now in order hereunto, it is necessary that in
all our approaches to God we see to the Institution of the Lord, both in
respect of the matter and manner of Worship, that it be according to Divine
Prescript, else we cannot sanctify the Name of God therein, nor glorify him
before the people. Hearing (as was said, and shall beyond contradiction in its
proper place be evinced) is part of instituted Worship, it therefore more
nearly concerns Saints than many are aware of, to have their consciences
resolved from the Scriptures of God, in the matter under enquiry, Whether it be
lawful for the Saints to hear the present Ministers of England? It Is the
Negative, we have received under our maintenance; because we are satisfied
Christ has so; To the proof whereof we now address our selves.

Argument 1.
That which there is no warrant for in the Scripture, being part of instituted
Worship, is not lawful for the Saints to practice: But there is no warrant in
the Scripture for hearing the present Ministers or England; and hearing is part
of instituted Worship. Therefore.

The major (or first) Proposition is evident.

1. From the nature of instituted Worship, which consists in this, that it be
of Divine Revelation; else whatever it is, it is not instituted Worship.

2. From the Verdict of Christ, who pronounces all the Worship of man to be
vain and fruitless, and so unlawful, that is bottomed on any thing but Divine
Revelation, Mark 7. 7.

3. If it be lawful to conform to any one part of instituted Worship without
warrant from Scripture, it is also lawful to conform to another, a third, the
whole, which would banish instituted Worship out of the world.

4. To assert that it is lawful to conform to any part of instituted Worship,
without warrant from Scripture, reflects sadly upon the Wisdom and Faithfulness
of Christ; for either he was not wise enough to foresee that such a part of
Worship was, or would be requisite, or had not faithfulness enough to reveal
it, though the Scripture compares him to Moses for faithfulness, who revealed
the whole Will of God, to the making of a pin in the Tabernacle.

6. It pours out contempt upon the Care of God over the New Testament Churches
(as if it were less to these, then to the Church under the Law) and the
Oeconomie of the Gospel, as not so complete as that of old, the whole of whose
Worship, Orders and Ordinances (as was said) was bottomed upon pure Revelation.

7. It carries with it a sad reflection upon the Authority of the Scripture, as
not thoroughly furnished to make the man of God perfect.

8. The Lord condemns not only that which is done against the warrant and
direction of the Word, but also that which is done beside it, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and
12. 32. Mat. 15. 9. Lev. 10. 1. (their sin lay not in this, that they offered
strange fire which was forbidden, but which God commanded them not) Prove. 30.
6. Jer. 7. 31.

9. Of the same mind with us in this matter are the renowned VVitnesses of
Christ in all ages; generally all that write upon the second Commandment, speak
fully hereunto.

Cyprian (in his Epist. to Caecilius de Sacram.) says roundly, Et quod
Christus solus, etc. i. e. that Christ alone ought to be heard: we have the
Father himself witnessing from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, hear
him. Wherefore if Christ only be to be heard, we ought not to attend to what
others did before us, but what he has prescribed. Beza (on Phil. 1. 1.) says,
Episcopos igitur, etc. The Apostle means by Bishops, such as were set over
others in the preaching the Word, viz. Pastors, Teachers and Elders, for so
were Bishops of old called, until he which for Polities sake, did preside in
the Assembly, began peculiarly to be called Bishop: hereof the Devil began to
lay the first foundation of Tyranny in the Church of God: Behold (says he) of
how great moment it is to decline from the Word of God, though but an hairs
breadth. So he. To whom may be added the Testimony of that lively Witness of
Christ Martin Luther In a Translation of the New Testament in Edward the 6ths
time, the Author of the Notes on Matthew. 15. says, God will not be worshipped
after the doctrine and precepts of men, but as he himself has prescribed and
taught us in his Word.
, who says, on 1 Pet. 4. 11. To the Office of preaching, that properly
belongs, which the Apostle Peter prescribes, viz. unto whomsoever the vocation
and charge of Preaching the Word is allotted, let him speak as the Words of
God; which Caveat and Lesson ought most carefully to be taken heed unto, that
no man presume to preach and teach any thing, whereto he has not the express
words of God for his warrant, and except he be most certain that the same be
directly to be avouched out of the sacred Scriptures. Which being so, what may
be thought of the Pope (we may add of the Hierarchy) and his dirty Traditions?
And anon after, he says, A Bishop ought to do nothing in the Church, unless he
be certain and sure of the warrantise thereof by God's Word; for God cannot
abide to have his Service jumbled and mingled at pleasure with every foolish
gewgaw and light trumpery; yea further, says he, And therefore we are strictly
forbidden not to rely unto, nor to allow whatsoever decree or constitution the
Bishops list to obtrude, and enjoin, unless they stand upon a sure ground, that
the things which they do, are allowed of God -- and unless they be able to say,
Do this; for it is the Will and Commandment of God, and we have his express
Word and Commandment for our warrant: if they be not able to say thus, they
ought to be accounted as Liars and Deceivers, much less ought any Christian to
yield unto them therein any obedience or subscription: And afterward, There is
nothing (says he) so pernicious, nothing so monstrous, nothing so beastly, as
to go about to govern the Church of God, without the Warrant of God's own Word.
Of the same mind is learned Whitaker, We acknowledge (says he) no Oil in God's
Service, because we read nothing of Oil in the Scriptures, can you show that
ever Christ or his Apostles used it? To whom many others might be added.

The minor (or second Proposition) consists of two parts.

1. That Hearing is part of instituted Worship, one would wonder should it be
denied; however it is evident it is so, from the light of this single
demonstration: That in which we wait upon God in the way of an Ordinance for
the communication of good, beyond the virtue of any creature to conveigh to us,
is part of the instituted Worship of God (for what I wait for, not being in the
thing it self, in which I am waiting, no ground can be assigned, for my
expecting of good through it, but Divine Institution) but in the Hearing of the
Word we wait upon God in the way of an Ordinance, for the communication of
good, beyond the virtue of any creature to conveigh to us: Therefore.

2. That Hearing the present Ministers of England is not warranted in the
Scripture: This will be manifested, when we come to the ventilating and
scanning of those places, which are usually produced for the abetting of the
practice of some in this matter: in the mean while we crave liberty to profess,
that it is not opinionativeness, singularity, vainglory, uncharitableness, or
any thing of that nature; (as some are apt uncharitably enough to censure) but
the dread and awe of God (who is a jealous God, and especially in point of
Worship) and an holy fear of offending him, that hinders us from complying in
these matters: could but one word, tittle or iota be produced from the
Scriptures of God, for the warranting the Hearing the present Ministers of
England, we should quickly lay our mouths in the dust, confess and bewail our
guilt and folly in refusing to conform thereunto; but this we are fully
assured, those that dissent from us, are not able to do; what they say herein,
shall (...) be sifted to the uttermost.

CHAP. II.
A second Argument proposed to consideration: That it is not lawful to hear the
present Ministers of England, as Ministers of Christ, nor as Gifted Brethren,
proved. A Separation from them, if Brethren, evinced. That the best of them
walk disorderly, proved.

Argument 2.
IF it be lawful to hear the present Ministers of England, it is lawful to hear
them, either as Ministers of the Gospel, or as gifted Brethren: But it is not
lawful to hear them, either as Ministers of the Gospel, or as Gifted-Brethren:
Therefore.

The major (or first Proposition) will not be denied; That Christ has
appointed some, as Ministers, by virtue of an Office-power, to dispense the
Ordinances of the Gospel, until his second coming, is granted by all, that it is
permitted to others, as their liberty, enjoined them, as their duty (having
received Gifts and Enablements from the Lord thereunto) to improve those Gifts
in preaching, praying, etc. for the Edification of the Body of Christ (though
not solemnly invested into Office) is assented unto, at least by some of those
with whom we have to do; whence a lawfulness to hear them as Ministers, or as
Gifted-Brethren, does necessarily arise.

It Is the minor (or second Proposition) that is capable, in the thoughts of
some, of a denial: which we prove, per parts, thus.

1. It Is not lawful to hear them as Ministers of the Gospel: they are not such,
therefore may not be heard as such. That they are not Ministers of the Gospel
(but Thieves and Robbers) is manifest: Such as come not in by the Door, which
is Christ, Joh. 10. 9. (viz. by virtue of any Authority derived to them from
him) are not Ministers of the Gospel, but Thieves and Robbers, Joh. 10. 1.
(from whom it is the property of the Sheep to flee, ver. 4.) But the present
Ministers of England come not in by the Door: Therefore.

That they come not in by the Door ( viz. by virtue of any Authority derived to
them from Christ) is evident: If they have received any such Authority or
Commission from him, they have received it, either mediately, or immediately:
the latter will not be asserted, nor without the working of Miracles, should it
so be, would it to the world's end be made good: It Is the former must be fixed
upon, viz. That they have received their Authority or Commission, mediately
from Christ, but to as little purpose; for those that receive Authority to
preach the Gospel mediately from Christ, have it from some particular
instituted Church of Christ, to whom power is soley delegated for the electing
of their own Officers, according to the tenor of the ensuing Scriptures, Acts
6. 5. and 14. 23.

These men (as it is known) have no such Authority, pretend not to it, have it
in derision, come barely with a Presentation from a Patron, and Ordination,
Institution and Induction from a Lord-Bishop (things foreign to the Scripture)
and impose themselves upon the people whether they will or no.

2. It Is not lawful to hear them as Gifted-Brethren. 1. The most of them are
not gifted; nor 2. Brethren, being Canonical-Drunkards, Swearers, Gamsters,
etc. 3. The best of them cannot by Saints, in respect of Gospel-communion, be
so accounted: for, 1. There was never any giving up of our selves, each to
other, according to the will of God and primitive Example, whence such a
Brotherhood does result. 2. We cannot (as things stand) perform the duties of
Brethren to them, according to Mat. 18. nor will they, or can they, in the
state in which they stand, to us. 3. If we acknowledge the best of them for
such, we must also acknowledge the worst of them: for, 1. They are all Members
of the same Church. 2. Profess themselves to be one Brotherhood, so says their
Rhyme upon the Lord's Prayer,

Our Father which in Heaven art,
And make us all one Brotherhood, etc.
Nay, 3. we cannot so acknowledge them, but we must also acknowledge the
Bishops for our Reverend Fathers, (for theirs they are) which how abhorring it
is to any tender enlightened soul, may easily be conjectured. But to hear this
Plea speak its uttermost, let it be granted they are Brethren, and may be so
esteemed; They are Brethren that walk disorderly, or they do not: That they
walk disorderly cannot be denied by such as pretend to Reformation, If
submitting to Ordination or Reordination by a Lord Bishop, covenanting and
protesting with detestation against a Reformation according to the Scripture,
and the best Reformed Churches, to own (as consonant to Scripture) a Lyturgy or
stinted Forms of Prayer in the Church, and read them, to wear the Surplice,
etc. be disorderly walking; they are (the very best of them) beyond
contradiction, to be reputed in the number of disorderly walkers; And so after
due admonition (according to the Scripture) and a perseverance in their sin, to
be separated from, by virtue of positive and express Precepts of Christ, Mat.
18. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Now we command you, Brethren, in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks
disorderly, and not after the tradition he received of us: With what vehemence,
authority and holy earnestness does the Apostle press separation from Brethren
that walk disorderly? We command you, and we command you in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and we command you, Brethren, by virtue of our relation to each
other, and that love and endearment that is betwixt us as Brethren, that you
withdraw your selves, etc. I scarce know any one thing pressed by the Apostle,
with greater vehemence than what is here instanced in: wherein we have also an
undeniable convincing Argument, that the persons of whom we are treating, walk
disorderly. Those that walk not after the tradition received from the Apostles
(we may add, and the Primitive Church for above three hundred years after
Christ, but according to the traditions of the old Bawd and Strumpet of Rome)
are such as walk disorderly: But the present Ministers of England walk not
after the Tradition received from the Apostles, but after the Traditions of the
Whorish-Church of Rome: Therefore they are such as walk disorderly. What
Apostolical Tradition have we for stinted Forms of Prayer or Lyturgies in the
Church, did they frame any? (those that are ascribed to some of them, are all
spurious, as has been over and over proved) for Surplice, crossing in Baptism,
and many other gewgaws used by them? if they have any Apostolical written
tradition for these things, let them produce it, and we shall lay our mouths in
the dust, and for ever be silent, as to a charge of this nature: If they have
not (as there is nothing more certain) they are disorderly walkers, if the
Apostles Argument be valid, We command you to withdraw from such as walk
disorderly. But who, I pray, are these disorderly walkers? how shall we know
them? they are (says the Apostle) such as walk not after the tradition
received from us.

CHAP. III.
A third Argument proving the unlawfulness of hearing the present Ministers of
England, produced. That they act by virtue of an Antichristian Office and
Calling, proved. Their perfect agreement with the Popish Priests in seventeen
Particulars, demonstrated. That the Office of Lord Bishops is Antichristian,
proved. (The Testimonies of the Ancients produced) Whence the Antichristianism
of the Office of the Ministers of England is evinced. An Objection answered.

Argument 3.
THose that act in the holy things of God by virtue of an Antichristian Power,
Office or Calling, are not to be heard, but to be separated from: but the
present Ministers of England act in the Holy Things of God by virtue of an
Antichristian Power, Office or Calling. Therefore.

The Major is evident. For 1. The Power, Office and Calling of Antichrist is
opposite and contrary unto the Power, Office and Calling of Christ: Not to
separate from such as act by virtue of such an Office-Power, is to stand by,
and plead for Antichrist, against Christ. 2. Its unlawful to attend upon the
teachings of Antichrist, therefore upon the teachings of such as act by virtue
of a Power derived from him. 3. Christ calls, and solemnly charges his, upon
the penalty of most dreadful Judgments, to separate from every thing of
Antichrist, Rev. 18. 4. and 14. 9, 10, 11. 4. There is not a command in the
Scripture enjoining Saints to take heed of being deceived, to try the spirits,
because many Antichrists are gone abroad into the World, but is an abundant
demonstration of the truth of this Assertion. 5. The institution of Officers of
his own, by Christ, to be continued in the way appointed by him to the end of
the World, Ephesians. 4. 11. 6. That there is not one promise of a blessing in the
whole Scripture upon persons atending on such a Ministry, with innumerable
things of the like tendency and import, that might be produced if needful, are
such a basis upon which the truth of the major Proposition stands, as cannot be
easily shaken or removed.

The Minor wants not sufficient demonstration.

First, The present Ministers of England, are either from Christ or from
Antichrist. There is no medium (a Linsey-woolsey-Ministry, that is partly of
Christ, partly of Antichrist, as it is not to be proved by Scripture, so will it
not be abetted) That they are not from Christ, has in part been proved
already, and may farther be evinced.

1. Their Names are foreign to the Scripture: Where read we of Deacons in
their sense, Priests, as distinguished from Christians, in the New Testament,
Deans, Cannons, Petty-Cannons, Prebendaries, Archdeacons, Lord-Bishops,
Parsons, Vicars? etc. these are only found in the Popes Pontifical, whence
they are derived. So are 2. Their Offices: Deacons attending Tables we read
of, but Deacons Praying, Preaching, Administering Sacraments (so called) by
virtue of an Office-power, an order of the first step to the Priesthood, we
find not: Priests in the Old Testament (both true and false) we read of; in
the New, Saints are so called; First, in respect of analogy to the ritual
Priests of old, whose prerogative it was to come near to God, Deuteronomy. 21. 5. to
whom, through Christ, Saints have access with boldness, Ephesians. 2. 18. and 3.
19. Jam. 4. 8. Secondly, in respect of their union and engrafture into Christ
the great High Priest over the House of God. Thirdly, in respect of that
analogy there is betwixt what Christ has done for them as Priest, and by his
Spirit works in them: He offered up Sacrifice; so do they, Psalm. 116. 17. and
141. 2. Romans 12. 1. Heb. 13. 14. He was crucified, died; so are they, Romans 6.
6, 7, 8. etc. Gal. 2. 20. Fourthly, as Priests, they are anointed to the
participation of, do thereby attain to, a kind of holy and intimate communion
with Christ, in all his glorious Offices, Rev. 5. 10. But an Office of
Priesthood in men for the Ministry of the Gospel, that are to be bounded by men
in that their Office, must preach what they would have them, and cease when
they would have them (as is the case of the present Ministry of England) the
Scripture is a stranger to: So is it 3. to their admission into this their
office, viz. by a Lord-Bishop, without the consent of the Congregation, in
which they act as Officers. The very truth is, both in their Names, Office, and
admission thereunto, the present Ministers of England symbolize not with the
Ministers of Christ, but the Popish order of Priests: (so that if these do act
by virtue of an Antichristian office-power, then do they) as he that runs may
read in the ensuing parallel particulars.

1. They are both called, and own themselves Priests; which though some may
make light of, yet considering that it is a term borrowed, either from the
Priests of the Law, the assertion of such a Priesthood being a denial of Christ
come in the flesh; or from the Priests of the Heathen (in conformity to whom,
as the Druides of old, our Priests wear their white Garment or Surplice) or
from the Antichristian Church (so called) of Rome: Such idolatrous
superstitious names being commanded by the Lord to be abolished, Hos. 2. 15.
Zech. 13. 2. wants not its sufficient weight; the retention whereof, being also
a sore suspicion of too great a compliance with, if not a willingness to return
to that from whence they are derived. Of the same mind with us herein is Hierom
upon the 2d of Hosea, the Hebrew Doctors, Kimchi and Aben-Ezra, the Caldee
Paraphrast, Ribera (though a Jesuit) Zanchi, Danaeus, Sanctius, Polanus, Rivet,
and almost all that write upon the said Scripture. The last mentioned, viz.
Learned Rivet, has these words in his Corollaries from Hos. 2. 15, 16. There
are many names which in themselves are good enough, and might be used, but God
abhors the use of them, because they have been abused to Idolatry: he
instanceth indeed in the word Mass; but Priest or Altar being of the same
allay, upon the same foot of account, is to be rejected. The reformed Churches
in Helvetia, in their harmony of Confessions, are of the same mind; The
Ministry (say they) and the Priesthood are things far different the one from
the other -- he himself (viz. Christ) remains only Priest for ever; and we do
not communicate the name* Priest to any Minister, lest we should detract
something from Christ.

2. The Priests of Rome must be first Deacons ere they are Priests: So must the
present Ministers of England.

3. The Priests of Rome must be ordained to their Office by a Lord-Bishop or
his Suffragan: So must the Ministers of England.

4. The Priests of Rome must at their ordination, be presented by an Archdeacon
or his Deputy, with these words, Reverende Pater, etc. Reverend Father, I
present these men unto thee, to be admitted unto the order of Priesthood: So
are the present Ministers of England.

5. The Priests of Rome must be ordained to their office according to their
Pontifical, devised by themselves: the Priests of England according to their
Book of ordering Priests and Deacons (which is taken out of the Popes
Pontifical, as is evident to any that shall compare the one with the other, and
as has been long since confessed by some of themselves, in an Admonition to the
Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's days, in their second Treatise.)

6. The Popish Priests must kneel down upon their knees at the feet of the
Lord-Bishop that ordains them, and he must say to them, blasphemously enough,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost; Whose sins ye remit, or forgive, they are remitted;
whose sins ye retain, they are retained: which exactly accords with the fashion
of ordaining the Priests of England.

7. The Popish Priests are not ordained in and before the Congregation, to whom
they are to be Priests, but in some Metropolitan, Cathedral City, several miles
from the place: So are the Priests of England.

8. The Popish Priests take the care of souls, though not elected by them, from
the presentation of a Patron, by the institution and induction of a
Lord-Bishop: and do not the present Ministers of England the same?

9. The Popish Priests wait not the Churches Call to the Ministry, but make
suit to some Prelate to be ordained Priests, giving money for their letters of
Ordination: So do the present Ministers of England.

10. The Popish Priests are ordained to their Office, though they have no Flock
to attend upon: So are the Priests of England.

11. The Popish Priests must swear Canonical Obedience to their Ordinary: So do
the present Ministers of England.

12. The Popish Priests may at their pleasure, without the consent of the
People, resign and give over their Benefices, and betake themselves to some
other of greater value: A symmetrie with them herein is visible, by the
frequent practice of the Ministers of England.

13. The Popish Priests, though ordained to preach, must have special License
from the Prelates so to do: So must the Priests of England.

14. The Popish Priests are subject to be silenced, suspended, deprived and
degraded by the Prelates; as are the present Ministers of England.

15. The Popish Priests are not of like and equal Power, Degree, and Authority
amongst themselves, but are some of them inferior to others herein; as Parsons
to Archdeacons, Archdeacons to Lord Bishops, Lord-Bishops to Archbishops: So
the Priests of England.

16. The Popish Priests must be distinguished from other People by their
Vestments, as Surplice, Tippet, etc. So must the Priests of England.

17. The Popish Priests are tied to a Book of stinted Prayers, and a prescript
Order, devised by man, for their Worship and Ministration: So are the Ministers
of England, and that to such an one as is taken out of the Popes Portuis, as
has been proved by diverse: That the Common Prayer Book in Edward the 6ths time
was so, you have his, with his Councils Testimony for it; thus they write, As
for the Service in the English Tongue, it has manifest Reasons for it, and yet
perchance it seems to you a New Service, and indeed is no other but the Old,
the same words in English which were in Latin -- If the Service of the Church
were good in Latin, it is good in English. How little different the
Common Prayer Book now in use is thereunto, they that will take pains to compare
the one with the other, may be satisfied.

To these parallel particulars might be added sundry more, wherein there is an
exact symmetry betwixt the Popish Priests, and the present Ministers of England
but -- Ex ungue Leonem.

The sum of what we have been offering in this matter, is this.

First, Those Ministers that in their Names, Offices, admission into their
Offices, are not to be found in the Scripture, are not Ministers of Christ, act
not by virtue of an Authority, Office, Power, Calling, received from him.

Secondly, Those Minsters that in their Names, Office, admission into their
Office, are at a perfect agreement with the Ministers of Antichrist (such are
the Popish Priests acknowledged to be by those with whom we have to do) are not
the Ministers of Christ, have not received any Power, Office or Calling from
him to act in the holy things of God: But such (as has been abundantly
demonstrated) are the present Ministers of England; Therefore these have
received no Power, Office or Calling from Christ, and so are Antichristian.

-- Quod erat demonstrandum. Secondly, Those that receive their Power, Office
and Calling from a Lord-Bishop, and act in the holy things of God by virtue of
that Power, Office, or Calling, act in the holy things of God by virtue of an
Antichristian Power, Office and Calling: But the present Ministers of England
receive their Power, Office and Calling from a Lord-Bishop, and act in the Holy
Things of God by virtue of that Power, Office and Calling. Therefore.

The consequence of the major (or first Proposition) is manifest, the Office of
Lord-Bishops is Antichristian, therefore those that act by virtue of a Power,
Office or Calling received from them, act by virtue of an Antichristian Power,
Office or Calling.

That the Office of Lord-Bishops is Antichristian, one would wonder should be
denied in such a day as this, after so full a demonstration thereof by many
Witnesses of Christ, who have wrote so clearly in this matter, as if they
carried the Sun beams in their right hand, especially that it should be denied
by persons of Presbyterian and Congregational Principles (if indeed any of them
do deny it.) To prosecute this matter to the uttermost is not our present
intendment, the intelligent Reader knows where to find it done already to our
hand; and if after all that has been said, any through self-love, or fear of
persecution, will herein be ignorant, we might say, Let them be ignorant. But
we shall propose briefly a word or two in this matter.

1. That Office that is not to be found in the Scriptures of the institution of
Christ, but is contrary to express precepts and commands of his, is
Antichristian: But the Office of Lord-Bishops is not to be found in the
Scriptures, is contrary to express Precepts. Therefore.

The minor Proposition consists of two parts. 1. That the Office of Lord
Bishops is not to be found in the Scripture of the institution of Christ: He
gave indeed Apostles, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. of Pastors
and Teachers we read, Romans 12. 7, 8. Ephesians. 4. 8. Bishops also, and Deacons,
without the interposition of any other order, we find, 1 Timothy 3. 12. Deacons we
have appointed, Acts 7. Elders, Acts 14. 23. those who are Bishops we find
called Presbyters, Tit. 1. 5, 7. and those who are Presbyters, we find termed
Bishops, Acts 20. 28. (Gr. (...), Bishops) but where the Office of Lord-Bishops
was instituted by Christ, we are yet to seek: indeed some appearances of a
spirit striving to ascend into this Chair of wickedness, was seen in
Diotrephes, and others in the Apostles time, but these were the Antichrists
that were then gone abroad into the world. The Scripture before mentioned,
Ephesians. 4. 11. speaks as fully to the Officers and Offices instituted by Christ,
as any we meet with: Fail they in their deduction of their Office from hence,
and they will undoubtedly prove succesless in their attempts. Let us then fix
here a little; mention we find here of Apostles, Prophets, Pastors and
Teachers, none at all either here, or elsewhere, of Lord-Bishops. But perhaps
their Office, though they are called by another name, is comprised in some one
or other of these, let that then be considered. Are they Prophets? that (in the
sense of the Spirit in this place) they will not pretend to. Are they Pastors
or Teachers? this is too great a debasement of their Lordships, their Parochial
Priests over whom they preside, are supposed to be Officers in that degree.
What then are they? Apostles! Their Successors they do indeed boast themselves
to be, and are so accounted by their Abbettors (and so does the Pope himself)
but how prove they their Succession from them? if they derive it through the
Papacy, who sees not the invalidity thereof? How lubricous and uncertain is
that their Succession? how do they therein proclaim their shame, and yield the
matter in controversy? what clearer Argument that they are Antichristian, if
the Pope be the Antichristian Head over many Countries, as is by the generality
of Protestants believed, and will not by themselves be gainsayed? But in what
sense do they pretend to be the Apostles Successors? do they succeed them as
Christians? that is not the thing in question, they stand or fall, in respect
thereof to their own Master; herein we have no controversy with them, as not
willing to judge any thing before the time. Do they succeed them in respect of
their Office? let them prove that, and take the Cause. The Apostles were first
immediately Sent by Christ: Secondly, Extraordinary Officers, Commissionated to
the preaching of the Gospel throughout the Nations of the world: Are their
Lordships such? what can be imagined more frivolous or false? where find we any
Apostles after the departure of those that were immediately by Christ called to
that Office? Did the Apostles ordain any as their Successors therein, in any of
the Churches of Christ? Where read we of their so doing? yea, are any
qualified with Gifts as they, for the discharge of such an Office? or does
Christ indeed send forth Servants in any employment, and not furnish them with
Gifts suitable thereunto? Credat Apelles!

What more dishonorable to the Lord Jesus can be asserted? it remains then,
that they being neither Prophets, nor Apostles, nor Pastors, nor Teachers, that
they are not to be found in the Scripture of the institution of Christ. Nor are
they dreamed of in the world for several hundreds of years after Christ.
Clemens in his Epistle to the Church of Corinth takes notice of no other
besides (...) and (...), Bishops and Deacons, which Bishops he calls (...),
Presbyters or Elders: Yea, Lombard himself confesses, Hos solum Ministrorum
duos ordines, Ecclesiam primitivam habuisse, and de his Solis, praeceptum
Apostoli nos habere: Lomb. l. 4. Sen. D. 24. li. 3. ext. The Primitive Church,
he tells you, had no other Order of Ministers, than Bishops (or Presbyters) and
Deacons; nor did the Apostles give commandment concerning any other. That their
rise and occasion was from the aims and designs of men, to accommodate
Ecclesiastical or Church Affairs to the state and condition of the Civil
Government, is ingenuously confessed by one that was looked upon to be as great
an Admirer of, and as able a Champion for, Diocesan and Metropolitical
Prelates, as any one of late days; it is Dr. Hamond we mind, who in his
Dissertations about Episcopacy, Sect. 3. has these words, His sic positis,
illud statim sequitur ut (in Imperli cognitione) in Provincia qualibet, cum
plures urbes sint, una tamen primaria, et principalis consenda erat, (...) Ideo
dicta cui itidem inferiores reliquae Civitates subjiciebantur, ut Civitatibus
Regiones, sic et inter Ecclesias, et Cathedras Episcopales, unam semper
primariam, and Metropoliticam fuisse: So far is the Office of Lord-Bishops from
being of the Institution of Christ, that their Primacy and Supremacy was the
result of the designs and contrivements of men to accommodate the state and
frame of the Church, to the state and condition of the Government of the
Nations.

2. That the Office of Lord Bishops is contrary to express Precepts of Christ
in the Scripture; the truth of which, he that runs may read in the ensuing
Scriptures, Mat. 20. 25. Mark 10. 42. Luke 22. 25. 1 Pet. 5. 3. the English of,
Vos autem non sic, but ye shall not do so; Neque ut Dominantes Cleris, not
lording it over God's Clergy or Heritage, an ordinary Reader may easily
conclude to be inconsistent with their fordly dignities. Not to multiply
Arguments in a matter that others have so largely debated. 2. That Office that
is derived from, and is only to be found in the Papacy, is surely Antichristian
(if the Pope be the head of Antichrist, this must not be denied) But the Office
of Lord Bishops is derived from, is only to be found in, the Papacy. Which of
the reformed Churches that have separated from the Papacy have retained it? Did
the Woman in her flight into the Wilderness carry it along with her? What more
absurd, then to run to the persecuting Whore and Beast for an Office of
Ministry? and what more evident demonstration of its being an Antichristian
office, than its entertainment only by that false Antichristian Church, and its
utter rejection and detestation by the true Spouse and Witnesses of Christ in
all Ages? What is delivered over to us in this matter by some of them, we shall
briefly affix hereunto. Hierome in his Epistle to Evagrius, and in his
Commentary upon the Epistle of Titus, professes, That it is more by Custom than
by any Institution of the Lord, that Bishops are become greater than the Elders
or Ministers. Har. of Conf. sect. 2. Tit. 11. So from him do the Churches of
Helvetia proclaim, whence they infer (and that truly according to Act. 4. 9.)
That no man by any right can forbid, but that we should return to the old
Appointment of God, and rather receive that, than the Custom devised by men.
Wickliff in his answer to King Richard the 2d, citing Mat. 20. 25. 1 Pet. 5. 3.
says, Lordship and Dominion is plainly forbidden to the Apostles, and dare
thou then usurp the same? if thou will be a Lord, thou shall lose thy
Apostleship, etc. The University of Geneva say, [ Theses Genev. 71.] These
Functions following, we hold to be altogether false, and destitute of all true
foundation, viz. the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome over all Churches; the
Cardinalship, Patriarchship, Archiepiscopalship, and briefly the whole
Episcopal degree of Lord Bishops over their fellow Elders. Marlorat in his
Exposition on the Revelation, chap. 17. 3. says, That Archbishops, Deans, etc.
are in office under Antichrist; yea, upon chap. 9. that they are the tails of
Antichrist. Beza says, They could not be brought into the Church, until they
had driven him out who is the only Master, Christ; and, there is neither holy
Scripture, nor Council, nor Ancient Doctors which ever did know such Monsters,
Beza's Confess. Art. 7. c. 14. The Noble Ancient Old-Castle, Lord Cobham, says,
That the whole Episcopal degree of Lord Bishops over their Fellow-Elders, is
altogether false, and destitute of all true foundation -- yea, that all other
Functions and Offices besides Priests and Deacons are unlawful, as being Sects
devised by men destitute of all true Foundation. To these we might add Honest
Bale upon the Revelation, viz. chap. 17. where he says, Canterbury and York
are the Beastly Antichrist's Metropolitans, and Primates, and upon chap. 13.
that Archbishop, Diocesan, Archdeacon, Dean, Prebend, Doctor, Parson, Vicar,
etc. are very names of Blasphemy: For Offices they are not appointed by the
Holy Ghost, nor yet mentioned in the Scripture. Cartwright says of them, That
their functions are not in the Word of God, but of the Earth, new devised
Ministries, and such as can do no good: that their Office is the neek of the
Popish Hierarchy, come out of the bottomless Pit of Hell. Fenner proclaims
them, to be no natural Members of the Body of Christ's Church, as being of
humane addition, not born with her, nor grown up with her from the Cradle. The
French and Belgic Confession says, That they pass not a Rush for them. The
Church of Geneva, That the Hierarchy is devilish Confusion, stablished (as it
were) in despite of God, and to the mocking and reproach of all Christian
Religion. The Seekers of Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's time speak fully
hereunto, [2 Adm. to Parl.] We have an Antichristian and Popish ordering of
Priests, strange from the Word of God, never heard of in the Primative Church,
taken out of the Popes shop, to the destruction of Gods Kingdom -- The names
and offices of Archbishops, Archdeacons, Lord-Bishops, etc. are, together
with their Government, drawn out of the Popes shop, Antichristian, Devilish,
and contrary to the Scriptures: Parsons, Vicars, Parish Priests, are birds of
the same feather, to whom might be added many others.

Object. One stone of offense must be removed out of our way ere we pass on
further, it is this: Though Lord Bishops are Antichristian, yet it does not
follow, that the Office and Ministry derived from them is so: For they are also
Presbyters, and ordain as Presbyters.

Answ. Give me leave to say, That were not men resolved to say any thing that
they might be thought to have somewhat to say, we had not heard of this
Objection. For, 1. That they act in the capacity of Presbyters in the matter of
Ordination, is false (1.) Contrary to their own avowed principles; their
Lordships think it too great a debasement, to be degraded from their Lordly
Dignity, to so mean an Office. (2.) Contrary to the known Law of the Land, by
which they receive power to act therein, in which they are known and owned
only in the capacity of Lord-Bishops. (3.) Contrary to their late practice,
whereby they have sufficiently declared the nullity of a Ministerial Office,
received from the hands of a Presbytery, in thrusting out of doors several
hundreds of Ministers so ordained. Strange! that it should be pleaded, they act
as Presbyters in the matter of Ordination, and yet they themselves judge a
Presbyterian-Ordination invalid. But 2. What if this should be granted? it
would avail nothing, except it can be proved, that they are and act as
Presbyters of the Institution of Christ, which (these being only in a
particular institued Church of Christ) will never be to the worlds end. Thus
far of the third Argument.

CHAP. IV.
A fourth Argument, proving the unlawfulness of hearing the present Ministers
of England. A twofold denial of the Offices of Christ, asserted. That the
present Ministers deny his Kingly and Prophetical Office, proved from their
Nonconformity to the Orders and Ordinances appointed by Christ for his House.
Several Institutions of Christ remarked: Their Nonconformity thereunto,
manifested. An Objection answered.

Argument 4.
THose that oppugn or deny any of the Offices of Jesus Christ, are not to be
heard, but separated from: but the present Ministers of England oppugn and deny
some of the Offices of Jesus Christ: Therefore.

Before we come to clear the several parts of this Argument, we shall crave
liberty briefly to premise,

First, That there is a twofold denying or oppugning of the Offices of Christ.

1. Verbal and Professional. Such was, and is that of the Jews; the Papists are
not guilty hereof; in words they own, preach up, plead for all the Offices of
Christ as much as any: So do also the present Ministers of England: This is not
then the denial of the Offices of Christ we implede them as guilty of.

2. Real and actual, when persons do that which enwraps in the bowels of it, an
impugning and denial of the Offices of Christ. This the Romish Synagogue are
eminently guilty of: So are the present Ministers of England, as shall (we
doubt not) be clearly demonstrated in its proper place.

Secondly, That a Verbal Professional acknowledgement of the Offices of Christ
is nothing, when contradicted in practice: This the Apostle avowedly asserts,
in respect of the knowledge of God, Tit. 1. 16. They profess they know God, but
in works they deny him: And may congruously enough be applied to the matter in
hand. This, as applied to the Combination and Synagogue of Rome, some of
themselves have long since acknowledged, Whilst they profess Christ to be King,
and submit not to the Laws he has prescribed in his Word, they make him an
Idol, and put a Scepter of reed in his hand: So some of their own.

But I interrogate; What if a man should with the greatest earnestness profess,
and in the height of a confident Spirit aver, That he were Born again of God,
Washed, Sanctified in the Blood of Christ, and by the Spirit of the Lord, that
he did receive and own Christ as his King and Lawgiver, when I see this man at
the same time walking in a way of Rebellion against Christ, in open contempt
and defiance of his Laws and Government, subjecting to the Yoke of other Lords
and Lawgivers; Shall his Plea be admitted? surely no!

Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam. It Is long since decided by Christ, That
False-Prophets are to be descried, Not by their words (they may speak like
Angels, cry Hail Master, kiss him, yet be False Prophets, yea Judasses to him)
but by their fruits: Let them profess a thousand times over, That they own all
the Offices of Christ, if they are in the mean while found in the practice of
those things that are inconsistent with the truth of such a Profession, they
are really Deniers and Opposers of the Offices of Christ. This is that then we
affirm in this matter. 1. That those that do really oppose any of the Offices
of Christ, are not to be heard, but separated from: This carrying a brightness
along with it, that is sufficient to convince all, except such, whose eyes the
god of this world has blinded; that its original is from God, we shall take
for granted will not be denied by a Professing Enlightened People, though
otherwise it were easy to multiply Arguments for its demonstration. 1. To
oppose Christ in any of his Offices, bespeaks such as are guilty thereof to be
Antichrists, 1 John 2. 22. and 4. 2, 3. 2 John 7. (of the same mind with us
herein is learned Beza upon the forecited Scriptures) and none will surely be
so inconsiderate (not to say worse) as to assert, It Is lawful to attend upon
the Ministry of Antichrist. 2. To hear such, is to strengthen and encourage
them in that their denial of, and opposition unto, the Offices of Christ; and
thereby become partakers with them in their sin: The thought of which, cannot
but be grievous to the poor Lambs of Christ. But this will not be denied.

It Is the second thing may sound harsh in the ears of some (as did some Sayings
of Christ, but if Truth, where God shall give the seeing eye and hearing ear,
'twill be received) viz.

2. That the present Ministers of England do oppose and deny some of the
Offices of Christ, viz. His Kingly and Prophetical Office, which we come now to
the proof of.

Argument. 1.
Those that hearken not to the Revelation Christ has made, and as Supreme Lord
and Lawgiver, has enjoined to be observed touching the Orders and Ordinances
of his House, deny the Prophetical and Kingly Office of Christ, Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
Acts 3. 22. Isa. 9. 6. But the present Ministers of England hearken and conform
not to the Revelation Christ has made touching the Orders and Ordinances of
his House: Therefore.

It Is the minor (or second Proposition) that in the thoughts of some is capable
of a denial, but the verity thereof shines forth as the Sun in its brightness,
in the review of the Orders and Ordinances of the House of Christ appointed by
himself; and the present frame and deportment of the Ministers of England with
respect thereunto: Which of them have they not made void by their Traditions?
This is that which Christ has said, (1.) That all power for the Calling,
Institution, Order and Government of his Church, is invested solely in him, as
the alone Lord, Sovereign-Ruler, and Head thereof, Mat. 28. 19. 1 Timothy 6. 14,
15. John 3. 35. Acts 3. 22. and 5. 31. It Is upon this foot of account that
Christ charge his Disciples, not to be called of men Rabbi, nor to call any
Father (viz. not to impose their Authority upon any, or suffer themselves to be
imposed upon by any in the matters of their God) Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10. because one
is their Master and Lord (viz. Christ) Hence also the Apostles lay the weight
of their Exhortations upon the Commandment of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 23. and 14.
37. proclaim all to be accursed that preach any other Gospel, Gal. 1. 8. (yea
though Angels from Heaven, should they live and speak as such) charge those to
whom they write, Not to receive any into their houses that bring any other
Doctrine (much more not to receive them as their Teachers) 2 John 10. yea, the
Spirit of the Lord in the close of the last Revelation of his Will, it pleased
this great King and Lawgiver, in such a way to give forth; testifies, That if
any man shall add unto these things, the Lord shall add unto him the Plagues
that are written in his Book, Rev. 22. 18. Do the present Ministers of England
conform unto this great Institution? in words indeed they do so: But what
means the bleating of the sheep, and lowing of the Oxen in our ears? Do they
not own other Lords, Heads and Governors, that have a Law-making power, and
would enforce the consciences of the Freeborn Subjects of Christ over his
Churches, besides him? What does this less than evidently proclaim their
disobedience and rebellion (which is as the sin of Witchcraft) against the KING
of Kings, and their rejection of his Scepter and Sovereign Authority over them!
But of this more hereafter.

2. This great Prophet and King has also revealed and proclaimed, That it is
his Will, that those whom he has called by his Word, should separate from the
world, walk together in particular Societies and Churches, having given up
themselves to the Lord and one another according to the Will of God, for their
mutual Edification and comfort in the Lord. The truth of this Sovereign
Institution of Christ, he that runs may read in the Scriptures hereunto
annexed, 1 Cor. 1. 2. and 5. 12. 2 Cor. 6. 17. Rev. 18. 4. John 15. 19. and 17.
6. Acts 2. 40. and 19. 9. Phil. 1. 5. Act. 2. 41. and 17. 4. 2 Cor. 8. 5. with
many more. In the proof of this matter we might be copious, but that we study
brevity: The diligent Reader knows where to find this theme, at large treated
of by learned Ainsworth, Bartlet, Cotton, Rogers, etc. How do the Ministers of
England acquit themselves, in respect of this Solemn Appointment of the Lord?
alas! who sees not that they are in their practice at open defiance herewith,
have it in derision and contempt, making no difference betwixt the Holy and
Profane, admitting persons led captive by the Devil at his will, that openly
blaspheme the Spirit of the Lord, and deride its effectual opperation in the
consciences of men, into their Society? Are any too vile (except such as truly
fear God, and desire to press after Holiness) to be admitted by them into their
Communion? Is not their Church State (so unlike is it to the Institution of
Christ) a very Babel, a Den of Dragons, and Hold of Unclean-Beasts?

3. That he has entrusted them, so called and united together, with Power, and
given them Rules for the due and right exerting thereof, for the carring on the
Worship of his House, to choose Officers over them to act in the Holy Things of
God for and to them (of which more shall be spoken in its proper place) to
admit Members, excommunicate Offenders, etc. all which we find shining forth in
brightness in the ensuing Scriptures, Act. 1. 23. and 6. 3, 5. and 14. 23. 2
Cor. 8. 19. Mat. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 4. Do the present Ministers of England
conform unto this Institution of Christ? nothing less; is there any thing like
this in the whole oeconomie invented and practiced by them? do they not to the
utmost of their power, labor to break this Bond of Christ asunder, cast away
this Cord from them, by stirring up the Magistrate to persecute by Fines,
Imprisonments, Banishment, etc. the precious People of the Lord, that desire to
be found in the practice of this Law of Christ, branding them with the odious
names of Phanaticks, Sectaries, Schismatics, etc.

4. That the Officers of his appointment are only such as these, Pastors,
Teachers, Elders, Deacons, Widows or Helpers: Who as they are in one
particular Congregation, so they have not any Lordship or lordly Authority over
each other, being all Brethren, Ephesians. 4. 11. Romans 12. 7. and 16. 1. 1 Cor. 12.
28. Phil. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. Acts 6. 5. and 15. 2. and 20. 17. and 28.
21, 28. 1 Timothy 3 chap. and 5. 9, 10, 17. This Law of Christ so clearly revealed
in the Scripture, they are so far from subjecting to, that they have neither
the name nor thing required by him therein. Set up other Officers and Offices,
as if in open contempt and defiance of his Authority; of which it may
righteously be said, He did at no time command them, neither did it ever enter
into his heart, so to do.

5. That these Officers be chosen by the common Suffrage of the Church of
Christ, and solemnly set apart by Fasting and Prayer, this is evidently
comprised in the ensuing Scriptures, Acts 1. 15. and 6. 1, 2, 3, 5. and 14. 23.
and 1. 23, 26. and 9. 26, 27. In conformity whereunto, we find the Saints for
many centuries of years after Christ, in the peaceable possession of this their
Privilege and Right.

Clemens in his Epistle to the Church of Corinth, p. 57. says, Our Apostles
also knew by our Lord Jesus Christ, that contention will be about the name of
Episcopal-Charge: Therefore for this reason, having received a full
predetermination, they constituted such as were fore nominated, and in their
instructive distribution delivered; that if they were negligent, other aproved
men should receive their ministration, being ordained by them, or in the mean
time by other choice men, all the Church consenting thereunto. Yea afterward,

Let some one among you, Ingenious, Merciful, filled with Love, speak, if
through me Faction, and Contention, Schisms, I will depart: Of which if you are
willing, I return and will do the things appointed by the Multitude. Wherein he
fully asserts the Privilege of the Church or People of Christ we are pleading
for. And afterward, during the reign of Antichrist, Christ has not left
himself without a Witness, nor his People without Champions to plead their
Right in this matter. To instance but in a few: That lively Witness of Christ
Martin Luther loudly proclaims, that the voice of the People ought not to be
severed from the choosing of Ecclesiastical persons: And long before him,
Cyprian (who lived about two hundred sixty years after Christ) says, Plebs
obsequens, etc. The People that obey the commands of God, and fear him, ought
to separate themselves from a wicked Pastor, seeing the People themselves
chiefly, have either power to choose Pastors that are worthy, or to refuse
those that be unworthy, Cypr. Epist. 68. and tells us plainly, That this is
bottomed upon the Authority of God: That that is a just and lawful Ordination
which is tried by the judgment and voice of all, viz. that fear and obey God.
Of the same mind long after, was Francis Lambard, the companion of Luther in
Germany, in the Preface of his Book, entitled, The Sum of Christianity, who
says, Verily every Parish ought to have his proper Bishop, the which should be
chosen by the People, and confirmed by the Commonalty of every Parish, who if
they swerve one jot or tittle from the Doctrine of the Gospel of the Kingdom,
ought to be deposed by the People; and others more fit, to be elected by them.
And in chap. 5. of the said Book, he professes, That it is the most grievous
crime, and by no means to be suffered, that many children of perdition do
deprive the People of God of their just Right and Title, viz. to choose them a
Pastor. Peter Martyr in his common places, refers the choosing and election of
Ministers to the People as their undoubted Right: To whom we may join Mr.
Bullinger, who says, That the Apostles exercised not Tyranny in the Church, in
ordaining Ministers without the consent of the People. Bullin. Decad. 5. Sermon.
4. Tit. 1. 1 Timothy 5. Gualter also upon Acts 1. 25. says, That those that
profess the Gospel handle the matter as evil as the Monks and Popish Bishops,
in that they restore not again to the Church the liberty of choosing Ministers,
which by Tyranny they took from them. Of the same mind is Zanchio, Calvin,
Beza, Danaeus, Tilenus, Tyndall (the Martyr) with many others, as Mr. Fox,
Cartwright, Mr. Jacob, etc. We cannot omit the famous Case of the United
Brethren of Bohemia, who concluding the whole Papacy to be purely
Antichristian, could not allow of the Ordination of their Ministers by any in
communion with it, and yet being persuaded of a necessity of continuing that
Ordinance in a way of succession, send some to the Greek and Armenian Churches;
who returning with dissatisfaction, they thereupon commit themselves and their
cause to God, and choose Elders from amongst themselves, and by Fasting and
Prayer solemnly set them apart to the work of the Preaching of the Gospel. To
these many more might be added. The practice pleaded for (as is evident) is as
ancient as the days of the Apostles, and the first election of ordinary
New Testament Officers, continued in the Church till after the days of
Constantine, when Pride and Tyranny soon brought all things into horrible
confusion, upon the pretext of Decency and Order; yet in the worst of times
have the Witnesses of Christ born their Testimony hereunto. What say our
Reverend Fathers and Ministers of the Church of England to these things? have
they not an equal respect to this Appointment of Christ, as to those before
instanced in? is there any thing like it almost, practiced by them, in this
great concern, of separating persons for the preaching of the Gospel of Christ?
is not the liberty of the Brethren and Churches of Christ, as much as lies in
them, wholly disannulled, and broken by them? have they any such call to the
Ministry? do they at all value or esteem of it? are they in the practice of the
Primitive Church, or of the Reformed Churches of this day, in this matter? is
not the print of the feet of the old Strumpet of Rome, the bloody Persecutor of
the Saints, the cunning Devisor of a new self-invented and whorish Worship, to
be soley found in the paths, they are in this matter traversing? and can such
be accounted as the subjects of the Kingdom of Christ, and the real owners of
his Authority and Power? To these, many other Institutions of Christ may be
added, which they subject not to. What, should I mention

6. That Royal Command of our Sovereign King and Lawgiver, (which the profound,
self-philosophically wise, but indeed foolish and unlearned Doctors of this
day, wrest, to the countenancing of the disorders and confusion of Antichrist
(darkness so gross that it may be felt) that all things be done decently and in
order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. viz. that the Saints may prophecy one by one, and ought
to admonish, exhort, and build up one another in their most holy Faith. Romans 8.
26. and 12. 6. 1 Cor. 4. 17. and 5. 4. and 11. 23. Ephesians. 4. 7, 11, 12. 1 Timothy
2. 1. and 3. 15. Jude 20. 1 Cor. 12. 7, 11. Mat. 25. 24. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. 1
Cor. 12. 15. and 14. 12, 24. Ephesians. 4. 3, 7, 15, 16. Act. 2. 42. Romans 15. 14.
Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15. Heb. 3. 13. to which
might be added the frequent examples of the Saints, in the Old and
New Testament, 2 Chronicles. 17. 7, 8, 9. Job 2. 11. Mal. 3. 16. Luke 4. 16. Act.
13. 15. 1 Cor. 14. 24 to 34. and the practice of the Primitive Church, as
witness Origin (in his Epist. to Celsum.) Tertullian (in his Apology) Justin
Martyr (in his Apology) and many others. Yea,

7. What, should I mention that grand Institution of this Sovereign Lord and
Lawgiver, that nothing be offered up to the Father, but what is of his own
prescription (Divine and Spiritual, without affectation of Legal shadows, (
Joh. 4. 24.) of worldly pomp, or carnal excellency, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and 2. 17. 1
Cor. 2. 12. and 6. 13.) 1 Cor. 12. 28. Isa. 33. 22. Jam. 4. 12. Mat. 15. 6, 9.
Heb. 8. 5. 1 King. 13. 33. and 12. 33. Jer. 7. 31. Numb. 15. 39. Deuteronomy. 12. 1,
4, 31. It Is evident the present Ministers of England conform not to the Orders
and Ordinances, Christ, as the great Prophet and Lawgiver to his People, has
appointed them to walk by; and therefore really disown the Kingly and
Prophetical Office of Christ.

But perhaps to these things, some may say; These are but small matters, good
men differ amongst themselves herein.

To which we answer,

1. That they are part of the Instituted Worship of God; the Orders he has
left his Children to conform to, has already been proved: to say, that any
part of the instituted Worship of Christ, is a small matter, is no small
derogation to the Wisdom of the Lawgiver that gave it forth.

2. What if it should appear, that as small as these things seem to be, they
are the great Grounds of the late Controversies of God, pleaded with Fire and
Sword in most of the Europaean Kingdoms? this may perhaps a little stay sober
persons from so rash a conclusion, that these are small matters: A serious
review of the late Contests of God in the Nations, with the consideration of
the Grounds and Rise of them, will to persons of sobriety, sufficiently evince
the truth of the Suggestion.

3. As small matters as these have been severely punished by the Lord: he is a
jealous God, and stands upon Punctilio's (if I may so call them) in his
Worship; hence is that expression, Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is a
jealous God, Josh. 24. 19. What should I mention the case of Vzziah, 2 Chr. 26.
16. of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Numb. 16. of Uzzah, whose sin lay merely in,
whose judgment was singly upon this foot of account, his not seeking the Lord
after the due order, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. God commands that when the Ark was
removed, it should be covered by the Priests, that no hand touch it, that it be
carried upon men's shoulders, Numb. 4. 11, 15. which Order was violated, when
they brought it from the house of Abinadab, 'twas Uncovered, and upon a Cart,
after the manner of the Egyptians, 1 Samuel 8. 7. for which breach of Order Vzzah
is struck dead.

4. As small matters as these, when once commanded by the Lord, are of that
force, as not only to deface the wel-being, but to overturn the true-being of
the Worship of God. Take one pregnant instance herein. The Lord commanded the
Israelites by Moses, to bring their Sacrifices to the place that he should
choose, and offer them there; which in it self was but a circumstance of place;
yet all the Sacrifices offered elsewhere, were a stink in the nostrils of God,
and not accounted by him as any Worship performed unto him.

5. But the Objection is altogether impertinent; we are not debating the
greatness of the sin, but the truth of what is charged upon the present
Ministers of England: what we have mentioned, are either the Appointments of
Christ, or they are not; if they are, (as has been proved) the present
Ministers conform to them, or they do not; if they do not (as nothing more
sure) they conform not to the Orders and Ordinances Christ has left his People
to walk by, (which is the thing in debate) and therefore really deny his Kingly
and Prophetical Office.

As for what is added, that good men differ amongst themselves in this matter,
it is of no more weight than what went before: for, 1. It Is not at all to the
business in hand. 2. It Is possible good men may for a while do that which
really enwraps in the bowels of it a denial of the Offices of Christ. We shall
not deny but some of the Ministers of England may be so in the account of God.
3. That good men differ, is an Argument of their Ignorance and Darkness, which
though in some cases it excuses a tanto, yet not a toto; it may alter the
degree, never the nature of the sin. 4. It Is false, that good men pressing
after Reformation, and the restitution of the Worship of God according to the
Primitive Pattern, do differ touching the substance of the things instanced in:
Were but the pride and passion of men's spirits a little more allaied; and they
disentangled more from their selfish interests, a greater harmony would appear
amongst them in these matters. But 5ly, as was said, The particulars instanced
in, are commanded by Christ, or they are not; if they are (as has been proved)
does it in the least discharge persons that conform not to them, from the
charge they are impleded as guilty, viz. Nonconformity to the Laws of Christ;
that good men differ in these matters ( i. e. some good men transgress the Laws
of Christ, which is sure no part of their goodness, nor any warrant to justify
me, in the doing of what may strengthen their hands in such a Nonconformity)

CHAP. V.
A second Argument demonstrating, that the present Ministers of England deny
the Prophetical and Kingly Office of Christ. That they own, submit and
subscribe to Orders and Ordinances that are not of Christ's revealing, proved
by the induction of 14 Particulars. An Objection answered. That they own Laws
and Institutions, contrary to the Institutions of Christ, proved, by the
induction of 10 Particulars. A 3d Argument, proving their denial of the Offices
of Christ, produced. That there is no other Head of the Church but Christ,
proved. Objections answered.

THat the Ministers of England deny the Kingly and Prophetical Offices of
Christ, and therefore are not to be heard, but separated from, has been
asserted, and by one Argument, proved, in the foregoing Chapter: To the further
evidence whereof, a few things more are to be offered in this.

Argument 2.
Those who own, submit and subscribe to Orders and Ordinances which not only,
are not of Christ's revealing, but contrary thereunto, do really deny, and
oppose the Prophetical and Kingly Office of Christ. But the present Ministers
of England do own, submit and subscribe to Orders and Ordinances, that are not
only, not of Christ's revealing, but contrary thereunto: Therefore.

The major (or first Proposition) is beyond exception: If an owning, submitting
and subscribing to Orders, and Ordinances, that are not only, not of Christ's
revealing, but contrary thereunto, be not a denial of his Kingly and
Prophetical Office, I must profess, I know not what is. Suppose the Chief
Magistrate or Magistrates of a Nation should give forth a Declaration of their
will, touching this, or that other concern, were not persons Nonconformity
thereunto (supposing it to be what lies within the verge of their Authority,
and power to command, and may righteously be exacted of them, whose Conformity
is thereunto required) a silent opposition of their Authority, but should any
presume to give forth Laws of their own, without the least stamp of Authority
upon them, yea contrary unto the Statutes and Declarations of their Governors,
would not all conclude that these persons and their Abettors were guilty of
Rebellion against their Rulers, and did really deny the lawfulness of their
Authority? This is the present case, if men shall be found traversing paths, in
the possession and practice of Orders and Constitutions that are foreign to
the Edicts of Christ, yea contrary thereunto, shall we not as rationally
conclude that these persons are really opposers of his Sovereign Authority and
Government? doubtless so!

It Is the minor (or second Proposition) that may be under suspicion amongst
some, viz. That the present Ministers of England (the very best of them) do
own, submit and subscribe to Orders and Ordinances, that are not only, not of
Christ's revealing, but contrary thereunto: In which two things are incumbent
upon us to prove.

1. That the present Ministers of England do own, submit and subscribe to
Orders and Ordinances, that are not of Christ's revealing. This being a charge,
as to matter of Fact, the production of a few Particulars, that lie near at
hand, for its confirmation, will give it a speedy dispatch.

1. They own, submit and subscribe to the Orders and Offices, of Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Eccles. Canons Can. 7.
with many others appertaining unto this Hierarchy, as Orders needful and
necessary in the Church of Christ, and promise subjection and obedience unto
them.

2. They own, and submit ( Can. 4.) to a Lyturgy, or Prescript form of Worship,
devised by men, and imposed solely by their Authority, to which they tie
themselves, neither diminishing, nor adding any thing in the matter or form
thereof.

3. They own, submit, and engage to conform to all the Orders, Rites and
Ceremonies prescribed in the said Book of Common Prayer, (Can. 36.) such as
bowing at the Name of JESUS, using the Cross in Baptism, kneeling at the Lords
Supper (which though we do not, some would say, smells very strong of the
Popish Leven, and is but one peg beneath the adoration of their Breaden-god)
wearing the Surplice, etc.

4. They own that the Office of a Deacon is the first step or degree to the
Ministry (Can. 32. 36.) to which they are to submit and subscribe, before they
are made Priests.

5. That no person be admitted to expound the Scripture, though judged worthy
of the Cure of Souls (as they speak, Can. 49.) without License from the Bishop
thereunto.

6. That there be some lawful Ministers, which are no Preachers, (Can. 49. 57.)

7. That these unpreaching Ministers (Can. 57.) may lawfully administer the
Ordinances of Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

8. That persons refusing to have their Children Baptized, by such dumb
Ministers, or receive the Communion from them, worthily deserve Excommunication
if they shall persist herein (Can. 57.)

9. That Confirmation by Diocesan Bishops, is an Ordinance of God. (Can. 60.)

10. That it appertains to the Office of Ministers to Marry. (Can. 62.)

11. That the Bishop of the Diocese may lawfully for a while, suspend a
Minister from his Ministry, for refusing to Bury the Dead. Can. 68.

12. That it is not lawful for Ministers to preach or administer the Communion
in private houses, except in times of necessity. Can. 71.

13. That no Minister may lawfully appoint or keep any solemn private Fasts, or
be wittingly present at any of them, nor hold any meetings for Sermons, in
market Towns or other places; which if he do, and persevere therein, he may
lawfully be deposed from his Ministry. (Can. 72.)

14. That Ministers ought to be distinguished by their Vestments and Apparel,
as Gowns, Hoods, Tippets, Square-Caps, and in their journeys, Cloaks with
sleeves (called* Priests Cloaks. Can. 74.) with many more that might be added,
to which the Ministers of England are to subscribe, and own as agreeable to the
Word of God, before their admission into the Ministry according to the 38th
Canon Eccleasiastical. Are any of these Ordinances and Constitutions of the
appointment of Christ? when, or where were they instituted by him? that these
are posts set by the Lord's posts, and thresholds by his thresholds, (of which
the Lord complains, Ezekiel. 43. 8.) who sees not? That the present Ministers of
England do conform and subscribe hereunto, cannot be denied, and thence an
owning subscribing and submitting to Orders and Constitutions that are not of
Christ's appointment, is evidently evinced.

Object. If it be said, That though these Canons, and Constitutions owned by
the Ministers of England, be not (...), to be found in the Scripture of the
Institution of Christ in so many words, yet by consequence they may rationally
be deduced from thence: As where it is commanded, That all things be done
decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. which it is the duty of the Church to make
Rules and Constitutions about, which when it has done, it is the duty of every
Son thereof, to own, or subject to, without questioning its Authority.

Ans. That there is any thing of moment in this Objection, though their
Achilles in this matter, and that which they are upon every turn producing, is
easily demonstrated. The whole of it being built upon as uncertain principles,
yea upon as notoriously false suppositions, as ever objection in so weighty a
case was built upon.

1. It Is supposed, that Christ has not determined in the Scripture, how the
Affairs of his House should be managed with decency and order, as well as
commanded that they be so; which is, 1. No small derogation to the perfection
of the Scriptures. 2. To the Wisdom and Faithfulness of Christ, debasing of him
herein, below Moses, though the Scripture in this respect prefers him before
him. 3. Diametrically opposite to the Scripture instanced in, which stands as a
two-edged Sword to cut the throat of their cause, in its approaches thereto for
shelter: Of which take this brief account; The Apostle having in the beginning
of the chapter, pressed the Church of Corinth, to follow after Spiritual Gifts,
but especially that they might prophecy; the liberty of the Saints therein
being fully asserted, and several directions thereabout given, he condemns
their disorderly practice, in respect of this important Duty and Privilege,
ver. 26. and gives direction touching its regular performance; and this he
does, first, generally, ver. 26. Let all things be done to edifying, which with
a little alteration he re-presses, ver. 40. Let all things be done decently and
in order. Secondly, Particularly, by telling them how they ought to manage this
affair, in a way of Decency, Order and Edification; wherein several Rules are
comprised, too long to be here insisted on, as in cases of speaking in an
unknown Tongue, ver. 27, 28. of prophesying by two or three, ver. 29, 30. of
the duties of Women with respect thereunto, ver. 34, 35. that from hence a
power invested in the Church for the binding of the consciences of men,
touching ceremonies in Worship, should be regularly deduced, is the firstborn
of improbabilities and absurdities. 1. Paul speaking by an infallible Spirit of
Prophecy, advises the Church of Corinth, that all things be done decently and
in order; therefore persons that have not, pretend not to such a Spirit, may of
their own heads bind our consciences by Laws and Rules of their own in the
service of God. 2. Paul does not only tell them, that all things ought to be
done decently and in order, but discovers to them, wherein that Decency and
Order lies; therefore the Church has power to determine in this matter, are
such Non-sequiturs as will not in have be made good. But let this be granted,
suppose that it is the privilege and duty of the Church to make Laws and
Constitutions, for the binding of the consciences of men in matters of Decency
and Order; this Church herein is bounded by the Scripture, or it is not: If it
be Learned Maccovius in loc. com. cap. 83. p. 851. says, Leges secundum quas
judicare debent rectores Ecclesiae sunt leges in verbo Dei praescriptae. The
Laws he tells you by which the Governors of the Church are to judge, are such
as are prescribed in the Word of GOD.
bounded by the Scripture, then when it has no prescription therein, for its
commands, its not to be obeyed, and so we are where we were before, that
Decency and Order is to be determined by the Scripture: If it be not bounded
thereby, then whatever Ceremonies it introduces, not directly contrary
thereunto, they must be subjected to; which how fair an inlet it is to the
whole Farago of Popish Inventions, who sees not? yet were this also yielded
them, they were never a jot nearer the mark aimed at, except it can be proved,
that supposing a power of introducing Ceremonies to be invested in the Church,
thence a power for the institution of new Orders and Ordinances, the
introducing of Heathenish, Jewish and superstitious practices in the Worship of
God, may be evinced: And yet should all this be yielded them, none of which
will they be able to prove to the worlds end; how will they manifest, those
Lordly Commands and Constitutions are the Constitutions of a truly-constituted
Church of Christ, (a strong supposition hereof is the (...) of the present
Objection:) and yet fail they in the making good their ground herein: who sees
not that their plea hitherto impleaded, sinks of it self? what is it then they
mean by the Church, whose (...), we are without disputing to subject to? is it
the National Church of England? But where find they any National-Church of the
institution of Christ, in the Oeconomie of the Gospel? how prove they that the
Church of England is so? Yet should this also be granted, where are the
Constitutions and Laws of this Church, that we may pay the homage to them as is
meet? when was it assembled (...) in the same place together, in its several
Members freely to debate, (1 Cor. 11. 20. and 14. 23.) and Maccovius in loc.
com. append. de Adi. p. 861. says, Conditio tertia quae requiritur in
adiaphoris est haec, quod haec non debeant introduci in Ecclesiam, nisi communi
consensu Ecclesiae, Acts 15. Things indifferent, he tells you, ought not to be
introduced into the Church, but by the common consent thereof, according to
Acts 15.
determine what Laws and Constitutions were fit to be observed by them? If it
be said, That this is not requisite, it is enough that it be assembled in its
several Officers, or such as shall be chosen by their Officers, whose Laws
every Member is bound to be obedient to. We answer, But these Officers are the
Church, or they are not; if they are not (as there is nothing more sure) I owe
no subjection to their Laws or Constitutions, it being pleaded that it is the
Church that has only power in this matter: if they are the Church, let them by
one Scripture prove they are so; or, where the true Officers of a true Church
are so called, and as Nonius says out of Naevius to them, -- Dum vivebo
fidelis ero. Yet except this also be yielded them, there is nothing of moment
in the Objection produced: It remains therefore that the present Ministers of
England, submit, own, and subscribe to, Laws and Constitutions, that are not,
in any sense, of Christ's revealing, and therefore oppose the Kingly and
Prophetical Office of Christ. But this is not all.

2dly. The present Ministers of England do own, submit, and subscribe to Laws,
Constitutions and Ordinances, that are contrary to the Revelation of Christ,
whence an opposition to the Kingly and Prophetical Office of Christ may
rationally be concluded: This also by the induction of a few particular
instances, will be evinced beyond exception.

They own and acknowledge,

1. That there may be other Archbishops, and Lord-Bishops in the Church of
Christ, besides himself: which is contrary to 1 Pet. 5. 3. 1 Cor. 12. 5. Ephesians.
4. 5. Heb. 3. 1. Luke 22. 25, 26.

2. That men may, and ought to be made Ministers, only by these Lord-Bishops:
which is contrary to Heb. 5. 4. Joh. 10. 1, 7. and 13. 20. and 14. 6. Act. 14.
23. with 6. 3, 5.

3. That Prelates, their Chancellors and Officers, have power from Christ to
cast out of the Church of God; contrary to Mat. 18. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 5. 4.

4. That the Office of Suffragans, Deans, Canons, Petty-Canons, Prebendaries,
Queristers, Organists, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officials, Parsons, Vicars
and Curats, are lawful and necessary to be had in the Church: evidently
contrary to 1 Cor. 12. 18, 28. Romans 12. 7. Ephesians. 4. 11. The Officers instituted
by Christ are sufficient for the edification and perfecting of the Saints, till
they all come unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, ver. 12, 13. in what sense the forementioned, being not one
of them of the institution of Christ, may be owned as lawful or necessary,
without an high contempt of the Wisdom and Sovereignty of Christ, cannot by
such dull persons, as my self, be conjectured. That any others see them any way
useful to the Church of Christ, may be imputed to such a sharp-sightedness as
was that of Caius Caligula, to whom, when he enquired of Vitellius, whether he
saw him not embracing the Moon? 'twas answered,

Solis (Domine) vobis Diis* licet se invicem videre. 5. That the Office of
Deacons in the Church, is to be employed in public Praying, Administration of
Baptism, and Preaching, if licensed by the Bishop thereunto. Contrary to Act.
6. 2. Ephesians. 4. 11.

6. That the Ordinance of Breaking-Bread, or the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
may be administered to one alone; as to a sick-man ready to dye: which is
diametrically opposite to the nature and institution of that Ordinance, 1 Cor.
10. 16. and 11. 33. Mat. 26. 26. Act. 2. 42. and 20. 7.

7. That a prescript form of words in Prayer, a ceremonious, pompous Worship,
devised by Man, and abused to Idolatry, is according to the will of God, and
may lawfully be used under the New-Testament-dispensation; contrary to Mat. 15.
9. and 28. 20. John 4. 23. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Jer. 51. 26. Romans 8. 26. 1 Cor. 14. 15.

8. That wicked and ungodly persons, and their Seed, are lawful Members of the
Church, and if they consent not willingly to be so, they may be compelled
thereunto: contrary to Psalm. 110. 3. Act. 2. 40, 41, 47. and 19. 9. 2 Cor. 6.
14, 17. and 9. 13.

9. That Women may administer the Sacrament of Baptism: contrary to 1 Cor. 14.
34. 1 Timothy 2. 12. Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20. Ephesians. 4. 11.

10. That the Lord's Supper is to be received kneeling, which is directly
opposite to the practice of Christ, in the first institution thereof, Mark 14.
18, 22, 23. and positive precept, as being what has an appearance of evil in
it (being a gesture used by the Papists in the adoration of their Breaden-god*)
1 These. 5. 22. as also to the practice of the Churches of Christ for several
hundred years after, to the time of the invention and introduction of the
Popish Breaden-god. Not to mention its contrariety to the judgment and practice
of most of the reformed Churches (if not all) at this day. What should I
mention the Constitutions and Canons before pointed to, wherein it is forbidden
to any to preach, not licensed by the Bishops thereunto, to Marry, or eat Flesh
at certain times, with many more of the like nature; all directly contrary to
the Sovereign Edicts of Christ, and some of them evident characters of the last
days Apostates, 1 Timothy 4. 3. from whom Saints are warned by the Lord, to turn
aside, ver. 5. These we have produced, carry an undeniable evidence with them,
that the present Ministers of England do own, submit and subscribe to Orders
and Ordinances, that are contrary to the revelation of Christ, and therefore
deny his Prophetical and Kingly Office. To all that has hitherto been offered
in this matter, we shall yet add, as a further demonstration of the truth we
are in the disquisition of,

Argument. 3.
Those that acknowledge another Head over the Church beside Christ, deny his
Prophetical and Kingly Office: but the present Misters of England do own and
acknowledge another Head over the Church beside Christ: Therefore.

If the assertion of another King in England, that as the Head thereof, has
power of making and giving forth Laws to the freeborn subjects therein, be a
denial of his Kingly Authority (as no doubt it is) the major (or first
Proposition) cannot be denied. If Christ be the alone King of his Church (as
such) he is its alone Head and Lawgiver: If he has not by any Statute Law
established, any other Headship in and over his Church, to act in the holy
things of God, from and under him, besides himself; who sees not the assertion
of such an Headship, carries with it a contempt and denial of his Authority? if
there be any such Headship of the institution of Christ, let us know when and
where it was instituted; whether such a Dominion and Sovereignty over the
Subjects of his Kingdom, with respect to Worship, be granted by them to any of
the Sons of men, absolutely, or conditionally: if the first, then must the
Church (it seems) be governed by persons, casting off the Yoke of Christ,
trampling upon his Royal Commands and Edicts: for so it is possible, it may fall
out those that attain this Headship may do; as it is evident many Popes of Rome
(the great Pretenders hereunto) have done. If the second, let one iota be
produced from the Scripture, of the institution of such an Headship, with the
conditions annexed thereunto, and we shall be so far from denying of it, that
we shall cheerfully pay, whatever respect, homage, or duty by the Laws of God
or man, may righteously be expected from us. But this will not, we humbly
conceive, in have be performed; and that because,

1. The Scripture makes mention of no other Head, in, and over the Church, but
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 22. and 5. 23, 29. 2 Cor. 11. 2.

2. If there be any other Head, he must be either within, or without the
Church: The latter will not be affirmed; Christ had not sure so little respect
unto his Flock, as to appoint Wolves and Lions to be their Governors and
Guides in matters Ecclesiastical, nor can the former; for all in the Church,
are Brethren, have no dominion or authority over each others Faith or
Conscience, Luke 22. 25.

3. If any other be Head of the Church but Christ, then is the Church the Body
of some others, besides Christ; but this is absurd, and false, not to say
impious and blasphemous.

4. There was no Head of the Church in the Apostles days, but Christ.

5. If any be Head of the Church beside Christ, they either have their
Headship, from an original right seated in themselves, or by donation from
Christ. To assert the first, were no less than blasphemy; if the second, let
them show, when, and where, and how they came to be invested in such a right,
and this controversy will be at an end.

6. He that is asserted in Scripture to be the Head of the Church, is said to
govern, feed, and nourish it to Eternal life; is her Spouse and Husband, 2 Cor.
11. 2. In which sense, none of the sons of men, one or other, can be the Head
thereof; and yet of any other Head, the Scripture is wholly silent. But of this
matter thus far. It cannot by any sober person be denied, but an owning of a
visible Head over the Church, having power of making and giving forth Laws,
with respect to Worship, (such an Headship not being of the Institution of
Christ) must needs be a denial of his Sovereign Authority and Power. That the
present Ministers of England do own and submit to such an Headship, is
undeniable: witness their Subscription, Oath, Conformity in Worship, to Laws
and Edicts, made and given forth by the sons of men, as Heads and Governors of
the Church; which are not only foreign to, but (as has been already
demonstrated) lift up themselves in opposition against the Royal Institutions
of Christ. This being matter of fact, the Individuals charged herewith, must
either acquit themselves, by a denial of what they are impleaded as guilty, or
prove that what they do, is not criminous, but lawful to be done. The former
being too notoriously known to admit of a denial: it is the latter must be
insisted on: what is therein offered, is nextly to be considered. This is that
some say,

Obj. 1. That they acknowledge another Head besides Christ, cannot indeed be
denied: but the Headship owned and acknowledged by them, is an Headship only
under Christ. To which we answer:

Answ. 1. But this Headship is either of Christ's Appointment, or it is not; if
it be, let it be shown where it was instituted by him, and (as we said) this
controversy is at an end: if it be not, the Assertion of such an Headship,
even in subordination to Christ over his Churches as such, hinders not but
persons owning, submitting thereunto, are guilty of denying the Kingly Office
of Christ. 2. The Headship pleaded for by the Church of Rome is no other. 3.
It Is not so as is pretended, they own an Headship that is not in all things
subordinate to Christ, having a Law-making and Law-giving Power touching
Institutions of Worship, that never came into his heart, are flatly against his
Appointments, as has been proved. 4. One Head in subordination to another,
does as really make the Body a Monster, as two heads conjoined. If it be said,

Obj. 2. That the Kings of Israel were the Heads, successively, of the then
Church; and therefore a visible Headship over the Churches of Christ, in the
New Testament is lawful.

We answer, 1. That betwixt the Economy of the Law and Gospel, there is a vast
disproportion; many things were lawful in that day, which to do, or subject to
now, were no less than a denial of Christ come in the flesh. 2. The Kings of
Israel were Types of Christ. 3. That the Kings of Israel were Heads of the
Church, is false. God was its alone Head and King. Hence their Historian says,
their Government was (...), and when they would needs choose a King God said,
they rejected him, to whom even, as to their Political Head, a Sicle was paid
yearly as a Tribute, called, The Sicle of the Sanctuary. True indeed, as they
were a Political Body, they had visible Political Governors, who when they
ceased, their Polity was at an end; but that these had any Headship over them,
to make any Laws, introduce Constitutions of their own framing in matters
relating to Worship, will never be proved.

CHAP. VI.
A fifth Argument against hearing of the present Ministers of England,
advanced. That they have the characters of false Prophets upon them, manifested
in 15 Particulars.

Argument 5.
THose who have the characters and properties of false Prophets and Priests
upon them, are not to be heard, but separated from: But the present Ministers
of England have the characters and properties of false Prophets and Priests
upon them. Therefore.

The major (or first Proposition) stands upon too firm a basis, to be quickly
removed: nor will any attempt so to do, Christ having charged his to beware of
such, Mat* 7. 15. to take heed that none deceive them, Mat. 24. 4, 5, 23, 24,
25. not to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits, because many false
Prophets are gone out in the world, 1 John 4. 1. not to receive such into their
houses, 2 John 10, 11. to watch against them, Act. 20. 29, 30, 31. with much
more that might be said (if needful) for its confirmation, is a sufficient
evidence of the truth thereof. But herein the parties litigant are at a perfect
agreement.

It Is the minor Proposition that is judged by some to come short of a
sufficient substraction, viz. That the present Ministers of England have the
properties and characters of false Prophets and Priests upon them. This we
doubt not, by a serious observation of the characters are given of such in the
Scriptures by the Holy Ghost, will to any ordinary understanding be made
exceeding perspicuous and evident. The signal Characters of whom are,

1. That they run before they are sent, Jer. 23. 21. That a Mission from the
Lord is of the essence of a lawful Ministry, that whoever wants such a Mission,
is no Officer of Christ, but a false Prophet, and Minister of Antichrist, may
hence rationally, at least by way of analogy, be deduced, is evident. Which
also exactly accords with what is asserted by the Apostle, Romans 10. 15. That
the present Ministers of England want such a Mission, has already been
demonstrated, and we shall not actum agere. In a word, when it shall be proved,
that they have received their Authority from Christ, either immediately or
mediatly, from any rightly constituted Church of Christ, or by succession from
the Church in the Wilderness, we shall acknowledge them to be the Ministers of
Christ, and look upon our selves as obliged to pay them all the honor and
duty, that as such, we are charged in Scripture to do: But if they have nothing
else to plead for themselves but what is usually instanced in by them, a
succession from the Church of Rome: That Apostate Church having lost her
Churchship, and therewith, all lawful power for the sending forth Officers into
the Churches of Christ, we shall not fear to say, That they are such as are
characterized here by the Prophet, persons that run before they are sent.

2. That they commit Adultery and walk in Lies, Jer. 23. 14. Which none as I
ever yet met with, interpret literally of corporal Whoredom and Adultery, but
mystically of spiritual Adultery, a departure from the pure Ways and
Institutions of the Lord in Worship, to the In an old Translation of the
New Testament, dedicated to Edward the 6th, the Author thereof in his Notes on
Mat. 21. says, They which in their Ministry and Preaching do otherwise than God
has commanded them, are no true Disciples of Christ.
Devices and Inventions of men (a sin usually in the Scripture expressed, for
the nature and greatness of it, under that notion, Jer. 3. 8. Ezekiel. 23. 37.
Rev. 2. 22. which is also in Scripture called a Lie, Isa. 28. 15. Amos 2. 4.
John 8. 44. The whole Worship of Antichrist being patched up with such dirty
Inventions, is so called, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.) That this character also does
rightly appertain unto the present Ministers of England, the best of whom, do
in the sense of the Spirit, in the forecited Scripture, commit Adultery, and
walk in lies, has already been proved (and more hereunto shall afterward be
spoken) ['twere well if upon some of them it had not a literal accomplishment]
which of the Institutions of Christ have they not mixed with their inventions?
From how many have they gone a whoring? Is not a great part of their Worship
drops of the Whores Cup of Fornication, and shreds of the great lie of
Antichrist? who that has soberly and unbiassedly considered of these things,
but must acknowledge it?

3. That they strengthen the hands of evildoers, that none does return from
his wickedness, Jer. 23. 14. That the present Ministers of England, really do
so, is capable of an ocular demonstration: perhaps they do in their Sermons
reprove sin, thunder out the Judgments of God against transgressors of his Law,
as much as any; but alas! what is this, to condemn them in the state wherein
they stand, without-repentance, to the pit of Hell in the Pulpit; and by and by
to Saint them in the Chancel, and tell them there, without exception, that the
Body of Christ was broken for them, his Blood shed for them? Oh how many
millions of souls are and have been hereby hardened to their own undoing, and
had their hands strengthened in wickedness? what should I mention their
admission of the Children of all to Baptism, without exception, their owning
them as Church Members, yea, die they never so wickedly, as Brethren, of whose
joyful Resurrection they profess they have a sure and certain hope; thereby
proclaiming their undoubted persuasion, that they are a People in covenant with
God? not to take notice of the terrible reflections, and uncharitable censures
are publicly by them past upon men truly fearing God, because they cannot
conform to them: How desperately are the hands of the wicked hereby
strengthened? So that none indeed does return from his wickedness: How rare a
thing is it to hear of one soul that is brought over to God by all their
preaching? so that visibly that Judgment of God seems to be upon them, ver. 32.
therefore they shall not at all profit this People.

4. That they prophecy placentia, smooth things, according to the desires,
tempers and lusts of men, to the pleasing of whom they addict themselves, Jer.
6. 14. and 27. 9. Ezekiel. 13. 10, 11. and 22. 28. What visible lineaments of such
a frame of spirit, are drawn upon the faces of that Generation of men,
concerning whom we are now discoursing? Have they not been of all others (I am
now speaking of such as are looked upon by Professors, as men of the greatest
parts and holiness) the most ready to strike in with, preach up, and plead for
what was most suitable unto the spirits of such, upon whom they have had a
dependence: 'Twere indeed well for them, could they in their present standing
and practice acquit themselves from that sore crime, of seeking to please men,
which if they do, they cannot be the Servants of Christ, Gal. 1. 10.

5. That they are greedy Dogs, that can never have enough, and look every man
for In a Translation of the N. T. dedicated to Edw. 6th the Author of the
Notes on chap. 10. says, We must preach the Truth with out any respect of
reward or gains. They therefore that preach for their bellies sake or preach
after the prescript of man -- are not the Disciples of Christ.
his gain from his quarter, Isa. 56. 11. seeking and serving themselves in
their Ministration Ezekiel. 13. 19. Mich. 3. 5, 11. That herein there is a perfect
harmony betwixt these false Prophets and the present Ministers of England,
cannot be denied: What means else their frequent Calls, from places of less, to
places of greater value; their gaping and greedy desires after preferment; the
vexations they put poor men to, that cannot in conscience put into their
mouths, preparing War against them?

6. That they sadden the hearts of the Righteous, Ezekiel. 13. 22: What need I
turn aside to make application of this to the Prophets of this day? who that is
serious, does not experiment the truth thereof in his own soul? to see the Name
and Ordinances of God profaned, the Ceremonies and Inventions of man subjected
unto, by such as pretend to be Ministers of Christ, would make an heart of
stone to bleed; much more those whose hearts are made tender by the Lord. Those
of our Brethren that as yet attend upon their Ministry, will tell us, they are
troubled at their Compliance and Conformity -- all that look in the least after
Reformation, say, they could wish it were otherwise; so that this character
also is visibly upon them.

7. That they mix the Word of God with their The Notes on Matthew. 28. in the
foresaid Translation are, Here do all Preachers learn what they should teach;
nothing else but God's Word; nothing else but that the Lord has commanded
them: Not their own Dreams and Inventions.
Dreams, Jer. 23. 25, 29. So do the present Ministers of England, as has been
proved.

8. That they come in Sheeps clothing, having the horns of a Lamb, but are
inwardly ravening Wolves, and speak like Dragons (i. e. pretend to the Holiness
and Meekness of Christ, and Saints, but are inwardly full of Raven and Cruelty,
yea terrible in their Edicts and Laws, stirring up and making use of the Powers
of the world, to persecute, kill and destroy the Saints) Mat. 7. 15. Rev. 13.
11. (which second Beast is no other than the false Prophet, mentioned Rev. 19.
20. as might easily be demonstrated) As face answers face in a Glass, so do the
present Ministers of England the False Prophets there spoken of. Are not all
the Persecutions, Imprisonments, Slaughters and Butcheries of the Children of
God, that the first Beast has exercised upon the Saints for this 1260 years,
to be charged upon this Generation of men? yea, who do more eagerly press a
rigid Conformity (not only contrary to the Kings Declaration from Breda, and
others since published by him, but also (as is thought) to his natural temper,
and the inclination and bent of his spirit) though to the infringing of the
Liberty, the Banishment, the taking away of the Lives of the Saints, who love
Truth and Peace, and humbly beg, That they may be suffered for the Tribute they
pay (as in the Dominion of the Grand Seignior they are) in quietness to serve
God according to their persuasions.

9. That they put no difference betwixt the Holy and Profane, Ezekiel. 22. 26. Do
not even the Ministers of England the same? Are not All their dear Brethren and
Sisters, living and dead, though Drunkards, Swearers, Adulterers and
Adulteresses? etc. Are not, as was said, the Children of them all admitted to
the Font, and they themselves to the Lord's Table? Is not the Childrens meat
frequently given by them unto Dogs, and the holy Ordinances prostituted to be
polluted by the worst of men?

10. That they exercise not pity to the weak broken scattered Sheep of Christ,
nor show bowels in their recovery, but with Force and Cruelty rule over them,
Ezekiel. 34. 4. One would think the former part of the chapter, were rather an
History of what is practiced by the false Shepherds of this day, than
otherwise: so perfect an Agreement is there betwixt their practice, and this
Prophecy of the Lord. They tell us it is our weakness and distemper that we
conform not to their Worship; that we are persons gone astray: We profess to
them, that we would not give way to Spiritual distempers, nor stray one step
from the ways of God might we but know it; we would thank any to convince us
of our mistakes, and reduce us to the true Sheepfold, if we are gone astray: Do
they seek after us; in a spirit of tenderness labor to convince us, and carry
us in their bosoms, like tender Shepherds to the true Fold? what less? with
force and cruelty they rule over us, threaten us with Excommunications,
Imprisonments, Banishments, dispoiling us of what God has graciously given us,
yea, condemning us to Death: in all which (through the Grace of God) we can
rejoice, though they thereby abundantly demonstrate, that they are the
successors of the false Shepherds here spoken of. What should I mention,

11. That they come up out of the Earth, Rev. 13. 11. are raised up by men of
earthly spirits and principles.

12. That they exercise the power of the first Beast, or make use of the Civil
Power for their supportment, ver. 13.

13. That they make an Image to the Beast, v. 14, 15. (i. e. erect an
Ecclesiastical State of Government, in a proportionableness to, and resemblance
of the Civil State.)

14. That they compel all under the penalty of Death, to worship or bow down to
this Image of the Beast, (or Ecclesiastical Government, in its Courts, Canons,
Laws, and Ceremonies devised by it) v. 15.

15. That they compel all to receive a mark, either in their righthands or
foreheads; secretly or openly, one way or other to acknowledge subjection unto
this Beast, without which they may neither buy nor sell, being cut off from the
Church, by their Excommunications, for their stubornness, v. 16, 17. All which
Characters of the second Beast (or false Prophet) he that runs may read upon
the present Hierarchy and Ministry of England. It remains then that the
present Ministers of England have the Characters and Properties of the false
Prophets and Priests upon them, and therefore are not to be heard, but
separated from.

CHAP. VII.
A sixth Argument against hearing the present Ministers of England, proposed.
Of the several sorts of Idolatry, that the Ministers of England are hereof
guilty, proved. An Objection answered. That the present Ministers act in Divine
things by virtue of a power received from Idolaters, offer up a Worship abused
to Idolatry, with the Rites and Ceremonies of Idolaters. That the Romish Church
are Idolaters. Objections answered.

Argument 6.
THose that are guilty of Idolatry, Saints may not have communion with (much
less own them as their Teachers) but ought to separate from them: But the
present Ministers of England are Idolaters. Therefore.

The Major (or first Proposition) will not be denied, because bottomed upon
express Commands from Christ, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and 10. 14. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 18.
Before we descend to the confirmation of the Minor (or second Proposition) we
shall crave leave to premise; That Idolatry may be considered under a threefold
notion. 1. Most gross and absurd Idolatry, when the creature is worshipped
terminatively; this Rab. M. Maimonides de Idolat. 8. 2, 3, etc. Observes that
never any Idolater was so silly as to think that an Idol of wood, stone or
metal, was a God that made the Heavens and Earth, but through them all
Idolaters intend to worship God.
few are guilty of, the Israelites of old worshipped not the Calf
terminatively, but God in it; therefore they are said to proclaim a Feast to
Jehovah, Exodus 32. 5. 2dly, Somewhat more refined Idolatry ( viz. in respect of
what we but now instanced in) when we offer up any worship or homage, proper
and due to God only, before any creature, as the Medium or Representative of
God: Such was the Idolatry of Israel in the Golden-Calf, Brazen-Serpent, etc.
Of this are the Synagogue of Rome, amongst all the combinations of men in the
world, most eminently guilty. To this Head may be added, 1. The ascription of
the Godhead to any creature, as to Herod, Acts 12. 22. 2. The ascription of the
Properties of the Godhead to any creature. 3. The worshipping of God in any
other way than what he has prescribed: which all that write upon the second
Commandment say, is the Idolatry therein forbidden. 4. The Oblation of Worship
or Service to God, that has been offered up to Idols, for which there is no
prescription in the Scripture. 3dly. Most refined Idolatry, when the heart goes
forth in desires after any thing beyond what is limited by the Lord, or trusts
and relies on any creature on this side God.

In the first sense, there are (as was said) few or no Idolaters in the world:
the Papists come as near thereunto as any, praying to the Cross, the Virgin
Mary, Saints, Angels, etc. expressly affirming, that the Virgin Mary may be
worshipped with that worship, which they call Cultus Latriae, which yet they
say is due only to God.

In the last sense there are none but at one time or other may be said to be
Idolaters; the hearts of the best of men too too often going forth too far in
desires after, and secret dependence upon, things beneath the Lord: which yet
they are watching and warring against, waiting and longing for the day, in
which they shall be completely swallowed up in the will of God. It Is in respect
of the second particular, before instanced in, that we assert the present
Ministers of England to be Idolaters: to the proof whereof we now address our
selves.

Argument 1.
Those that worship the true God in any other way than he has said he will be
worshipped in, and is prescribed by him, are Idolaters: But the present
Ministers of England worship the true God in another way, than he has said he
will be worshipped in, and is prescribed by him. Therefore.

The Major (or first Proposition) is evident, from this single Consideration:
To worship the true God through false mediums is Idolatry, such as so worship
him are Idolaters; (this must be so, or else there is little or no Idolatry in
the world, nor ever was: The Athenians (and other Gentiles) worshipped the true
God, for they worshipped him whom Paul declared to them, even that God that
made the world, Acts 17. 23, 24. yet none doubts but they were Idolaters, which
they cannot be charged with upon any other account, than their worshipping the
true God through false mediums.) But to worship God in any other way than what
is of his own prescription, is to worship him through a false medium. Therefore
so to worship him is Idolatry, and they that so worship him are Idolaters.

The Minor (or second Proposition) viz. That the present Ministers of England,
worship the true God in another way than he has said he will be worshipped in,
and is prescribed by him, is that which is denied by some; but the truth
thereof, we doubt not, will to the unprejudiced Reader be beyond exception
evident, from the ensuing demonstration, Viz.

Those that worship God after the way of the Common Prayer Book, worship him in
another way, than that he has said he will be worshipped in, and is prescribed
by him: But the present Ministers of England worship God after the way of the
Common Prayer Book: Therefore.

The Minor (or second Proposition) cannot be denied, their subscription before
they are admitted to the Ministry, together with their daily and constant
practice, are sufficient evidences hereof.

As for the Major Proposition, That to worship God after the way of the
Common Prayer Book, is to worship him in a way that is not of his Appointment.
1. Let any show, when, and where, such a stinted-form of Service was appointed
by Christ, and this part of the controversy is at an end: sure we are, there
are not the least footsteps of such a way of Worship to be found in the
New Testament, no, not in the whole Book of God (whatever is pretended by some
touching Lyturgies (in the sense we are speaking) amongst the people of the
Jews;) no, nor yet was there any such a way of worship thought of, much less
imposed, in the first and purer times of the Gospel, for several centuries of
years, after the days of Christ and his Apostles. In the Epistles of the
Church of Smyrna (about the Martyrdom of Polycarpus) and of the Churches of
Vienna and Lions (concerning their Persecution) in the Epistle of Clemens (or
the Church of Rome) to the Church of Corinth, in the Writings of Ignatius,
Justin Martyr, Clemens, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, and their contemporaries,
there is not only an utter silence of such a thing, but Assertions wholly
(...), and oppsit thereunto. Tertullian says expressly, Illuc suspicientes
Christiani, manibus expansis, quia innocuis, capite nudo, quia non crubescimus,
denique sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus. Apol. cap. 30. The Christians in
those days (he tells us) looking toward Heaven (not on their
Common-Prayer-Books) with their hands spread abroad, etc. prayed to God without
a Monitor, because from their hearts. And in several places he testifies, that
they praised God in a way of Prayer and Thanksgiving according to their
abilities. Indeed Claudius de Saints and Pamelius (two Popish Divines) tell
us of Lyturgies composed by the Apostles, James, Peter, and Mark: Of Peter's
and Mark's Cardinal Bellarmine himself, not only takes no particular notice,
but upon the matter condemns them, as supposititious and spurious: which that
they are, is abundantly demonstrated by learned Morney, and no more need be
added thereunto. There are some also fathered upon Basil, Chrysostom and
Ambrose, but as these lived about the years 372, 381, 382, in which time many
corruptions had crept into the Churches of Christ, so the spuriousness thereof,
as being falsely fathered upon the persons whose names they bear, may easily be
demonstrated: It Is already done to our hands by learned Morney, in his Book De
Missa, l. 1. chap. 6. Durantus himself (the great Lyturgy-munger) acknowledges,
That neither Christ nor his Apostles, used any prescribed Forms, but the Lords
Prayer and the Creed (that they used these, he says, but proves not, nor will
it ever be proved to the worlds end) That about the year 380. Theodosius (the
Church being rent by Heresies) entreated* Pope Damasus (at whose election,
though the contest was betwixt him and Ursinus, a Deacon of the Church, there
were not fewer than one hundred thirty seven persons slain) that some
Ecclesiastical Office might be made, which was accordingly done by Hierome, and
approved by Pope Damasus, and made a Rule. The unlikelihood of this latter part
of the Story is manifest: Theodosius was too well acquainted with the Spirit of
Prayer, than to go about any such thing; had he judged it necessary, having
assembled the great Council of Constantinople, wherein were not less than an
hundred and fifty persons convened; Is it probable this good man Theodosius,
would in so momentous a concern, rather consult with one single person, than
such an Assembly as were by his Authority met together? and yet should this be
granted, it would not from hence appear, that at this time there was any
Lyturgy devised and imposed; all that is pretended to be done by Hierome, was
the appointing an Order for the reading of the Scriptures, which is another
thing to the imposition of Forms of Prayer in Worship. There is one passage in
Socrates his Ecclesiastical History, l. 5. c. 21. who lived about the year 430.
that carrying an undeniable evidence with it that at that time there were no
Lyturgies, we cannot pass over in silence, it is this: (...); wherein he tells
us, that among all the Christians in that age, scarce two were to be found that
used the same words in Prayer. Not to tire the Reader in this disquisition;
Though one part of the Lyturgy was not long after introduced by one Pope, and
another part by another, yet till Gregory's time (who to the honor of
Lyturgies be it spoken, was the very worst of all the Bishops of Rome that
preceded him) viz. about the year 600. was there any considerable use, or any
imposing of them? Yea till the time of Pope Hadrian (which was about the year
800. was it not (as I find) by public Authority imposed: Then indeed the
Emperor Charles the Great being moved thereunto by the foresaid Hadrian) by
his Civil Authority commands the use of a Lyturgy (viz. Gregory's Lyturgy, as
is thought) to which he compels his Ministers by Threats and Punishments; the
usual attendancies and support of Lyturgyes ever since their production in the
world.

The sum is, That in as much as first, it cannot be proved (the contrary being
most manifest in the Scripture) that any Lyturgy was enjoined by Christ or his
Apostles, or in use in the first Churches planted by them. 2dly, It is evident
that for the first four hundred years and more after Christ, there was no
Lyturgy framed, nor any by solemn Authority imposed, to the year eight hundred;
it follows undeniably from hence, That to worship God in the way of a Lyturgy,
or stinted Forms of Prayer, is to worship him in a way that is not of his
appointment. To which we add,

2. That Worship which is an obstruction of any positive duty charged by
Christ, to be performed by the Saints, is not a Worship that is of his
appointment. But this is undeniably true of the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship:
Therefore.

That Christ did upon his Ascension give unto his Church, Officers, as signal
characters of his Love to, and Care of it, will not be denied, Ephesians. 4. 11. is
an evidence hereof beyond exception. That to these Officers He gave Gifts and
Qualifications, every way suiting the employment which he called them forth
unto, cannot without a most horrid advance against the Wisdom, Faithfulness,
Love and Care of Christ toward the Beloved of his Soul, be gainsayed. That be
not only expects, but solemnly charges upon these Officers, an improvement of
the Gifts bestowed upon them, for the edification of his Body, is evidently
comprised, and very frequently remarked in the Scripture, 2 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Cor.
12. 7. Ephesians. 4. 11. Prove. 17. 16. Luke 19. 20. To imagine after all this, that
any Worship should be of the institution of Christ, that should shut out of
doors as unnecessary, the exercise of the Gifts given by him, to be made use of
in the solemn discharge of the Worship of his House, is such an imputation of
folly to him, as may not be charged upon any person of an ordinary capacity or
understanding: Yet this is righteously to be imputed to him ( absit Blasphemia)
if the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship, be a Worship of his appointment: The
exercise of the Gift of Prayer (to mention no more) being wholly excluded
hereby. Nor will it in the least take off the weight of this Argument to say,
that liberty is granted for the exercise of this Gift before and after Sermon:
For

1. The whole Worship of God may according to these men's principles, be
discharged without any Sermon at all; and its manifest, it is frequently so, at
one time or other, in most of the Assemblies of England.

2. Those their Prayers are also bounded and limited by the 55th Canon of the
Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical.

3. We had always thought that Christ having given Gifts unto men, did require
the use of those Gifts at all times, when ever persons were called to the
performance of that Service for which they were designedly given by him, by
virtue of the forementioned Precepts. When Christ has given a Gift of Prayer
unto his Children, and charged them to stir up the Gift given, and not to
napkin their Talent, we had verily thought, that when ever they had been called
forth to the performance of that duty, he did really intend and expect, that
they should be found in the exercise of the Gift given, and see as yet no
reason to change our apprehensions in this matter.

But 3dly. The Common-Prayer-Book-Worship, is a Worship of which we find no
footsteps in the Scripture (nor in some centuries of years after Christ) as
has already been demonstrated: Whence it follows, that it is a Worship of pure
humane invention, which is not only not of Christ's appointment, but contrary
to the very nature of instituted Worship (as is proved in our first Argument)
and to very many Precepts of the Lord in the Scripture, Exodus 20. 4, 5. Deuteronomy.
42. and 12. 32. Prove. 30. 16. Jer. 7. 31. Mat. 15. 9, 13. Mark. 7. 7, 8. Rev.
22. 18. The mind of God in which Scriptures we have exemplified, Lev. 10. 1, 2,
3, 4. Josh. 22. 10. etc. Judge. 8. 24. 2 King. 16. 11. 1 Chronicles. 15. 13.

4. That Worship which is not necessary for the edification, comfort or
preservation of the Saints in the Faith and Unity of the Gospel, is not of the
institution of Christ. But such is the Worship of the Common Prayer Book:
Therefore.

The Major (or first Proposition) will not be denied. The Lord Jesus having
freed his Disciples from all obligations to the Ceremonies of the Law,
institutes nothing de novo, but what he knew to be necessary (at least would be
so by virtue of his institution) for the ends assigned; which was the great aim
of Christ in all Gospel-Administrations, Ephesians. 4. 7, to 15, Col. 2. 19. Acts
9. 31. Romans 14. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 10. 23. and 14. 3, 4, 5, 12, 26. 2 Cor. 12. 10.
1 Timothy 1. 4.

That the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship is not necessary for the edification,
comfort or preservation of the Saints in the Faith and Unity of the Gospel
(whatever is pretended by its admirers) might many ways be demonstrated. Take
one pregnant instance instead of all, that will make it exceeding manifest. The
Churches of Christ for the first four centuries of years, and more, after his
Ascension, knew not any thing of such a Worship (as has been already
demonstrated; not to mention the Reformed Churches at this day, to whom it is
as a polluted, accursed, abominable thing) yet, than those first and purer
Churches, for Light, Consolation, truth of Doctrine, and Gospel-Union, hitherto
there has not been any extant in the world, more Famous, or Excellent, no nor
by many degrees comparable to them. But we shall not further prosecute this
Argument; enough has been said to demonstrate that the Common
prayer-Book-Worship is not of the appointment of the Lord: Therefore such as
worship him in the way thereof, worship him in a way that is not of his
prescription. If the former, notwithstanding all that has been said, be
scrupled by any, we refer them to Tracts written by Smectymnuus, V. Powel, to a
Treatise entitled, A Discourse concerning the interest of words in Prayer, by
H. D. M. A. the Common Prayer Book unmasked, as also to a Treatise lately
published, by a Learned (but nameless) Author, entitled, A Discourse
concerning Lyturgyes and their imposition: In which that matter is
industriously and largely debated.

Object. If to what has hitherto been proposed, it be said, That the Lyturgie
or Common Prayer Book is no essential part of Worship, but merely
circumstantial: Praying, it is true, is part of Worship, but praying in this or
that Form is not so, but merely a circumstance thereof: And therefore, though
it be true, that the present Ministers of England worship God after the way of
the Common Prayer Book, yet it follows not, that they worship him after a way
that is not of his appointment. To this we answer;

1. That many things are strenuously supposed, as the basis upon which the
weight of this Objection is laid, which the Framers thereof knowing to be no
easy task to demonstrate, do earnestly beg us to grant unto them: Which being
matters of greater moment than many are aware of, we shall not part with on
such easy terms. It Is supposed, first, That there are some things in the
instituted Worship of Christ, that are merely circumstances thereof, as such.
Secondly, That it is lawful for Saints to pray in a Form. Thirdly, That Forms
of Prayer imposed, are but mere circumstances of Worship, and no essential
parts thereof. Fourthly, That Circumstances of Worship, as such, are not
determined by the Lord in the Scripture, but left to the wills of men, to
determine therein as they shall judge meet. All unproved. Of the last we have
already spoken, and shall not here reassume the debate thereof. Touching the
first, That there are some things in the instituted Worship of Christ, that are
merely Circumstances thereof, as such, we crave liberty to deny, which till the
proof thereof be attempted, may suffice. Circumstances in the Worship of Christ
attending Religious Actions, as actions, we grant; but Circumstances of
Worship, as such, will never be proved: To infer that because time and place,
with sundry things of the like nature, are Circumstances in Worship, therefore
there are Circumstances of Worship as such, is frivolous: Those things being
the attendments of religious Actions, common to any civil actions of the like
nature to be performed by the sons of men; no action to be managed by a
Community, can be orderly performed by them, without such an assignment of time
and place: Public Prayer being so to be managed as a religious Action, has
the Circumstances before mentioned attending it, and so it would were it a mere
civil action to be performed by a Community, though it related not at all to
the Worship of God.

2. That it is lawful for Saints to pray in a Form ( i. e. to tie themselves to
a written stinted form of words in prayer) is not yet proved, not like to be,
it is too large a field for us to enter into, nor is it needful to do so till it
be proved, That to pray in the form of the Common Prayer Book, or imposed
devised Lyturgies is so: yet in transitu, we crave leave humbly to offer, that
to pray in a form, as before explained, is altogether unlawful, being, 1. A
quenching of the Spirit of Prayer. 2dly, A rendering useless the donation of the
Spirit, as a Spirit of Prayer, unto the Children of God. 3dly, Directly opposite
unto the many positive Precepts of Christ, before instanced in, of stirring up
the gift given to us of God, improving the talents he has been graciously
pleased to entrust us withal. 4thly, If it be lawful for Saints to pray in a
form, it is lawful either because they have not the Spirit, or that having the
Spirit, he is not a sufficient help to them in their approaches to God: If the
first, they are not Saints, Romans 8. 9. to assert the second, is little less
than Blasphemy; besides its direct opposition to Romans 8. 26. As for the third,
viz. that Forms of Prayer imposed, are but mere Circumstances of Worship, and
not parts thereof, it cannot be proved. The contrary thereunto is evident; That
which is made so the condition of an Action, that without it the Action is not
to be done, is not a Circumstance of it, but such an Adjunct as is a necessary
part thereof: But Forms of Prayer imposed, are so made by that their
Imposition. Therefore, etc.

Sacrificing of old on the Altar at the Tabernacle and Temple, was part of the
Worship of God; that they were to perform this Worship only, at those places,
being once commanded, was not a Circumstance of that Worship, but as real an
essential part thereof, as sacrificing was. The case is the same here; Prayer
is commanded, so is the use of these Prayers, which are as really by virtue of
that Command, made alike parts of Worship. But,

2dly, That the Lyturgy or Common Prayer Book, is no essential part of Worship,
is utterly denied by the present Ministers of England, who make it not only a
part, but the principal part (to which Preaching must give place, and be
omitted, if they have not time for both) yea, the whole of the Worship of God,
which being performed, they suppose they have served him acceptably, without
more ado; and if omitted, whatever else is done, God is not worshipped at all.

And thus far of the first Argument, for the demonstration of what we are in
the disquisition of, viz. That the present Ministers of England are Idolaters:
The sum whereof is this, Those that worship God in any other way than he has
said he will be worshipped in, and is prescribed by him, are Idolaters; But the
present Ministers of England worship God in another way than he has said he
will be worshipped in, and is prescribed by him, ( viz. in the way of the
Common Prayer Book, which that it is not of Divine Prescription, has been
demonstrated) Therefore --. To which we add,

Argument 2.
Those who act in the holy things of God, by virtue of an Office-Power received
from Idolaters, and offer up to him, a Worship merely of humane composition,
once abused to Idolatry, with the Modes and Rites of Idolaters, are guilty of
the sin of Idolatry: But the present Ministers of England act in the holy
things of God, by virtue of an Office-Power received from Idolaters, and offer
up to him a Worship merely of humane composition, once abused to Idolatry with
the Modes and Rites of Idolaters. Therefore --

The Major (or first Proposition) carrying a brightness along with it,
sufficient to lead any one into the belief of the truth thereof, one would
think might be taken for granted. Two things are asserted therein.

1. That such as act in the holy things of God, by virtue of an Office-Power
received from Idolaters, are themselves such (at least in respect of that their
Office-Power so received by them.) That Jeroboam's Priests were all of them
Idolaters we suppose will not be denied: Supposing some one or more to Act in
the Worship of God by virtue of an Office-Power received from them, were these
to be accounted in that respect, Idolaters? it seems so: nor can there be the
least pretense of reason to the contrary: Certainly such as act by virtue of
Authority committed to them, in matters Civil, from Rebels, are equally guilty
of Rebellion, as those from whom they derive that their Authority. The case is
here the same.

2. That such as offer up to God a Worship merely of humane composition, once
abused to Idolatry with the Modes and Rites of Idolaters, are Idolaters: If
these be not such, I must profess I know not who are. That there are few, or
none, that worship the creature terminative, will not be denied, the most of
Idolaters in the world are such, upon the account of their worshipping the true
God through Mediums of their own devising, with Rites and Modes that never
entered into the heart of God to prescribe. To assert that any should symbolize
with Idolaters herein (who are soley upon this foot of account such) and not be
guilty of the sin of Idolatry, is absurd and irrational. The Major Proposition
then (as was said) may be taken for granted; Such as act in the holy things of
God by virtue of an Office-Power received from Idolaters, and offer up to God a
Worship merely of humane composition, once abused to Idolatry, are Idolaters.
Whether this be true of the present Ministers of England, is in the next place
to be considered; of which briefly.

1. That the Romish Church (so called) are Idolaters, their Worship, in the
complex thereof, Idolatry; will not (we suppose) be denied by any that call
themselves Protestants, the most learned of whom have asserted and proved it so
to be: If any of our Reverend Fathers are of another mind, we would entreat
them to construe to themselves a Copy or two of Verses, composed by Persons of
Eminency in that Combination of men, and then give us their second thoughts,
which are usually better than the first.

Thus some of them, -- O felix Puerpera,
Nostra pians Scelera,
Jure Matris Impera Redemptori.
Wherein the Virgin Mary is not only prayed unto, but Christ in his Exalted
state is subjected to her Authority; which is not only a spice of Idolatry, but
also some of the most horrid Blasphemy imaginable. Their praying to Images,
Adoration of Saints, etc. is known. Take a taste hereof in the ensuing
Instances; thus then they speak: O Crux spes unica,
Auge piis constantiam
Hoc passionis tempore,
Reisque dona veniam.
In which the Cross it self is invocated, as their only Hope, to bestow pardon
upon the guilty, patience and constancy upon the Godly. And who comes not in
the least short hereof, for Blasphemy and Idolatry. Bonarous the Jesuit, Lib.
3. Amphitrial. Honor. l. 3. cap. ult. ad Divinam Hallensem, and Puerum Jesum,
says as follows:

Haereo haec inter meditans, interque cruorem, Thomas de Aquino 3a part Sum:
Quaest. 25. Arti: says, Sequitur, quod eadem reverentia exhibeatur imagini
Christi, and ipsi Christo, cum ergo Christus adoratur adoratione latriae,
consequens est, quod ejus imago sit adoratione latriae adoranda.

The Image of Christ, he tells you, is to be worshipped with the same worship,
that Christ is. Yea, Bellarmine de Imag. cap. 21. says, Imagines Christi, and
Sanctorum venerandae sunt, non solum per accidens, and improprie, sed etiam per
se, and proprie, ita ut ipsae terminent venerationem, ut in se considerantur,
and non solemn, vicem gerunt exemplaris.

In which he asserts, what I had thought had not bin owned by any Idolater in
the world, viz. That Images are to be worshipped, not as the representatives of
the Deity, etc. and per accidens, but properly and per se, so as that they
terminate the Worship.



Inter delicias uberis, and lateris.
Et dico (si forte oculos super ubera tendo)
Diva parens mammae gaudia posco tuae.
Sed dico (si deinde oculos in vulnera verto)
O Jesu lateris gaudia malo tui.
Rem scio prensabo si fas erit ubera dextra,
Laeva prensabo vulnera si dabitur.
Lac matris miscere volo, cum sanguine nati,
Non possum antid^to nobiliore frui.
Vulnera restituant turpem, ulceribus mendicum,
Testa cui saniem radere sola potest.
Ubera reficient Ismaelem sitientem,
Quem Sara non patitur, quem neque nutrit Agar.
Ista mihi ad pestem, procul and procul, expungendam,
Ista mihi ad longas evalitura febres.
Ira vomit flammas sumatque libidinis Aetna,
Suffocare queo sanguine lacte queo.
Livor inexpleta rubigine saevit in artus
Detergere queo lacte, cruore queo.
Vanus honos me perpetua, prurigine tentat,
Exsaturare queo sanguine lacte queo.
Ergo parens, and nate meis advertite, votis,
Lac peto, depereo sanguinem, utrumque volo.
O sitio tamen! O vocem sitis intercludit.
Natae cruore sitim comprime, lacte parens.
Dic matri, meus hic sitit optima matter,
Vis e font tuo promere; deque meo.
Dic nato, tuus his frater, mi mellee fili
Captivus monstrat vincula, lytron habes.
Ergo Redemptorem monstra te jure vocari,
Ubera si reliquis divitiora geris.
O quando lactabor ab ubere vulnere pascar,
Deliciisque fruar, mamma, latusque tuis.
To which might be added as second hereunto, the blasphemous poetry of
Franciscus de Mendoza, in viridario utriusque eruditionis, lib. 2. Prob. 2. The
usual ascription of Laus Deo, Virginique matri Mariae, in the close of their
writings; in which, Divine honor with God is ascribed to the Virgin Mary, is
known to all: Any ordinary Reader knows where to furnish himself with many more
instances of the like nature, equalizing, if not exceeding in expression the
greatest Idolaters that ever were in the world. We judge it not necessary to
stand longer upon this matter, it is beyond exception evident, that that
Assembly of men that are usually known, by the name of the Church of Rome are
Idolaters: If there be any such in the world, they are so.

2. That the present Ministers of England act by virtue of an Office-Power,
from this Combination and Assembly of Idolaters, they themselves will not deny:
Succession from hence being one of the best pleas they have for the
justification of their Ministry: (which when they have proved, that ever the
Lord Jesus did entrust an Assembly of the greatest Murderers, Adulterers and
Idolaters in the world, with any power for the sending forth Officers to act in
the Holy Things of God, to, and for the Church, his Spouse, will be admitted,
but this they shall never be able to do) So hugely importunate are some of them
herein, that they are not ashamed to ask us, why Ordination may not be received
from the Church (so called) of Rome, as well as the Scripture? To which we
shall only say, that when it is proved that we received the Scripture from
that Apostate Church, by virtue of any Authority thereof, as such, somewhat of
moment may be admitted in that enquiry, but this will never be done. It Is true,
the Bible was kept among the People in those parts where the Pope prevails,
yet follows it not from hence that we received it from their Authority, as
Ordination is received; if we did, why did we not keep it, as delivered from
them to us, in the vulgar Latin? so that of these things there is not the same
reason! It will not then be denied, but the present Ministers of England act in
the holy things of God, by virtue of an Office-Power received by Succession
from the Church of Rome, and so from Idolaters (that Church being eminently so,
as has been proved.)

3. Nor can it be denied, but they offer up to God a Worship merely of Humane
Composition (as the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship has been proved to be) once
abused to Idolatry, with the Modes and Rites of Idolaters. That the
Common-Prayer-Book-Worship is a Worship that was once abused to Idolatry,
being the Worship of that Church, whose Worship (at least in the complex
thereof) is so, cannot, with the least pretense of Reason, be denied. That the
whole of it is derived from, and taken out of the Pope's Portuis, as are the
Common Prayers out of the Breviary; the Administration of the Sacraments,
Burial, Matrimony, Visitation of the Sick, out of the Ritual, or Book of Rites:
The Consecration of the Lord's Supper, Collects, Epistles, Gospels, out of the
Mass Book: The Ordination of Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests, out of the
Roman Pontifical, has been asserted and proved by many. Which might be
evidenced (if needful) beyond exception, not only by comparing the one with
the other, but also from the offer was made by Pope Pius the 4th, and Gregory
the 13th, to Q. Elizabeth, to confirm the English Lyturgy, which did it not
symbolize with the Service of the Church of Rome, they would not have done.
Yea, when the said Queen was interdicted by the Popes Bull, Secretary
Walsingham procures two intelligencers from the Pope, who seeing the Service of
London and Canterbury in the Pomp thereof, wonder that their Lord, the Pope,
should be so unadvised, as to inderdict a Prince, whose Servive and Ceremonies
did so symbolize with his own: When they come to Rome, they satisfy the Pope,
That they saw no Service, Ceremonies, or Orders in England, but might very well
serve in Rome; upon which the Bull was recalled. Not to mention what we have
already minded, viz. the Testimony of King Edward the 6th and his Council;
witnessing the English Service to be the same, and no other but the old, the
self-same words in English that were in Latin (which was the worship of
England and Rome, in Queen Mary's days) it is evident, that the present
Ministers of England offer up a Worship to God, once abused to Idolatry. That
they do this with the Rites, Ceremonies and Modes Maccovius loc. com. append.
de adiaph. p. 860. says, Non licet mutuari, aut retinere res aut ritas Sacros
Idololatrarum sive Ethnicorum sive Pontificiorum, etc. etsi in se res fuerint
adia Phorae quia vitandam esse omnem conformitatem cum Idololatris docemur.
Lev. 19. 4, 27. and 21. 5. Deuteronomy. 14. 1.
of Idolaters ( viz. such as are in use in that Idolatrous Church of Rome)
needs not many words to demonstrate; what else is the Priests change of Voice;
Posture and Place in Worship enjoined them? not to mention their Holy
Vestmentes, Bowings, Cringings, Candles, Altars, etc. all of which as it is
known, owe their original unto the appointments thereof. It remains, That the
present Ministers of England, acting in the Holy Things of God, by virtue of an
Office-Power received from Idolaters, and offering up to him a Worship merely
of humane composition, once abused* to Idolatry with the Rites and Modes of
Idolaters, are deeply guilty of the sin of Idolatry. To which we add,

Argument 3.
Adoration in, by, or before a creature respective, or with relation to the
creature, is Idolatry; such as so adore, or worship God are Idolaters. But the
present Ministers of England, do adore or worship God, in, by, or before a
creature respective, or with relation to the creature: Therefore.

The major (or first proposition) being generally owned by Protestants, it
being the very same maxim they make use of, and stop the mouth of the Papists
with, in the point of adoring God mediately by the creature, we shall not stand
upon the proof of it: None that know what they say, will deny it.

The minor Proposition ( viz. That the present Ministers of England do adore,
or worship God, in, by, or before the creature respective, or with relation to
the creature) will receive a quick dispatch: Not to mention their bowing and
cringing at the Altar: That Didoclavius p. 755. says, Genuflectere non modo
excludit ritus institutionis, sed etiam praeceptum secundum de vitanda
Idololatria multis modis violat; which Maccovius assents to, loc. com. p. 861.
they kneel at the receiving of the Sacrament is known, that they with their
Communicants should do so, is enjoined by their Church, That their so doing is
an adoration, or worshipping of God before the creature respective, or with
relation to the creature, is too manifest to admit of a denial: Nothing being
more certain than that the Elements are the objectum significative a quo, or
the motive of their kneeling, which if they were not there, they would not do.

Object. To what has been hitherto offered in this matter, if it be said, That
the charging the present Ministers of England with Idolatry, is exceeding
harsh, and that which is an argument of a very unchristian, and censorious
spirit. Though this makes nothing to the enervating of what has been offered,
yet we answer,

1. That many words of Christ himself, were accounted hard sayings, and not to
be born, and that by such Hearers as were once his Admirers, and did with
seeming-great affection attend upon his Ministry: That such poor worms as we
should be recharged herewith, is no great marvel, it is enough for the Disciple
to be as his Master.

2dly, We have in this matter said nothing, but what is in Thesi, over and over
asserted, by most or all Protestant VVriters, upon the second Commandment: who
assert fully, that the Calvin, Perkins, Ames, Maccovius, Altingius, Wendeline.
Paraeus, Explicat. Cate. p. 3. Q. 96. p. 528. says, Quid postulat secundum
praeceptum? Resne Deum ulla imagine, aut figura exprimamus neve ulla alia
ratione eum colamus, quam qua se in suo verbo coli praecepit, 1 Samuel 15. 23.
Deuteronomy. 12. 30. Mat. 15. 9. And afterward he adds, Huic secundo Praecepto
contraria sunt ea, quae vero cultui divino adversantur. 1. Idololatria, quae
est cultus numinis fictitius, aut superstitiosus. Sunt autem Idololatriae duae
species, praecipuae: una crassior, cum fictitium numen colitur -- haec species
prohibetur in imo praecepto, and aliqua ex part, in tertio: altera est
subtilior, cum verus Deus coli fingitur, sed errator in genere cultus, hoc est,
cum vero Deo cultus fingitur praestari, aliquo opere, quod ipse non praecepit
haec species Idololatriae, hoc praecepto proprie damnatur, and nominatur (...),
sive superstitio. And page 529. Qui peccant contra secundum praeceptum, peccant
and contra primum, quia qui Deum aliter colunt, atque vult coli, illi fingunt
Deum aliter effectum, atque est, hoc est alium Deum: Ita non Deum, sed cerebri
sui commentum, quod sic affectum esse sibi persuadent, colunt -- fingere alium
Dei cultum, est aliam Dei voluntatem, proinde and alium Deum fingere, etc.
worshipping God in a way not prescribed by him, is Idolatry; such as do so,
are Idolaters: with our application hereof unto the present Ministers of
England, if they are guilty (as that they are, has been abundantly
demonstrated) why should any be offended? To speak Truth, when our silence
would be prejudicial to the souls of our Brethren, methinks should not be
accounted unchristian or censorious.

But 3dly, What would these Objectors have said to Tertullian, (that renowned
Servant and VVitness of the Lord Jesus in his day) who is by far more nice in
this point of Idolaty, than we have declared our selves to be; He in his Book
De Idololatria, charge such as make Statues or Images, build or adorn Idols
Temples, (though it were their trade) Astrologers, Schoolmasters, (that name
the names of Idols, making honorable mention of them in their Orations) such as
keep holidays, dedicated to Idolatrous service, as their Saturnalia (in the
stead of which, is the time with us called Christmas) etc. such as adorned
their Gates, Posts, Houses after the Pagan manner at Festivals, with Laurel,
Ivy, etc. as sympolizing with Idolaters: yet sure we are, he could not justly
be charged with an unchristian or censorious spirit. If it be further said,

Obj. 2. But what shall we judge of Latimer, Ridley, Hooper, and many other
famous Witnesses and Martyrs of Christ, who worshipped God after the same way
of Worship that these do now? were they also Idolaters? how could they be saved
then, when the Scripture says, that no Idolater shall inherit the Kingdom of
God, and we do not find that they repented hereof? To this we answer.

1. That the persons instanced in, were eminent Witnesses of Jesus Christ in
their day (whose very Names are in our nostrils as sweet Perfume) we readily
grant, and would be loath to speak one word to abate of that just esteem is due
to their Names and Testimony for Christ.

2dly, That they are now with Christ, and shall come with him, and sit upon
Thrones to judge their unjust Judges in the day appointed thereunto, we have
not the least scruple.

But 3dly, they were but men encompassed about with many infirmities; that they
were guilty of the sin of Idolatry, cannot (from what has been said herein
it is evident) be denied.

Yet, 1. They were in that day but just peeping out of the Gates of Babylon,
beginning to arise and shake themselves out of the dust of the Abominations of
the great Whore; and it is no wonder if some of the filth of her Fornications
did cleave to them. 2. They worshipped God in sincerity according to the light
he was pleased in that day to communicate, and God accepted of them in Christ,
granting to them a general Repentance for those Iniquities they saw not to be
so, knew not themselves guilty of. Which is all we shall at present say
hereunto. The intelligent Reader knows that these things are not of any moment
for the invalidating of what has been offered upon this subject. Thus far of
this eighth Argument, The present Ministers of England are guilty of Idolatry;
therefore it is the duty of Saints not to hear, but separate from them.

CHAP. VIII.
A 7th Argument against hearing the present Ministers of England. It Is an
offense, grief, and cause of stumbling to the Saints, proved. Two Objections
answered. The nature of Scandal given. An eighth Argument proposed to
consideration. The various ways of partaking with others in their sin,
considered. That hearing the present Ministers, is a partaking with them in
their sin, proved.

Argument 7.
It Is not lawful for Saints to do any thing, for the doing whereof, there is no
positive Precept in the Scripture, that is an Offense, Grief, Scandal and cause
of stumbling to their Brethren: But the hearing the present Ministers of
England (as there is no positive Precept in the Scripture for it, so it) is an
Offense, Grief, Scandal and cause of stumbling to the Brethren. Therefore --

The Major (or first Proposition) is bottomed upon express Precepts in the
Scripture, Romans 14. 13, 15, 20. 1 Cor. 8. 9, 13. and 10. 24.

The Minor (or second Proposition) consists of two parts.

1. That for hearing the present Ministers of England, there is no positive
warrant in the Scripture; if there be, let it be produced, and this
Controversy is at an end: The contrary thereunto, has all along been manifest
in this present Discourse. It cannot enter into our hearts, to imagine, that the
Lord Jesus having instituted Officers of his own, for the management of Affairs
in his House, should ordain, that any of his Household should attend upon the
Ministry of such as are not of his institution (as has been abundantly
demonstrated touching the present Ministers of England, that they are not) nor
is it by many, pleaded as their duty so to do; but only as their Liberty,
which they judge they may, or they may not do, without sin.

2. That for the Saints (such as are visibly so, profess themselves to be such)
to hear the present Ministers of England, is an Offense, Grief, Scandal and
occasion of stumbling to their Brethren. This is too evident to be denied, to
how many thousands in England for whom (those that as yet attend upon the
present Ministry thereof, dare not but think) Christ dyed, is the practice of
some herein, a Grief, Scandal and occasion of Stumbling? Their groans and
tears, alone, and together upon this foot of account, will better demonstrate
the truth hereof, than our words can. Yea, how many poor souls have been drawn,
by reason of the practice of some Leading Brethren in this matter, against the
checks of their own consciences, to a Conformity herein, to their after-grief
and wounding? Upon whose doors it is to be feared (and we wish they would in the
fear of God lay it to heart) may be written, THE BLOOD OF SOULS. If it be said,

Object. That there is a twofold Scandal, 1. Scandalum acceptum, a Scandal, or
Offense taken. 2. Scandalum datum, a Scandal or Offense given. In respect of
the former, possibly many may be offended at their practice in the matter
treated of, and so would some or other whatever is done by them: It Is
impossible but Offenses should come, that there is any just Offense given by
them, herein, is denied. To this we answer.

Answ. 1. That as we admit of the distinction, so no doubt there is a truth in
what is suggested thereupon, That whatever I do, some one or other will be
offended at it: There are a generation of men, whom the doing of my duty will
offend, and cause to blaspheme; these are not to be minded, but to be pitied:
Christ himself was to some a Rock of Offense, and Stone of Stumbling.

2. But it is not yet proved (nor like to be) that the Scandal treated of, is a
Scandal taken and not given, the very nature of Scandal given, as is confessed by
all, and evident beyond exception from the Apostles discourse, 1 Cor. 8. 10.
lying in the doing of what is judged, by me, to be my liberty, which other
Saints are not fully persuaded of in their own minds to be so, but are ready to
conclude it to be my sin, and evil, and from thence have occasion of Grief, or
Stumbling administered to them. This was the very case of the Church of Corinth
(upon the occasion whereof Paul writes to them, 1 Cor. 8.) some of them judged
it their liberty to sit at meat in the Idols Temple; others not being fully
persuaded hereof, were scandalized many ways, at this their practice, which
the Apostle therefore condemns as unlawful. Should it for Arguments sake be
granted (though in truth it be not so) that it is the liberty of Saints, to hear
the present Ministers, yet many of the sincere Lambs of Christ, being stumbled,
grieved and Scandalized herear, for that very reason (if no more could be said
herein) it becomes our sin (to be guilty whereof, who can choose but be filled
with trembling, that has ever with seriousness read that terrible Commination
of Christ, Mat. 18. 6. Whosoever shall offend one of these little Ones that believe
in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and
he were drowned in the depths of the Sea?) especially when those that are thus
scandalized, are able to demonstrate, that their Offense is not any pevish
Humor, or foolish Nicety, but what is too really administered by the actions of
their Brethren: When they shall hear Christ, commanding them to separate from
every thing of Antichrist, Rev. 18. 4. and therefore from his Ministry, and
they are in conscience persuaded the Ministers of England are such, which they
judge they are able to demonstrate: When they consider, how the Laws of their
dear Lord and Lawgiver are made void, by the traditions of these pretended
Ministers, whose Kingship they see them visibly opposing, when they find upon
them the characters of False Prophets, and Apostles, and are able to manifest,
that they are deeply guilty of the sin of Idolatry (from whom they are enjoined
by Christ to turn away) yea when they take a veiw of the frame of the spirits
of their now Conforming-Brethren in days past, and the Principles were then
owned by them: That they did then (some of them at least) separate from the
Assemblies of England, as not true Churches of Christ, and accounted the
Common-Prayer-Book-Priests, persons not meet to preach, unworthy to be attended
upon in their so doing, and see them now saying, A confederacy with, and
attending upon the ministry of those very persons and things, from whom, not
only Christ has commanded them to separate, but these very Brethren did
formerly decry, and at least seemingly abominate, they judge, they have just
ground of Offense given to them: Nor can it be denied, but it is indeed so. If
it be yet further said,

Object. 2. But if I do not go to hear the Preachers of this day, many truly
godly and sober Christians will be offended at my forbearance; so that whether
I hear, or whether I forbear, I shall offend.

To this I answer, 1. That granting the case to be as is suggested (though
perhaps somewhat else, upon a serious and strict search, may be found to lie at
the bottom of our Conformity beyond what is here pleaded: I am very apt to
believe were but a toleration granted, it is not the fear of offending any,
would cause our Conforming-Brethren to attend upon the Ministry of the present
Priests of England. Yet supposing it to be as is intimated) we ask, 1. Do you
look upon your going to hear as your duty, or merely as your liberty? if the
first, let it be proved from any positive precept of Christ, and we are
satisfied: If the second, you are bound by many solemn injunctions (which are
at least reduceable to the Moral Law) not to use your liberty to Scandalize
your Brethren.

Secondly, Let both parties be weighed in an upright Balance, such as you
judge to be offended with you for not hearing, and such as are offended
thereat. I am bold to say, That the last mentioned, for Number, Holiness,
Spirituallity and Tenderness, do far surmount the former, who will really be
Scandalized at your forbearance.

Thirdly, Let also the grounds of the offense on both sides, be weighed; the
one are offended at you, That you build not up in practice, in a day of
trouble; and cause thereby the Enemies of the Lord to triumph and blaspheme,
what in a day of liberty, you did in your preaching and practice, pull down and
destroy: The other, because of your disobedience to what they are satisfied;
and you your selves once were, God is calling you to ( viz. to have nothing to
do with, separate from, this generation of men.) But

Fourthly, That it is your duty (especially if in a Church-Relation) to meet
together as a People called, and picked by the Lord out of the Nations of the
World, in a way of distinction from them, cannot be denied: the neglect of
which, is charged by the Lord, as the first step to Apostasy, Heb. 10. 25. Be
you in the practice of this duty, and see, what Spiritual Saint will be
offended at you; if any should, you might have peace therein; you doing your
duty, no just cause of Scandal is given. Yet further,

Fifthly, Consider on which side the Cross lies; which the Flesh, and fleshly
interest is most opposite to, whether in going, or forbearing to go to hear
these men, and let that be chosen: Usually, that is the way of God that has
most of the Cross in it, and the flesh is most struggling and contesting
against. But thus much of the seventh Argument.

Argument. 8.
That which Saints cannot do without being guilty of partaking with others in
their sin, is utterly unlawful for them to do. But the Saints cannot attend
upon the Ministry of England, without being guilty of partaking with them in
their sin. Therefore --

The Major Proposition is clearly bottomed upon Scripture, Psalm. 50. 18. Ephesians.
5. 7. 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 John 11. Rev. 18. 4. which might be abundantly
demonstrated were it needful: Sure that God who commands me to abstain from all
appearance of evil, 1 These. 5. 22. never enjoined, expects not that I should be
found in the practice of what, without sin, cannot be performed by me.

The Minor Proposition, viz. That the Saints cannot attend upon the present
Ministry of England, without being partakers with them in their sin, will admit
of a speedy dispatch. Two things are briefly to be enquired into.

1. What that, or those sins are we suppose the Ministers of England to be
guilty of.

2. How it will appear that any person's attending upon their Ministry, renders
him guilty of partaking with them therein. Of the former we have already
treated, and proved (beyond what any are able to say to the contrary) That they
are guilty of the sins of worshipping God in a way that is not of his
appointment, of acting in the Holy things of God, by virtue of an Antichristian
Power, Office or Calling; of opposing really the Prophetical and Kingly Office
of Christ; of using and conforming to Modes and Rites in Worship, not appointed
by the Lord, that have been abused to Idolatry, etc. Nor is it denied by our
Conforming-Brethren, but with some of these things the present Ministers of
England may be justly charged: That they worship God after the way of the
Common Prayer Book, with Modes and Rites used in the Papacy, cannot be denied:
Nor can their undue administration of that great Ordinance of our Lord Jesus,
of breaking Bread to all, according to the form therein prescribed: That they
are Ordained, and some of them Re-ordained by the Episcopacy is also known. I
ask, are these things the sin and evil of these men, or are they not? If they
are not, why did not our preaching-Brethren receive the Ordination from the
Bishops these received? Yea, why do not our half-conforming-Brethren attend
upon the reading* of the Service used, join with them in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper as administered by them? Does not their absenting themselves
herefrom, abundantly demonstrate, that they in their consciences are persuaded,
that it is the sin and evil of the present Priests of England thus to act, and
from such a Mission in the Worship of the Lord? As for the second, That the
hearing of the present Ministers of England, is that which renders a man
guilty, of being partaker with them in their sin; the consideration of the
several ways persons may justly be charged with being guilty of partaking with
others in their sin, will abundantly demonstrate the truth thereof. To instance
in a few particulars; Then may persons justly be charged as guilty hereof,

1. When they are found any way consenting with them in their sin, Psalm. 50.
18. When thou saw a Theif, then thou consentedst with him, and have been
partaker with Adulterers. It Is not the doing of the act that was done by these
wicked persons, that is here called partaking with them, but a secret
consenting with them therein.

2. When they do that which has a real tendency to encourage persons in their
sin, 2 John 11. Receive them not into your houses, bid them not Godspeed; for
he that bids them God speed is partaker of their evil deeds.

3. When they neglect the doing of those duties which the Lord requires at
their hands, for the reclaiming of them from their sin; such are Watching over,
Rebuking, Admonishing, first privately, then by two, and in case of obstinacy
and perseverance therein, telling it to the Church: which are duties eminently
comprised in the ensuing Scriptures, 1 These. 5. 14. Heb. 3. 12, 13. and 10. 24,
25. Lev. 19. 17. Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.

4. When they (notwitstanding all that they have done, or can do, being under
an utter incapacity of proceeding further therein) perceive them to persevere
in their sin, shall still continue to hold communion with them, and not
separate from them. Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my People; lest being partakers
of her sins, ye receive of her plagues: The abiding with obstinate persevering
Offenders (as it is against positive injunctions of the Most High, Romans 16. 17.
2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy 6. 5. Ephesians. 5. 8, 11. Rev. 18. 4. So is it in
the last place instacn'd in) assigned by the Spirit to be one way of partaking
with others in their sins. Not to multiply more particulars, let us in a few
words make Application of these remarked. To the business in hand.

Is there any thing in the world that carries a greater brightness and evidence
with it, than this, That the hearing the present Ministers of England, is to be
partakers with them in their sin? is not our so doing, a secret consenting with
them, and encouraging of them in their evil deeds? Is this to discharge those
duties incumbent upon us (if we indeed look upon them as Brethren) for their
reclaiming? yea, is this to come out of, and separate from them? what less? So
then, except it can be proved, that the particulars instanced in, are not some
of those ways, whereby persons do become guilty of partaking with other men's
sins; or that to attend upon the present Ministers of England, is not what does
symbolize with some one, more, or all of them (which can never be done) it
evidently follows, that it is not lawful for Saints to hear the present
Ministers of England, the doing whereof, is apparently a partaking with them in
their evil deeds.

CHAP. IX.
A ninth Argument against hearing the present Ministers. That it casts contempt
upon the Ways and Institutions of Christ, hardens persons in a false way of
Worship and Rebellion against God, proved. A tenth Argument produced, That it is
not lawful to go into the Assemblies of false Worshippers, proved. An eleventh
Argument, that there is no promise of a Blessing upon the hearing these men,
proved. A twelfth Argument, proving, that so to do, is the first step to
Apostasy. Several Queries proposed.

Argument 9.
THat the doing whereof does cast contempt upon the Ways and Institutions
(some one or more of them) of our Lord Jesus, and hardens persons in a false
way of Worship and Rebellion against him, is utterly unlawful for the Saints to
do: But the hearing of the present Ministers of England is that, the doing
whereof does cast contempt upon the VVayes and Institutions (some one or more
of them) of our Lord Jesus, and hardens persons in a false way of Worship and
Rebellion against him. Therefore.

The major Proposition is laid down in such full, clear, and evident
expressions, bottomed upon Scripture and right Reason, as carry a brightness
with them, that none but such as are desperately and judicially blinded, will
or can gainsay.

The minor (or second Proposition) viz. That the hearing of the present
Ministers of England, is the doing of that which does cast contempt upon the
VVayes and Institutions of our Lord Jesus, and hardens persons in a false way
of Worship and Rebellion against him, is by our dissenting-Brethren gainsayed.
Three things are therein asserted.

1. That our hearing these persons is that which casts contempt upon the VVayes
and Institutions of Christ. 2dly. That it hardens persons in a false way of
Worship. 3dly. That it hardens and encourages souls in their Rebellion against
the Lord. As for the first, a brief Observation of some of the Institutions of
Christ, clearly bottomed upon the Scripture, will abundantly evince its
original to be from God.

First then, That separation from the world and men of the world, from all
ways of false Worship, and the Inventions of men thereabout, until the Saints
of the Most-High be apparently a People dwelling alone, and not reckoned
amongst the Nations (however it be decryed, and sound harsh in the ears of
carnal men) is one grand Institution, a man may run and read in the following
Scriptures; Numb. 23. 9. Joh. 15. 19. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 17, 19. Ephesians. 5. 8, 11.
2 Timothy 3. 5. Hos. 4. 15. Rev. 18. 4. Prove. 14. 7. (nor is it denied by some of
our Conforming-Brethren.)

Secondly, That Saints separate from the world, should frequently meet together
as a distinct body therefrom, for the edification and building up of each other
in the Way and Will of God, according to the gifts bestowed upon them, is so
evidently asserted, as the Institution of our alone King and Lawgiver in the
Scripture, that it cannot be gainsayed; Mal. 3. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. Heb. 3. 12.
Jude 20. Heb. 10. 24, 25. 1 Cor. 12. 9. Acts 12. 12. and 18. 23. Ephesians. 5. 19.
Jam. 5. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.

Thirdly, That particular Congregations, or Assemblies of Believers, gathered
into one body, for the Celebration of the Worship of God (in opposition to any
National Church or Churches whatsoever) is of the Appointment of Christ, is
alike evident as the former. Act. 8. 1, 3. and 12. 1. and 13. 14. and 15. 22.
and 18. 22. and 20. 14, 28. 1 Cor. 1. 2. and 6. 4. Acts 9. 1. 1 Cor. 16. 19.
Romans 16. 4. 2 Cor. 8. 1. Gal. 1. 2. Acts 16. 4, 5. and 14. 23. 1 Cor. 11, 12.
and 14. 4, 5, 12, 19. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Rev. 1. 2, 3, 11.

Fourthly, That Christ has appointed Officers of his own, to act in the
Holy-things of God, in and over these Assemblies, whom he furnishes with Gifts
every way suiting their Employment, to whom, without turning aside to the voice
of strangers, or attending upon the Ministry of such as are not of his
Appointment, it is the duty of Saints to hearken, is very conspicuous in the
ensuing Scriptures, Ephesians. 4. 11. Heb. 13. 7, 13. Mat. 24. 4, 5, 23, 24. 1 John
2. 18. and 4. 1. 2 John 10. Acts 20. 29, 30, 31. Rev. 2. 14, 15, 16. which
exactly agrees with what was practiced by primitive Believers, who it seems
received none without the Testimony of some Brethren of known integrity in the
Churches; 1 Cor. 16. 3. Act. 9. 26. Not to mention more, let it be weighed,
whether the hearing of the present Ministers of England, does not cast contempt
upon these Institutions of Christ. What is more evidently preached forth by
such a practice, than, 1. That separation from the Assemblies of England
(though in their constitution, carnal and worldly) and the worship thereof
(although false and merely of humane invention) was and is our sin and evil?
2dly. That it is not by virtue of any Sovereign Institution of Christ, the duty
of Saints to meet together, as a body distinct (without going out to other
Assemblies to worship with them) for their mutual edification in the Lord.
3dly. That particular Assemblies are not soley of the Institution of the Lord
Jesus, but that National are also to be accounted as the true Churches of
Christ (though they have no footing in the Scripture of the New Testament, from
whence the Pattern of Gospel-Churches is soley to be deduced.) Yea, 4thly, That
the Officers of Christ's Appointment are not sufficient for the Saints, but
together with them, the help of false and Idol-shepherds is to be sought after,
than which, what greater contempt can be poured upon the forementioned
Institutions of our dear Lord? Yet who sees not all this to be the language
which is heard and goes forth into the Nations, from the practice of our
Brethren in the matter we are debating? If they look upon Separation in the
sense before-minded, to be of the Institution of Christ, can they offer a
greater affront thereunto, than to run into the Assemblies of the Nation? If
they judge it their duty to meet together distinct from the World and its
Worshippers, why run they thereunto? If they apprehend National Churches to be
the result of humane prudence, without bottom in the Scripture, and the
Ministers of Christ to be only (in contradistinction to the Ministers that are
not of his Appointment) attended unto; why give they the right hand of
fellowship unto such Assemblies, as profess themselves to be parts of such a
National Church, and hear Ministers that have relation thereunto? who have
received (as has been proved) no Mission from Christ to their Ministry. If
this be not evidently to pour contempt upon the Institutions of Christ, and
confessedly so, we shall for ever despair of success in the most facile and
righteous undertaking. As for the second Particular, that hereby poor souls are
hardened in a false way of Worship, what can be thought less? (supposing the
Worship in the Parish-Assemblies of England to be so, as has been proved) when
they shall see Professors, that were wont to pray and preach together, to
profess, and protest against Common-Prayer-Book-Priests, and Worship, to cry
up, or at least approve of, Laws made for their ejection, if guilty of no other
crime, than conforming to the Worship they now conform to and practice, now
flock unto their Assemblies, and hear their Priests: what can they imagine
less, than that these persons, thus acting in a direct contrariety to their
former judgment and practice, do now see they were mistaken? and are,
beginning at least, to return unto those paths fom whence they departed, and
that these ways, in which they and their forefathers have walked, are the Good
Old Way in which rest is to be found? Woe unto the world because of Offenses, woe
also unto them by whom they come. Nor is the third Particular, viz. That hereby
poor souls are hardened in their Rebellion and Blasphemy against God, the
Spirit, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell therein, to be in the least
questioned: We every day hear, to the breaking of our hearts, stout words
spoken against the Lord, because of the practice of some in this thing. What
say the wicked of the world less, than that Religion, which many pretend to, is
but a Fancy, that the Professors thereof are but a Generation of Hypocrites,
that will turn to any thing to save themselves; that the spirit by which they
are acted is but a spirit of Phanaticism and Delusion! yea, how do they bless
themselves that they are not, nor ever were (and resolve so much the more, they
will never be) of the number of such Professors! Ask them a Reason of all this,
and they wonder you should ask them, and speedily reply to you, Do you not see
how many of you, for fear of Persecution, have disserted your former
Principles, and are returned to our Assemblies and the Ministry thereof, and
that any of you stand out ('it is from hence evident) that it is from a spirit of
Pride and Obstinacy, and not, as you pretend, from Divine Tenderness, and the
Leadings of the Spirit of the Lord. And what can we say to all these things?
must we not with grief and sorrow confess, that there is indeed too great an
occasion administered to them for their thus speaking, though this will be no
plea for them in the day of Christ. Blessed are they that are not offended in
him. It remains then, that inasmuch as the hearing the present Ministers of
England, pours out contempt upon the Ways and Institutions of Christ, hardens
persons in a false way of Worship, Rebellion and Blasphemy against the Lord:
it is utterly unlawful for Saints to be found in the practice thereof. To all
that hitherto has been said, we shall yet briefly add,

Argument. 10.
God calls his People out of, and strictly charges them, not to go to the
places of False-Worship: Therefore it is unlawful for the Saints to attend upon
the present Ministers of England. The Antecedent is clearly proved, Hos. 4. 15.
Amos 4. 4. The Reason of the Consequence is, Because we cannot go to hear the
present Ministers of England without we go to their places and assemblies of
False-worship (as the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship has been proved to be.)

Argument 11.
That, upon the doing whereof Saints have no promise of a Blessing, not any
ground to expect it, is not lawful for them to do. But in the hearing of these
men, the Saints have no promise of a Blessing, nor ground to expect it.
Therefore.

The Major (or first Proposition) will not be denied. As for the Minor (or
second Proposition) That the Saints have no promise of a Blessing from God nor
ground to expect it, in the hearing of the present Ministers of England, may
many ways be demonstrated. If there be any promise of a Blessing upon them
from God, in their so doing, let it be produced, and we shall willingly
confess, there is no weight in this Argument: But this we conceive to be no
easy task for any to discharge, and that for these Reasons:

1. The Blessing of the Lord is upon Sion, Psalm. 87. 2. and 78. 68. there he
dwells, Psalm. 9. 11. and 74. 2. Jer. 8. 19. Isa. 8. 18. Joel 3. 17, 21. the
presence of Christ is in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1. 12, 13.
and 2. 1. it is his Garden in which he feeds and dwells, Cant. 6. 2. and 8.
13. and we are not surer of any thing (nor will it be denied by our Conforming
Brethren) (many of them) than we are of this, That the Assemblies of England,
in their present constitution, are so far from being the Sion of God, his
Candlesticks, his Garden, that they are a very Wilderness, and that Babel out
of which the Lord commands his People to hasten their escape, Rev. 18. 4.

2. God never promises a Blessing to a People waiting upon him in that way
which is polluted and not of his appointment, as we have proved the Worship of
England to be.

3. The Lord has expressly said concerning such as run before they are sent,
That they shall not profit the People, Jer. 23. 32.

4. The Lord protests, that such as refuse to obey his Calls, to come out of
Babylon, shall partake of her Plagues, Rev. 18. 4.

5. Where the Lord is not, in respect of his special Presence and Grace, there
is no ground to expect any Blessing: but God is not so in the midst of the
Parochial Assemblies of* England. Where are the souls that are converted,
comforted, strengthened, stablished, that are waiting at the doors of their
house? Though many will not see it, yet a sad spirit of withering, and visible
decaies is to be found upon many that are waiting upon the teachings of the
Ministers of this day: And we hope the Lord will in mercy, cause those that are
indeed his, to see it, that they may remember from whence they have fallen,
repent, do their first works, and watch to strengthen the things that remain,
that are ready to dye, for God has not found their works perfect before him.

Argument 12.
That, the doing whereof is one step to Apostasy, is not lawful to be done. But
the hearing the present Ministers of England is one step to Apostasy. Therefore.

The Major Proposition will readily be granted by all: The beginnings of great
evils are certainly to be resisted. Apostasy is one of the greatest evils in
the world.

The Minor (or second Proposition) viz. That the hearing of the present
Ministers of England is one step to Apostasy, is evident.

1. It cannot be done (especially by persons of Congregational Principles)
without a relinquishment of Principles owned by them, as received from God:
That the Church of England, as National, is a Church of the institution of
Christ: That persons not called to the Office of the Ministry by the Saints,
are rightful Ministers of Christ, must be owned, and taken for granted, ere the
conscience can acquiesce in the hearing of the present Ministers (for we
suppose 'twill not be asserted by those with whom we have to do, that there can
be a true Ministry in a False Church, or that False Ministers may be heard; and
yet the present Ministers are Ministers in, and of the National Church of
England, and were never solemnly deputed to that Office by the suffrage of the
Lords People.)

2dly. Nor can it be done without the neglect of that duty, which with others,
is eminently of the appointment of the Lord, to secure from Apostasy, instanced
in by the Author to the Hebrews, Hebr. 10. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of
your selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and
so much the more as you see the day approaching. In which the duty of Saints
assembling of themselves together, as a body distinct from the world, and its
Assemblies, as also their frequent, and as often as may be, exhorting one
another, as a medium to secure them (by the blessing of the Lord thereupon)
from a spirit of Degeneracy and Apostasy from God, is clearly asserted: Whence
it undeniably follows, That the hearing of the present Ministers of England
(being inconsistent with the constant and diligient use of the means prescribed
for the preservation of the Saints in the way of God: for whilst they are
attending upon their teachings, they cannot assemble themselves according to
the prescription of God in the forementioned Scripture) is at least one step to
the dreadful sin of Apostasy from God, and therefore is it utterly unlawful for
Saints so to do. And thus far of the 12th Argument for the proof of the
assertion under our maintenance, viz. That it is not lawful for Saints to hear
the present Ministers of England, to which many others might be added: But we
doubt not, to the truly tender and humble enquiring Christian, what has been
offered will be abundantly sufficient to satisfy his conscience in the present
enquiry. We shall only in the close offer a few Queries to be in the fear of
the Holy One, considered by the intelligent Reader.

Quer. 1. Whether the Lord Jesus be not the alone Head, King, and Lawgiver to
his Church?

2. Whether the Laws, Statutes, Orders and Ordinances of Christ, be not
faithfully to be kept, though all the Princes in the world should interdict and
forbid it?

3. Whether to introduce other Laws for the Government of the Church of Christ
and the Worship of his House, be not an high advance against, and intrusion
into his Kingship and Headship?

4. Whether the Lord Jesus as King and Head over his Church, has not
instituted sufficient Officers and Offices for the administration of Holy
Things in his House, to whom no more can be added without a desperate
undervaluation and contempt of his Wisdom, Headship and Sovereignty over it?

5. Whether the Officers instituted by Christ, are not only* Pastors,
Teachers, Elders, Deacons and Helpers?

6. Whether the Offices of Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, Deans, Sub-Deans,
Prebendaries, Chancellors, Priests, Deacons, (as an order of the first step to
a Priesthood) Archdeacons, Subdeacons, Commissaries, Officials, Proctors,
Registers, Apparitors, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Canons, Petty-Canons,
Gospellers, Epistollers, Chaunters, Virgers, Organ-Players, Queristers, be
Offices any where instituted by the Lord Jesus in the Scripture?

7. Whether the calling and admission into these last mentioned Offices, their
administration, and maintenance now had, and received in England, be according
to the Word of God?

8. Whether every true visible particular Church of Christ, be not a select
company of People, called and separated from the world and False Worship
thereof, by the Spirit and Word of God, and joined together in the Fellowship
of the Gospel, by their own free and voluntary consent, giving up themselves to
Christ and one another according to the Will of God?

9. Whether a company of People living in a Parish (though the most of them be
visible Drunkards, Swearers, etc. or at least strangers to the work of
regeneration upon their souls) coming (by compulsion or otherwise) to the
hearing of Public Prayers or Preaching, are in the Scripture account Saints,
and a Church of Christ according to the Pattern given forth by him: Or rather,
be not to be esteemed Daughters of the old Whore and Babel, spoken of in the
Scriptures?

10. Whether in such a Church there is, or can rationally be supposed to be, a
true Ministry of the institution of Christ?

11. Whether the Book of Common Prayer, or stinted Lyturgies, be of the
prescription of Christ, and not of man's devising and invention?

12. Whether if one part of a Worship used by a People, be polluted, the whole
of their Worship be not to be looked upon, in a Scripture account, as polluted
and abominable, according to 1 Kings 18. 21. 2 King. 17. 33. Isa. 66. 3. Hos.
4. 15. Ezekiel. 43. 8. Zeph. 1. 5? so that if their Prayers be naught and
polluted, their Preaching be not so too.

13. Whether a Ministry set up in direct opposition unto a Ministry of Christ,
which rises upon its fall, and falls by its rise, can by such as so account of
it be lawfully joined unto?

14. Whether such as have forsworn a Covenant Reformation according to the
Word of God, and swear to a Worship that is merely of humane devising, that
have nothing of the essentials of a Ministry of Christ to be found upon them,
may be accounted of as his Ministers, and be adhered to?

15. Whether such as shall so do, be not guilty of casting contempt upon the
Institutions of Christ, and disobedience against his Royal Edicts, commanding
them to separate from persons of such a complexion? To which many others of
the like nature might be added.

CHAP. X.
Arguments for the lawfulness of hearing the present Ministers of England; 1.
From the supposed Precept of Christ, Mat. 23. 1. (whether the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 23. 1. were Magistrates or Ministers, debated: If Ministers,
that their Office and Calling was lawful, proved. That Christ neither commands
nor permits his Disciples to hear them, proved.) 2. From the practice of Christ
and his Apostles. 3. From Phil. 1. 15. 4. From their preaching truth. 5. From
Judas his preaching. 6. From their being good men. 7. From the practice of
Learned and Good men in former days, and now. 8. From the Magistrates command.
9. From the pretended Plea of their being true Ministers because they convert
souls. 10. From persons not knowing whither to go to hear: Fully answered.

HAving hitherto been upon the confirmation of the Truth asserted by us, viz.
That it is not lawful for Saints to hear the present Ministers of England, we
come now to consider, what is in this matter objected by our dissenting
Brethren. This is that they say,

Object. 1.
Christ commands (or at least permits) his Disciples to hear the Scribes and
Pharisees (who were men as corrupt in their Doctrine, as vicious* in their
lives, as the present Ministers of England can be supposed to be) Mat. 23. 1,
2. Therefore it is lawful to hear these.

Answ. This being the main Objection used by our dissenting Brethren in this
day (as it was by others in times past) their very Achilles in this
controversy, we shall speak the more largely to it: Many things are supposed
by the Objectors, and taken for granted (and must be so by all that judge any
weight to be in what is from this supposed command of Christ argued) which they
will never be able to prove; and yet are the very basis upon which the stress
of the Objection lies.

As 1. It Is supposed that the Scribes and Pharisees here spoken of, were in the
Ministerial Seat, Teachers and Expounders of the Law, which at first view seems
to be a difficult task for any to demonstrate. That some of the Scribes and
Pharisees (which were particular Sects among the Jews, as is known) were so,
cannot be denied; that these here mentioned by our Savior are such, is not so
evident. They are expressly said to sit in Moses Seat (not Aarons) who though he
were of the Tribe of Levi, yet was not the Ministerial, but Magistratical Seat
committed unto him. To the Posterity of Aaron did the Office of Priesthood
appertain (as is known to all that have but in the least turned aside to
consider of this affair) nor is it altogether frivolous, that is by some
observed, That these Scribes and Pharisees are especially charged with the
omission of Judgment and Mercy; things most nearly relating unto the Office of
Magistracy, to whom it does especially appertain to look thereunto. Now will it
in the least follow, That supposing Christ enjoined his Disciples to attend
upon the Scribes and Pharisees, acting as Magistrates, and conform to what is
justly and righteously prescribed by them as such: That therefore it is lawful
to attend upon the present Ministers of England. But let this be granted;
Suppose,

2. The Scribes and Pharisees to be the Preachers and Expounders of the Law in
that day, the Seat mentioned, to be a Ministerial Seat; yet this will not at
all help them in the matter in controversy, except it be granted to them, that
the Scribes and Pharisees were not a lawful, but a false Ministry, that had
surreptitiously climbed up into this Ministerial Seat (for who sees not the
invalidity and nothingness of this Argument, 'Twas lawful to hear the Scribes
and Pharisees which were the lawful Church Officers of that day, of the
appointment of the Lord, acting by virtue of an Authority derived from him;
Therefore it is lawful to hear persons that have not any such Authority from
Christ, but are mere Intruders and Ministers of Antichrist) (as the present
Ministers of England have been proved to be.) Now this upon that supposition,
that they were Ministers, we cannot yield, for these Reasons. 1. The Pharisees
are expressly said to be Priests and Levits, John 1. 19. (and this is the record
of John, when the Jews sent Priests and Levits from Jerusalem, to ask him, Who
art thou? ver. 24. And they that were sent were of the Pharisees) which were
the ordinary lawful Ministers of that day. 2. These of all others were most apt
to question the Authority of such as taught the People: So when John appears
Preaching and Baptizing, and professes to them, that he was not the Christ, nor
Elias, nor Prophet (who was expected by the People of the Jews) they immediately
question his Authority, John 1. 25. Why baptizest thou then? which they could
not be supposed to have the face to do, if they themselves, of all others, had
been the greatest Intruders. Nay, 3. When they question Christ himself about
his Authority, he asks not them, From whence they had theirs (which doubtless
upon that occasion, he would have done, had they not been lawfully seated in
the Seat they did possess) but from whence John had his, who was esteemed as a
Prophet. 4. We have the Lord Jesus many times crying out above all others,
against the Pharisees, condemning them of Pride, Hypocrisy, Avarice, etc. but
not the least tittle of the usurpation of Moses-seat, is by him charged upon
them, or in the least intimated, which doubtless would have been had they been
guilty thereof. But let this also be granted, that we may hear this Argument
speak its uttermost, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat; this Seat is
a Ministerial Seat, and they sit not here by virtue of any lawful Authority,
but are mere intruders; what follows from hence? why this, if it were lawful to
hear the Scribes and Pharisees, persons vicious in their lives, corrupt in
their doctrine, having no lawful call to the place they possessed: then it
undeniably follows, that it is lawful to hear the present Ministers of England,
though they have no lawful Authority or Call to the Office they assume. It must
it seems, then 3dly, be granted, that when Christ says, What they say unto
you, do, he is to be interpreted, to command, or at least, to permit an
attendance upon their Ministry. But this is that we deny, and dare confidently
aver, That it never entered into the heart of Christ to permit, much less to
command any to attend upon the Ministry of the Scribes and Pharisees: Nor is
any such thing in the least intimated in the words under consideration. For
first, the words are in the original, (...), etc. which may more strictly be
rendered, the Scribes and Pharisees have sat in Moses Chair, all things
therefore whatsoever they have said unto you, etc. (i. e. whatever in times
past, you have heard delivered by these men, according to the mind of God, do
you not now reject because of that Hypocrisy, Pride, Coveteousness, etc. you
are made to see is predominant in them. Let the words be as they are rendered,
whatever they bid you observe and do, that observe and do. Yet 2ly, who that
has but half an eye can choose but see, that an attendance upon their Ministry
is remote enough from being their intendment? We had always thought, that they
might have been sufficiently acquainted with, and been in a capacity of hearing
and knowing what had been said by these men through their particular occasional
meeting and discourse with them, though they had never spent one hour in
attending upon their Ministry. Which that our Savior did not enjoin, no nor so
much as permit by that expression, we suppose may be clearly demonstrated from
the ensuing considerations.

1. There are not a generation of men of whom the Lord Jesus does speak more
contemptuously (and charges with greater enormities) than he does of that
generation of Scribes and Pharisees. In this very chapter he enforms us of
their Hypocrisy, ver. 5, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29. and Pride, ver 6, 7. and tells us
plainly that they shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, neither entering
in themselves, nor suffering those that are entering, to go in, ver. 13. That
they make their Proselytes twofold more the children of Hell than themselves,
v. 15. that they are blind Guides, ver. 16, 19, 24, 26. perverters of the
Scripture, such as make void the Commandments of God by their Traditions, ver.
16, 17, 18. that they are Serpents, a generation of Vipers, that cannot escape
the damnation of Hell, ver. 33. yea, such as shall kill, crucify, scourge,
persecute the Messengers of the Lord, ver. 34. And can it be imagined, that
Christ should have no more tenderness to poor souls, than to direct them to an
attendance upon such persons as these for teachings? -- Credat Apelles! Are
these likely motives to persuade, or enforce any thereunto? Yet this is what he
immediately subjoyns, having said, whatever they bid you observe, that observe
and do.

2. The Doctrines owned by them are known: The Tessera of their Sect, was,
Justification by the works of the Law, which is diametrically opposite to the
work Christ was then upon, and the Doctrine preached by him.

3. That they denied Christ to be the Messiah, blasphemed him in his Doctrine
(as the deceiver of the people) in his Life (as a VVinebibber and glutonous
person) in his Miracles (as one that wrought them by the Devil, who are
therefore condemned by Christ, as guilty of the very sin of Blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost, Mat. 12. 31.) is known, as being what is frequently remarked in
the Scripture.

4. We no where find the Disciples attending upon the Ministry of the Scribes
and Pharisees, notwithstanding this supposed command or permission of Christ.
Nay,

5. We cannot but think the supposition hereof, not only inconsistant with,
and opposite to that expression concerning Christ, Mar. 6. 34. And Jesus when
he saw much People was moved with compassion toward them, because they were as
Sheep not having a Shepherd (what? without a Shepherd, and yet the Scribes and
Pharisees, whose feeding they might lawfully attend upon; does Christ pity
them in this destitute state, and not give them one word of direction to wait
upon these profound and worthy Doctors?) but also contrary to that solemn
command given forth from the Lord, Acts 2. 40. Save your selves from this
untoward generation; and the practice of the Disciples, who continued in the
Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and breaking of Bread and Prayer, Acts 2. 42.

6. Were that the intendment of Christ, as is suggested (and the Argument used
by our Brethren valid) a lawfulness to hear the variest Blasphemer in the
world, that denies that Christ is the Messiah, affirms that he was a Deluder of
the people, a gluttonous person, a winebiber, one that did Miracles by
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, that persecutes even to death Christ in his
People, might by a like parity of Reason be deduced. Christ commanded, or at
least permitted, his Disciples to hear the Pharisees who were such (as has
been proved) therefore it is lawful to hear persons with the same characters
upon them. But God forbid any such injurious dealing should be offered to
Christ, or that any who pretend to fear God (and I hope do so in reality)
should stand by a cause which has no better Arguments to defend it, than what
may be as righteously every way made use of for the attending upon the Ministry
of the greatest Blasphemer or Opposer of Christ in the world. Evident then it
is, notwithstanding the great flourish that many make with this Scripture, for
the abetting of their attendance upon the present Ministers of England, that it
refuses to admit the least sanctuary thereunto. The Scribes and Pharisees,
mentioned Mat. 23. 1, 2. may for ought we know be Magistrates, not Ministers;
if Ministers, they were, as has been proved, lawfully so: Christ says
concerning them, Whatever they bid you observe and do, that observe and do.
Therefore it is lawful to attend upon the Ministers of England, whose lawful
calling to their Office cannot be proved; yea, though there is not the least
intimation of a Command from Christ, or so much as a permission to his
Disciples, to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, -- Nugae et tricae sicula! If
this be to dispute, a man need not fear but to be able to multiply Arguments at
an easy rate, for whatever he has a mind to undertake the defense of: yet
this is supposed by many to he of the greatest moment in this controversy.

Object. 2.
If it be said, But we find Christ, and the Apostles after him, going
frequently into the Synagogues, were these Scribes and Pharisees preached.

Answer.

We answer, first; That all that Christ and the Apostles did, is not lawful for
Saints to practice, will not be denied: many instances are near at hand for its
confirmation, should it so be. 2. That it is one thing to go into the
Synagogues, and another thing to go thither to attend upon the Ministry of such
as taught there: this is the present case, which that Christ or the Apostles
ever did cannot be proved. 3. They went thither to oppose them in, and confute
their Innovations and Traditions in the Worship of God, to take an opportunity
to teach and instruct the People in his Way and Will: Which when any have a
spirit to do, and are satisfied that they are thereunto called by the Lord, in
respect of the present Ministers and Worship of England, we shall be so far
from condemning them therein, that we shall bless God for them. But this is not
to the purpose in hand: the attendance of our Brethren upon the Ministry of
England is quite another thing, that requires other Arguments for its support,
than we have hitherto met with.

-- Parvas habet spes Troja si Tales habet. Object. 3.
Paul rejoices at the Preaching of the Gospel, though 'twas preached out of
envy, Phil. 1. 15, 16. To which briefly;

1. There may be cause of rejoicing in respect of the issue and event of
things, by the wise Providence of God, though the means used for their
production be evil; and not to be abetted or complied with: In what have
Christians greater cause of rejoicing than in the death of Christ? Yet had it
been utterly unlawful to have joined in counsel with, or any ways abetted or
encouraged those wicked persons that crucified and slew him. Should the Pope
send some Jesuits into any remote parts of America to preach the Gosplel to the
poor Indians there, here were upon some accounts ground of rejoicing, yet no
ground for Saints to attend upon a Jesuitical Ministry. But 2ly, it appears
not, that these Paul speaks of, were not true Gospel Ministers, and so it
reaches not the case in hand: This being that, we have proved the Ministers of
England guilty of, viz. an acting in the Holy Things of God without any
Commission from Christ, which when our Dissenting-Brethren prove they have, we
shall easily acknowledge the lawfulness of attending upon their Ministry. 3ly,
It follows not in the least, that these the Apostle speaks of, were either not
real Saints, or not true Ministers of Christ, because they are said to preach
him out of envy; the object whereof was not Christ; (for had they envied him,
they would never have preached him) but Paul, (thinking, says he, to add
affliction to my bonds) which is consistant with Grace, and a lawful Mission to
the preaching of the Gospel. Yet, 4thly, Here is not in this Scripture the
least word requiring Christians to hear them. That because Paul rejoices at
their preaching, therefore it is the duty of Saints to attend upon their
Ministry, is such a Non-sequiter as will never be made good.

Object. 4.
The Ministers of England preach Truth, and is it not lawful to hear Truth
preached? We answer,

1. That it is lawful to hear Truth preached is readily granted: but this must
be done lawfully, and in the way of Christ's Appointment. 2ly. All that preach
Truth are not to be heard, nor will our dissenting Brethren say they are. For,
1. There was never yet any Heretical-Preacher in the world, but he preached
some Truth; is it lawful to hear such? this will not be said. 2. The Devil
himself preached Truth, yet Christ forbids him, and commands that he hold his
peace. 3. The Popish Priests preach Truth; yet who will say it is lawful to
attend upon their Ministry? But, 3dly, As the present Ministers of England
preach Truth, So, 1. They preach it but by halves, and dare not for fear of the
L. Bishops Inhibition, preach any doctrine, though never so clearly revealed in
the Scriptures, and owned by them as the Truth of Christ, he commands them not
to meddle with. 2. The main Truths they preach (at least many of them) are
contradicted in their practice. They Will tell you that the Lord Jesus is the
great Prophet, and King of his Church; but how palpably this is contradicted by
them in their practice, conforming to Institutions and Laws that are not of his
prescription, who sees not? This we have already abundantly demonstrated. 3.
With the Truth they preach, they mingle many Errors, directly contrary to the
Scripture, and the Revelation Christ has made of his Will therein. Instances
of this kind have been already exhibited, to which may be added many more: we
shall mention but a few, 1. That the Ministry, Worship and Government which
Christ has appointed to his Church, is not to be received or joined unto,
unless the Magistrates (where they are reputed Christian) do allow it. 2. That
the Apocryphal books which have in them Errors (2 Mac. 12. 44, 45. and 14. 41,
42. Eccles. 46. 20. Wisd. 19. 11.) Untruths (2 Esd. 14. 21, 22, 23. 2 Macc. 2.
4-8. Tob. 5. 11, 12, 13. with 12. 15. Judith 8. 33. and 10. 9, with v. 12. and
11. 6, 12, 13, 14, 15. 1 Mac. 9. 3, 18. with 2 Mac. 1. 13 to 17. and 9. 1, 5,
7, 9, 28, 29.) Blasphemy ( Tob. 12. 12, 15. with Romans 8. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Rev.
8. 3, 4.) Magic ( Tobit 6. 6, 7, 8. and 9. 2, 3. with 3. 7, 8. and 11. 10, 11,
13. with 2. 9, 10.) and contradiction to the Canonical Scriptures, ( Judith 9.
2, 3, 4. compared with Genesis 49. 5, 6, 7. Esther in the Apocrypha, chap. 12. 5.
and 15. 9, 10. with Ester canonical, chap. 6. 3. and 5. 2. Eccles. 46. 20. with
Isa. 57. 2.) may be used in the Public Worship of God. 3. That the most
wicked, and their seed, may be compelled, and received to be members of the
Church. 4. That Marriage may be forbidden at certain seasons, as in Lent,
Advent, Rogation-week, etc. 5. That Baptism is to be administered with a Cross
in the forehead, and that as a symbolical sign. 6. That though the most
notorious obstinate Offenders be partakers of the Lord's Supper, yet the people
that join with them are not defiled thereby. 7. That there may be Holy Days
appointed to the Virgin Mary, John Baptist, to the Apostles, All Saints and
Angels; together also with Fasts on their Eves, on Ember-dayes, Fridayes,
Saturdayes (so called heathenishly enough) and Lent. 8. That the Cope,
Surplice, Tippit, Rocket, etc. are meet and decent Ornaments for the Worship of
God and Ministry of the Gospel. 9. That the Book of Common Prayer is the true
Worship of God. 10. That Christ descended into Hell (as if Christ descended
into the place of the Damned, as the Papists hold. 11. That Lord Bishops can
give the Holy Ghost, and power to forgive and retain Sins. 12. That Altars,
Candles, Organs, etc. are necessary and useful in the Church of God. 13. That
all Children Common Prayer Book of Public Baptism.
when baptized are regenerate, and received by the Lord for his own Children by
Adoption. Yea, 14. That Children being baptized, have all things necessary for
their Salvation, and shall undoubtedly be saved. So they profess in the Order
of Confirmation in the Common Prayer Book; with much more that might be offered
in this matter.

Object. 5.
Judas preached, though a wicked man; and no doubt 'twas lawful, yea the duty
of Saints to hear him.

To this we say,

No doubt but it was so. But, 1. Judas was not a visible wicked man at the time
of his preaching, but so close an Hypocrite, that he was not known to be so, no
not to the Disciples: But some of the present Ministers of England are visibly
wicked and profane.

2. Judas was chosen, and called by Christ to be an Apostle, commissionated by
him to preach: but the present Ministers of England are not so, as has been
proved. So that this is not at all to the business in hand.

Object. 6.
But there are some good men amongst them, and such as belong to God, may we
not hear good men? To which briefly.

Answer.

1. That there are some amongst the present Preachers of this day, that are
good men, we shall not stand to deny: Yet,

2. We crave leave to say, That they are all of them such as are sadly polluted
and defiled by their Compliance, in respect of their standing in the Ministry
Antichristian, whose teachings Saints have no warrant to attend upon.

3. The greater hopes we have of their goodness, the more cautelous should we
be of encouraging them in a false way; that they by our relinquishment of them,
and separating from them (after we have discharged all other duties we are
satisfied are incumbent upon us to perform toward them) may come to see their
sin, repent, and do their first works, that God and we may again receive them.

4. Yet the goodness of any, as to the main, is no warrant for any to hold
communion with them, or attend upon their teachings: There are Brethren that
walk disorderly, whom it is the duty of Saints to separate from: that the very
best of the Ministers of England do so, will not be denied. The Incestuous
person, 1 Cor. 5. was, as to the main, for ought I know, a good man; yet were
not the Saints at Corinth to hold communion with him, till upon his repentance
he was again received, 2 Cor. 2. 6.

5. It Is utterly unlawful to communicate with a devised Ministry, upon what
pretext soever.

6. So is it for any to partake in other men's sins (as has been proved): but
every usurped Ministry is the sin of him (though never so holy a person) that
exercises it.

Object. 7.
But many Learned and Good men (and such as in conscience could not conform to
the Ceremonies of the Church of England) have in days past (and do now) hear
the present Ministers thereof.

To which we answer,

1. That the greatest Scholars, and most accomplished for humane Wisdom, Parts,
yea visible Holiness, have not been always on the Lords side, following him in
paths of his own appointment; but many times have been found the greatest
Persecutors and Opposers of Christ; the most stupendously ignorant of the Will
of God in respect of the Truth, and Work of their Generation, of any persons in
the world: Witness the Scribes and Pharisees, the Learned Rabbis, and Profound
Doctors of that day, with what virulency did they oppose Christ and the
Doctrine of the Gospel preached by him?

2. That persons of as great Holiness, and renown for Learning, and all manner
of Accomplishments, as learned Ainsworth, Cotton, etc. have been and are of the
same apprehension with us in this matter: Not to mention the Reformed Churches,
who generally renounce the Ministry of the Church of England, not admitting any
by virtue of it to the charge of souls (as they speak.)

But 3. To the Law and to the Testimony, Isa. 8. 20. if they speak not
according to this Rule, though Angels for knowledge and holiness, they are not
to be received, or heeded: One word from the Lord is of more weight to hearts
made truly tender, than the Example of an hundred Professors can be: it is
possible these may err be yea and nay; but so cannot the Truth of God, which
is always the same, and will abide so for ever.

4. The Apostle has long since determined this case, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be ye
followers of me as I am of Christ: So far as Saints follow Christ, I may and
ought to follow them, but no further: So that the Learning, Parts, or Holiness
of any that attend upon the present Ministers of England, is no warrant for me
so to do; nor will ever be a satisfactory answer to that enquiry, Who has
required these things at your hands?

Object. 8.
But the Magistrate commands us, and ought we not to obey Magistrates?

Answer.

1. That Magistrates have no power to command in matters of instituted Worship,
where Christ is silent, or to govern in his Church, is affirmed by many.

2. The Commands of Magistrates, when contrary to the Will and Way of Christ,
are not to be subjected to. This case is long since stated and resolved by the
Apostle ( Acts 4. 19, 20. and 5. 29.) and Spirit of the Lord, breathing long
before in his renouned Witnesses, Dan. 3. 16, 17. and 6. 10. nor is it denied
by any that are sober, or juditious. Whether the hearing of the present
Ministers of England be contrary to the Word of God, the Will and Way of
Christ, we leave, from what has been offered, to the considerate Reader to
judge; And shall only add what was long since asserted by Augustine in this
matter, who August. do Verb. Domini, Sermon. 6.
was herein fully of the same mind with us; Sed timeo inquies ne offendas
Majorem, time prorsus, ne offendas Majorem, and non offendes Deum. Quid enim
times ne offendas Majorem? Vide ne forsan major sit isto quem times offendere.
Majorem certe noli offendere -- quis est inquies Major eo qui me genuit a an
ille qui Teipsum creavit? -- qui enim resistit Potestati, Dei Ordinationi
resistit: sed quid si illud jubeat quod non debes facere? -- timondo
postestatem ipsos humanarum rerum gradus advertite: si aliquid jusserit
Curator, nonne faciendum est? tam et si contra Proconsul jubeat, at non utique
contemnis potestatem, sed eligis Majori servire, nec hinc debet Minor irasci,
si Major praelata est. Rursum si aliquid ipse Proconsul jubeat, and aliud
subeat Imperator, numquid dubitatur in illo contemptu, illi esse serviendum?
Ergo si aliud Imperator, and aliud Deus, quid judicatis? solve tributum, est
mihi in obsequio, recte! Sed non in Idolio, in Idolio prohibet, quis prohibet?
Major Potestas. Da veniam! tu cancerum, ille gehennam minatur. He tells us
plainly that such as fear to offend their Superiors, should much more fear to
offend God, who is greater than all. The Emperors and Monarchs of the World
threaten us with a Prison if we disobey them; the LORD threatens us with Hell,
upon our disobedience of Him.

Object. 9.
But the Ministers of England are true Gospel Ministers, for they convert
souls; which the Apostle makes the Seal of his Ministry or Apostleship:
Therefore it is lawful to hear them.

To this we say,

That the Ministers of England are true Gospel Ministers, is absolutely denied
by us; what is offered in this Objection, proves nothing.

1. Paul makes not the Conversion of the Church of Corinth, singly, a
sufficient Demonstration, or convincing Argument of his Apostleship; he only
uses it, as what was most likely to win, and work upon their affections, who
upon other accounts could not but know that he was an Apostle of the Lord Jesus.

2. Conversion of souls is no Argument, either of a lawful Call to an
Apostleship, or Ministry of Christ: For, 1. Many have converted souls, that
were not Apostles, as ordinary Ministers. 2. The Lord has used private
Brethren, Women, yea, some remarkable Providence, as instruments in his hand
for the conversion of many souls; yet who will say that private Brethren,
Women, or Divine Providence are Apostles or Ministers of the Lord Jesus. But
3dly, should it be granted, that Conversion of Souls is an Argument of a lawful
Ministry, where are the Churches, nay where are the particular persons
converted by them? we have not heard of any, nor will it be an easy task for
the Objectors to produce instances in this matter.

Object. 10.
But our Ministers are removed, and we know not where to go to hear; would you
have us sit at home idle? we cannot so spend the Lord's day.

Answer.

To which we would humbly offer a few things:

1. That though we are not against any Ordinance of Jesus Christ, yet we are
afraid that those poor souls, that know not how to spend the Lord's day without
hearing, do too much idolize that Ordinance of God, and never knew what it was
to spend that day with him.

2. You need nor sit at home; if you are enquiring after God, and communion
with his People, you may soon hear of some one or other of the Assemblies of
the Saints, whither you may repair to wait upon the Lord with them.

3. But thirdly, Were it, or should it be otherwise; Yet better be idle, than
do worse; better do nothing, than sin against God, encourage others in their
evil deeds, pollute and wound thy own soul, grieve the Saints, stumble and
harden the wicked, and cause them to blaspheme God, his Name, Sanctuary, and
such as dwell therein. But,

4. There is no necessity of being idle; If thou know not where to hear on
that day, have thou no work to do save that? 1. Art sure that God, and Christ,
and Eternal Glory are thy portion and inheritance? Thou walk in the Light of
Assurance, or thou do not? if thou do, is one day in seven too much to
spend in the solemn admiration of Grace, that ever so vile a creature as thou,
should be accounted worthy of such unexpressible kindness and glory? what, O
what will Eternity be then? If thou do not, are not these worthy of thy
utmost diligence to get Assurance of? What, stand idle, and an Interest in God,
Christ, and Eternal Glory to make sure of! 2. Art thou sufficiently acquainted
with thine own heart? do know so much of thy self as thou need to know? or
judge thou this to be a work that requires not thy utmost diligence and
attendance? 3. Have thou no sin to be mortified, no want to be supplied, no
grace to be quickened and strengthened in thee? 4. Have thou as much communion
with God as thou desire? have heard as often from him by the teachings of the
Spirit (the incomparably and infinitely best Teacher) as thou do wish? or
do think that God will not manifest himself to, and teach in a corner, a poor
soul that is there waiting for him alone, because there be no Assemblies of
Saints he knows of, to whom he might join himself, and he dares not have
communion with Adulterers? If thou have not fellowship with God thou desire,
and teachings from him, (as who has) stir up thy self to lay hold on God,
groan, and cry after him, till he has brought thee into his Chambers, and
afforded thee richer displayes of his Glory. 5. Art thou altogether ready
trimmed (without more ado) for the Coming and Kingdom of Christ Jesus? what
should I mention those important duties of reading the Scriptures, meditation
on them, etc. have thou all this to do, and much more that might be added, and
yet nothing to do on the Lord's day? Set about these things in good earnest,
and when thou live in the Light of Assurance, without the least doubt or
clouding, when thou art sufficiently acquainted with thine own heart, the Will
and Scriptures of the Lord; when thou have as much communion with God in
retirement as thou desire, and teachings from his Spirit; when thou have no
sin to be mortified, nor grace to be quickened and strengthened; when thou art
quite ready for the day of Christ, and need no further fittings, we shall
consider what may further be said to this Objection; but till then it cannot be
pleaded, when souls have all this work to do, that they must sit at home idle,
if they go not to hear the Preachers of this day. But thus far of the
Objections that are by some made against the Assertion of the Unlawfulness of
attending upon the present Ministers of England; which are all of any moment we
have yet met with: what of weight is in them, must be left to the judgment of
the Christian Reader to determine.

We shall add no more but this, That we have spoken our judgment and
conscience herein, as in sincerity, in the sight of God; with what meekness,
Christian tenderness, and fear of giving any just offense to the truly
Conscientious, he knows. The sole of our aim in the whole, is, That Christ may
be glorified in the recovery of any poor Lamb, that is turned aside to the
flocks of the Companions in this cloudy and dark day; that others that have
hitherto kept themselves from Idols might be further established in the Will of
God, and strengthened to follow Christ in his temptations, that they may inherit
that Kingdom and Glory, prepared for them before the foundation of the world:
May we but in the least contribute, by Divine Blessing, hereunto, whatever
becomes of these Papers, or how ever they be by others accounted of, we have
our end, and shall rest satisfied.

FINIS.

