A REPLY OF Sir GEORGE DOWNING Knight and Baronet, Envoy Extraordinary from His
Majesty of Great Britain, etc.

TO THE REMARKS OF THE Deputies of the Estates-General, UPON HIS MEMORIAL Of
December 20. 1664. Old Style.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1665.

A REPLY of Sir George Downing, Knight and Baronet, Envoy Extraordinary from
His Majesty of Great Britain, etc. To the Remarks of the Deputies of the
Estates General, upon his Memorial of the 20th of December, 1664. Old Style.
THE underwritten Envoyee Extraordinary of His most Sacred Majesty of Great
Britain, etc. having sent to the King His Master a certain Book printed at the
Hague, and Entitled, Succinct Remarks and Deductions made by the Deputies of
the Estates General of the United Provinces, upon his last Memorial, and
approved by the said Estates, and ordered by them to be delivered by their
Agent de Heyde to the Ministers of several Kings residing here, and to be sent
to their Ministers abroad with this Direction and Instruction, page 3. To the
End, that they continue duly to inform those Kings of the foundation of the
Alliance which this State has with them, and of the true State of Affairs; and
to the End that they do cause Their Majesty's to comprehend the sincerity of
their Intentions and Procedure. And His Majesty having also been informed, That
the said Book has accordingly been sent and delivered, has commanded him His
Minister to say thereupon, by way of Reply, as follows.

And first, as to the bitter Invectives, Reproaches, and foul and railing
Language wherewith the said Book is stuffed from the beginning to the End; It
is to be remarked, that it is an usual thing here (however strange it may seem
elsewhere) to revenge themselves in this kind upon any with whom they have
Disputes. How many Resolutions has he seen of the Estates General, wherein the
Subjects of other Princes having addressed themselves to the Kings their
Masters, upon their just Complaints against the People of this Country, and the
said Complaints thereupon brought to them in their Name, and by their Order,
they have not contented themselves with the not doing them Justice, but fallen
upon their Persons with railing Language, treating them with the Title of
Impudent, etc. And having had lately a Dispute with the Bishop of Munster, a
Prince of the Empire, they thought it not enough to take the Sconce or Place in
Question, but in their Letter to the Emperor of the 10th of June 1664. and
which was printed and sold publicly here at the Hague, they treated the said
Bishop with the Titles and Characters of Unjust Usurper, great Impudence, and
that his humor rendered him incompatible, if not to His own Subjects, yet at
least to all His Neighbors: But certainly, it is a practice very little to the
reputation or advantage of any that use it: Such as have a good Cause in hand
to plead, will not spoil it by railing Language, which renders suspect whatever
is said, as proceeding from Passion, and not from Reason; but such as have an
ill one, when they cannot answer ad Argumentum, they turn themselves ad
Hominem: And as to himself, he is not here as a particular Person, but as the
Minister of the King his Master: And he is commanded to say, that there was not
one word in his said Memorial, that passed the bounds and limits either of his
Orders, or of Civility, and good Manners: And as whatever Evil Treatment by
Word or Deed is done to any public Minister residing in any Court in the
Execution of his Office and Instructions, is done to his Master, That His
Majesty takes them all as said against his own Royal Person, Crown, and
Dignity, and looks upon it as a piece of Turcism, and of the way of those of
Algiers, where when any Dispute arises between them and any other Prince or
State that has a Minister residing there, they sometimes revenge themselves
upon the Minister first, with reviling Words, and then with blows; and the one
is as lawful as the other: Nor is the King Himself, His Parliament, and the
whole Nation in General, better treated therein than he; and is this the way to
accommodate matters? or is this a proper preparatory and Introduction to that
Extraordinary Embassy from France to England for that End?

And as to the matter of the said Book, page 5th, 6th. The Deputies endeavor
to justify the Procedure of the Estates General, in not communicating to him
their Resolution, to which his last Memorial was an Answer, upon this double
ground; First, That if he the said Envoy Extraordinary would have had it, or
any Copy of it, that he ought to have sent to their Secretary for it. Secondly,
That it was not their intention to answer to his Memorial, and that he had
nothing to do with that Resolution. As to the first: Every Court has its
Customs; and he does declare, That to his best remembrance in the many years he
has resided here, he never received any one Resolution of the Estates, but
what was sent to him by their Agent de Heyde, or some other Officer of theirs;
and that having once for have sent to their Secretary for the Copy of a Paper
that did concern him, answer was made, That they could give none till they had
order; and that when they had such order it should be sent. As to the Second:
Was not the said Resolution Entitled, Extract out of the Register of the
Resolutions of the Estates General, upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing?
And does it not begin, Having deliberated by way of Resumption upon the
Memorial of Sir George Downing, etc. And was not the whole Body thereof, To
make appear the contrary of what had been by him alleged in his said
Memorial? And how is it then, That he had nothing to do with it? Was he not
here upon the account of the King his Master, to do his business, to maintain
his Cause upon the account of the Disputes between him and this State? And
shall such a Resolution be Printed and published, and given to other Ministers
by them, and can it be said that he had nothing to do with it? Whereas in truth
he was the principal, and concerned in the first place, and other Ministers
only Secondarily; and that their Communicating the same to them, and not to
him, looked rather like a Surprisal of them and their Master, then otherwise.

For what is further said, page 6th, of his having distributed his Memorial,
'twas not he but the King his Master that sent it to other King, and Princes:
All he did was to give it to some other Ministers: And what is more ordinarily
and constantly practiced, here and in other Courts, then for public Ministers
upon occasion to give one another Copies of their Memorials and Papers? But
this was not done till it had been first given to the Estates General; and they
in printing and publishing their Answers, without delivering them to him or the
King his Master, did thereby break off all further Treaty between him and them;
and to be a Minister of the first, second or third rank makes no difference as
to this, they are alike sent to the State, and to deliver their Papers in the
first place to them, and they theirs reciprocally to the said Ministers; and
when this Correspondence is broken off, it cease to be any further a
Negotiation or Treating, and becomes a declaring against each other, and an
appeal to others thereupon. And so is this Case.

Page the 6th and 7th. In answer to what he had said of his Majesty's having as
a perpetual mark of his kindness toward this Country, suffered many ancient
pretenses of his Subjects to be blotted out, the Deputies are pleased to say,
Upon which there is to be considered, that if this abolition of all ancient
pretenses be a mark of affection, the pretenses of the Subjects of this State,
and of the State it self, were much greater in number and quality then those of
the English (as appears by the LISTS exchanged on both sides), they desired
that all the Piratories done by Portugal Commissions should have been
forgotten, and de facto your Lordships have testified so much more affection
then the King of England, for that you have yielded more of your Right then he;
for that which ought to be principally considered here is, that it will not be
found that even before the conclusion of the said Treaty, any one English Ship
has been taken by the Inhabitants of these Provinces, or their Arms, which
the English could reclaim, as belonging really to them. Whereas the said LISTS
of damages did not consist of, or intermedle with, or contain in them any
thing that was blotted out by the said Treaty, but only such matters as were
reserved by the same. And as to any thing pretended to be done by Portugal
Commissions, those were also all matters that had happened since the year 1654.
and so also not mortified, but reserved by the said Treaty. And how then do the
Deputies bring these two instances, as Arguments that this State had forgiven
more than his Majesty? And as to their third Argument, which they call their
main one, viz. That it will not be found that even before the conclusion of the
said Treaty, any one English Ship has been taken by the Inhabitants of these
Provinces or their Arms, which the English could reclaim as belonging really
to them: and which is again repeated, page 11th and 12th. For that the English
cannot complain, that since that time (to wit, the time of the General
abolition) and before the conclusion of the said Treaty, the Inhabitants of
these Provinces have taken any one Ship Effectually belonging to English. What
may not be said by them that will publish to the World, deliver to foreign
Ministers here, and cause to be delivered by their Ministers abroad to Kings
and Princes, a Paper with such an Affirmation as this? What, not one Ship taken
before the Treaty, that the English could reclaim as belonging Effectually to
them? Was not the Ship Experience built in England! and belonging wholly to
English, Sailed wholly by English, taken Anno 1660. upon the Coast of Portugal,
with her lading worth between four and five Tun of Gold, by one Quaerts, and
others of Zealand? Was not the Ship Charles, belonging to Captain Spragg, and
others his Majesty's Subjects, and whereof he was Commander, taken as she was
peaceably at an Anchor in the Road of St Martins in France, under the
protection of the Castle, in the Month of July 1660, by three Men of War of
this State, and then in their Service, Commanded by one Captain Enno doedeson
Star, and the men barbarously treated? And so all that great Roll of Ships
specified and set down in the LIST of the Damages of the English, delivered by
him unto them, and all taken since the General Abolition, and before the
conclusion of the late Treaty, and the Times and Places, and by whom there
particularly specified? And is this (as is said page 3.) To inform duly the
Kings their Allies of the true Estate of Affairs between the King His Master,
and them? And have they not great Reason to expect, That upon such
Informations, they should break with the King his Master, to join with them?
Nor is it to be wondered, since their Papers contain in them such Informations
as these, that they pass by the King His Master, and Him His Minister, and give
them no Copies of them, and are so angry, that they take any notice of them.

For what is further said, page 7, 8. concerning the Lists of Damages, That the
Lists were exchanged in time convenient; that he the saidEnvoyee had so much
less Reason to complain upon this account; for that their Lordships were sooner
ready than he.

As to the first, The Treaty was concluded upon the 4th of September, 1662. St.
Vet. and the Lists of Damages were not exchanged till the 23d of August, 1664.
St. Vet. which was near two years after; and was that a convenient time to be
spent merely for the giving in of what they had to demand? or did it look like
a desire of hastening to a Conclusion, and determining those Matters that had
been the Cause of so much rancour between the Nations?

As to the Second, viz. their being ready sooner than Him, having several times
by word of Mouth earnestly solicited the Exchange of those LISTS; upon the
11th. of September, 1663. Old St. he gave a Memorial to the States General,
wherein he declared, That he was then ready on his part to exchange the said
LISTS, and did from time to time after press the Exchange thereof, giving in
also some other Memorials to that End; and yet it was near a year after, e're
he could obtain the same: And when about fourteen days before the Exchange
thereof the Agent de Heyde came to him to speak to him about the exchanging of
them. Which was the first Summons that ever he had about that Matter; He
returned for Answer, that it had been so long since he had been ready, that his
Papers were near musty with lying by; that he would look them out, and attend
at the day should be appointed for the Exchange of them: And when within a few
days after, viz. upon the 16th. day of August, he came to a conference with
the Deputies, theirs was not yet ready, for that they had it only in Dutch
(whereas it has been a constant Custom between them, as with other Ministers
also, to deliver all Matters in some common Language, or at least a Copy.) And
so that meeting lost, and the Exchange not made till the 23d, as abovesaid.

Page 8, 9. The Deputies say, To pursue from step to step the Text of the
Treaty, immediately after the Exchange of the LISTS, and before the speaking of
any accommodement, or decision of the Matters therein, two things were to be
examined: First, Whether the Pretensions set down therein, were not more
ancient than the times limited by the said Treaty? Secondly, Whether they were
of such a Nature and Quality as may be thought fit to be referred to such
Arbitration? Whereupon, in the Conferences about this Matter, their Deputies
made only one Remark upon the English LIST, to wit, upon a matter happened in the
Indies, and known atLondon, the 20th. of January, 1659. And it was accordingly
exchanged by him the said Envoy, and in the preliminary Conferences, only these
two things could be considered: However, it pleased the said Envoy to proceed
otherwise, employing to no purpose, in the examining matters, to the bottom,
the time in which the said LISTS might have been perfected, whereby it appears,
That, if the said LISTS have not been perfected, the said Envoye is the Cause
thereof, and not your Lordships.

With their favor there is a third thing, which by the Text of the 15th
Article was also to be considered in the Preliminary Conferences; and which is
the foundation of the other two, viz. That they be such matters as the one
Party has suffered or can pretend to have suffered from the other; nothing was
to stand in the LISTS, which, supposing the fact to be true, could not yet be
charged upon the other; and the English LIST was so carefully and modestly
penned, that the Deputies (as is here confessed) made but one only Exception
against it, though the Estates had sent it to all the Provinces, to all the
Admiralties, and to the East and West India Companies, to be Examined and
considered. And he the said Envoy Extraordinary had proceeded with that
Frankness and Candor, as to tell the Deputies at the time he delivered the
said LIST, that that Article was liable to Exception; and that he should not
have offered it, but that there were several notable circumstances that did
wholly differ it from others of the like Nature. And when in the next
Conference upon the 14th of October following O. St. the said Deputies did
demand to have it Expunged, in the ensuing Conference after, which was upon the
8th of November following O. St. he consented thereunto; and withal demanded
of them if they had any other Exception to make against the English LIST, to
which they replied, No: and then asked them whether the said LIST was not then
fully agreed by them, to which they replied, Yes.

And whereas they do impute to him, in relation to the Remarques made by him
upon their LIST, that he should have uselesly spent the time in Examining
matters to the bottom, he went not beyond the three rules above mentioned: but
whereas such care had been used in the penning of the English LIST, as that but
only one Exception could be made against the same, as abovesaid: the truth
is, there were very few Articles in theirs that were not liable to Exception by
the said rules. For Example, Article the 2d, 3d, 10th, 17th, 18th, 39th, 44th,
48th, etc. no time mentioned, whereby it could not be distinguished, whether
they were matters that happened within the time limited or not. Moreover,
Articles the 2d, 19th, 24th, 28th, 33d, 34th, 35th, 39th, 43d, 44th, 45th,
47th, 48th, 71, 72d, 73d, etc. no person named that should have done the
injuries there complained of; and so it appeared not whether those matters had
been done by English, or other Nations; and de facto in several Articles, the
persons named and complained against were no English, nor had we any thing to
do with them, as Article 16th, 20th, 30th, 68th, etc. and so they might as well
have inserted whatever Ships had been taken from them by the Turks. And a
notorious Pirate called Vryborn, who had no Commission, and who preyed
indifferently upon all Nations, having taken a Dutch Ship near Cuba, and coming
therewith by accident to the Island of Jamaica, the Governor there immediately
seized him, and clapped him and his Company in Irons as Pirates, and sent five of
them in Irons to London, to be tried for their lives; set the Dutch men that he
found on board him at liberty, and restored them their Ship, supplied them
freely with necessaries for their Voyage out of his Majesty's Stores, and gave
the Master of the Dutch Vessel money to go to London to prosecute him, and
provided him with a Passage; and the said Pirate is since hanged, and yet this
is inserted among others to augment the number of their pretenses. And for the
pretenses of the Dutch East India Company, he showed that they were so far from
being of such a Nature, as to be fit to be referred to such an Arbitrage by
Commissioners and Umpires, etc. or to any Arbitrage, as that in truth the very
inserting of them was a plain and downright Mocquery and Derision of the
English; for Example, Article the 4th. Whereas Anno 1661. the States General,
and the East India Company having given their Orders to the English East India
Company to receive possession of the Island of Poleron, (which of right was
theirs) and thereupon the said Company put themselves to a great Expense in
sending Shipping, Men, and all necessaries for the possessing and planting the
same; they content not themselves with the Non-delivery thereof, and their
frustrating thereby all that Expense, but here demand reparation for their
going to receive the same. So, Article the 5th, they demand reparation from the
English, because their East India Fleets return every year round Scotland, and
because they every year send a Convoy for the securing of them. Whereas what is
this to the English? Do not other Ships also that return in the Summer from
other long Voyages, by reason of the largeness of those Seas, and the length of
the days, return that way also? And do they not here constantly, even in time
of peace, grant Convoy to their Shipping for the Baltic, for France, and for
London it self? and why do they not by the same rule demand satisfaction from
the English for them also, and in the conclusion make them bear their whole
Naval Charge? If they think fit to return that way, and to be at the Expense of
Convoyes for their Shipping, What is that to the English? So Article the
Seventh, They say they command all their Ships outward bound for the East
Indies, not to enter into any Harbor, or cast Anchor in any Road of England,
and demand satisfaction for the same from the English. They may if they please
give such Orders to all their Shipping, and that as well inward as outward
bound, and by the same Rule demand satisfaction for the same. Article the
Eighth they say. That while they were in War with the King of Bantam, and kept
some Ships before the said place for the blocking of it up, the English
notwithstanding thereof did endeavor to Trade there. Is this a business to be
referred to such, or to any Arbitrage? If the Dutch be in War with any Country,
and have a few Ships Riding before a place, without a Land Force to block up
the same, Is it not lawful for English to Trade there? Yea in Anno 1659. did
not the Dutch East India Company make satisfaction to the English East India
Company, for three English Ships that they had then taken upon the account of
their having Traded at that place? Article the Ninth, They say they had a
Contract with the Queen of Achin for the sole buying of her Pepper, and some
other Commodities in certain places; and yet that the English had Traded in the
said places for the said Commodities: Whereas the English were no Parties to
the said Contract, and so not bound up therewith, and consequently no Action
against them if they did so Trade. Moreover, that there were several Articles
concerning Ships taken for Trading at His Majesty's Plantations contrary to the
Laws of His Kingdoms, and in the said Articles it is acknowledged that they did
Trade there, and that a great many of the said Articles were concerning matters
which in the Artiticles themselves they acknowledge to have been ended between
the parties themselves, and thereupon the money paid, yet therein revived, and
payment again demanded for them from the same Parties: And these, and other
Remarks of the like Nature having been made by him in the Conferences last
mentioned, to this day, he has never since heard from them: And how is it then
that they are pleased to say, That he the said Envoyee Extraordinary, and not
their Lordships, has been the cause the said LISTS are not perfected?

Page 9, 10, and 11. Concerning the Hopewell, Leopard, Charles, James, Mary,
etc. The Deputies say, That they were only hindered from trading in certain
places that were either formerly besieged, or blocked up by Sea; that the
English can demand no other Satifaction, but only for the loss of the profit of
their Voyage, and so that these Pretensions cannot be very considerable; that
theEnglish themselves have done the like in several rencounters, and that yet
this State has offered to His Majesty to satisfy the Persons interessed, and
to make a Reglement for the future. Suppose the Case as is here suggested, and
as they put it, that the places where those Ships would have traded, had been
really, and bona fide, blocked up by Sea, without being also blocked up by Land
(which they do not so much as pretend to affirm) how fresh and pregnant are the
Instances of the practice of this State against such a Maxim as that?

When the King of Spain had of late years a great Number of Ships of War upon
the Coast of Portugal, and before the Town of Lisbon, for the blocking of it up
by Sea: and though he had at that time a great Land Army in the Bowels of that
Kingdom, yet did they not send their Men of War thither, and that not only to
force their Trade, but also to take those Men of War of the Spaniards that had
interrupted the same? And when the late King of Sweden did formerly besiege the
Town of Dantzick with a great Fleet of Men of War, and had also at the same
time considerable Land Forces in those parts; yet did they not send a Fleet
from hence, and by force open their Trade there? whereby they have sufficiently
let the World see how little they will endure that Rule to be practiced against
them which they impose upon others: and let it but be taken for granted that
they may thus do, farewell all the Trade in the East Indies, or upon the Coast
of Africa, or upon any of those remote parts, for any other Nation but
themselves.

But with their favor, this is not the Case: As to the Hopewel and Leopard;
Has it not been made out in several Conferences, in the presence of the
Directors of the East India Company, not only by authentic Copies of the
Commissions and Instructions of the Captains of the said Ships, the protests
made by them, but under the hand of the Commander in Chief of the Dutch Fleet
before Couchin, that the Hopewell was upon her way from Surat to Porca, and
stopped in the open Sea as she was passing by Couchin to go thither, and not
suffered to pursue her Voyage: and that whereas the Leopard, being one of his
Majesty's own Ships, according to the Instructions she had to that Effect, came
of her own accord in her way to an Anchor before Couchin, to acquaint the same
Commander with her design for Porca, where the English had then a settled
Factory, to which the said Ships were consigned; and the Dutch at neither of
those times had either a Land Soldier within the Kingdom of Porca, or a Man of
War before the Town, nor upon the whole Coast of that Kingdom; that
notwithstanding thereof, they were both stopped by him, and not suffered to
pursue their Voyages thither. And here (if the said Envoy Extraordinary would
give himself the liberty) might he not justly retort on them their railing and
reviling language, for affirming, as is here affirmed, that they were only
hindered from Trading in places blocked up by Sea?

And as to the Charles, James, and Mary, has it not been made out at several
Conferences by Authentic and undeniable proofs, that the places where they
were hindered from Trade were not besieged or blocked up by Sea? but only the
Dutch West India Company kept constantly about Castle Delmina three or four Men
of War; who as soon as they heard that any Ship belonging to English, or any
other Nation, was come upon that Coast for Trade, one or more of them was sent
to ride before such place where they were to Trade, and then they must not
trade there because it was a place block't up; and if the said Ship weighed
Anchor to go to any other place, then the said Men of War weighed Anchor also,
and followed them to such place, and then they must not Trade there neither,
because that was a place block't up; and so from place to place. This is the
truth as to those Ships, and yet they shot at, and took their Boats with their
ladings, wherever they endeavored to send them on shore, taking also the men
prisoners; and in like manner shot at the Boats or Canoes of the Natives, which
endeavored to come on board them; and this in places where the Dutch had
neither Fort nor Factorie: and where the English had not only a constant
Trade, but settled Factories, and at places where other Christian Nations had
their Forts, and with whom we were in Amity, and had a free Trade; as namely at
Fredricksburgh belonging to the Danes: and let them show that the English have
done the like to them in those parts.

And whereas the Deputies say, that the Damage could not be very great* since
it was but the hindering of some Ships from their Trade, and not the taking of
them. Is the defeating of so many Ships of East India and African Voyages a
small matter? Yet this is not the main, but the consequence hereof, which was
no less then the utter overthrow of the whole English Trade in those parts. For
if the said Companies might upon such pretenses as these are, defeat such Ships
as were sent thither, of their Voyages, without making good and just
satisfaction, who would adventure any more, or to what purpose? And what might
then France expect of their new East India and West India Companies, but that
their Ships return as these with their Empty Holds, Provision spent, Tackle
worn out, Men's wages to pay over and above, and yet the most Christian King
must be importuned by this State even to break with his Majesty, because of his
opposing these mischievous practices.

And as to what they say that satisfaction was offered, it is true, that after
many Memorials, long and tedious Conferences, and many Months delays, seeing
His Majesty and His Parliament: netled and alarmed in the highest degree with
these and orher the Insolences of the Subjects of this State, they do in their
Resolutions of the 5th of June last, New Style, promise, that they would so
direct matters as that satisfaction should be made; but nothing followed
thereupon. And whereas they would impute the cause thereof to the want of some
Body to pursue it on the behalf of the persons interessed, did not he the said
Envoy from day to day with all vehemence and earnestness continue to press them
in their Name and on their behalf? and yet what does their Resolution of the
25th of September say more then their former? And whereas the 14th Article of
the late Treaty requires expressly, that satisfaction be made within 12 months
for all matters on this side the Cape de Bonesperance, that should have
happened after the conclusion of the said Treaty, the said 12 Months did
expire, and nothing done, Complaint having been made by Memorial, concerning
the Ships Charles and James, on the 17th. of September, 1663. Old Style,
concerning the Ships Hope-well and Leopard on November 7. following, and
concerning the Ship Mary on February 16. of the year 1663. Old St. and yet to
this day no satisfaction given, whereby the Treaty broke; and in the mean
while, daily new Complaints; the Hope-well hindered in a second Voyage to Porca;
the Samson, Hopefull-Adventure, Speed-well, and Captain Bartwick's Ship, and in
a word, every English Ship that went to trade upon the Coast of Africa, that
they could master, in like manner defeated in their Voyage, as the Charles,
James, and Mary, and not so much as Satisfaction promised for any of those; and
which is above all to be remarked, That whereas we had been so long held in
Expectation of our money, now at last instead thereof, it is added in the
aforesaid Resolution, That the Case is disputable; so that we were now further
off our payment then in the beginning of the Summer; or, if it had been given
Us, (which it is not) yet being done in this manner, that is to say, not as of
Justice and due, but only as out of particular Courtesy and Complaisance to
His Majesty for that time, What would it have availed us? The Dutch East India
Company did in the year 1659. make satisfaction for the Postilion, Frederick,
Francis, and John, (as abovesaid) taken upon the account of their having
traded to Bantam, then block't up by Sea by them; and there was added in the
Treaty concerning those Matters, That the two Nations should for the future
rencounter one another with all peaceableness and perfect friendship, as well
within the East Indies as elsewhere. Yet so great is the advantage that the
said Companies have made by practices of this kind, as notwithstanding the said
satisfaction and promise of the State they have continued ever since to do the
like (as appears by the many Complaints of this kind of the English East India
Company, specified in the Englist LIST of Damages) for that by hindering other
Nations from trading, they enforce the Natives to compact with them for the
whole Product of their Countries; and so though they do make satisfaction for
the particular Ships stopped, yet they thereby become infinite Gainers; and
then not suffering any Nation to Trade there, because they say, they have
agreed for the whole. Nor has their present Grandeur arisen so much from their
Mesnage, or any thing of that kind, as from these violent and indirect Means:
And if these things were practiced by the said Companies, while disowned and
discouraged by the State, and promise made that the like should not be done for
the future, What was now to be expected from them when it was said by the
State, that it was disputable whether they might not do so? yea, in the Dutch
List of Damages, as abovementioned, satisfaction demanded from the English,
for having traded in Places blocked up by them by Sea (as they call it?) And
thus whereas this Dispute had hitherto been only between the Companies of each
side, it was now become a Dispute immediately between his Majesty, and this
State, they patrocinating and maintaining what the said Companies had done: And
do not the Deputies say in this Book, page the 11th, That These Pretensions are
not so clear, but that they may be disputed? And page 18. they say, We do avow,
and We do maintain, that it might be done. And thereby all hopes of any quiet
Trade, or good Understanding in those Parts for the future utterly cut off; and
not only so, but what Security nearer home? Do not the Deputies say in page 17.
That which is just in the Indies, cannot be unjust in Europe? And is not that a
fair Warning to all the Kings of Christendom, to let them know what they are in
time to expect in these Parts also? that is to say, to be handled by those of
this Country, as their said Companies now handle the Kings of the Indies; to be
told, that unless they will sell them the whole product of their Countries,
they shall sell them to no body, and to have Fleets placed upon their Coasts
for the effecting thereof? And as to what is said of their having proffered a
Reglement for the future, he refers to what is said by him concerning this
matter in his Reply to page 17.

And as to what is said, page 11. concerning the Parliament of England, the
said Envoyee Extraordinary could wish, that with what ever Language the
Deputies had pleased to treat him, that they had been more sparing as to them.
They say there, That the Proposition which the Parliament made to His Majesty,
was, That He ought to attacque this State, and to make War upon them.

The two Houses of Parliament (as is known to all that understand the
Government of that Kingdom) are they to whom the People thereof do ordinarily
in great greivances address themselves, and it is their Natural way for relief;
and the said Houses upon such Complaints, cannot transact or treat with any
Foreign Prince or State, (that being the Prerogative of the Crown) and so
humbly applied to His Majesty, That he would be pleased to interpose, for the
obtaining satisfaction in those numerous and great Complaints; but as to the
attacquing of this State, or making War with them, that there is not a word of
any such matter in the said Proposition; but it hereby appears, what is in the
Deputies sense attacquing of this State, viz. Let never so many Injuries be
done by the People of this Country to others, if after never so many years
patience, and utmost Endeavors for obtaining satisfaction in an amicable way,
serious and real Consideration be at last had for obtaining the same, This is
attacquing them, and becoming an Aggressour; and they are pleased to add as to
the Reason and Ground thereof, It must necessarily be believed, that this
Proposition proceeded from an insatiable appetite, that they had to ravish the
Goods of others, and from a depraved Gusto, that they found in the Taking,
Robbing, and Depraedation of the Inhabitants of these Provinces.

A very uncharitable construction, and such a one as none but the Deputies of
this State would ever have made. Suppose never so much to be taken from the
People of this Country, What Advantage could the Parliament of England have
thereby, or what could they expect by a War as to their own particular
Accounts, but only to be Contributors largely with the rest of the Kingdom out
of their own Fortunes toward the maintenance thereof, as if one would take the
Liberty of Retorting, might it not be said, and with much more Reason, that the
East and West India Companies of this Country, durst not presume to do as they
do, but because so great a part, at least, of the Governors thereof are
concerned in them, and that it arises from the same ground, that it is so
difficult, and almost an impossible thing to obtain Justice and Satisfaction
for any Injury done by them, be the Case never so Clear and Evident.

For what is further said, in page 11. The said Envoy Declares possitively,
that he has Order from the King His Master, to assure this State, that His
Majesty will not permit that His Subjects do Attaque or Surprise as Sea the
Ships of the Inhabitants of these Provinces; And that the King would do them no
hurt till he had Advertised them by a Formal and Preallable Declaration of War.

To this, he does Reply, that he cannot but wonder that the Deputies do Affirm,
that he does Declare thus much, the words of his Memorial being as follows;
That the King his Master did the last Spring (to take away from them all
Umbrage, which might cause any Extraordinary Equipping at that time) give him
Order to Assure them (as he then did in a Public Conference with their
Deputies) That His Majesty would not trouble or hinder their Fleets, which they
then expected out of the Streights, and theEast-Indies, nor those then at the
Fisheries upon His Coasts.

And was not all that made good to them to a puncto, and is it not a very ill
requital for so franck and seasonable a Declaration as that was at that time,
(and which the King His Master was no way obliged to make to them) and which
was made good, thus to misrecite his Words?

For the Justification of the Extraordinary Equipage in these Parts the last
Summer, the Deputies say, page 11, and 12. They Take, they stop in the Havens
of England, and Confiscate with their Merchandises the Ships of this Country by
Express Order of the King, and yet cry out against their Equipage, though but
small, and such as had been heretofore made; So that it was impossible that the
said Equipage could give any Umbrage to the King of Great Britain, Especially
after they had assured His Majesty by their Letter of the Twenty fourth of
July, that their Real Intention and Constant Resolution was to do no hurt to
His Subjects, and that it would be fitting not to suffer that the said Fleets
should go off their Respective Coasts, and Havens, and that the King said to
the Ambassador of this State, in the Audience He had about this Matter, That
His Majesty would let Him know His Mind concerning this Matter in Three Days
in Writing, which yet he has not done to this day.

It is to be Remarked, that they here Allege the Taking, Stopping, and
Confiscating of the Ships and Goods of this Country in these Parts, for a
ground to Justify the late Extraordinary Equipage; Whereas that Equipage was
Ordered and Equipped in the beginning of the Summer, and the Taking, and
Stopping of the said Ships was not till November following, nor any Confiscated
till February after: And as to what they say that that Equipage was but very
small, and that they had formerly made the like; Did they not resolve in the
beginning of Summer to Equippe Thirty of their Capital Ships over and above
their Fleet under De Ruyter, and such as were fitted out for the Convoy of
their East India Ships, and what for Guiny? And was this a small Equipage? And
were not hundreds of Carpenters sent on a sudden to work thereupon, sparing
(as is said in his Memorial) neither Holy Day, nor Work a Day, Moonlight, nor
Sun-light, as if it had been upon the most Pressing and Urgent Necessity that
could have fallen out; and this in a time when they had no Dispute with any
other Nation that could give any imaginable Occasion or Pretense for the same;
Nor had the King His Master, at that time above Seven or Eight Men of War in
these Seas, nor any further Equipage in hand; And he had Declared in His Answer
to His Parliament, which was well known here, that He would yet Endeavor the
Accommodating of Matters with this State in an Amicable way, and give Orders to
him His Minister to that Effect: And how can it then be here said, That it was
impossible that this Equipage could give any Umbrage to His Majesty.

On the contrary, how was it possible, but that it should give him the utmost
Umbrage, it being very well known that their Lordships are too good Mesnagers
to put themselves to such an Extraordinary Expense in a Frolic, and without
some proportionable Design, and to be sure such Design could not be with
Reflection upon any other then himself.

And as to the Letter to His Majesty above mentioned, they do here Confess,
page 12, and 13. (as was Alleged by him in his said Memorial) That they had
one Fleet Actually out and gone to His Majesty's Coasts at the time of the
Writing of that Letter, and so would have been out of that Engagement, and it
was as Numerous as that of His Majesty's, for the keeping whereof within Doors
they were so Solicitous. And whereas they say; That this State had no other
Fleet at Sea that was Capable to Act, for that those that they had at Sea were
only Destinated for the Convoy accustomed to be sent every Year for their
Fleet out of the East Indies.

It is not usual to send every year such a Fleet as that for the convoying home
of their East India men, and there is not one Word in the said Letter
concerning that Fleet, much less to assure him of the design and intention
thereof, and why they umbraged as His Majesty's having Sixteen or Seventeen Men
of War together in the Downs, His own Port, and where he is wont ordinarily,
even in times of the greatest Quiet, to have as many for the Honor and
Grandent of His Kingdom; and he in the mean while not umbraged at their sending
as many upon His Coasts, when they had also at the same time another
Considerable Fleet in Readiness at Home; And suppose they had assured His
Majesty in their said Letter to Him, with all the Fine Words Imaginable, that
this Fleet had been only Destinated for the Convoy of their East India Ships,
had they not in like manner assured Him when they sent De Ruster into the
Streights, that he was Destinated only against the Pirates of Algiers and those
Parts; and yet it was after found that he was capable to Act elsewhere, and upon
other accounts; And if it be considered about what time those Orders must have
been sent to him: It will appear that his going to Guiny, must have been in
Design and Agitation about the very time of the delivery of this Letter to His
Majesty, for that He received them about the beginning of September, New Style.
And at the same time they had also in Agitation the Preparing of another Fleet,
under the Notion of sending thither, which also was out of the Engagement in
the said Letter, and yet the Deputies would have it thought that the States had
Proceeded with such Incomparable and Indisputable Candor and Franknesse
toward His Majesty in Relation to these Matters; Whereas in Truth, all their
Overtures to Him concerning the Dispositions of Fleets, had Designs and Catches
with them. And on the Contrary, His Majesty to show His Real, Peaceable
Intentions, had from the beginning of the Reports about these Equipages,
Earnestly pressed that the same might not be, and that no Extraordinary
Equipage upon either side should be made, for that then to be sure there could
not be any thing of ill Ren-counter, Surprise or Jealousy.

And as to what they say, Page the Thirteenth, That they did pay them off so
soon as their East India Fleet was Arrived. Was not Tromp (Commander of that
Fleet) and others of them after the Arrival of their East India Ships,
Re-victualled and sent to join with their Lieutenant Admiral Obdam before the
Ma^s, and continued with him a long time after. And as to what is said or His
Majesty's having promised to give them His Answer in Writing in Three Days, It
appears hereby how Exact their Lordships are in taking notice of, and Expecting
the Fulfilling of whatsoever is said to them, even to the least Circumstance
and Puncto, and to take Advantage thereupon. It were well if such Ministers as
Reside here, could obtain in many Months, that which often times is promised to
be given them in a few days; but if they Please to Examine first the Memorial
of the Ambassador of This State to His Majesty of the 11/31 th. of July last,
They will find it therein said, that His Majesty had even then by Word of Mouth
given him His Answer as to this point, the Words being; That his Majesty had
been Pleased to Answer upon the First Point Touching the Keeping of the Fleet
from going to Sea, that the Numbers which were Fitted and Prepared on His
Majesty's Side were no way Extraordinary, but only for Common and Customary
Use, and without Design of bringing any Damage and Inconvenience upon the
Inhabitants of the United Provinces, and that though they did go out, that He
would give such Order to the Chief Commander thereof, that this State should
have no cause to apprehend any Sinister Encounters from the same.

And upon the Fifth day of August following, His Majesty gave the said
Ambassador an Answer in VVriting to the like Effect; And how is it then here
affirmed, That His Majesty has not to this day made known to their Ambassador
in Writing His intention concerning this Matter.

And may it not Justly be said, that he that was the Penner of this Book, was
either very little acquainted with has passed between His Majesty and this
State, or very ill inclined?

For, What follows, Page the Thirteenth, Hereby may be Judged, the Candor and
Sincerity of the English, for that before the time of this Equiping (which they
would have to be thought the Immediate Cause of the Violences they have done,
the King of England) had already given Order to Attacque, and take by Force the
Places and Forts belonging to this State, so that in serving themselves of this
Pretext, for the Covering of their manifest Violences, they give themselves
insensibly into a Ridiculous Contradiction, producing for an Effect, that which
had its being a long time before its Cause.

As to how far His Majesty is from being liable to be Charged or Blamed upon
the Account of any of these Matters, appears by what follows, where they are
Treated of at Large; but as to the Purpose, for which they are here Produced,
viz. As if they had been made a Foundation, for what had been done afterward
by His Majesty here in Europe; If it had been so, it had indeed been very
Ridiculous, but all the use that is made by Him in His Memorial of that
Extraordinary Equippage, was to show that they did thereby enforce His Majesty
to Arm also, the Words being Page the Fifth; Seeing himself Menaced with these
Equipages, which could not be but with regard to the KING Himself, was at last
constrained (though very contrary to His Inclinations) to Arm Also.

So they might also have saved the Labor of saying afterward, Page the
Thirteenth and Fourteenth; It cannot be said these Orders were given because of
the Equipage made in this Country, or because of the Voyage of De Ruyter to the
Coast of Africa, seeing they were Executed before the said Equippage was made
here, and long before the Voyage of De Ruyter.

He was not so Ridiculous as to make that which had happened after, to be the
Cause of what had been done several Months before, and when, and where, and by
such Persons as could have no manner of Imagination thereof; Nor was ever the
said Equipage, or De Ruyter's going to Guiny, produced for the Justifying of
what was done by the English there; and therefore one would think some more
Grounded Occasion at least should have been found out, if they had had a mind
to take to themselves the Liberty of falling upon the whole English Nation with
such Reproachful and Disdainful Language, and which it may be is not elsewhere
to be found, no not upon the Reallest of Occasions to have been given by any
State to a Nation in General; And to say no more, the English have deserved
better from this Country and State, and what if it should be Retorted.

Hereby may one Judge of the Candor and Sincerity of the Hollanders, etc. Page
the Fourteenth, Fifteenth, and Sixteen, Concerning the Ship St. Jacob, Laden at
Gottenburgh and bound for England, the Deputies are pleased to say;

First, The said Envoy has the Impudence to say, that This State are the
Aggressors in Europe, for that they Stopped in their Ports a Certain Ship which
came from Sweden Laden with Masts. That which he says is so Extravagant, and
the Reason wherewith he backs it so Impertinent, that none but Sir George
Downing would have affirmed the one or made use of the other.

Secondly, Seeing the Ship concerning the stopping whereof he complains was of
Gottenburgh; What had he the said Envoy to do to Intermeddle therein?

Thirdly, This State had Defended the Transporting out of the Country of all
sorts of Commodities serving for the Equipping of Ships, after the Publication
of these Defenses, this Pretended Ship of Gottenburgh happening to be in one of
the Havens of this Country, it was necessary that She had a Particular
Permission from the States to go out.

Fourthly, That Liberty was granted Her to go out, and it depended only upon
them to be gone.

Fifthly, That during the being of this Ship in this Country, News came that
the English Took and Stopped in their Havens, all Ships belonging to the
Inhabitants of these Provinces.

As to the First with your Favor; He is not the only Person, or the First
that Affirmed them to be the First Aggressors in Europe, and that among other
Reasons upon the Account of the Stopping of this Ship; the King His Master had
said the same in His Narrative given to His Parliament in the Month of
November, and therein among other Arguments alleged the business of this
Ship; So that it is His Majesty upon whom these Incivil and Opprobrious Terms of
Impudence, etc. are Cast and do Abutt, nor was the said Narrative unknown here
at the time of the Writing of this Book.

As to the Second, The said Ship was Laden upon the Account of one Sir William
Warren an English man and Merchant of London, and Bound for England; and those
of the said Ship with whom the said Lading was Entrusted, did apply themselves
to him the said Envoy upon her stop for his assistance for the obtaining of her
Releasment, as well as to the Minister of Sweaden upon the account that she
came from Gottenburgh, and the Master a Burger of that Town; And can it then be
doubted; whether he the said Envoy Extraordinary had to do with the Business or
not, or did he need Procuration from Sweaden, or was it Intermedling with the
Interests of another Crown, to demand the Releasement of a Ship Laden upon the
Account of His Majesty's Subjects and Bound for England?

Concerning the Third, Their Defense was against the Transporting of such kind
of Goods if Laden and taken in this Country, but this Case was quite otherwise,
for that this was a Ship which was driven in by much foul weather that she had
met withal at Sea, and so not in the least within the Compass or Question of
the said defense, nor liable by the Treaty between His Majesty and this State
to any molestation or search; There are many sorts of Commodities that are
prohibited by the Laws of England to be imported into that Kingdom or exported
out of the same by the People of this Country; yet such ships as are only
driven in thither by storm, or other necessity, and do not break Bulk, are
not, nor cannot be questioned thereupon; and that is this Case, and so that the
Defense aforesaid cannot in the least justify the stopping and detaining this
ship.

As to the Fourth, The Master and Others entrusted with the Lading of the said
ship, were here soliciting at the time, of the granting the Order for her
Releasement, and went immediately away therewith, but coming to their ship, and
preparing to set sail, they were not suffered so to do, but threatened to be
shot at, and so were forced to return back to the Hague again.

As to the Fifth, It is not here confessed, that while that Ship was in this
Country, they had Advise of the Stopping, and Taking of their Ships in England,
and so there needs no more then this their own Confession, to prove who first
began to stop Ships in Europe; And what though she were afterward set at
Liberty? The Rupture was begun, and then there were other things also to be
Remedied as well as that.

And as to what is said, Page the Sixteenth, concerning the Confiscating of
their Ships; There was no Ship Confiscated or Condemned in England, till the
first of February, Old Style, which was long after the News was Arrived at
London, of De Ruyters having Seized all the English Merchants Ships that he had
met withal; to a considerable Number and Value, and having actually broken
Bulk, and taken out their Ladings, and Appropriated them to the Dutch
West India Company.

Concerning the Reglement for the future, the Deputies say, Page Seventeen, The
said Envoy knows that they were always ready to go about the making of a
General Reglement, and Treaty Marine, but that he did always excuse it, and
always Declare, when he was Summoned to Confer about this Matter, that he had
no Order concerning the same, but only to stick to the Terms of his Project.

To this he does Reply, that the Discourse concerning this Matter arose in
Conferences with the Deputies of this State about several Injuries done to the
English East India, and African Companies, by the East and West India Companies
of this Country, that thereupon for Prevention of the like for the Future, His
Majesty did Command him to tender to this State a Concept of a Reglement, which
accordingly he did; Nor are there wanting instances of particular Transactions
of that kind before, between England and this Country, and many things are
proper for those Remote Parts which are not applicable nearer Home; That he did
daily press the State for their Answer thereupon, both by Word of Mouth, and
in several Memorialls given in by him from time to time to that Effect: But as
to what they say, that he was Summoned to Confer about the same, he does
utterly deny it, much more that he should have refused the coming to Conference
about those Matters; nor did he, ever Declare that his Orders were to abide
only by the Terms of the said Conceit, nor ever any such thing Imagined or
Intended, but only that the said Concept should be a Groundwork to work upon,
and that they might make their Exceptions thereunto, and that there should be
added thereto, or taken therefrom, as should appear reasonable and fitting
upon debate; but that he could never make the least-advance therein, nor ever
had (as is said in his Memorial) one word of Answer from them concerning this
matter.

As to the near Twenty Ships that he had affirmed in his Memorial to have been
taken in few years before the Conclusion of the late Treaty upon the Coast of
Africa, only by the West India Company of this Country, they say in the
Seventeenth page, That they are imaginary, as well as that he says of the Evil
Treatments done to the English, Exaggerating them to the Terms of a Romance,
with which he must have his Fancy Working at the time he Penned that Article,
he does wrong to the Truth when he speaks after that manner; Very severe
censures if Justly Charged. Was not the Ship Brotherhood of London taken upon
the Coast of Guiny in the Month of February, 1655. by one Cox, Commander of a
Frygot, called the Gat, and one Yapoone, Commander of the Ship called the
Kater, both Commissionated by the West India Company of this Country; And the
Ship Rapahanock, belonging to one John Jefferies, and the Company of English
Merchants of London taken near Cape Lopez upon the Coast of Guiny about the
Eleventh of September, 1656. by two Ships of this Country, the one called Mary
of Amsterdam, and the other the Unicorn of Middleburgh, Commanded by one John
Scharael of Munekedam. The Ship Sarah belonging to one Anna Lewellin
Administratrix of Robert Lewellin Merchant; Humphrey Bean and Company of
English Merchants, whereof Arthur Perkins was Commander, taken upon the Coast
of Guiny in the Month of August, 1656, by two Ships of this Country, the one
called the Mary of Amsterdam, and the other the Unicorn of Middleburgh,
Commanded by the said Schrael of Munekedam.

The Ship Fortune, belonging to one Constant Silvester, and Company of English
Merchants taken about the month of August, 1656. near Cape Lopez upon the
Coast of Guiny by the said Mary of Amsterdam and Unicorn of Middleburgh,
whereof the said John Schrael was Commander.

The Ship, Saint John, belonging to Vincent de la Bar and Company of English
Merchants taken in the year, 1658. near the Port of Calbarine by a Ship of the
said West India Company, and there confiscated.

The Ship Lion, Providence of London belonging to Sir William Thomson, and
Company or English Merchants taken upon the Coast of Guiny in the Month of
August, 1656. by two Ships belonging to the said West India Company, the one
called the Mary of Amsterdam, and the other the Unicorn of Middleburgh whereof
the said John Schrael was Commander.

The Ship (Brazil Fregat) of London, belonging to John Bushel, and Company of
English Merchants taken between Angola and Farnambuca in the Year 1657. by a
ship of Ulissing, whereof one Quaerts was Commander, called L' Escluse.

The Ship the Leopard, belonging to Nicholas Bauchart of London, and Company of
English Merchants taken near Cabo Blanco in the month of October, 1656, and
brought up to the Castle of Arangeny at Cape Blanco.

The Ship (Merchants Delight) belonging to one John Young, and Company of
English Merchants taken near Cabo Corso in Guiny about the Month of August,
1661. by a Ship belonging to the West India Company of this Country, called the
Amsterdam.

The Ship Paragon, belonging to Bernard Spark, and Company of English Merchants
taken upon the Coast of Guiny, about the Fifteenth of October, 1661. by two
Ships belonging to the West India Company of this Country, the one called the
Amsterdam of Amsterdam, whereof Aaron Couzens was Master, and the other the
Arms of Amsterdam, whereof Nicholas Yole was Commander.

The Ship Daniel, belonging to John Knight, and Company of English Merchants
taken upon the Coast of Guiny, in the month of May, 1661. by a ship of
Amsterdam belonging to the West India Company of this Country called the
Amsterdam, whereof one Aaron Couzens was Commander.

The Ship, Black Boy, belonging to one Arnold Breames, and Company of English
Merchants taken near Comenda upon the Coast of Guiny about the Thirteenth of
April, 1661. by a Ship of this Country, called the Graffena, which came from
Castel-Delmina.

The Ship Ethiopian, belonging to John Allen, and Company of English Merchants
taken upon the Coast of Guiny in the month of January, 1661, by a ship
belonging to the West India Company of this Country, called the Post-Horse,
which carried her to Castel-Delmina.

The Ship Charles, belonging to James Burkin, and Company of English Merchants
taken upon the Goast of Guiny, in the month of August. 1661, by a ship
belonging to the West India Company of this Country: called the Amsterdam of
Amsterdam, whereof Aaron Couzens was Commander; besides several others taken by
them there and elsewhere: And how is it then that they say, that those ships
were but imaginary, and it appears (by the respective times of their being
taken above cited) that these were all matters of a fresh date; and such as are
not blotted out, but reserved by the late Treaty. And as to the evil treatments
and Cruelties complained of by him the said Envoy to have been done to the
English in those Parts, they are pleased to say of them also that they are
imaginary, and would make the World believe that all that was but Romances of
his inventing; whereas the Depositions taken and sworn in the High Court of
Admiralty of England, the 20th. of August, 1662. concerning the Ship Merchants
Delight, say, That the said Ships whole Company were put into Nasty Holes at
Castel-Delmina, by Jaspar Van Huysen (General for the West India Company of
this Country) where several of them famished to death, and the rest that were
set at Liberty after a cruel Imprisonment, the most of them never since heard
of; The Company of the Ship Paragon after like cruel Imprisonment turned to
shift for themselves amongst the Wild Beasts.

The Company of the Ship Brotherhood, having been stripped and plundered of all,
turned on shore amongst the Wild Natives, about Cape Lopez, without any thing
of relief or sustenance, where several of them perished for want; and had it
not pleased God, that after their having been there in a miserable condition 20
days, a certain English Ship, called the Happy Fortune, whereof one James
Peperel was Master, came thither accidentally, in which they obtained passage,
the rest had perished also, nor had it so much as been known what had become of
them.

The Company of the ship Black-Boy carried to Castel-Delmina, the English
Colors with scorn and contempt trampled under-foot, the men miserably treated,
so as that the Master and six of the said Company died (as was verily believed
of poison) the rest turned on shore to shift for themselves.

The Company of the Ship Brazil Frigot, nine of them turned upon a shore that
was altogether uninhabited, and no victuals to relieve them, very few clothes
to cover them (as appears by the Depositions taken in the said High Court of
Admiralty, the 16th. day of April, 1663.) and much more of this kind could he
instance, done within these few years upon the same Coast, besides what
elsewhere, all transmitted to him the said Envoy Extraordinary under the Oaths
of many of the persons themselves that felt them, to whom, and the rest of
their Comrades, the said evil treatments, and cruelties, were more then
Imaginations and Romances.

And whereas they say further, Page the 17th. We have never heard of those
pretended Cruelties and Barbarisms, nor has so much as Complaint been ever
made, that the West India Company had taken any one ship that had truly
belonged to the English.

He did acquaint the Deputies for the Affairs of England (by whom this Book is
Compiled) with these Cruelties in the Conferences held with them concerning the
Lists of Damages, and the said Ships are all particularly mentioned and set
down in the English List, so long since delivered by him to them; How is it
then that they here pretend Ignorance of the one and the other? And whereas, as
to the Ships they would Evade under the Notion of the Words, Truly belonging to
the English.

This is a very Excellent and easy Evasion, and upon this account their
Companies may take what they please from Us, and it is but for them to affirm,
That it did not truly belong to the English.

Those many Families of His Majesty's Subjects at London and elsewhere that felt
those Losses, and many of which are thereby utterly ruined and Banckrupt are
Living and too true Monuments to whom the said Ships did belong. And if they
could clear themselves upon so easy a Score, Why is it that we have been kept
off these two years and a half since the Conclusion of the Late Treaty? So as
that we have not yet been able to come so far, as to begin to make out either
our Propriety therein, or the value of the Damages sustained thereby: And
whereas these Suggestions are no doubt brought them from their Companies, it
may not be amiss here to put the Deputies in mind with what Confidence it was
Affirmed and Maintained by the Directors of the East India Company before them,
that the Hope-well and Leopard were designed for Couchin, a place then Beseiged
both by Land and Sea, and not to Porca which was not Block't up by Land nor
Sea; and yet when it came to the Scanning of those Matters, he the said Envoy
made out under the very hand of the Commander in chief of those Ships that
stopped them in their Voyage, that he stopped them from going to Porca.

For what they say further, Page the 17th. We know not to what purpose the said
Envoy speaks of those said near Twenty Ships. The purpose was very clearly set
down in his Memorial, viz. That whereas all the Complaints that were Mentioned
in the Resolution of the Estates-General, to which it was an Answer (as to what
out of Europe) were only of matters pretended to be done against the West India
Company, thereby to show what great Reason the English had to be offended with
them, and to be the more sensible of the Injuries done to them since the
conclusion of the Late Treaty, considering how they had from time to time been
handled by those of that Company before the making thereof, having in a few
years space (as said) taken near Twenty English Ships in those Parts only, and
not only no satisfaction given for the said Ships, but new Injuries heaped upon
them, and the same Designs carried on, to the utter Ruin of the English Trade
in those Parts.

And whereas Page the 18th. the Deputies would excuse what had been done by the
said Company since the conclusion of the said Treaty; for that say they, First,
He confesses Ingenuously, that since the Conclusion of the Late Treaty, there
has not been one English Ship taken. Secondly, That all that has been done
is, that they would not permit the English to enter into Places Asseiged by
the Arms of this State, or Blocked up by Sea.

And so that that could not Justify what had been done by the English against
Them, especially considering the Resolutions of the Fifth of June and Twenty
fifth of September, wherein they had declared that they would cause
Satisfaction to be made to the Persons concerned in the Ships, Hopewell,
Leopard, Charles, James, and Mary. He never said or confessed, that no English
Ship had been taken since the Conclusion of the Late Treaty, and the contrary
is acknowledged Page the Twenty seventh of this very Book; But that which was
said in his Memorial, was only that those of the West India Company had not
taken any in those Parts of Africa since the conclusion of the Late Treaty;
And as to their Pretenses, that what they had done as to the hindering of our
Ships from Trading there, was only in places Besieged, and that they had
promised Satisfaction; These Allegations and Excuses have been so Fully
answered before, that it were but mispence of time to say any more concerning
them, but as to that which was the force of his Argument, they Answer not at
all, viz. That the Question was not about the Charles, James, and Mary only,
but that what was done to them, was in like manner done to Every English Ship
that came upon those Coasts by Men of War, kept there on purpose to that End;
Whereby it appeared that what was done to them had not been upon some
accidental Rencounter, but upon Design, and that this Practice was as certainly
Pernicious and Destructive to the Trade of the English, as the Taking of their
Ships, and more discouraging to the Merchant (as has been afore-shewen) and so
that either some Course must be taken by His Majesty, not only for the
obtaining of satisfaction for those Individual Ships, but for the Securing in
General of the Trade of His Subjects in those Parts, or otherwise that they
must give it quite over.

Page the Ninteenth, They say that he should have said in His Memorial; That
one must not doubt of the Truth of all he says concerning these Pretended
Hindrances of the English from Trade and Evil Treatments of them; for that the
same does appear by the Complaints he had Order from time to time to make to
this State concerning the same.

The Deputies deal here with him as in other parts of their Book, misrecite the
words of his Memorial, and then descant upon them after their fashion; the
words thereof were not, For the same does appear, etc. nor did it ever enter
into his imagination, that his bare affirmation should be taken for a juridical
proof: but his words are, As it does appear by the Complaints, etc. That is to
say, taking them as they were accompanied with Examinations upon Oath of the
Masters and other Officers of the said Ships, and which were also by him
produced to the said Deputies with other authentic Documents, which were
juridical proofs: and so might it not justly be said, that those matters were
made appear by him in his Complaints concerning the same? And what occasion
given for all those reviling expressions which they are pleased here to make
use of? But whereas they say, If the Complaints of Sir George Downing could
serve for juridical proofs, the Inhabitants of these Provinces had long ago
deserved the treatment which they have received from the English, and the
hostilities which have been committed against them had been easily justified.
If then by this Reply it shall appear (as it will) that nothing was complained
of by him, but what was upon good and real ground; it follows by the Deputies
own confession, that his Majesty is justified in what has been done against
the people of this Country, and that he has had sufficient ground and reason
for the doing thereof.

Page the 19, Concerning the Remonstrance or Declaration of Valckenburgh, they
say, The 14 ofAugust last, the said Envoy presented a Memorial concerning the
same subject, upon which this State made a very considerable answer the 8 of
October following; so that he is in the wrong to say, that satisfaction has
not been given him. It is therein said, that Valckenburgh, Director General for
the West India Company upon the coast of Guiny, does not conclude in his
Declaration to cause all other Nations to be gone out of all those
Quarters.'It Was not said by him in his Memorial, that they had given him no
answer, but, That a Remonstrance or Declaration had been published as well in
the name of theStates General, as of the said Company; wherein was deduced
their claim and pretended right to all that whole coast, to the exclusion of
all other Nations. And that, The said Declaration was not yet disavowed, nor
satisfaction given thereupon.

And has not such a Declaration been published? And did not he the said Envoy
give this State a Copy thereof at their desire? And can they say, that in the
forementioned answer it is disavowed? And could it be called, giving us
satisfaction, that when we complain that a Remonstrance is issued out by a
Governour-General, and that not only in the name of the West India Company, but
in the name, and on the behalf of the Estates General themselves, claiming a
whole Country wherein we have considerable Forts, Lodges and Factories, and a
considerable Trade; and which Remonstrance had been formerly sent and notified
by the said Valckenburgh to the chief Agent of the English African-Company at
their principal Fort, to tell us, that he does not therein conclude to bid the
English be gone? What though he had not therein bid us be gone out of any
place? is not such a claim, and the notifying thereof, a great injury, and
which His Majesty had just reason to complain on, and to expect should be
disavowed by the State, whereby his Subjects might be put out of apprehension
of being disturbed in their quiet and peaceable possessions and Trade? But he
does in the said Remonstrance, not only claim the whole, but therein actually
commands the English to be immediately gone out of Tacorari and Cabo Corso, two
places in which they had not only a constant Trade, but settled Factories, at
the very time of the issuing out the said Remonstrance (as is therein
confessed) and acknowledged by him the said Valckenburgh) and not only
commanded them out of them, but upon those very grounds and arguments upon
which he therein claimed the whole. And the Deputies will have it thought, that
the State has given them satisfaction, when they say in their deduction
aforesaid, That it does not conclude to cause all other Nations to be gone out
of all those Quarters. So far from disavowing their pretended right to the
whole, or the commanding the English immediately out of those two Factories and
places, as that they will have it to be judged abundant satisfaction to them,
that they have time given them to dislodge by degrees, first out of those
places, and not at once commanded to be gone out of all those Quarters.

And it is to be remarked, that the said Remonstrance was issued out the 7 of
June, 1663. and so long after the conclusion of the late Treaty; whereby it
appears, that since the conclusion thereof, His Majesty's Subjects were not
only disturbed at Sea, by the Shipping of the West-India-Company, under the
Command, and by the Orders of the said Valckenburgh their General; but also the
whole Country claimed from them, and actually commanded to quit immediately two
of their settled and principal Factories. And for what they say that Captain
Holmes should have sent to one Henry Williamson Cop, That Captain Holmes had
sent three persons of condition to one Henry Williamson Cop that commanded at
Cape Verd for the West-India-Company, who said to him from Holmes, that he had
express Order from the King his Master to let all know, that the right of
Trading upon the coast of Africa, from Cape Verd to the Cape of Bona Esperanza,
belonged to him only, to the exclusion of all other Nations.

We show this State a formal Writing, and not discourses which may fall, and
which may possibly not be well remembered, or mistaken, or stretched beyond the
intent and meaning of them that said them. And so was this Case: yet what a
mighty business did this State make hereof! writing a Letter immediately to his
Majesty expressly about it, and causing their Ambassador to complain highly
thereof in an Audience demanded for that effect. If we should make such ado
about all the high words and threats in those parts, and in the East Indies,
and elsewhere, of those employed by the East and West-India-Companies; we
should be able to do little else. Besides, those discourses are here
acknowledged to have been upon the 12 of March 1661. and so, long before the
conclusion of the late Treaty, and so upon which the Deputies cannot justify
any thing done by them since: whereas this Remonstrance of Val^kenburgh was, as
abovesaid, long after the conclusion of the said Treaty, and so a new Breach:
and above all, it is to be remarked, that the Deputies do here confess, That
whatever it was that should have been said by Holmes, or his order, that it was
immediately upon complaint, as aforesaid, disavowed by his Majesty, as is here
acknowledged, page the 20. which their Lordships having represented to the King
of Great Britain, as well by their Letter of the 28 of July 1662, as by word of
Mouth by their Ambassadors Extraordinary which were then at London; His
Majesty disavowed that Action of Holmes, in his Answer of the 24 of August of
the same year. And so suppose such words had been spoken, and that since the
last Treaty, yet they would have been so far from being to be imputed to his
Majesty, or to be made use of for the justifying of any Hostilities against
his Subjects, as that on the contrary, this State had all the reason in the
world to be highly satisfied with his Majesty's generous and frank proceeding
therein; and themselves thereby so much the more condemned, that when such a
Remonstrance published in their Name, and which a fresh breach, being since the
conclusion of the late Treaty; and having been pressed so often, and for so
long time together concerning the same, that yet to this day it is not
disavowed by them: on the contrary, we are told that we ought to take it for
satisfaction, that what is therein declared, was not executed at once: yea, the
Deputies will not admit that there was therein so much as an offensive word.

And for what is said of Selwyn's Paper, page the 21. that could not have
caused Valckenburgh's Remonstrance, for that it was written after, and in
answer thereunto; putting him in mind also of many outrageous hostile actions
done by him against the English, desiring they might quietly continue in their
Trade and Factories, and telling him that they had more reason to bid him quit
places he possessed, then he them, for that he did at that very time possess
several places which did of Right belong to the English, mentioning the same,
and particularly Cabo Corso; and so that if they must come to dislodging, that
the English had more reason to expect that the Dutch should dislodge, then they
the English.

Page the 21, 22, 23, 24. concerning the business of the King of Fantine, they
say, first, That he the said Envoy has never produced any proofs. Secondly,
That he does not add any particularities or circumstances that can give the
least color or appearance of truth thereto. What he gave them, was out of an
Original Examination taken in the high Court of Admiralty at London, and sent
him by special Order of the King his Master, with command to acquaint the State
therewith; and how is it them they are pleased to say, that he has given them
no proofs, or out of a mere loose Paper? Nor was what he gave them (as they are
pleased to call it, page 23.) The saying of one person only, but attested also
by one Dobson, a principal person in those parts: and what ground then, or
occasion for all these most injurious and reproachful terms which they are
pleased upon this occasion to lavish out withal, and spend a couple of leaves
of paper upon, such as no man would give to his Footman? and might they not be
retorted in the highest manner, if one took pleasure in sullying his Mouth or
Pen?

And as to the Second: Had there indeed been no circumstances to make good the
intention of such a Design, it might have passed like the Stories written to
them by their Officers in the East Indies, of the designs of the English to
besiege Batavia, (which are ridiculous in the very imagination of them.) But
could there be more pregnant circumstances then those suggested, viz. First,
That the Dutch did actually pay down to the Natives a sum of money for their
encouragement? Secondly, That they did furnish them with store of Muskets and
Powder from Aga; which the English having notice of, sent Soldiers to a
certain Village thereby, who (de facto) did surprise a part of them, and bring
them to Cormantine. Thirdly, That the West-India-Company were to block it up by
Sea, while attacqued by the Natives by Land, and that accordingly two of their
Ships were actually upon their way, and come as far as Cabo Corso in order
thereunto; but that hearing of the failer of the design of the Fantiners, they
immediately returned.

Page the 24, 25, 26, 27. concerning the business of Cabo Corso, they say,

First, That it was attacqued and taken, not by any rencounter that happened in
those parts, and which might have provoked Captain Holmes to those violences;
but by express Order of the King of Great Britain, according to his own
Confession and Declaration. Secondly, That the English have not pretended that
Cabo Corso did belong unto them, but since that they had carried their Arms
thither, and since that they have taken it.

Concerning the first, he has express and positive Orders from the King his
Master to declare, That his Majesty did never avow or say that he had given
Orders to Holmes for the taking of that place: That in his Answer of the 5th of
August last given in writing to the Ambassador of this State, there is this
following Clause: Concerning Captain Holmes, We have with great sincerity
assured the said Ambassador, that he had no Commission to take Cape Verd, nor
any other place belonging to the Dutch, or to do any act of Hostility upon any
of the Subjects of the United Provinces, that was not for the defense of Our
Subjects, and their Trade in those parts. That all he ever said to the said
Ambassador concerning Cabo Corso, was, that he looked upon the Case as to that
place, to be very much differing from that of Cabo Verd; and so much, as that
if he had given Order for the taking thereof, very much might have been said
for the justification thereof. And to the like effect does he the said Envoy
Extraordinary speak in his Memorial: That suppose his Majesty has permitted
his Subjects to endeavor to recover the possession thereof, it could not be
thought strange, not could this State have had any just cause of Complaint or
Grievance threat: for the English had not only a bare liberty of Trading, or
of having a Factory at that place, (as at several others upon that Coast) but
one Thomas Crispe, chief Agent for the English Guiny-Company, at the earnest
invitation of the King of Fetu, whose Land that was, went thither about the end
of the year 1649. and purchased the same of the said King, and paid for it: And
after all things were concluded, the Kings Officers summoned all the Natives
thereof by the beat of Drum, both men, women and children, to a very great
number; and when they were all come together, public and solemn Proclamation
was then and there made, That the King of Fetu, with the consent of his
Officers and Great Men, had sold the Land of Cabo Corso to him the said Crispe.
Whereupon the people gave several great shouts, throwing the dust up into the
air, and cried, that that was Crispe's Land. And the said Crispe is yet alive,
and now at London, and has by special Order of the King his Master sent to him
the said Envoy the Contents hereof under his own Hand, with the Testimony of
others that were then in those parts, and know the same to be true. And some
time after, a party of the Natives of that Country falling upon the English
House there, and robbing and plundering the same, and so the English retiring
for the present, the Swedes came thither, demolished what had been there built
by them, and built a Fort upon the ground which the English had purchased.
Afterward the Danes drove out the Swedes, during the late War between those
Crowns; and then the Dutch got the place from the Danes. And so the Dutch
deriving from the Danes, can have no better Title then the Danes; and the Danes
deriving from the Swedes, can have no better Title then that of the Swedes,
which was only Possession, and having built upon the Land of another without
their consent; and so the Question is singly, Whether the Land should follow
the Fort or House, or the House the Land; and whether a Possession of so late a
date, can create a Title against a clear and undoubted Purchase.

And whereas they say, page 26, That they had bought that Fort from the Danes;
It is very well known, That the Ministers of Denmark do say and maintain, that
the West-India-Company of this Country did nevery buy them out, but only that
during the late Siege of Copenhagen, and in the time of the low estate of that
Kingdom, that the Governour-General for the Dutch West-India-Company, called
Van Huysen, did debauch and corrupt one Samuel Smith, (who then commanded the
said place for the King of Denmark) to put the same into his hands for a Bribe
of seven or eight thousand Gilders: And that this was without the knowledge,
permission, or order of the said King. And this is their Title to this place,
about which they make so much ado. Nor did they content themselves with the
said Fort, but (as in all other places) having once got footing, they fell
immediately to the utter expelling of the English from all share or interest
there: And whereas they had rebuilt themselves a House or Factory there, some
belonging to the Dutch West-India-Company, and in their Service, did on the
first of May 1659. attacque the same, and burn it, with all the Movables and
Merchandises. And it being afterward rebuilt by the English, they hired
others to set upon it, and burnt it again, with all the Merchandises therein;
nor would so much as permit them to come and trade there with their Shipping.
And the said Deputies Rule is, page 7, That one may retake by Arms, that which
has been gained by Arms. But this Case had been otherwise: for the Dutch
having got into the said Fort in manner abovesaid, were a little after droven
out by one Jan Claes, who was General for the Natives; and the said Claes
having driven them out, and knowing well that the undoubted Right of that place
did belong to the English, made a tender to their Agent in those parts to
restore the same to them: but he was neither provided at that time with men,
nor other necessaries for the receiving thereof; and before they came to him
from England, the said Jan Claes died. Afterward, (and while the Dutch were
still out of the possession thereof) the Government of that Country sent a
public Minister to Cormantine, to treat with the English Agent there, about
putting of the said place again into their hands: and a Treaty was perfected
and completed between the Governor of Fetu, and Commissioners sent thither by
the said Agent, and a sum of money paid in hand according to the said
Conditions. Nor was there so much as any certain knowledge in England that the
Dutch had re-possessed themselves thereof, at the time when Holmes his Orders
and Instructions were made, nor other News thereof then a report which came
about that time out of this Country. And supposing it to be true, yet that
could not alter such a Treaty made while out of their hands: and that Case
being thus, if his Majesty had given him such Orders, what could they have to
say against the same? And whereas it had been said by him in his Memorial, that
his Majesty had been so much the more justifiable in letting his Subjects take
possession thereof, because of the little effect that the Instances made here
in his Name in other matters had had: The Deputies are pleased to mis-recite
the clause in his Memorial, and then descant thereupon after their fashion. The
Clause (as recited by them) is, For seeing that his Majesty has not been able
by all endeavors and instances to get out of their hands one Ship, or the
value of a penny of Goods since his return to his Kingdom; what hope was there
that such a place should have been restored? And they are pleased to comment
thereupon: This is a strange confidence of the said Envoy, to put in writing,
and to publish among foreign Princes and Ministers, and to present to your
Assembly a thing, of the contrary whereof he has been so convinced by the
Deduction which ye made the 9th of October last, upon the King of Great
Britain' s Answer in Writing; where your Lordships have made clearly appear, by
the restitution of the Ship Handmaid, and of the Shaloup taken by Captain
Banckert, and by several other particularities, That what the said Envoy says
here, is not true: so that he might have spared the giving occasion to have
himself contradicted here. Whereas the words of his Memorial are, And in truth
if his Majesty has not been able, by all his endeavors and instances, to get
out of their hands any one Ship, or the value of a penny of Goods since his
return to his Kingdoms, which had been taken by violence from his Subjects,
concerning which he the said Envoy had made complaint heretofore; what hopes
that such a place would have been restored? But their Lordships leave out all
the middle thereof, viz. Which had been taken by violence from his Subjects,
concerning which he the said Envoy had made complaint heretofore, whereby the
sense is quite changed; and then apply instances thereto, which would no ways
suit therewith, taking the entire sentence together. For as to the Ship Hand
maid, it is true, that that business did pass his hands, but that Ship had not
been taken by violence from the Subjects of His Majesty: The Turks had taken
her from the English, and the Dutch only rescued her from the Turks. And as to
the Shaloup taken by Banckert, 'twas not a matter whereof the said Envoy had
made complaint, for that it was a business managed at London by His Majesty's
Ministers there, though there was scarce another instance of that kind that
passed not his hands; and he does here again affirm the truth of the said
Clause in his said Memorial. Whereas in the Letter of the States, of the 26 of
January 1664. to the King his Master, their words are, That His Majesty had
very often caused justice to be done upon their complaints, since the
conclusion of the Treaty between him and this State.

But as to the second: Did not the Agent Selwyn, in his letter abovementioned
to Valckenburgh, of the 14* of June, 1663. remonstrate the right of the English
to that place, and protest against the detaining the same from them? And did
not he the said Envoy Extraordinary, in a conference held with the Deputies of
this State, upon the 12 of Feb. 1663. Old style, deduce and make out the right
of the English African-Company to that place? and it was not taken by Holmes
till the 9 of May following (as is here confessed, Page the 24.) And how is it
then, that they say here, That the English did not claim it till they had got
the possession of it?

And whereas Page the 25 they say, He himself did interpose in the said
difference between the West India- Company of this Country, and the African-
Company of Denmark, concerning this place, as he has often intermedled with
several matters, wherein neither He, nor the King his Master, had to do: And in
the Memorial which he presented concerning this matter, he backs the
pretensions of the Danes, and speaks not at all of those of the English; from
whence an infallible argument may be drawn, That the King of England (whom he
brings in speaking in his Memorial) did not at that time think that the Fort of
Cabo Corso (...) belong to the English, as in truth they did not think it, till
they were in possession of it; and that now they judge(...) their best pretense
for the excuse of their hostilities ^^mitted there. The Memorial given in by
him (...) behalf of the Danes, which was of the 8 of Febr^^^^, 1663. Old style,
was only in general terms, (...) That whereas the King of Denmark had applied
himself unto the King his Master, complaining of great injuries, violences and
depredations do^^ to his Subjects by the West-India-Company in those parts,
that his Majesty held himself obliged to concern himself therein; nor is there
a word therein concerning Cabo Corso, or any other matter in particular; and
there were at that time a great many differences between the Danes and them,
viz. the taking of their Ships, hindering others from Trade at places of their
own (upon which we had no pretense) as Fredericksburgh. And how then is an
infallible Argument to be drawn from thence, that the English did ^ot think
that the Fort of Cabo Corso did belong unto him till they were in possession
thereof? And the contr^^y before made appear in the Letter of Selwyn above
mentioned: and the Conference aforesaid, wherein he the said Envoy had made out
the right of the English to the said place, was but within three or four days
after the date of this Memorial. And whereas they say, That he does therein
back the pretensions of the Danes, and speaks not at all of those of English;
Are not the words of the said Memorial, That his Majesty holds himself obliged
to intermeddle therein with the same zeal and fervor, and to the same degree,
as for the injuries done to himself and his own Subjects in the same parts, and
by the same Company? And whereas they are pleased to say, As he has often
meddled in several matters, wherein neither He nor the King his Master had to
do; They would thereby insinuate, as if the said Envoy Extraordinary had of his
own head given in that Memorial, whereas it was in pursuance of a Letter from
the King his Master to him, expressly commanding him to do it, and of which he
knew nothing, till it was put into his hands by Hannybal Schestedt, High
Treasurer of Denmark, who had procured the same, and brought it out of England
with him. And to what is there said, That the King his Master has nothing to
do therein, they know better; and that (as is said in the said Memorial) His
Majesty is obliged by all the bonds of Honor, Friendship, Blood, Gratitude and
Treaty, to interpose himself in the concerns of that King.

Page the 27 and 28. Concerning the Island of Polerone, their Lordships make no
reply to what has been said in his Memorial, viz. That the said place ought to
have been restored to the English, by virtue of a solemn Treaty in the year
1623, and yet we know not to this day that it is restored. And indeed no answer
in such a case was the best answer: and it is to be observed, that by the said
Treaty it was stipulated, not only that the said Island should have been
restored, but the words thereof are, That the same should be restored in the
same estate and condition the English had formerly enjoyed it. Whereas it was
not only not restored, but those of the East-India-Company did cut down, and
grub up by the roots all the Nutmeg-trees and Plants in the said Island, and
have done the like several times since; whereby in case it should at any time
come to be restored, it should be (at least for many years) altogether useless
and unprofitable to them.

Concerning the Treaty of 1654. they acknowledge, that the said Island was
adjudged to be restored to the English by the sentence of the Commissioners on
both sides appointed by that Treaty; but say, that Orders were then accordingly
given to the English for the receiving the possession thereof, and so that if
they had it not, they had none to blame but themselves: but if giving Orders
here in Europe were enough, we had had it long before. And I pray, had not the
English East-India-Company again in the year 1660, Orders both from the Estates
General, and the Dutch East-India-Company, both to the Dutch Governour-General
in the Indies, and to the Governor of the Banda Islands (of which that is one)
for the delivery of possession thereof to them, and of which he the said Envoy
Extraordinary has Copies by him? but yet when the said Company had put
themselves to between twenty and thirty thousand pounds sterling Charge, in
sending Men and Necessaries accordingly for the receiving the same, and the
said Orders were tendered to the said Governour-General, together with His
Majesty's Commission to the like effect, he laughed at them; nor would give them
any Order to the Governor of the Banda-Islands for the delivery thereof;
notwithstanding to take off all pretense of failer on their part, the English
continued their Voyage from Batavia to Po^erone, and did there demand the said
Island, with their Letters to the Governor and Council over the Banda-Islands;
but answer was made them, that they should not have it, and Soldiers were
drawn up along the shore, and they were let know, that if they offered to come
on shore they would fire at them.

And whereas it is said, page the 28, That the Revolution which happened in
England by the Re-establishment of his Majesty, did so change affairs, that
what had been only stipulated in the name of Protector could not be any further
executed; that there must be another Adjustment made with his Majesty, before
new Orders could be given for the accomplishment thereof. And so would upon
that account excuse the non-rendition thereof, till the conclusion of the
Treaty in the year 1662. Whereas those Letters were written about seven months
after the Return of his Majesty to his Kingdoms; and in that of the Estates
Generalto the Governor and Council of the Banda-Islands, there is express
mention and reference made to the aforesaid Award of the Commissioners: The
Letter being to this effect: Whereas the Governors and Directors of the
English East India -Company are now intended to go and take possession of the
Island of Polerone, so we have found it expedient by these presents, to write
unto you, that according to the Award given up by the Commissioners on both
sides, those who shall come to appear from the aforesaid English Company with
due Authority and Qualifications in the Islands ofBanda, ye shall give place,
and deliver over the aforesaid Island of Polerone. Whereupon we relying,etc. In
the Hague, the 17 of December, 1660.

And it is to be remarked, that the Deputies in reciting (page 27) the clause
of his Memorial concerning Polerone, wholly omit that part thereof relating to
these Orders.

Concerning the Treaty of 1662. they say, 'Twas he himself that delivered to
this State a Letter from the King his Master, of the 22 of January 1663. in
which His Majesty says expressly, That he was entirely satisfied with their
procedure in this matter.

By the fifteenth Article of the said Treaty, it was agreed, That immediately
after the Ratification thereof, Orders should be given by the States General,
and the Dutch East-India-Company, for the delivery of the Island of Polerone to
the English East-India-Company: whereupon, after the Ratification thereof, His
Majesty wrote to the States General, demanding the said Orders; which being
accordingly sent hence for London, as His Majesty had demanded the same by
Letter, so He was pleased by another Letter to acknowledge the receipt thereof,
and that with very civil and obliging expressions; well hoping that for the
future, all things would have gone after another manner, then before the
conclusion of the said Treaty. And this is the Letter here mentioned: nor does
it contain any more in relation to this business, nor indeed could it, being
written not above fourteen weeks after the conclusion of the said Treaty, being
dated Whitehall the 22 of January 1662. Whereas the Deputies say in this their
Book, That it was dated the 22 of January 1663. which is above fifteen months
after the conclusion of the Treaty; whereby they would have it thought, that
this Letter had been written upon some further procedure in relation to this
business, and upon some advice out of the Indies concerning the same. Nor will
the excuse of New style or Old style serve the turn; for if they had meant New
Style, then it must have been dated the first of February 1663. and not the 22
of January 1663. And the King his Master does by no means understand this
manner of proceeding with him.

And now, I pray, does this Letter contradict or interfere, in the least, with
what had been said by him in his Memorial? Had he therein said, That they had
not given Orders for the delivery thereof, or more then that, Yet we do not
know to this day, that the said place is restored.

And was not that then true? And what ground or occasion given for them, to
say, Page the 28, The said Envoy does hereby make appear the wrong he does, in
forming Complaints upon a matter, concerning which the King himself had thanked
the State? Had he complained, that this State had not given Orders for the
restoring that place; or said more then as abovesaid, That we did not yet know
that that place was restored? and can any of them say yet to this day, that it
is restored? But if he had thought he should have been taken up so short, he
would have added (as he then could) that the said Orders, together with His
Majesty's Commission, under his Great Seal of England, had been actually
^endred and delivered to the Dutch Governour-General at Batavia; and that he
had made sport therewith, as with the Orders of the year 1660. asking how he
could know that piece of Wax from another piece of wax? and how he could know
the King's Picture and image thereupon from another? with many vaunting and
insolent expressions; though he did acknowledge that he knew of the conclusion
of the said Treaty; and that thereby the said Island was to be restored, and
that the Orders by them presented, as from the Estates General, and
East-India-Company, were really their Orders; and that they who tendered them,
were the Factors and Servants of the English East-India-Company, and so that
there could be no question, but that it ought to be delivered to them. And so,
what though His Majesty's Commission should not have been kept so perfectly
clean, that could raise no question: but it is a sign how exact the Deputies
informations concerning this matter are, and what credit is to be given
thereunto; for that they call it a Paper, Page the 28. Presenting to them a
Paper that was so foul: whereas it is very well known, that the Broad-Seal of
England is never put to Paper, but to Parchment only: nor do themselves
allege, that the Orders of the Estates General, or Dutch East-India-Company
were sullied, or those of the English East-India-Company. And when they had
spent much time in descanting upon the Commission and Orders, then the said
General would have them to give an Acquittance, wherein should be inserted such
a Clause as was directly repugnant to the Treaty, and no way in their power to
sign, and wherein they must in writing give thanks for the restoring of the
said Island to them, as if of grace, and not a thing agreed by Treaty to be
done, and of due, and which had so many years been unjustly kept from them, and
now to be delivered with the trees again utterly wasted and destroyed, whereas
at the time of its taking it was well planted; and what other or further
Devices may afterward be made, either there, or by the Governor and Council
of the Banda-Islands, Time must show: we have cause to fear the worst; and if
it be not delivered, it will appear to have been caused upon such account, and
not (as is here suggested) upon the want of Shipping, or other necessaries on
the side of the English for the receiving thereof, though they had no great
encouragement to be over-forward in providing them, considering what the like
Orders had cost them in the year 1660, and to what effect.

And whereas they say, That the aforesaid Letter of the 22th of January was
delivered to this State by him the said Envoy; The Deputies have very much
forgot themselves: the said Letter was not delivered by him, nor could be, for
that he was at that time in England, nor had been in Holland some months
before, nor returned thither till several months after.

Page the 29 and 30, concerning the business of New Netherlands, they argue,

First, from the signification of the word Octroy,which, say they, Is only an
Advantage accorded to some particular Subjects, to the general exclusion of all
other Subjects of the same Sovereign, but which does not at all oblige the
Subjects of other Princes and States.

Secondly: And though the Octroy or Patent which the King of England had given
to his Subjects, did comprehend New Netherland, yet that could not give the
English any Right to the Places and Lands which the Subjects of this State had
possessed peaceably for forty or fifty years, and which they had occupied
whilst it was deserted and uninhabited.

Thirdly, As to what was alleged of their endeavoring to usurp still more
upon the English, and to impose their Laws and Customs upon them, and to raise
Contributions from them: They say, We judge that this is a production of his
Imagination, and dare say that there is nothing of truth therein.

Fourthly: That if his Majesty had thought that his Subjects had any pretense
to this place, would not his Majesty's Commissioners, during the whole time
that the Ambassadors of this State were inEngland, have spoken one word
concerning this matter? however, since they have not done it, it ought to be
put among the number of those that are mortified by the said Treaty.

As to the first, He does reply, That he did not argue in his Memorial from the
Grammatical signification of the word Octroy, but from the matter and substance
of the Octroys, Patents or Charters granted by his Majesty's Royal Ancestors
concerning those parts. The Deputies suppose that they must be after the Model
of the Octroys of the Dutch East India and West-India-Companies, which do not
give the Sovereignty of all the Lands within the limits thereof to the said
Companies, but only certain Privileges therein, to the exclusion of the rest
of the Subjects of this State: And some such there are in England also, as of
the English East India, Turkey, African, Moscovian Companies, etc. but these are
quite of another nature; they do grant the Sovereignty of the Lands within
their Limits to the Grantees, under a certain Model and Form of Government, and
under certain Powers and Jurisdictions therein set down and prescribed.

And as to the second, the Deputies do not deny that this Land called New
Netherlands is within the Patents granted by his Majesty, to his Subjects, and
he the said Envoy does affirm that it is.

And let those of the West India Company produce an antienter Patent for the
same, but he does not believe they can produce any at all, other then that
general Octroy (which as abovesaid) grants not the Sovereignty of all Lands
within the Limits thereof: And as to the point of Possession, there is nothing
more clear and certain then that the English did take possession of and
inhabit the Lands within the Limits of the said patents, long before any Dutch
were there. It Is not to say, (nor is it requisite that it should be said) that
they did inhabit every Individual Spot, within the Limits of them. It is
enough that their patent is the first, and that in pursuance thereof, they had
taken possession, and did inhabit and dwell within the same, and made
considerable Towns, Forts, and Plantations therein before the Dutch came to
dwell there: Is it to be imagined that the Dutch East-India-Company have fully
Peopled and cultivated the Island of Ceylon, and other their great Colonies in
the East Indies, and yet if the English should upon such pretense, endeavor to
settle there without their consent. Would they approve thereof, or suffer the
same? or account their Title there to be good, or other then Precarious; and
the settling of the Dutch in New Netherlands (so called) was upon permission
granted them by the English for their Shipping, to take in Wood, and Water,
there, and other Provisions for their relief, when they should come into those
Parts, but the English did never grant unto them the Sovereignty thereof, but
that the said Company (as they do elsewhere) did upon this precarious
admission and connivance, incroach from time to time upon the English.

But whereas they say Page 29. The said Envoy says, that the Dutch ought every
year to demand the confirmation of their possessions, and descant thereupon:
But we have above observed, that there is very little to be built upon what he
says, that it ought not to be believed but upon very good proof.

It is very hard measure, that the Deputies still take to themselves the
Liberty of misreciting the Words, and Clauses of his Memorial, and make it
speak what it never did, and yet withal fall upon him with reproachful, and
disdainful Language, for having said and Written that which is no where (that
he knows of) to be found but in this Book. The clause in his Memorial was; That
those Hollanders which were there, did dwell there simply by permission, and
not by any Right that they could pretend to that place, and that that had been
declared to them from time, to time, and from year to year. And is not there a
great difference between, That it had been declared to them from year to year,
that they had no right to dwell there, and That they ought every year to demand
the confirmation of their possessions. And are not the very next words of his
Memorial, But so as that the English were content to have suffered them to
dwell there, provided they would have demeaned themselves Peaceably. So far
from having said that the English did expect that they should every year demand
a confirmation of their possessions, as that on the contrary what he said was,
that though their possession was but procarious, yet that the English were
contented to let them live there and enjoy the same, upon condition of their
demeaning themselves quietly; And was it not so that about the year 1654, the
English were about granting them certain Limits, and the same had taken Effect
and been ratified; if their continued New Insolences had not diverted the
same: yet it shall be far from him to retort any such unhandsome Expressions.
And as to the Argument whereby they would prove that they were more then few in
Number, for that It is not probable that a few Hollanders should have so fallen
upon many English.

That they were but few in comparison of the English is a fact too known to
need proving; but the argument may be thus well Retorted, How great was their
presumption, to have attempted those Insolences, which they did from time to
time attempt, being so few in Number, and how great the patience of the English
who are so Numerous and strong in those parts, being able to bring many scores
of thousands of able fighting men into the field, that they should yet so long
have suffered the same. And this lead's me to the third particular, It would
have been a boldness and a presumption indeed in him the said Envoy to have
fained these Allegations, and endeavored to have imposed them upon their
Lordships and the world, that they had from time to time injured the English,
and usurped upon them in those parts if it had not been so; But I pray was not
One How, sent by His late Majesty of Blessed Memory into those parts about
twenty five years agone, and did not the Dutch there seize him and his Company,
and keep them Prisoners, and were not great complaints thereof brought to the
Court of England, and which were highly resented? And did not the Dutch about
twenty years agone come to an English Town called Stanford, where none but
English lived, and summoned them to come under their obedience and pay them
contribution, and set up the Dutch Arms there, and all along the late times of
disorders in England, were there not continually high complaints brought over
against them? did they not send armed Men to an English Town called Greenwitch,
and force the English there to come under them? And was not one Deyer sent in
Cromwell's time to stop their Insolences, and who did Free the English of them
in several places. Moreover did not the last Governor of New-Amsterdam (so
called) lately come with Armed men to a certain English Town called
West-Chester, within the bounds of the English Colonies, and where they had
bought the Land of the Natives (as is their Custom, not to settle any where in
those parts without first contracting with them) and by force compelled them to
come under their obedience, and to pay them contributions, or else to quit
their dwellings in two Month's time, and Named the place Oostdorp. And about
three years ago, upon fresh complaints of their Usurpations by Land, and
moreover that they did stop and hinder the English Shipping from their Trade in
those parts, Was not one Scot sent to warn them to live quietly, and not to
injure the English, or otherwise that some other Course should be taken with
them, and yet the Deputies would have it thought that there has been nothing
of this kind, and that what has of late been done to the Dutch in those parts,
should have been a surprise without any thing of provocation, or occasion given.

And as to the fourth Particular more needs not be said, then what is in his
Memorial, viz. That the English had by their Charter Jura Belli in those parts,
without appealing first into Europe; but if it can be made good that they have
done any injury to the People of this Country, His Majesty will be always
ready to see that right be done. But whereas their Lordships do in several
places of this Book, say, that His Majesty should have confessed, that the
taking of New Netherland, (so called) should be done by his order. He is
commanded to say, that his Majesty never said more concerning this, then
concerning Cape Corse, and that he did never say to the Ambassador of this
State, that he had given any such Order: Nor did he give it, nor was the said
place taken by any Order of his. And if the Deputies had pleased to have minded
the Answer of the States General of the ninth of October last; given to His
Majesty by their Ambassador, They would therein have found, that the said
Estates do not impute the taking of New Netherland to His Majesty, but to his
Subjects in those parts, the words being, That their Lordships have made
complaint, that His Majesty's Subjects in New Netherland, had with Violence
driven the Subjects of this State out of their Possession.

And this was after De Ruyter was actually gone for Guiny, nor was so much as
any thing known in Europe concerning the taking of Cabo Corso, till about the
same time. And how then these matters, and His Majesty having said that they
were done by his Order throughout this Book, produced to justify the sending
him thither.

Page 30, and 31. Concerning what had been said by him the said Envoy
Extraordinary, that the 15th Article does only Mortify matters of Piracy, and
the like, and not of Rights and Inheritances of Lands. They say, It is hard to
say whether the said Envoy do faign the ignorant or be so in Effect. And for
the disproving of what had been said by him, they produce the instance of the
Island of Polerone, concerning which they say, That it being stipulated by the
said Articles, that the said place should be restored, that consequently all
other matters of that kind must be thereby mortified; for that Exceptio firmat
Regulam. And add this harsh expression, A strange blindness, if it be not
wilful; Whereas that clause of the Treaty run's, that by the restitution of
the said Island, all actions, and pretensions for losses, injuries, and
offenses committed upon each other in India, and known in these parts, the
10/^0 of January 1658/9 should cease, be extinguished, and annulled: Moreover
the Deputies offer no answer to the instance given by him in his Memorial
concerning the case of Sir William Lower, which was a Case depending in their
own Courts of Justice, concerning an Inheritance of Land long before the years
1654, or 1659, (which are the respective times of the general abolition in the
said Article) and yet since the conclusion of the late Treaty, that case has
not been abolished but still proceeded in, and continued as before. And how
many other cases and actions are there of the like nature upon disputes
concerning the Inheritances of Land depending in the Courts of both sides, as
also concerning Morgages, and other real Engagements, and concerning Wills,
and Testaments, Bonds, Obligations, and Merchnts accounts of antienter Date
then the terms prescribed in that Article. Let but the Deduction of the States
General of the ninth of November last be looked upon, and they will find
therein enough of this kind; and how strange and monstrous an Article would
that have been, that should have abolished all Men's actions of these kinds.
And further to show that it was the meaning of those that made the Treaty, at
the time when they Penned it, that that Article should not have so vast an
extent, but only to reach to matters of Piracy and the like. The Deputies might
have remembered, that during the Negotiation thereof, this very Objection was
made by the Ambassadors of this State, upon the debate of this matter, viz.
that it might be of too large and general extent, and his Majesty's
Commissioners did return to them for answer as follows; Their Excellencies
have already seen a Catalogue of the complaint, of diverse of His Majesty's
Subjects for injuries done to them by the Dutch, so that if they please to call
the same to mind, there can be no such incertitude in the Article concerning
Commissioners, as their Papers would seem to intimate. Moreover it will
appear, that this Article of Commissioners is not desired for businesses of
Lands and Houses, but for matters of Pirateries, and Merchandises taken by
force, which we desire should be so Examined and determined, for the avoiding
the charge and delay of Juridicall Proceedings. And upon this account His
Majestey did not, nor needed not make mention of this business during the
Negotiation of that Treaty, and upon the same account His Majesty did not think
fit to insert in the List of Damages this pretense of His Subjects thereto,
nor to the Fort of Cabo Corso, though as to the spoil and burning of their
Goods there, he did cause that to be put into it.

Besides (as has been shown above) there were very many and great
provocations done in those parts called New Netherlands to the English since
the conclusion of the late Treaty, and so though the Treaty were to be
construed as they would have it, yet it does not help them concerning the
business of Guiana. They say Page the 31. The Digression which the said Envoy
makes as to the business of Guiana is from the purpose, for that say they, he
has nothing to do to trouble himself how this State will make off this matter
with France; he did not mention that business as intermedling between the French
and them, but if at this time they have sent a Minister into France, to decry
the King his Master, and his Affairs, and to stir up that Crown against him,
and particularly upon the account of his having (as they pretended) given
Orders for the taking Cabo Corso, and New Netherlands (to which His Majesty's
Subjects have so clear and undoubted a Title) Was it from the purpose for him
to say, that suppose His Majesty has given such Orders, can any Prince think
it strange, or be surprised thereat, much less the most Christian King (as the
words of his Memorial) seeing it has pleased the same King that very year to
Order or suffer his Subjects to repossesse themselves in the same manner by
Arms and force, of a certain place called Guiana, which they pretend to have
been unjustly possessed and detained from them by the said West-India-Company.
And if that were a Digression, the Deputies must give him leave to make another
of the like kind, and to put them in mind of the late Edict, whereby all the
Shipping of this Country in the Havens of that Kingdom, were arrested and
seized, upon the single account of the having seized in this Conntry, two Ships
belonging to the French East-India-Company, and though the said Ships were
built here and but newly bought, and that the pretense of seizing them, was the
Service of the State and payment proffered, and that the dispute about them had
been but of a few weeks standing. Page 32, 33. concerning the business of Cabe
verd, and the Ships of the West-India-Company taken by Captain Holmes on the
Coast of Guiny, Whereas he the said Envoy had said thereto, First, that His
Majesty had not only disavowed his having given him any Order for the doing
thereof, but also disowned the Acts themselves; Secondly, that by the 14th
Article of the late Treaty, 12 Months time is given for the doing of Justice
upon what should happen either by Sea or Land upon that Coast since the
conclusion of the late Treaty.

To the First, the Deputies say, that His Majesty had in like manner before
disavowed the taking the Fort St Andre by the said Holmes, but yet that nothing
followed thereupon. This is fully answered before, and thereby made appear that
it is to themselves, and not His Majesty, to whom it is to be imputed, that no
further Progress had been made in that matter; Yet it may not be amiss (since
the Deputies do so often make mention of this business, and make so great
Outcry concerning the same) to add how little the Concern of this State is
therein, or in what had been done concerning it; For that that Fort did not
belong to the West India Company of this Country, but to the Duke of Courland,
and that they had but lately shufled themselves into it, (as they do into the
Possessions of every one under one pretense or other) Nor were they in it upon
their own account but His, and under pretense to keep it for him, and so that
the cause of complaint was not properly by them, but the said Duke, and though
all possible Endeavors have been since used by them to draw him to their
Party, they have not been able to prevail therein, but the said Duke has
applied himself to the King his Master, and His Majesty and He, are come to an
Agreement, concerning the same, and the said Agreement concluded and sealed,
and so neither the West India Company, nor the State, have any thing to do
therein. And whereas they say, that His Majesty's answer was only in General
Terms, but that he does not positively promise restitution and reparation:
could more be said by him upon the first complaint; yea (as is said in his
Memorial) could any further answer have been expected from the meanest of
their own Courts of Justice in any Case that should come before them? And were
it not injustice to condemn the most criminal person before he were heard, or
at least a competent time given for his appearance; and did not His Majesty say
withal, that Holmes had order to return, and was expected very speedily in
these parts, and that so soon as he should be returned, he would cause the
matter to be examined, Justice done, and the Offenders punished. And however
the Deputies would insinuare as if that had been but an Elusion, yet did he not
return accordingly, and upon his arrival, was he not immediately by his
Majesty's special Order carrito the Tower of London (a place where none are
put for any private disputes, or for any Offenses, but wherein the King
Himself is concerned) in order to his examination about these Matters.

But whereas the Deputies would have it be believed that the said Holmes is so
Monstrous a Person, and that all he had done had been without any provocation,
It may not be amiss to give here a touch of what he does allege for his own
justification.

And First, as to the Fort St Andre, he says, that coming in the year 1661,
into the River of Gambia to trade there, (as formerly the English had done)
that those of the said Fort fired at him, and would not permit him to pass up
the said River. Whereupon he fell upon them

As to the business of Cabo Verde, he says, that coming again upon the Coast
of Africa, and going to the River of Gambia near Cabo Verde, he was informed
that a little before his arrival there, one that was Commander of the Ship
Black Eagle, and an Agent for the Dutch West India Company in those parts, had
stirred up and engaged the King of Barra to make War against the English, and
had actually joined himself and Ship with the said Kings Forces for the
completing of his designs, and this was confessed to the said Holmes by the
said King of Barra (as he has to show under the Hands of many credible
Witnesses who heard the same) Moreover that the said Agent had endeavored by
sums of Money, and other Rewards, to corrupt the Officers of the Royal
Company to deliver into his Hands, for the use of the Dutch West-Indiae
Company, the Places, and Factories then in the possession of the English in
those Parts, and that has been since made good by the Oath of some of the said
Officers, lately taken before the Lord Mayor of London. Moreover that at a
certain place called Ventam he had told Captain Manuel Vasse de Fraiula
Commander in Chief for the King of Portugal in the River of Gambia, and Manuel
Alves de Britto, and diverse other Portugal Merchants, that they were resolved
to beat out the English; That hereupon he went to Cabo Verde, not with design
to attaque the same, or commit the least Hostility against it, but only to
speak with the Governor of that place, and to endeavor to compose matters
for the present and until final Order should be taken concerning the same
here in Europe; but coming thither, (without the least provocation given by
him) he was immediately shot at from the said Fort, whereupon he fired at them
again, and several shot having passed between them, whereby his Ship was much
dammaged, his Mast shot through, and much weakened, his Master, and several of
his Men wounded and killed, he drew off to a further distance, where being
enforced to come to an Anchor for the repairing of his Ship and Mast, without
any thoughts of returning thither again, or pursuing the matter any further,
while they were mending their Mast, the Governor hung out a white Flag, and
sent a Boat on board him, tendering the Surrender of the said Place; that
passing thence and calling at Lestus, he was there informed by the King of the
Country, that a certain Holland's Ship called the Unity had been there but some
days before, and endeavored to persuade him to expel the English from trading
there, and that he having refused to consent thereunto, that the Captain of the
said Ship had seized all the said Kings Subjects that were come on board him,
to trade (according to the Custom of that Country) as also all such Fishers as
they found upon the Coast, making them Slaves, and carrying them away. Moreover
that the Dutch coming to several places, had put out English Colors, and
having thereby enticed the Natives on board them, carried them away and made
them Slaves, leaving the Odium upon the English, that sailing thence to Anta,
where the English had then a Factory, he found that one Captain From belonging
to the said Dutch West India Company, had but a little before compelled the
English there to take in the English Colors that were wont to be displayed
there; that sailing forward on the Gold Coast, he found, that not only those
Ships of the Royal Company had been hindered in their Trade, concerning which
complaint had been come to England before his departure thence) but that
Valckenburgh, General of the West India Company there, had, and did, continue
hindering every Ship of the said Royal Company from Trade there, That he had
published the Declaration above mentioned, wherein he claimed the whole Coast
and the whole Trade thereof, and wherein he had commanded the English to quitt
immediately two of their principal Factories, viz. Tacorari, and Cabo Corso as
above said. Moreover that he was informed by the Natives all along the Coast,
that the said Valckenburgh had proffered to them a Bendy of Gold for every
English Man's head that they should bring unto him, and greater sums for such
as were Commanders among them. That thereupon he sailed to Castle delmina to
speak with him, where he found one Captain Cubit Commander in chief of a
Squadron of the Royal Companies Ships upon that Coast, who told him that he
had already written to him to the same effect, and desiring that they might
live and Trade peaceably each by the other, but that he had utterly refused to
hearken to any thing of that kind; whereupon Sailing thence to Cabo Corso
(where the English had a Factory) and where also on the other side of the Water
the Danes had a Fort called Fredericksbergh, and having no intention of
annoying the Dutch, nor offering them the least offense, nor so much as going
ashore on that side that they were, but on the other side where the Danes were,
and with whom the English were in a perfect good understanding, and had a Free
Trade, that the Dutch within the Fort of Cabo Corso did several times shoot at
him, and very much endanger him; that hereupon (and not upon the account of any
Orders from His Majesty, which he denies that he ever had) he called a Council
of War, where it was resolved to attaque the said Fort. He says further, that
having sent for the Governor of Inashang (an English Factory) to come to him to
Cormantine, that being to pass by a place called Aga, the Dutch there shot at
him and wounded several of his Company. Moreover that sending a Drum with a
Letter to Anna Maboa, a Garrison of the Dutch, that they most inhumanly fell
upon the Messenger under the Wall of their Castle, and contrary to the Laws,
and Customs of most Barbarous Enemies, cut him, mangled him, and stripped him,
leaving him dead upon the place.

Concerning the second, viz. the 14th Article, they say Page the 33. The said
Envoy gives a Sense thereof according to his mode, but that the Article says
the quite contrary to that he pretends to infer; Whereas in truth he barely
repeated that clause of the said Article, which says that twelve months time
shall be given for the doing of Justice upon any Complaint of any thing done
upon the Coast of Africa by Land or Sea, since the conclusion of the said
Treaty, as was the business of Cape Verde, and what else complained of against
Holms, without making any construction thereof at all, nor did there need any,
the words being of themselves as plain and full as words could be made for the
purpose they are cited by him, that is to say, to show that ways of Force were
not to be made use of in such cases, till the Expiration of twelve months time
after Complaint and Demand of Justice; But the Deputies do here repeat a clause
of the said Article, Viz. That it says, that if any one does any Violence,
that he alone shall be punished and no other; And do make a construction
thereof, and such a one as whoever would take upon him the liberty of
retorting, might well say a Sense thereupon according to their Mode, and that
the Article says quite the contrary, etc. For say they, That is to say, that
the party offended or hurt, cannot resent it or revenge himself but only
against him that has done the hurt or offense, and that Letters of Reprisal
which may reach to others as well as the parties offending, cannot be given
till the Expiration of a year after complaint. Whereby they do infer from the
said Clause, that indeed as to Letters of Reprisal which do Extend beyond the
persons that had committed the offense, that those cannot be granted till a
year after complaint, but that as to such way of force as reaches only to the
persons that had committed the offense, that the party offended might in the
mean while make use thereof, and so nothing in this Article that derogates from
or restrains the Law of Nature, which teaches to repel Force with Force;
Whereas nothing can be more clear, then that the true intent and meaning of the
said Article is, not only that no Letters of Mart can be granted during the
twelve Months therein mentioned, whereby others then the persons offending may
come to suffer, but that during that time the offenders themselves are not to
be proceeded against by force and Violence; but in a Judiciary way, the words
thereof being, That twelve Months time shall be given for the doing of Justice
and giving of Satisfaction: and it follows immediately after in the said
Article, In case the offenders against this Treaty do not appear and submit
themselves to Judgment, and give satisfaction within the time above expressed,
that then their Estates, Goods and Revenues whatsoever, shall be confiscated
for the injuries and wrongs by them offered, and be liable to further personal
punishment, so that the said twelve Months is given, not for sending Fleetes
and Armies to Fight against them, but for their appearance and submitting to
Judgment, and for the giving of satisfaction, not the taking of it by force,
and then if it be not thus given (and not before) their Estates, Goods and
Revenues in general liable to be seized, but not by the Arbitrary and Violent
proceedings of Vice Admirals, but by a lawful sentence by way of confiscation,
the words being, Their Estates, Goods and Revenues whatsover shall be
confiscated for due and full satisfaction of the injuries and wrongs by them
offered; And if there be a failer herein and that Justice is either denied or
delayed, then, and not till then, is the door open for ways of Force against
them.

And whereas they say Page the 34th, That it is not easy to make pass for the
injuries of particular persons, such Hostilities as have been done with the
Arms, and under the Pavilion of the Sovereign. It is true that the 14th
Article does reach only to such matters as should be done by the Subjects and
inhabitants of either side, and not to such things as should be done by His
Majesty on the one side, or this State on the other; but suppose an offense be
committed under the Flagg of either side, that alone is not a sufficient
argument to make it to be an act of the Government of either side: for example,
Enno Doedestarre took the Charles aforesaid in the year 1660, in the Road of
Martins in France with three Men of War of this State, and under their Flagg.
And Captain Banckert of Zeland did since take in the Channel with one of their
Men of War under their Flagg, His Majesty's Shaloup aforementioned then in his
service. And the East and West-India-Companies of this Country do proceed and
act in the Name of the States General, and Valckenburg's Declaration was in
their Name, yet has the King his Master charged any of these actions upon the
State as done by them, merely because done under their Flagg, or be their
Authority in general? No more can Holmes his actions by upon that account
imputed to His Majesty, that were done without His Order.

And whereas they say, page 33. that then The same Article would authorize
these violences, which is pretends to hinder.

Is there no medium between authorizing of them, and the forbidding the having
recourse to force for a certain time? Is the submitting them for a certain time
to a course of Justice, an authorizing of them? And when entailed with so
severe a punishment in the issue, as the Confiscation of their whole Estate,
declaring their persons to be enemies, and further personal punishment, and an
Obligation upon him whose subject he is, for the taking care that Justice be
accordingly done, for that otherwise the 23 Article of the same Treaty, gives
them liberty of having recourse to force.

And for what is said, Page 34. It is not enough to disavow an action, and to
protect him that has done it.

Is insisting that the person offending be proceeded against according as it is
set down in the Treaty, a protecting of him? By the same Rule, the maintaining
of any Courts of Justice, or form of proceeding against Criminals, and the not
suffering them to be taken in a violent manner out of their hands, and
tumultuarily fallen upon, may be called a Protecting them. His Majesty was
always far from protecting of Holmes; on the contrary, he always declared
that so soon as he returned He would have him punished in case it should appear
he had done amiss; and if they would have had the patience to have expected the
fruits of H^s Majesty's Justice, but that it ought to be done according to the
way in the Treaty; that is to say, that he ought to have a time to appear, and
submit himself to Justice, and not a Fleet sent immediately to fall upon him
Right or Wrong. And if it shall be Objected, That great inconveniences might
follow, if this rule should be kept to. With their favor it is reciprocal, and
so as much danger to the one as the other, and yet the King his Master has
kept up himself Religiously thereto; He did not, upon the complaints made by
his Subjects to him, concerning the injuries done to them in those parts, or
the East Indies, since the late Treaty, send a Fleet to those Coasts, to fall
upon the Subjects of this State, and yet the Argument Of fear of other
Violences and Pirateries to follow without end, was much more strong on his
side, then it could be on theirs (considering how his Subjects have been from
time to time treated in those parts) but made and continued his complaints
here, and expected their doing him Justice according to the said Article. And
suppose such an Article had not been made, would not the inconveniences and
dangers have been greater on the other hand? the Government on both sides,
being then liable to be engaged upon every complaint and suggestion, to the
sending of Fleets and Forces to the attacquing and falling upon the ships, and
Subjects, and Possessions of each other; and so it would be impossible at any
time to continue six Months in Peace with one another: Or though it should be
true, that the inconveniences might be greater with this Article, then
without; yet the Treaty being now ratified, there is no place to object the
same. But under favor, this Objection lies not at all against the said
Article, nor does at all reach the case in dispute; for the Article does not
hinder the providing against future Violencies and Robberies: It does not
forbid the sending Force to protect and defend for the time to come, as was
also declared by his Majesty to the Ambassador of this State, and that such,
and such only were his Orders to Holmes: all it forbids is, that if any
injuries have been actually done, that force cannot immediately (nor till the
expiration of 12 Months) be sent for the revenge thereof, or for procuring
Right thereupon, of which nature were the Orders of this State to Van Campen,
and De Ruyter.

Whereas they say, Page 33, and 34. If Sir George Downing would take the pains
to look over his Memorial, and to hearken to reason, he would not have the
boldness to give here an Explanation directly contrary to the Maxim which
himself avowed in his Memorial of the 13 of Febr. 1664. Wherein he endeavors
to justify the action of Five English men of War that had taken since the
conclusion of the late Treaty, a Dutch Ship called the Arms of Amsterdam, which
he pretended to be an English Ship, and to have been taken by those of the
West India Company of this Country before the Treaty, and says, that it is not
strange, that they had endeavored to retake by force, that which had been by
force unjustly taken from them.

The Estates General had written a long Letter to the King his Master, dated
the 26 of January 1664. N. S. making a very long complaint to him concerning
the taking of a certain Dutch ship belonging to the West India Company of this
Country, called the Arms of Amsterdam: Moreover, they had communicated the said
Complaint to him the said Envoy Extraordinary, with a large deduction
concerning the same, making a huge noise about it; which he the said Envoy
Extraordinary, examining narrowly, and looking into the business found out that
the said Ship called the Arms of Amsterdam, was in truth an English ship
belonging wholly to English Merchants of London, and that her true Name was the
Merchants Delight, and that having sailed from Dover in the year 1660. upon a
trading Voyage to the Coast of Guiny, under the command of one C. Bonner an
Englishman, she had been there seized in an hostile manner, by a certain ship
belonging to the said Company called the Amsterdam, whereof one Aaron Cousens
was Commander, in or about the Month of Aug. 1661. and carried by her to Jasper
van Huysen, then General for the said Company at Castle Delmina. And although
the said Bonner did declare to the said Van Huysen, that himself and Company
were English, and that the ship with her lading belonged to one John Young, and
other Merchants of London, and verified the same by authentic Writings and
Papers; yet that he kept the said ship and lading, evilly treated the men,
altered and new named the ship, calling her the Arms of Amsterdam, that thereby
she might be the less subject to be known wherever she should be met by the
English, and that he had order long before from the King his Master in Council
to complain to the States General concerning the taking of that very ship from
his Subjects, and for which yet no satisfaction had been made: Hereupon he took
the liberty to inform them of the truth of the matter in his said Memorial, and
to tell them that the Case was not so strange and ill as they put it, viz. That
the English had taken a Dutch ship, but only that they had by force retaken an
English ship that had been by force taken from them* thereby to excuse a tanto.
And what can now be said for the justification and defense of the sending Van
Campen and De Ruyter for Guiny. Was not the business of Cabo Verde, and what
else complained of, matters happened since the conclusion of the late Treaty, and
so directly within the compass of that Article? And was not the resolution for
the sending of Van Campen (as is said in his Memorial) taken within about 6 or
7 weeks after complaint made by this State to his Majesty, concerning the
taking of Cabo Verde, and the actual sending De Ruyter within a little after,
and does it not appear by the express words of Van Campen's Instructions, that
his being sent thither, was not only upon the defensive, to perserve the places
and shipping of this Country in those parts, but in direct and downright terms
to fall upon his Majesty's Subjects, and attacque them, revenging themselves by
force against such whom they pretended to have done them hurt. Nor is it
therein said that they might fall upon Holmes only, who was the only person
complained of; but the words are general and dubious, viz That those to whom
the Command of the said Fleet was given, in case that upon the said Coast they
should find, or rencounter any ships or Subjects of his Majesty's, that they
should take care not to endammage them, or to trouble, or incommodate them in
their Traffic; provided they had not already, or did not then do any damage
to this State, or its good Inhabitants. Whereby it is left in their
construction and discretion whom they are to fall upon, viz. whomever they
should judge to have done, or to be doing any hurt to this State, or any of
their Subjects. And this Resolution is put into his Majesty's hands by the
Ambassadou^^ this Country, and not only so, but given to several other Kings of
Europe, his Friends and Allies. And its withal declared that this Fleet shall
pass the Channel before his Ports, and that under the Convoy of a numerous
Fleet of Capital ships of War under the Command of the Lieutenant Admiral of
this State. And was it possible for his Majesty longer to sit still and to
remain without doing any thing. Hitherto the dispute had been only between the
Subjects and Inhabitants of both sides, but now this State had hereby engaged
it self: whereby the Dispute was come to be immediately between the King his
Master and them; and though while this State intermeddled not, neither did the
King his Master upon the other hand interpose, but with patience expected
justice to be done by them to his Subjects, according to the terms of the
Treaty; but they on the other hand* upon the first complaint of any injury done
in those very parts to their Subjects, breaking through the Rules and Bonds of
the Treaty; what now remained, but the opposing of force to force.

And whereas the Deputies would have it thought no indignity or affront to his
Majesty, for that Fleet to have passed, for that, say they, The Sea is open to
all the World. It may not be amiss to mark that however they plead so much for
the the Seas being free in these parts, yet that the contrary is practiced
where the people of this Country have the power: witness the late Declaration
of the Dutch East India Company (not yet disavowed by this State) wherein they
claim a whole great Sea to themselves. And witness the usage, of the West India
Company at Cape Blaneo upon the Coast of Africa, where they will not suffer any
Nation to fish in the open Sea without their permission, and paying them the
tenth fish, and the Governor there within these few years, seized and
confiscated an English ship called the Leopard, for having fished there, but
here in this Case there was no question about their Liberty of passing the Sea,
but about their passing with such a Resolution and to such an End. And could a
greater affront be done to a King, then when he had done what was possible for
the satisfaction of this State and more then requisite, that notwithstanding
thereof, he shall be told by them, that they are resolved to fall upon his
Subjects, and not naming whom, whereby not any of them were in surety,
especially considering they questioned our trading even at our own Factories in
those parts (as has been before shown) and call it a hurting them. Moreover it
is to be considered that at the very time when this resolution was put into his
Majesty's hands, there were just Reasons to surmise and believe, that De Ruyter
was actually already gone, or upon the point of going to Guiny, and so that all
this declaring of their intent of sending Van Campen was but a mere Grimasse,
whereby to color the preparing so considerable a Fleet, as they were then
gathering together under the Notion of Van Campen's going to Guiny and the
convoying of him, but that in truth the real intent and meaning was to make use
thereof nearer home; for it had been said and written by this State to his
Majesty, That De Ruyters employment was to be against the Pirates of Algiers
and those parts, and not a word of the sending him to Guiny; and the Deputies
say, page 36. That it had been very rediculous to have made known his Order.

From whence it must necessarily follow, that it was never intended to send Van
Campen thither upon the same ground, because this State did declare and give
out that he was to go thither: And yet it is not to be imagined that this State
would have been at the charge of preparing such a Fleet as this for nothing, or
without some proportionable design* and so his Majesty had just reason of
jealousy, that as they had sent De Ruyter to fall upon him in Guiny, that in
truth this Fleet was designed to have fallen upon him in these parts, as was
done in the beginning of the late War with England, if he had not in time
provided for his own safety and defense, which was no sooner done, but the
noise of Campen's going to Guiny was immediately out of doors, and the great
Fleet which they had so long kept together separated. And let the words of the
instruction to Van Campen aforementioned be considered, and it will appear that
the same did reach as well to these parts as the Coast of Africa, the words
being, In case that upon the said Coast, or in their way thither, they should
find or rencounter any ships or subjects of his Majesty's, that had already
done, or were then doing any hurt to this State or its subjects: So that the
said instruction reached to his whole way, viz. from the Maes to Guiny, and so
was no other then a declaring of War against His Majesty as well in Europe as
upon the Coast of Africa.

And as to the reproach cast upon this State, upon the account of their sending
De Ruyter to Guiny, viz. that they had invited His Majesty to send a Fleet to
act with theirs against the Pirates of Algiers and those parts, etc.

They say page the 35th. He supposes as if there should have been some kind of
Treaty or Promise to act conjoyntly against the Pirates of Barbary, but it will
not be found that there was any Treaty to that effect, nor yet any Negotiation
conducing thereunto. Is not this Clause in their Letter of January, 1664. N. S.
wherein they invite His Majesty to send his Fleet to act with theirs, viz. That
their Fleet should stay in the Mediterranean Sea and thereabouts, until it had
cleared the same of all those Pirates that ruined the Negotiation and the Trade
there. And does it not follow in the said Letter? We are entirely resolved so
to do, and not to recall our Fleet until we have reduced them to reason. And did
not His Majesty by word of mouth, and He his Envoy Extraordinary, after by his
Order declare unto them in his Memorial of the 3d. of February, 1663. O. S. his
acceptance of that their invitation, and his sending Sir John Lawson with a
Fleet against those Barbarians, and that it should act with all good
correspondence with theirs? and did they not do it accordingly until the time
of De Ruyters quitting those parts? and yet the Deputies would have it thought
as if there had been nothing of a promise on the part of this State to continue
De Ruyter against those Pirates, and that there had been nothing of any
Negotiation or Espece of Treaty or Promise concerniug that matter: And had they
so much upon any account to say against the King his Master, as he has to say
against the Estates General in this, as well upon the account of the
unhandsomness, as of the unwarrantableness of the action, what an Outcry would
they make? and what account is hereafter to be made of any of their
Declarations as to the employments of their Fleets?

And whereas it follows, page the 35th. That the English have made two
different Treaties with those Pirates, without giving notice to this State. The
first Treaty was made long before the writing of that Letter; yea the said
Letter refers thereunto: And for the second Treaty, it was not made till long
after De Ruyter had abandoned that work, and was gone for Guiny; and how then
could His Majesty's Fleet communicate with him? and as to any other Princes of
Christendom His Majesty was under no engagement concerning that matter with any
of them.

They say further, page 35. It would seem that it was the intention of the
English, to employ the Forces of this State alone against those Pirates, while
they carried their Arms upon the Coast of Africa, there to ruin the Commerce
of the Inhabitants thereof.

Whereas (as appears by the foresaid Letter) His Majesty did not put this
State upon sending against the said Pirates, but they put him upon it; so that
if there were any designs, it must be in them by virtue of that their solemn
Letter and Engagement, to put his Majesty out of all manner of jealousies or
suspicion of their diverting that Fleet, that so it might the more securely
steal away for Guiny: Nor is it altogether unworthy the remarking* that there
were laid up before hand in readiness about Cadix, all manner of Provisions and
Necessaries for such a Voyage. And (I pray) whereas it is said in the
Resolution of the Estates General of the 20th. of September last, That the
reason of the communicating to him their intention of sending Van Campen was,
That His Majesty may be entirely assured of the sincerity of their intention
for the conservation of peace, and of all good understanding with him. Yet when
at the same time His Majesty pressed to know whether De Ruyter was gone, (who was
in truth the person designed thither) nothing would be made known to him or
confessed concerning the same: Yea, the Deputies say as aforesaid, It would
have been a ridiculous action to have let the same to be made known, and that
the Ambassador of this State himself had no knowledge thereof. And when they
had as aforesaid, sent out a considerable number of Ships of War to his
Majesty's Coasts, presently after the Estates General write to him, to keep in
his Fleet, and they would keep in theirs, and press vehemently by their
Ambassador an immediate answer; and if His Majesty had yielded thereto, he had
been their caught also.

They say further, page 36. concerning the instruction of De Ruyter, That he is
sent only to punish the Authors of these Violencies and Hostilities: whereby
it is also avowed concerning him, as well as Van Campen, that his sending to
Guiny was not upon the defensive, but also to fall upon His Majesty's Subjects.
But whereas the words are, That he should fall upon only the Authors of these
violencies. And Monsieur Van Benningen in his late Paper published here in
Print, entitled, The substance of what Monsieur Van Benningen Envoye from the
States General to the most Christian King, had represented to him in his
Audience of September, 1664. says, That the States had sent a Fleet to Guiny,
not to attacque reciprocally the Forts, Ships, and Goods of the Subjects of
England, but to re-take that which had been unjustly taken from them. Whereas
no sooner was De Ruyter come into those parts, but finding there 8 Merchants
ships that had not been arrived there above 7 or 8 days before, and had no
hand nor share in any thing done against the People of this Country, yet he
immediately seized them, broke bulk, unlading them, and appropriating their
Cargoes to the use of the West India Company. And in stead of declaring, That
they would punish De Ruyter for the doing thereof, he is since the coming of
that News advanced from being Vice Admiral of Amsterdam, to be one of the
Lieutenant Admirals of Holland. And the Deputies say here, We judge that there
is no body that will not praise and commend the prudent conduct of this State,
and that excellent design that they had to cause De Ruyter to go from the
Streights to Guiny. Nor is there any thing said for his being designed for the
Coast of Guiny only; and so he may be designed for the attacquing of His
Majesty's Subjects in other parts of the World as well as there.

And now what occasion was there for the inserting of all those calumnies and
reviling expressions in the Deputies Remarks, much less for the State to have
owned them, and stamped their Authority upon them. Is there so much as one
incivil or indecent word challenged in any part thereof to have been in his
Memorial, and does it not now appear that there was also nothing therein but
what was according to truth.

And can it now be doubted by any who has been the Aggressor and the Cause of
all the present Disorders between the Nations. First, as to what before the
Treaty, to say nothing of the Bonne Esperanza and Bonne Adventure, and how His
Majesty has been dealt withal in relation to them (that having been already
Printed and Published at large.) As to the Lists of Damages, 'twas as appears
near 24 months after the Signing of the late Treaty ere he the said Envoye
could obtain the Exchange thereof, and then coming to the Examination of them
according to the 15 Article. Whereas the English List was so soberly Penned,
that but one Exception was made thereunto. The Dutch List on the other hand was
so composed, as that scarce an Article thereof but liable to exception. And
that they had excepted against in the English List was at the next Conference
expunged, and so the said List agreed, and ready to be proceeded upon. On the
contrary, as to the Exceptions made against theirs, to this day no answer
returned, whereby it remains at their doors, that no farther procedure has
been for the adjusting and determining those matters. And as to what has
happened since the Treaty, the Hope-well, Leopard, Charles and James, etc. had
not only been stopped and defeated in their Voyages, before any thing attempted
by Holmes, but the news thereof was come into England before he went thence;
nor was any thing done by him upon the Coast of Africa, till it plainly
appeared by the stopping of every other English Ship that came upon these
Coasts, that what was done was not done by accidental rencounters, but out of
design; nor till Valkenburgh had actually commanded the English out of Cabo,
Corso, and Tacorary, two of their principal Factories, under a penalty of a
great sum of money for every month that they should remain there after the
said notification; and this done in a Declaration, wherein he deduced the Right
of this State to the rest also, and so that the English could not but believe
that the next News must be the commanding them to quit entirely the whole
Coast. Yet (as he says for himself) he did not go about to take upon him the
revenging thereof, nor had done what he did but upon immediate Attacques and
Provocations upon the respective places occasioning the same; and suppose it
had been otherwise, yet upon complaint made by this State, can they say that
His Majesty did by them as they did by him in the business of De Ruyter, viz.
give them no answer at all, or such a one as they gave him in the business of
the stopping the said Ships and of the said Declaration; yea, did he not
immediately disavow what had been done by the said Holmes, and declare that he
had no Orders from him for the doing thereof, and that so soon as possible
matters could be examined, he would do therein according to Justice and Reason;
yet contrary to the Express Letter of the 14 Article, which gives a twelve
Months time upon complaints in those parts, this State within 6 or 7 weeks
after complaint resolve to send a Fleet of Men of War of their own thither, and
within about as many weeks more put a Resolution into his Majesty's hands;
whereby it appears, that their Orders were not to be upon the Defensive only,
and to convoy and protect their Subjects and shipping from further injuries;
but to attacque and fall upon his Majesty's Subjects, and not some one or more
of them by Name; but under such general words, as from the reach whereof none
of them were secure: and that not upon the Coast of Africa only, but even here
in Europe, in the Channel before his own Ports. And what though there had been
no other Provocation but this very Resolution? was not this alone enough to
have warranted his Majesty to have fallen upon them, both in Europe and
elsewhere? If any King or State send a Declaration to another King or State,
letting them know that they have prepared a Fleet, and have actually given
orders to the Commanders thereof to fall upon their Subjects, and that it
appears that nothing but wind and weather hinders the execution thereof:
suppose the said King or State to whom such intimation has been given, shall
thereupon (and while God Almighty by his Providence hinders the execution of
the said Orders) attempt something against them or their Subjects; Shall not
yet the other that gave the said Denunciation be looked upon as the Aggressor?
Yet his Majesty remained still only upon the defensive doing nothing against
them: yea whereas 12 Months were now expired since the Complaints made by his
Majesty concerning the Charles and James, etc. and nothing of satisfaction
given; whereby the said Article, upon that account, was also expressly broken by
them, and his Majesty at liberty to have righted himself: yet notwithstanding
he did not do it, and that though they on the other hand, had (as aforesaid) in
relation to their pretenses, broken in upon the said Article, endeavoring to
right themselves by force within the time limited contrary thereunto: Nor did
his Majesty intermeddle or give order for the offering the least offense to
their Subjects, till he certainly knew that De Ruyter had quitted that Coast
and work he was sent hence about; and that his Majesty had again and again
demanded of the Ambassador of this State, residing in his Court, to be
satisfied whether he was gone, and upon what design, which he had reason to
demand and expect to be satisfied in: First, because the work was not then done
with those of Algiers, and that this State had (as is above shown) engaged to
his Majesty that that Fleet should continue there till an issue thereof: And
secondly, because that being in such a manner gone away, 'twas not to be
imagined, in that conjuncture of Affairs, that it could be upon any other
account then to go to Guiny to fall upon his Subjects there. Nor is it an
answer to say, That their Ambassador did not know it: He was their
Ambassador, and his Majesty did demand it of him, and if they did not think
fit, either by him, or otherwise to satisfy his Majesty concerning the same,
and considering their Resolution that they had put into his hands concerning
Van Campen, and yet in which they make such Protestations to his Majesty, of
proceeding so frankly with him; what could he then conclude, but that while
they were here amusing him under the notion of Van Campens going to Guiny, that
De Ruyter was gone thither to execute what was threatened to be done by Van
Campen. Moreover, that themselves had actually begun the stopping of ships in
those parts, stopping the ship from Gottenburg, bound for London: and now, and
not till now, did the King his Master intermeddle by way of Force; and yet only
stopping and seizing their ships, and that only till such time as he should
come to be satisfied concerning the designs and acting of De Ruyter, as was
several times declared by him to the Ambassador of this State: Nor was any
disposition made of any of the said ships or their ladings, or any of them
declared Prize until the first of February, O. S. which was long after his
Majesty had certain News that De Ruyter was arrived in Guiny, and had taken a
whole Fleet of Merchants ships of his Subjects, unladen the Goods, and which
were ships that had not done any thing against this Country; and the said
ships were seized upon the 13 October, O. S. and upon the 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, of the same Month, he did unlade the same into his own ships: whereas
his Majesty's order for the seizing of the ships of this Country, was not till
the 9 of November following, of the same style, nor any ships stopped or seized
thereupon till a day or two after; so that De Ruyter had actually seized and
unladen a whole Fleet of English ships, long before his Majesty had so much as
given order for the intermedling with any ships of this Country, or doing any
thing against them: Nor were any Letter of Mart granted by his Majesty, till
long after they had been granted by this State against his Subjects; nor Trade
prohibited between both Nations by him, till the like first done here. And
whereas the Deputies do so often in this Book charge his Majesty with having
done what he did, without any preceding Denunciation or Declaration, he did
not denounce before hand to them, the doing of what was done by Holmes, nor
what was done in New Netherlands; nor could he, these being actions done
without his Order; but as to what was done by his Order, viz. the taking and
seizing of their ships in these parts, to say that this was done without any
preceding Denunciation, is like the rest of the Calumnies in this their Book.
Not to mention what passed between his Majesty and the Ambassador of this
State upon this account: was not the Memorial of him the said Envoye to the
States General of the 27 of July last, as follows:

His most Sacred Majesty of Great Britain, etc. being desirous to omit nothing
that may in any wise contribute on his part, for the prevention of any
misunderstanding or breach between Him and this State, has by His last Post
expressly commanded him His Envoye Extraordinary, to declare to their Lordships
the Estates General of the United Provinces; that His Majesty has given order
to examine the Complaints that have been made unto him in their Name, against
one certain Captain Holmes, for matters alleged to be done by him on the Coast
of Guiny, and will upon full information and hearing of both parties, do
according to Reason and Justice. But if their Lordships shall not think fit to
expect the doing thereof, but contrary to the style and practice of all
Nations, and particularly of his Majesty toward them, whom yet (to say no
more) He has not found over-quick in the dispatch of Justice toward his
Subjects, and expressly against the letter of the Fourteenth Article of the late
Treaty with Him, having made their complaint, shall think fit immediately to
have recourse to Force for remedy, they might as well have spared the labor of
making their Complaint, and the King his Master will hold himself obliged to
oppose Force to Force.

Given at the Hague this 7th. of April, 1665. O. S. G. Downing.

FINIS.

