WHerefore to prove the thing, otherwise as good as nothing what we say; but
like saying and doing, which are two: concerning which of more consequence then
supposed, even of those three witnesses in earth, what power endued withal, in
relation to the three in the high Court of heaven (Joh. etc.) they styled
Judges of the Earth (to wit) the grave and prudent Barons of Exchequer; Et hi
tres unum, etc. Mr. Baron Trevare, the Ancient of days in his likeness; The
second like the Son of man, the azure clouds mixed his Foot-Carpet; The third
answerable to the Holy Ghosts slow operation, PROPHESY for a time ceased, or
like that saying of theirs, Have not so much as heard whether any Holy Ghost,
etc. to whose Ministry committed the Mystery of Times and Seasons, by all the
world derided, etc. several days before whom this troublesome trial appearing of
the Manor and Rectory of Pyreton, by what indirect courses and ways taken,
thereto the King entitled, by juggling Projectors plots, an old Outlawry
revived, caused hereby to stretch it self out by their breathing into it, etc.
to overthrow a lawful Purchase and Ioynture, after enjoyed so many years,
waiting their opportunity, the widows Estate to cut it off, by such trivial
encumbrances sifted forth: the very Image of the Beast, Revel. 13. by the
Great-Seal faced forth, only paying His Majesty about a Mark yearly; a costly
purchase therein by his own officer for one born out.

Not unlike that dispute about Moses body, between the Archangel and the other,
reported by Jude, this Law point debated so often in open Court by the
advantage taken of her imprisonment, got into possession, so passing from this
to the Judges charge for repairing this breach, appointed to stand in the gap,
hereby to take off the Lords heavy hand from him, namely the King, by conjuring
this Spirit down, raised up in his Name, the three kingdoms suffering for it,
no less then for the sin against the holy Ghost committed, added thereto,
forgiven neither in this world nor the other; witness the Archbishop for one
gone to his proper place from Towerhil: and yet delivered not for all so long
in travel the aforesaid Kingdoms, such distraction witness continuing in
Ecclesiastical and Civil affairs both.

No ordinary offense or trespass for, but with a high hand, as not unknown to
himself: That for her coming unto him not without manifestation of a Commission
in that case: To give him a taste of his judgment at hand, no less then the
hand writing ( Dan. 5.) served on him in his gallery; immediately by a
reference under his hand bearing date, 1633: October. etc. Whitehal, committed
for that cause the space of two years a close prisoner in the Gatehouse, etc.
stripped of all ever since, a cup whereof himself since has drunk the dregs,
cannot deny it, This is the business that sleeps not.

Howsoever he fallen asleep, like them bidden to sleep on, etc. she though then,
and since armed with no few sad tokens of that kind come to pass on others no
obscure ones.

With this for another observation, her Ioynture the Manor of Englefield
whilst she in the Gatehouse, bought by the Marquis of Winchester, how his of
Basing, such an Example not the like, unluckey Babel Towers, how costly to
widows and fatherless, now made to kiss the ground.

All put upon his rekoning, in the Isle of Wight, and impeached of treason in
this kind; as Whitehals desolation too: no light thing; showed about their
neck a meeter ornament what weight not unknown. Yet for making atonement in
that case, for his Majesty's folly, now this suffices, like as when JOBS
captivity said to return, was appointed to pray for his three friends: So on
the other side, the aforesaid Judges three to make his peace, to turn his
Captivity away, fallen so low as hard to judge, whether exposed to the dunghill,
or the dungeons Slavery the greater or better Estate, unhappily by his own
seeking happened.

Nor his Name wiped out of this Record, once that a good Confession made,
afterward makes as bad an end lifting up the heel, as much as in him lay, like
Balaam, loving the wages of unrighteousness; his own Solicitor General, to this
pacification such an adversary, wherein the general good also a copartner with
this, of the widows cause which the Lord defends, and stands up for it.

In which, if any misprision has been since their judgment irreversable, may
if they please, appoint the Amoveas Manus to be renewed, etc. And with this
belief concluding, Behold, I make all things new, including Lucifers
Restoration, first and last of that Name, when the times of refreshing comes,
morning and evening star both; and his own Badge the star born, its Motto too,
How art thou fallen, etc. first of that Name, King Charles, and last of great
Britains Kings, counseld by her his Eve, or CHAVAH, also Adams figure, from
whose hands the Lord vouchsafes to accept satisfaction none, declared as before,
which cost him his life, eaten by a Lion, he sent to cry O Altar, etc. charged
neither to eat bread, nor water to drink there, that kings arm which restored (
Kin. 13.) so then learnd Judges, to whom not unknown mercy afterward, as well
as judgment begins at home; your charge the substance or sum of it, when Zions
widow restored settled in her possession, which makes ways for others, by your
means, orders a mitigation for his discharge, so fast in the Sea (as it were)
about his neck a millstone, etc. every one in his order, even Sodoms
enlargement, before the return of Capernaums Captivity. Endless praise be to
whom ascribed.

Anno 1648.
FINIS.

