THE Excommunication OUT OF PARADISE.

By the Lady Eleanor.

GENESIS 3. So he drove out the MAN.

Printed in the Year 1647.

To the Honorable, Oliver Cromwell, Esquire Lieutenant General, etc.
Noble Sir,
YOur own high merit not only, but that renowned Family of yours (envi^d a
little not) Lord Cromwell Earl of Essex, such a Benefactor or Pillar of Church,
begets this boldness in her to salute you, though farther to be acquainted have
not the honor; but so much honoring them or their memory, through whose
clemency or zeal, when the Faith lay at stake, we enjoyed the Scriptures first
in the vulgar or mother tongue, which began with the Commandments and Lords
Prayer, etc. She saying nothing but according to the Scriptures; whereof thus,

August, 1647. Being your humble Servant, etc.

The Excommunication out of Paradise,
By the Lady Eleanor.
THe Ark, Baptisms express figure (Pet. 3.) No such custom admits in Church, of
those knowing not good from evil, to be Baptized; witness at man's estate all of
them saved by water: where his three Sons, though married all, yet had none
born unto them till after the flood, Noah that according to all the Lord
commanded, so did he.

Neither after our Lords example, of obedience giving to understand, As my
Father gave me commandment, so I do; he at full age arrived: The Dove when as
descended, or abode on him, who began then to be about thirty of Age, thrice
ten: Certainly had a great thing been commanded, as they replied, Naaman
bidden, Go and wash in Jordan, etc. How much rather this imposed, But go ye and
preach; He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved (verse.) according who
went forth and preached every where; where thus (ver.) Both men and women were
Baptized: As the Eunuch for another, If thou believe with all thine heart,
thou may be Baptized: So he whose Father and Mother answering, He is of age,
ask him; and again, Therefore said his Parents, He is of age, etc. (Ioh. 9.) He
bidden, Go and wash, as much to say, Godfathers and Godmothers needless.

The Church past nonage, has need of milk no longer, such meat no^ belonging
to Babes: Now (to search the Scriptures) the wedding Garment expected from none
such under age; witness Marriage honored with his first Miracle; of the good
wine till last reserved, himself the blessed Bridegroom watched so long for.

And He that despised Moses Law (Heb. 10.) if dyed without mercy; what incur
they that offer despite thus unto the Spirit of Grace? alleging, because of
Children brought unto him, and setting one in the midst of them, saying, Who
shall offend such one of these little ones, etc. and laying his hands on other;
and except ye receive the kingdom of God as a little child, therefore the
persons of men and women are excepted: whereas of another sort in truth signify
Babes and Sucklings, of whom said, I thank thee, O Father, that have revealed
these things unto such and such, hidden from the learned; whose weak Objections
these, of Little children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of
heaven; only spoken after a comparative way, as before showed, little for their
purpose: who produce Circumcision, appointed for Males, to uphold this
Antichristian custom in times of Ignorance, through subtilty crept into the
Church, with the Serpent (as it were) yea, has God said, Ye shall not, etc.
the very forbidden fruit untimely tasted, as the Common prayer book partly
confesses, in old time; but at Easter and Whitsontide administered, which
custom, say they, out of use, cannot well for many considerations be restored,
etc. without mentioning so much as one in behalf of their mock-Baptism, founded
on Circumcision of Infants, a character not to be blotted out in the flesh,
that impression even verifying the Sows returning to the mire, and the Dog gone
back, etc. as accompanied with a point of more concernment then Joroboams
prefering to the priesthood the inferior sort, or his offering incense, those
Mother Midwives Joan Baptists suffered to take that office upon them, because
of Ziporahs circumcising her Son.

So turn ye to that warning piece (Apocal. 13.) of the Antichristian Beast
whose desperate wound was healed; and the false Prophets description, and see
upon what foundation both State and Church stauds in the last days (verse.) And
I stood upon the Sea, and I saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven
Heads and ten Horns, crowned, etc. expressly bears date the present seventeenth
Century, even the British beast also armed at all points, from Brute its Name
derived; where Europia (as it were) carried into the Sea: Besides Cesars
adored Image, not to be drowned in forgetfulness, and tribute money from
strangers, vvounded forest of all by Brutus, he of his own begetting foretold
of the fatal Ides of March; by whom the year was set according to the Sun,
Three hundred sixty six days, corrected the Calendar, whose Names lives to
this day both of them, Julius Caesar, the Month of JVLY named after it. As for
the Man of Sin, the other Beast his coming out of the earth, horned like the
Lamb, but a Dragons voice, the tithes (to wit) or fruits of those Rams, no few
surnamed, Pope Innocent, he that runs may read it; whose feigned Miracles, with
Cross and Crucifix adored, like that of Gold, whose height sixty cubits, and
breadth six (Dan. 3.) and thus running over the Number of his Name 666 namely,
Julius Caesar and August, whose numeral letters Vic Lvvvi about the fortieth
year of which Reign (Augustus) who reigned 55 years and odd Months; the Lamb
of God came into the world, aged 30. in the fifteenth of Tiberius reign (Luke,
etc.) so that the aforesaid the 55 years and six Months, to Months 666 amounts
the Grigean Account put into the reckoning; since which Empires rising (1600
complete) as low declined; and whether or no our British Coat the Leopards
spotted or pothered robe (verse.) be not as Esaus voice from Jacobs to be
discerned, or the Lambs from the Dragons language, even paralleld with the ten
persecutions, these days of ours the ten horns subscribes it; one Isle calling
unto another, Patmos Isle unto Great Britains, and this great beast followed
so, and admired of all the world; said to rise up out of the sea; begins not
too with that Founder of the Spanish Faction, George Duke of Buckingham, of the
Order of Saint George, Master of the Horse, Admiral of the Seas, as by the
Names of Ships, the one a Leopard, the Lion another, the Bear, etc. he with a
Butchers knife slain at Portsmouth in the Month of August 1628. having
continued from 1625. March, beyond expectation; ten years that was a Minion to
the former. And so much for his three years and an half, (ver.) together with
the time expressed of his continuing how long, who went away from his Parliament
(1641. Jan.) until Nazebies victory (1645. June) where the Dragons great
Authority personates, S. George the patron of that Order; as count the number
of his Name also, Viscount Vvilers (Vic Lvvvi) or 666. wanting no open mouth,
if standers by to be credited, his last words heard at Portsmouth, at whose
dispose not only high Offices, but the Crown Revenue, Six hundred thousand
pounds and more per annum, the weight of Solomon's Gold (2 Chro. 9.) 666 Talents
aluding thereto.

Where the treasurership the other Beast that came up out of the earth, spoke
as the dragon, not a true word as much to say, of late in the Clergies custody,
as by the horns of the Lamb signified the two Archbishopricks bought and sold
with the rest.

And as the story of 88 the Spanish Armado's defeat, witness in this catalogue,
the Hangings of the the House of Peers, bordered about with so many Heads and
Names, as it were (v.) I stood upon the sand of the Sea, and I saw a Beast rise
up, etc. with all those crowns, etc. also in the House of Commons, those pieces
of Tapistry, of Fruitage and Flowers, all in their pots coming out of the earth
about 666 sometime in number; and so much touching that Allegory of their
rising up, set between pillars, referred to the beholders, Hangings sometime
belonging to the Abbey, as it were the others up, and that spoke, etc (verse.
xi.) the influence of the ten Horns, pretending to the French R. for another,
with no inferior mouth 1610. mortally wounded, whose Faction revived by the
Cardinal, lives and breathes to this day by his skill, such the mutable
condition of all, Behold, as he stood upon the sand, though said, Who is able
to make war with the Beast? As Essex behold too Viscount Hereford such another,
from Heralds mystery deriving that appellation, as the Stag or red Deer bearing
it for his Crest; and so count again, Numerus ejus sex centi sexaginta sex,
Rev. of whose rising from the generation of the Walters: Walter Devorex
begetting Walter: and Walter Dev. Walter and Walter, etc. some six one after
another of that Name.

Not without his sevenfold Blasphemous Titles, superscribed one as deeply
interessed in the Horns as any other, in the Forehead signed with the Horn;
that married was in the year 1606. at the years of 16. 1636. who fathered a
son; and the year 1646. Sept. 16. aged 56. in the sixth year of the Parliament
was stricken in the head by an an Apoplexy, that blow invisible too, whose
Father, aged 36. that was beheaded, plotted by Walter Rawley, when as the
Adored Image of the Beast, with those coat arms so adornd, as though he had
been alive followed of all: In S. John Baptist Chapel interred for the Walters
sake, the last of his name of Essex.

Lastly, in these troublesome Seas tossed Kings of the North and South, French
and Spanish, such dutiful sons of Rome, the horns ten pointing that way not
only from Cornu and Corona, as Carolus derived, ten in number, four of the
Race of Charles the Great, and six of the House of Austria; but from Henry the
fourth of Lancaster House, unto Henry the Eight, and his progeny ten even
Crowned; whereof the prophet Daniel thus, cap. 7. v. 23. of these devouring
Tyrants, treading down Laws, etc. And another shall rise after them, diverse
from the first (to wit) o^ another nation, before whom three fell, by whom
changed both the Name of the Kingdom, and their Liberties, etc. no other then
Great Brit. Scotish-horn, speaking with such a lawless mouth, succeeding those
three without issue, Edw. 6. Mar. and Eliz. of whose time and times and half,
or three years and half, the truth showed before of it, from the most supreme
mystery that of times and seasons, signifying how long from his unhappy
departure from his Parliament, until his being taken 1645. and outed, etc. of
whom the last news, his Resurrection or rising out of the sea, brought to
judgment; so hitherto the end of the matter, as Daniel 7, etc. only these,
Let him that is filthy, be so still, and he that is holy also, etc. and he that
is a-thirst, take the water of life freely, which children and Infants are not
incapable of, are free without it, cannot thirst or long for what they never
knew, the Spirit and the Bride saying, Come, and if any man thirst, etc. out of
his belly (he that believes) shall flow rivers of living water, ^ Joh.)
proclaimed that great day, of it so much.

FINIS.

