A DISCOURSE WRITTEN BY Sr George Downing The KING of Great Britain's Envoyee
Extraordinary to the States of the United Provinces.

VINDICATING His Royal Master from the Insolences of a Scandalous Libel,
Printed under the Title of [An Extract out of the Register of the States
General of the United Provinces, upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing
Envoyee, etc.] And delivered by the Agent de Heyde for such, to several Public
Ministers:

WHEREAS No such Resolution was ever Communicated to the same Envoyee, nor any
Answer at all Returned by Their Lordships to the said Memorial.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. Anno Domini, 1664.

A DISCOURSE Written by Sir George Downing, the King of Great Britains Envoyee
Extraordinary to the States of the United Provinces, etc.
THE Envoyee Extraordinary of His most Sacred Majesty of Great Britain, etc.
having lately seen a certain Paper entitled, [ An Extract out of the Register
of the Resolutions of the High and Mighty Lords Estates General of the United
Provinces, upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing, Envoy Extraordinary from
the King of Great Britain,] did not at all think it fit for him to take any
notice thereof, but to pass it by as a Pamphlet, (of which sort there come out
too many here every day:) in regard that no such Resolution had been
communicated to Him by their Lordships, nor any one word given him in Answer to
his said Memorial: And he had accordingly past it by, without taking any notice
thereof, had he not since by accident been informed by several Public
Ministers residing here, that the said pretended Resolution had been brought to
them by the Agent de Heyde; Whereupon he now holds Himself obliged to Complain
in most serious terms to their Lordships the Estates General of the United
Provinces, of this strange and irregular way of proceeding; That while he is
Residing here on the behalf of the King his Master: Papers, in form of Answers
to his Memorials, should be given to other Public Ministers, here and
elsewhere, and sent all over the World, and yet concealed from Him; and thereby
neither opportunity of being convinced, if any thing of reason should have been
said therein, nor on the contrary of vindicating the Honor and Justice of the
King his Master in what he is therein unjustly charged and defamed withal.

Suppose that he the said Envoy Extraordinary, should have proceeded in that
manner, and have given the Memorial (to which the said Paper is a Reply) to all
Public Ministers residing here; and have sent it to all Courts abroad, and
should have Printed, and exposed it to the view of the World, without giving it
to their Lordships, what would they have thought thereof? and what might have
been expected that they would have said to it? Can their Lordships imagine that
this way of acting does tend any way to the Justifying of their Cause, as to
the working of better impressions concerning the same in the minds of those
Public Ministers, or their Masters? Or rather, that they must be exceedingly
scandalized thereat, as looking more like a Surprise of them and their
Judgments, then otherwise; and considering that they may to morrow be dealt
with in like manner, in relation to any Paper they may give in; and see the
Affairs of their Masters traduced and defamed without any opportunity or
possibility of clearing the same.

And as to the Matter of the said Paper; Is it enough to say in general terms,
That the said Memorial was ill grounded, or abusively informed, without
particularizing at all how, or wherein; or so much as excepting against any one
word thereof, much less disproving the same.

And again; If the things wherewith they are charged therein be true (as they
both are, and must now be taken by all men to be, since nothing is made out by
their Lordships to the contrary) To what purpose is the whole sequel of the
said Paper? If it be true (as it is) That the Royal Master of the said Envoy
was no sooner returned to His Kingdoms, but that he was immediately, and from
day to day troubled and importuned with a Crowd of Complaints of His Subjects
against those of this Country; all which notwithstanding, His Majesty did not
grant any one Letter of Marque, nor betake himself to any way of force for the
obtaining of their reparation and satisfaction; But in stead thereof, for an
Everlasting memorial of his great kindness and good will toward this Country,
and for the facilitating of the bringing to a Conclusion the late Treaty with
them, (finding the Complaints and Pretensions of his Subjects to be so numerous
and great,) was pleased after all to suffer very many of them, and those to a
vast value, to be utterly mortified and extinguished; and the rest (except the
business of the Ships Bonadventure, and Bon-Esperanza) after so much money and
time had been already expended in the pursuit thereof, and many of them ready
for a determination, to be put in a LIST, and proceeded upon anew according to
the fifteenth Article thereof; no ways doubting, but that all possible speed
would have thereupon been used in bringing the matter to an issue, and that for
the future better order would have been observed toward His Subjects: But
having waited now above 27 months since the Conclusion of the said Treaty; and
in that time their Lordships being continually called upon by His Said
Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary, yea by His Majesty himself in several Audiences
to their Ambassador; Yet so it is, that those matters are still so far from
being ended, that in truth they seem to be now rather further from it then at
the day of the signing of the said Treaty; and on the other side, new injuries
daily heaped, and the same designs of the East and West-Indie-Companies carried
on for the utter overthrow of all the Trade of His Majesty's Subjects in those
parts of the world, as appeared by the business of the Ships Hopewell, Leopard,
and other Ships in the East Indies, and by the business of the Charles, James,
Mary, Sampson, Hopeful Adventurer, Speedwell, etc. upon the Coast of Africa:
All which are matters happened since the Conclusion of the said Treaty. And after
all this, and notwithstanding His Parliaments application to Him upon the
account of His aggrieved Subjects, in so solemn and extraordinary a manner; His
Majesty was yet so far from being inclined to any other then ways of
accommodation, as that he did by a public Writing, or Declaration declare,
That he would yet try what could be done by amicable endeavors at the Hague,
before he would make use of any other means; (the which was also very well
known to their Lordships) and did thereupon accordingly give orders to his
Envoy Extraordinary to press them afresh: And further to make out his peaceable
and moderate intentions, and to take off all umbrage from their Lordships, to
let them know, (as accordingly he did in public Conferences with their
Deputies) That His Majesty would not in any kind trouble their Fleets which
they then expected from the Streights, and East Indies, nor their Fisheries
upon His Coasts; Yea, further to put them out of all doubt, ordered a far less
equipage of Shipping for the Summerguard then had been known these many years;
but all this was so far from working the desired and intended effect, as that
on the contrary their Lordships betook themselves to Arms in an extraordinary
manner, ordering the fitting out with all speed a great Fleet, and hundreds of
Carpenters forthwith dispatched to work upon it night and day, (holy days as
well as working days); whereby His Majesty seeing himself wholly defeated of
His good intentions, and instead of satisfaction for His Subjects, braved and
threatened with those equipages, which could have no other regard but upon
Himself, was at last enforced for His own defense, (though very much contrary
to His inclinations and intentions) to arm also.

And whereas it may be pretended, as if their Lordships having fitted Their
Fleet, did desire that His Majesty would be pleased, (for avoiding of all
inconveniences) to keep His Fleet within His Harbors, and that then they would
keep in Theirs also; It is to be Considered, that This Proposition was not made
until that they had actually put to Sea, a Fleet near as numerous as the whole
that His Majesty was equipping, and which was actually gone toward His Coasts;
so that this could not but be construed to be rather a mocquerie, then
otherwise; for that thereby they had a Fleet at Sea to do what they pleased,
and in the mean while His Majesty had tied His own hands and obliged Himself to
keep within doors; but he was yet pleased to assure them, that His (if it did
go out) should not do them the least Injury; still in the mean while pressing
here at the Hague by His Minister and Himself urging their Ambassador at
London, to hasten the dispatch of the matters in difference; And as a further
testimony of His desires of living in good Correspondence with This Country, He
did declare His willingness to enter into a Treaty for the better regulating of
the Trade and Navigation of both, and the prevention of such disorders for the
future; and for the quicker dispatch and ripening of so good a work, a project
thereof was in His Name tendered to them long ago, and yet to this day not one
word of answer thereupon.

And if it be also true, (as it is) that their Lordships began the seizing of
Ships in these Parts; stopping the Ship from Gottenburg bound for London, and
though pressed again and again to set her at liberty, yet still retained her,
and to this day not so much as a word of answer why or upon what account.

These things being so, can there be any doubt who is the Attacquer or
Aggressor, unless it must be held for a Maxim, That let their Lordships and
Their Subjects deal with his aforesaid Majesty and His Subjects from time to
time and from year to year as they please, yet they are not Attacquers or
Aggressors; but if His Majesty or His Subjects, after never so many years
sufferings, and all amicable endeavors first tried to have obtained their
satisfaction, without to this very day having been able to obtein it in any one
of those numerous cases of piracy and violence committed by the people of This
Country against them, whereof complaint has been made from time to time unto
their Lordships by His Majesty's Minister: If after all, any thing be* done by
them toward the righting of themselves, his Majesty must be called and reputed
the Attacquer and the Aggressor. Let their Lordships make out, That the
complaints in the said Memorial are ungrounded, and His Majesty will yield unto
them: but if otherwise, Who will think it strange if at last something be done
toward the righting of them.

And as to the Particulars mentioned in the said Paper to have been suffered by
them from the English, though those matters have not been treated of between
their Lordships and the said Envoy Extraordinary, but between the King his
Master and their Ambassador at London, so that it is not properly his business
to reply thereunto, but to refer them to that answer which his Majesty has
promised to give concerning the same; yet seeing their Lordships have been
pleased not only to mention and insist thereupon in the aforesaid paper, but
indeed to say nothing else by way of answer to the complaints in his Memorial,
he cannot but say thus much thereunto.

That the Places and Ships said to be taken from them, were all belonging to
the West-Indie-Company of this Country; and nothing complained of in the paper
to have been taken from them belonging to any else of These Countries; And when
it shall be considered, that in the LIST of Damages alone, there appears to
have been near twenty English Ships successively, within a very few years
before the conclusion of the late Treaty, taken in a hostile manner upon the
Coast of Africa, only by the Shipping of the said West-Indie-Company, with
their whole Lading, to a very great value; and not only so, but the men that
belonged to them, very many of them most barbarously and inhumanly treated; put
into stinking nasty dungeons, and holes at Casteldelmina, there to lie in the
midst of their own excrements, nothing but bread and water given them, and
thereof not enough to sustein Nature, their Bodies tortured with exquisite and
horrid tortures; and when any of them dyed, the living and the dead left
together, and such as escaped, turned out to perish by hunger, or wild beasts
in those miserable Countries, or to be carried away Captives by the Natives; by
which means, several hundreds of his Majesty's good Subjects have perished and
been destroyed: And to this hour, notwithstanding all solicitations and
endeavors, not one penny of satisfaction given to the persons concerned in any
of the said Ships; And ever since the Conclusion of the said Treaty, Ships of
War have been kept by the said Company upon the said Coasts; which though they
have not proceeded so far as to take more of the Shipping of his Majesty's
Subjects, yet they have done that which is equivalent, and as ruinous to that
Trade; stopping and hindering every one that they met withal from all Commerce,
and to that effect pursuing them in an hostile manner from place to place: And
wherever any English anchored by them, hindering and shooting at, and taking
by force, with their Ladings, all Boats of the Natives that endeavored to come
aboard them, and their Boats that would go on shore; yea, depriving them of so
much as any provision or refreshment of fresh water (as appears by the
Complaints made by the said Envoy Extraordinary from time to time to their
Lordships concerning the same): And publishing a Declaration in the name as
well of the States General, as of the said Company, wherein they deduce their
right to that whole Coast, to the exclusion of all other Nations; And
notwithstanding all Complaints to their Lordships, neither the said Declaration
disavowed, nor any thing of Satisfaction given, but still new Complaints
coming, and among others, that of their having stirred up the King of Fantine
by rewards and sums of money given him to that end; and supplying him with all
sorts of Arms and Ammunition for the surprise of his Majesty's Castle at
Cormantine in those parts; concerning which also Proofs have been since given
to their Lordships by the said Envoy Extraordinary, so that there was an
absolute necessity imposed upon his Majesty and his Subjects, either of loosing
all that had been actually taken from them, and withal abandoning for ever
that Trade it self, or otherwise of betaking themselves to some other ways for
their relief. And it will rather be thought strange that their patience did
hold out so long, then that now at last something should be done, toward the
righting of themselves.

Besides, as to the business of Capo Corco, did not the said Envoy
Extraordinary long ago complain in the name, and by Order of the King his
Master, in Public Conferences both with the Deputies of their Lordships the
Estates General, and also with those of Holland in particular, of the injurious
possessing and keeping of that place by those of the said West-Indie-Company,
deducing and remonstrating at large his Masters Right thereunto, the ground
having been bought by His Subjects, of the King of That Country for a valuable
consideration, and a Lodge or Factory built thereupon; and those of the
West-Indie-Company of this Country being got into the possession of the place,
merely by fraud and treachery; but no reflection made thereupon by their
Lordships, much less any hopes given of ever obtaining any restitution thereof
from them. And indeed, if His Majesty had not been able to rescue out of their
hands the least Boat, or penyworth of Goods since His return to His Kingdoms,
(concerning which) complaint had been made by His Envoy Extraordinary, of its
being forceably taken by them from His Subjects,) what hopes of their quitting
to him any such place, especially remembering that business of the Island of
Poleroon in the East Indies, which has been a restoring by them ever since the
year 1622. at which time it was by solemn and particular Treaty promised to be
done; and again, by another Treaty, in the year 1654. and by Orders of the
Estates General and East-Indie-Company of this Country, in the year 1661. and
again, by Treaty in the year 1662. and yet to this day we know nothing of its
being delivered; and can it be thought strange, if invited thereunto by the
King of the said Country, that His Majesty should after so fair warning
condescend to suffer His Subjects to endeavor to repossess themselves thereof?

And as to the business of New-Netherland (so called) this is very far from
being a surprise, or any thing of that nature, it being notoriously known, that
That spot of Land lies within the limits, and is part of the possession of His
Subjects of New England, (as appears most evidently by their Charter) and that
those few Dutch that have lived there, have lived there merely upon connivence
and sufferance, and not as having any right thereunto; and that this has from
time to time, and from year to year been declared unto them, but yet so as that
the English were contented to suffer them to remain there, provided they would
demean themselves peaceably and quietly; but that the said Dutch, not
contenting themselves therewith, did still endeavor to incroach further and
further upon the English, imposing their Laws and Customs, and endeavoring to
raise Contributions and Excises upon them, and in places where no Dutch were or
had ever been; Whereupon they have formerly been necessitated several times to
send Soldiers for the repelling of them.

And as to what is said in the said Paper, as if though the English should
formerly have had any pretense to the said place, that yet the said pretense is
cut off by the fifteenth Article of the late Treaty; To this he does Reply,
That That Article does only cut off matters of Pyracies, Robberies, and
Violence, but as to the Rights and Inheritances of Lands and Jurisdictions,
that it does not at all concern or intermeddle with the same. And that this is
so, there needs no other Argument but the producing of several Examples out of
their own Courts of Justice, whereby it will appear that indeed as to the
Plundering and Taking of Ships, or the like, that all such causes (if happened
before the time limited in the said Treaty) did cease upon the Conclusion
thereof; but as to such as were then depending concerning the Inheritances of
Lands, that they have still continued to be pursued: As for Example, the Case
of Sir Thomas Lower, an English Man, for certain Lands claimed by him in
Zealand. Besides, those of New Neather-Lands, had since the Conclusion of the
Late Treaty, made new Incursions upon the English, and given them many new
Provocations, and by their Charters they have Jura Belli within Themselves,
without Appealing first into Europe; And if after all this, his Majesty has
suffered them according thereunto to rescue themselves from such continued
Vexations and Mischiefs; Can Any Prince think it strange, or be surprised
thereat, much less the most Christian King? (For whose Satisfaction this Paper
seems to be more particularly Calculated:) Whereas He has been pleased this
very same year, to Order or Suffer (with his Privity) His Subjects to
Repossesse themselves in like manner by Force and Arms, of a certain Place
called Cayenne, which they pretend to have been wrongfully possessed and kept
from them by the same West Indie Company.

And as to the business of Cabo Verde, and the taking of their Ships, and what
else is alleged to have been done in those parts (except that of Cabo-Corco:)
'Twas but in the month of June last, that the first Complaint was made thereof
to his Majesty, and did he not immediately return for Answer, That he had given
no Order or Direction to Captain Holmes, the Person complained of, for the
doing thereof; That he did expect him Home very speedily, and that upon his
Return, he would cause those matters to be Examined, and Right to be done them,
and the Offenders punished? And did not the said Envoy Extraordinary upon the
Twenty Seventh day of July last deliver a Memorial to them to the like Effect?
And could more be said or done for their Satisfaction? Yea could their
Lordships* Themselves within their own Countries demand more of any of their
Schepens, or most Inferior Court of Justice? And does not the Fourteenth
Article of the Late Treaty say in express Terms, that In case any thing should
happen upon the Coast of Africa, either by Sea or Land, that Twelve Months time
shall be given after Complaint, for the doing of Justice; Yet did they not
within about Six or Seven weeks after; Resolve to send a Considerable Fleet of
Theirs into those Parts, to the Number of Ten Men of War (besides the Ships of
the said West-Indie Company,) under the Command of one Van Campen, and
strengthened with a Considerable Body of their Milice, under the Command of one
Hertsberg? And did they not within about Six or Seven Weeks after that* put a
Resolution into the hands of the said Envoy Extraordinary by their Agent de
Heyde, and about the same time give it to the King, his Master by their
Ambassador at London, Denoting and Containing the Instruction given to the
said Van Campen?

And whereas they are pleased to Complement His most Christian Majesty in the
said Paper, as if upon his score in hopes of the good Effects of his good
Offices for the Accommodating of Matters, and for the making their Cause the
more clear, they had hitherto forborne the Proceeding against his Majesty's
Subjects as they might have done: Is it not therein expressly Declared and set
Down, that That Force was not sent thither barely to Defend what they had, and
to take Care that nothing more should be Attempted upon them; but in down right
Terms, to Attacque and Fall upon His Majesty's Subjects, and to Carve out
their own Satisfaction and Reparation; and to pass by his door's for the doing
thereof? And that, Seconded and Backed with another Great Fleet under their
Chief Sea Officers; An Affront and Indignity too great for the Name of King to
Suffer, and Digest without Just Resentment.

And moreover, whereas their Lordships had lately invited his Majesty of Great
Britain, and other Christian Princes to send Fleets into the Mid-land-Sea to
Act Jointly against those Barbarians; And that he did accordingly Declare unto
them (in Writing, and by his Envoy Extraordinary,) his Intentions of Sending,
and that his Fleet should Act Junctis Consiliis with theirs; Yet so it is, that
while it was Acting there, Pursuant thereunto, and in Expectation of being
Seconded and Appuyed by theirs, according to their Promise, De Ruyther was on a
sudden Commanded thence.

And whereas their Lordships would make the World believe that they had
Proceeded with such Singular and Extraordinary Franchise, and Clearness
toward his said Majesty, in Communicating their Intentions and Designs (as
abovesaid;) Yet, Is it not evident that the said Orders must have been given to
De Ruyther much about the same time?

And though Sir John Lawson, and his Majesty's Fleet happened to be in the same
Port with De Ruyther, when he quitted those Parts; yet neither did he in the
least impart unto him his Intentions of quitting the same, or whither he was
going; and though the King of Great Britain has since, several times pressed
their Ambassador at London to be Informed whither he was gone, and upon what
account, yet to this day his Majesty has not been able to obtain any
Satisfaction or Assurance concerning that matter; Whereupon, and all other
Circumstances being laid together, He has Just Reason to suppose and believe,
that he is sent, and employed against Him; And that while his Majesty was
continuing (according to common Consert and Agreement between them,) his Fleet
against the Common Enemies of the very Name of CHRISTIAN, and at a season, when
it more then ordinarily becomed every one to show something of their Zeal
against them; Theirs is called off and turned against him: Nor is it to be
imagined that De Ruythers Instructions, which are Concealed, should be more
Favorable then those which were Avowed to be given to Van Campen.

And is it then to be wondered, that his Majesty shows himself a little
Concerned? Or is it now to be doubted, who is the Attacquer, or Aggressor? And
if De Ruyther is in one part of the World, making War against him, what is to
be said against it, if his Majesty not having at this time in those Parts a
suitable Force to Resist him, does make use of what he has nearer home to
endeavor to secure himself, or to get something of theirs into his hands? Does
either Common Right, or His Majesty's Treaty with This Country oblige to seek
Satisfaction only in that part of the World where the Injury is done; and so
does that at all alter the Case, because that their Forces acting against Him
out of Europe, His do something against Them, in Europe?

His Majesty has been very far from beginning with them in any Part of the
World, but if at this time they are Actually with a Considerable Fleet of the
Estates falling upon Him, and his Subjects; and He has thereupon given Order
to the stopping of some of their Ships in These Parts; Will not all the World
Justify His Majesty herein? And when withal, Themselves also began the
stopping of Ships in These Parts, and that he has all those reasons of
Complaint against them above mentioned.

Given at the Hague, this 16. of December, 1664. G. Downing.

FINIS.

