AN EXAMINATION OF THE ARGUMENTS Drawn from Scripture and Reason, In Dr.
SHERLOCK's CASE OF ALLEGIANCE, And his Vindication of it.

LONDON, Printed in the Year M DC XCI.

An EXAMINATION of Dr. SHERLOCK's Case of Allegiance.
IT is the design of this Treatise to examine all the Arguments in Dr.
Sherlock's Case of Allegiance, that are drawn from Scripture and Reason; and
that the state of the Controversy may be clearly understood, I begin with

SECT. 1. The Case plainly and briefly stated.
HEre he complains, first of the perploxing this Controversy by intermixing
the dispute of Right with the Duty of Obedience; but is it not as much
perplexed by Separating them? Is not this the great Controversy between us,
whether Allegiance be due to those who have no legal Right to it? And thus the
Controversy is perplexed because it is a Controversy.

Then he tells us, it seems unfit to dispute the Right of Princes, a thing
which no Government can permit to be a Question; but it seems to me unfit that
Religious Oaths should be broken, and if Allegiance be due only to those who
have a Right, the dispute of Right is unavoidable; and if no Government can
permit it, that is no Obligation upon me to be Perjured.

But such disputes will carry Men into the dark Labyrinths of Law and History;
and therefore the Doctor leads them into the inextricable Labyrinths of
Providence. Now I think that Law and History are not such dark, unintelligible,
and uncertain Riddles as he makes them; they were not designed to maze and
blunder our Understandings, but to rectify and inform us about Fact and Right.
If History cannot enlighten us in Matters of Fact, then the Ages that are past
are buried in Darkness and Oblivion, and all History, Sacred and Profane, is no
better than Romance. If Law be a clear and safe Rule of Conscience only to a
very few, why is it published, and enjoined, and enforced by Penalties upon the
many? It is a contradiction to the very nature of Law, to say it cannot be a
clear and safe Rule of Obedience; and if Law and History are clear in any
thing, it is very probable they are clear in things Fundamental, and in Matters
of greatest Importance and most universal Concernment. I know there are great
and intricate disputes about our Constitution, and so there are about the most
evident conclusions of Faith, Sense, and Reason; but Doubts and Errors do not
overthrow Truth and Certainty; and if some Men shut their Eyes at Noonday, it
is no good Consequence that there is no Sun in the Firmament, or that Light is
Darkness.

He gives a summary Account Page 2.
of the Difficulties, which they who refuse the Oaths do labor under. They
think, that a rightful Prince only has a Right to our Allegiance; that though
he be dispossessed of his Throne, he has Right still, and therefore our Duty is
still owing to him, and to no other, and our Oaths of Allegiance to him still
bind us; and that no other Prince who ascends the Throne without a legal Right,
has Right to our Allegiance; and that to swear Allegiance to him while we are
under Obligation of a former Oath to our rightful Prince, is Perjury. This is
indeed the Principle we proceed on, though it is not the sum of all that can be
said in this Cause; our Principles, I think, may be more clearly and fully
expressed, and ^ propose them thus:

We maintain that a lawful Sovereign cannot lawfully be Resisted on any
pretense whatsoever; and therefore cannot lawfully be Deposed, nor consequently
be lawfully* Dispossessed; that such unlawful Acts are null in themselves, and
can effect nothing; that a rightful Prince does not cease to be so, because he
is wrongfully Deposed, that his Right does remain after he is Deposed, unless
he renounce it by Resignation, or lose it by De^eliction; that when this
ancient Right is extinguished, the Usurper of the Throne becomes a lawful
Sovereign, and has a Right to Allegiance and not before; that the Dispossessed
Prince, as long as his Right to the Government continues, has a Right to
Allegiance; that Allegiance includes all those Duties, which are contained in
the relation of a Subject, not only Submission and Obedience in things lawful,
but most especially actual Defense and Assistance against all his Enemies: That
therefore Allegiance cannot be Sworn to an Usurper, because it is an Obligation
to assist him against the true and rightful Sovereign, that such assistance is
manifest Injustice, and in them that are bound by Oath to assist the rightful
Sovereign inexcusable Perjury: And lastly, That God's Authority is Delegated
only to rightful Princes, and that Usurpers, while they continue such, have no
better Title to it than even Pirates and Robbers; and these I take to be the
Principles of them who refuse the Oath.

But the Propositions which the Doctor opposes to their Principles, are fairly
reconcilable with them; for* 1. We may acknowledge that Allegiance is due not
for the sake of legal Right, but Government; and, 2. That it is due not to bare
legal Right, but to the Authority of God. We may admit that Allegiance is due
to God's Authority, and for the sake of Government, and yet a legal Right to
Government may be still an evident Proof both of the Authority of God, and of a
Right to Allegiance.

3. We may allow also, That God, when he sees fit, sets up Kings without any
regard to legal Right, or humane Laws: He may do it by express Revelation, and
he may do it by his Providence extinguishing the legal Right, and so making the
Possessor a rightful Prince, though his Right be grounded on no humane positive
Law, but upon the Law of Nature. And, 4. It may be granted that a Prince so
established, Is invested with God's Authority, which must be obeyed not only
for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake; and thus admitting these Principles to
be true in some Sense, it will neither follow, That our old Allegiance nor our
old Oaths are at an end, nor that Allegiance is always due to the Powers in
possession.

But, here in short, lies the Controversy between us, whether an Usurper who
has wrongfully Dispossessed a rightful Prince, whose legal Right to the Throne
does still continue in force, has nevertheless the Authority of God on his
side, and by consequence a divine Right to our Allegiance. The Doctor is for
the affirmative, and his Adversaries against it.

But first he endeavors to bias the Reader to his Opinion by obsering, Page 3.
How much it makes for the ease and safety of Subjects in all Revolutions; and
therefore, they have reason, he says, to wish it to be true, and to be glad to
see it well proved. Whether this Principle be in reality for the ease and
safety of Subjects may be debated hereafter; suffice it here to observe, That
ease and safety are usually strong Arguments, but only to Flesh and Blood;
Trouble and Danger do generally pursue Truth and Virtue; and if Principles may
be prejudged by this Criterion, the Epicurean and the Atheist have much the
better on it, and are wiser, in their Generation at least, than the Religionary
and the* Christian. Salus Populi has been ever the Argument for Rebellion and
Regicide; we know it is Milton's Fundamental Principle; and in all Revolutions,
it is as much for the ease and safety of Subjects certainly to execute the
Deposed Prince, as it is to abjure him. The same renowned Author wrote a Book
for the Lawfulness of Divorces, in the case of a troublesome and unsociable
Marriage; and the great Reason that runs through his Book, is this, because the
Remedy of Divorce is much for the ease and happiness of Mankind, and the making
the Bond indissoluble is, says he, the Changing the Blessing of Matrimony into
a familiar and coinhabiting Mischief, at least into a drooping and disconsolate
Houshold-captivity, without Refuge or Redemption.

Mr. Hobbs has taught his Followers, that Subjects when commanded by their
Sovereign to deny Christ, may lawfully obey him; they have the License, says
he, that Naaman had, and need not put themselves into danger for it: A
Principle much, no doubt, for our Worldly ease and safety; and upon the same
account he advanced another Principle, the same, for ought that I can see,
which is maintained by the Doctor, That the Obligation of the Subject to the
Lev. page 124.
Sovereign does last no longer than the Power lasts, by which he is able to
protect them. In short, the Temptation (for it is nothing else) with which the
Doctor would corrupt his Reader, may equally serve as a persuasive to the
denial of Christ, the Existence of Spirits, Hell Torments, and to diverse other
Articles of the Hobbian ^elief; and to a Discourse concerning them, no fitter
Introduction could be devised than this, That those Principles are so much for
the ^ase and safety of Mankind, that they have reason to wish them to be true,
and to be glad to see them well proved. But I think it a much fairer way of
procedure which the Cas^^st^ have hitherto prescribed: First to consider
Lawfulness, and then Expediency, to examine what is just and righteous, before
we enquire what is safe and easy; and if a bias must needs be clapped upon our
Reason before we enter into Argument, I am sure it is much safer for a
Christian to incline the Balance on the other side, and to suffer Ease and
Safety to weigh against Duty and Conscience.

And now we come to Argument, and the Doctor undertakes to prove his Opinion
from Scripture and Reason, and from the Principles of the Church of England: He
begins with the last, but that comes not within the compass of my undertaking,
and therefore I proceed to consider

SECT. 3. The Testimony of Sripture and Reason in this Matter.
HEre the Doctor does premise, Case of Alleg. p. 10.
That the Proofs from Scripture and Reason, must necessarily be intermixed and
interwoven with each other. But why was this necessary? Was it impossible for
the Doctor to separate his own Reasons from God's Revelations? Are not
Arguments from Scripture and Reason easily distinguished? And to what purpose
is this Confusion of Discourse, but to blunder and confound the Reader's
Understanding; nevertheless he pretends to set th^^ matter in a clear Light,
and first he presents us with some plain Propositions, as he calls them.

The 1. and 2. Propositions, ( That Civil Power and Authority is from God, and
that he gives this Power and Authority to so^^* particular Persons,) are beyond
all Controversy with the Refusers of the Oath, and for this very Reason they
refuse them, because they are sure the Dispossessed Prince had Authority from
God to govern them, and they cannot be sure that God has deprived him of it.

But the 3d. Proposition is that on which the whole Controversy turns, and the
sum of it is this, That every one who is in Possession of Sovereign Power, has
the Authority of God. If this can be proved, the dispute is at an end, and so
it is likewise, if it cannot be proved. It will be evident* to any one that
thoroughly considers the Doctor's Book, and all the Reasons and Arguments in it,
that most of them must stand and fall together with this Proposition. The
Doctor has not only asserted it, but has endeavored also to establish and
deduce it by a train of Consequences; here he has laid the Foundation of his
Discourse, and therefore no doubt it has all the Strength, and Stability that
so wise a Builder could give it: This is his Fundamental Proposition, and let
us impartially examine the Deduction he has made to prove it.

There are but Three ways, says Page 11.
he, whereby God gives this Power and Authority to any Persons, either* by
Nature, or express Nomination, or by the Disposals of Providence. Now these
Three ways are really no more than One, for the ways of Nature and express
Nomination are only some of those various ways, whereby the Providence of God
has disposed of Authority, and they are not therefore contradistinct to
Providence, but comprehended ^n it; the World has been ever governed by
Providence, and therefore there never* was, no^ can be, any Power or Authority,
which was not derived from it. But the various Methods by which Providence has
conveyed Authority, may indeed be reduced to some general Heads, and then,
according to the Doctor's Scheme of Principles, there will be Three ways of
conveying Authority, by Nature, by Nomination, and by giving Power and
Possession; but we think that a legal Right is one of the ways of Providence
also; we are sure that whosoever has it, it is a Gift of Providence; and since
a Right to a Sovereign Power implies a Right to the Possession of it, we cannot
possibly conceive how one Prince can have a legal Right to Possession by virtue
of God's Donation, and another, at the same time, have a divine Right to be the
Possessor by God's Donation also. But let us follow the Doctor through his own
ways of Providence.

1. By Nature; Parents, says Ibid.
he, have a Natural Superiority over their Children, and are their Lords and
Governors too; this was the first Government in the World, and is the only
Natural Authority; for in Propriety of speaking there is no Natural Prince but
a Father. Thus he plainly acknowledges that a Parent is a Natural Prince, and
that in the beginning of the World the Fathers of Families had Civil Power and
Authority over their Children. And now for Argument sake, let us revive the
Patriarchal Government, and suppose a Paternal Prince, as Noah for instance,
invested with Civil Authority over his Children; suppose again, that one of his
Natural Sons, let it be Cham for example, does by force depose Noah, and usurp
his Power, and acquire plenary Possession of it; and suppose once more, that
the Unnatural Usurper requires an Oath of Sem and Japh^t, and all the rest of
the Family, wherein they must Swear, That they will live in Obedience to Cham,
and support his usurped Power, and contribute their Prayers, Purses, and Arms,
to oppose their Father Noah, and to kill him if he endeavors to recover his
Paternal Power; what should Sem and Japh^t do in this Case? Do, says the
Doctor, they must Swear, and Pray, and Fight for the Usurper, against their
Natural Father, for though Noah has a natural Right, Cham has a divine Right,
he Reigns by God's Authority, and that may certainly be defended against all
Persons whatsoever. Thus this Principle in its Consequences, is much worse than
the Corban, for it teaches Children not only to deny Maintenance, but actually
to murder their natural King and Father, and it glosses away the Precept of
Honoring Parents into a License to destroy them; but, I think, that God did
never authorize either Parricide or Usurpation.

On the contrary, If in the Case supposed it can never be lawful for Children
to forswear, oppose, and to destroy their Parents, when they seek only to
recover their Rights of which they are wrongfully Dispossessed; if natural
Fathers can never cease to be such, and their Authority is Inalienable without
their own Consent, and if the mere Possession of it by an Usurper does not
entitle him to the full Allegiance of the Children; what reason can then be
given why Civil Authority in a legal Father, which is the same with that of a
Natural, should not be equally Perpetual and Inalienable also? Why should
Dispossession extinguish this Authority in one Father, when it does not in the
other? If Providence does superinduce a divine Right over a legal Right, upon
the same Grounds it will destroy a natural Right, and if it be lawful for
Subjects to bind themselves by Oath to act for an Usurper against their
political Father, than may Children in the same Case oppose their natural
Father in the Prosecution of his natural Rights: But I appeal to the Sense and
Reason of Mankind, whether such an opposition would not be highly Wicked and
Unreasonable, and yet the Doctor's Principle will serve to justify it.

2. His next way is, By particular Nomination, and thus God made Kings in
Jewry. But this nominated King I leave in better Hands, with all the Arguments
and Evasions that belong to him.

3. He proceeds to tell us, That Ibid.
God ruled in all the other Kingdoms of the World as well as in Jewry, and all
other Kings ruled by God's Authority, as well as the Kings of Judah and Israel,
who were advanced by his Command; and if any one doubts this, it is evident out
of Daniel, That the most High rules in the Kingdoms of Men, that he removes
Kings and sets up Kings, and that he gav^ to Nebuchadnezzar a Kingdom, Power
and Strength, and Glory, (yet he afterward owns that Nebuchadnezzar was made
King over the Jews by God's express Command) and if all this be not evidence
enough, The Prophecy of the Four Monarchies is a Demonstration of it. I have
considered this Prophecy as it is Recorded in Daniel, and any one else, that
considers it, will find that it contains only a Prediction of great Revolutions
in the Governments of the World; but, I hope, the bare Prediction is no
Demonstration, That the Accomplishers of it had the Authority of God to
legitimate the unjust Invasion and Possession of the Rights of others. There
are great Writers who affirm the Kingdom of Antichrist is foretold in that
Prophecy, and it is undeniably foretold (if the great Beast be Antichrist) in
the Revelations; Is Antichrist therefore to reign by the Authority of God?
Indeed the Doctor's Arguments do prove it, but that is a plain Demonstration
that they are Fallacious. Was the Cruci^ixion of our Savior by God's
Authority? And yet that was Prophesied also* May not Usurpation against God's
Authority be as well Foretold, as the Delegation of it? If the Introducers of
the Four Monarchies were Usurpers, the Prediction of them is no Proof of a
divine Commission, and if the Doctor can demonstrate such a Commission out of
Daniel's Vision, I will undertake to demonstrate it in the behalf of Antichrist
also. In the mean time, we deny not that God governs in all the Kingdoms of the
World, and that he removes and sets up Kings as he pleases; we maintain
that all rightful Kings do rule by God's Authority, as much as if they were
expressly Nominated, and we believe farther, that God cannot be the Author of
Wickedness, and that he gives not his Authority to Usurpation and Injustice.

But now, says the Doctor, Page 12.
God governs the rest of the World, removes Kings, and sets up Kings* only
by his Providence. This Proposition he explains thus; Then God sets up a King,
when by his Providence he advances him to the Throne, and puts the Sovereign
Authority ^^ito his Hands; then he removes a King, when by his Providence he
thrusts him from the Throne, and takes the Government out of his Hands. The
Proposition then, according to the Author's Sense, is to be understood in its
utmost latitude, That whosoever is by Providence advanced to the Possession of
Sovereign Power, is made a King by God, and whosoever is deprived of it by
Providence, is deposed by God. But this is ambiguously proposed, and is true in
one Sense, false in another; and this ambiguity will be evidently exposed by
this parallel Proposition; That God does then give a Man an Estate, when his
Providence puts him in Possession of it, and he deprives a Man of an Estate,
when by Providence he is Dispossessed of it: It is certain that God governs
every thing in the World, as well as Kingdoms by his Providence, and if all
Events, then certainly the Dispossession and Possession of an Estate must be
ascribed to it. And therefore the Proposition is true in this sense, that as
far as God's Providence is concerned in the disposal of an Estate, he may be
said to take away or give it. But it is manifestly false in this sense; that
whosoever has by Providence the Possession of an Estate, has a divine Right to
it by God's Donation. A Thief has by God's Providence Possession of honest Men's
Properties, and in some sense it is God that gives it him, but it was never yet
thought that he had a jus Divinum to them. The Sabaeans drove away Job's Oxen,
and yet he acknowledged that the Lord had taken them away; but it would be a
strange Commentary upon the Passage to say, That the Sabaeans had God's
Authority to keep them.

And by Analogy to this parallel Case, the ambiguity of the former Proposition
may be easily unfolded. It is true that God removes and sets up Kings in the
same sense as his Providence does advance or dethrone them; but it is false,
that whosoever is in any sense advanced to a Throne by Providence, is set up by
God, so as that he has God's Authority to keep it: For it is undeniably evident
that Providential Possession is no Argument of divine Authority; and therefore
though it be granted, That God now governs the World, and sets up Kings only
by his Providence; yet it will by no means follow, that every one who is set up
in any sense by Providence, has Authority from God; for then it would follow,
that Pirates and Robbers have his Authority also.

But here the Doctor leads me into a Digression about Providence, and because
the whole Controversy depends upon the right understanding of God's
Providential Concurrence in all Events and Actions; it is necessary to attend
him through it.

Providence he defines to be, God's Government of the World Case of Alleg. p.
12.
by an invisible Power, whereby he directs, determines, overrules all Events
to the accomplishment of his own Will and Counsels; and to avoid Cavil we admit
the Definition. There is a known Distinction between the permissive and the
effective ordering and authorizing Providence of God, and there is evident
Reason and Necessity for it; for otherwise we must foolishly charge God with
being the efficient Cause and positive Author of all the Wickedness in the
World. But the Doctor will not allow the Distinction in the Case before us, and
his Reason is, Because it does not relate to Ibid.
the Events of Things, but to the wickedness of Men, and though God cannot be
the Author of any Wickedness, yet he is the Author of all Events which happen
to private Persons or Societies; and the Consequence which he draws from this
Doctrine is, That the Usurpations of Government are not only permitted, but are
effected and authorized by it. To lay open the falsehood of this Doctrine, it is
necessary to observe how the divine Providence is conversant about Wickedness.

Before it is accomplished, Providence is concerned only in prohibiting and
hindering the Commission of it; this is to be understood only of moral
Impediments, such as are consistent with our natural Liberty, and are not
irresistible. And here a Distinction is made between the internal and external
acts of Sin, between an act of Wickedness as it lies in the Mind, and the
outward Execution of it; the former is never hindered by irresistible Power, for
that would destroy the very nature of the Will; but Providence does often lay
such effectual Restraints upon the execution of Sin, that it is impossible to
effect it, and when God does not by the interposition of his Power hinder a
wicked event, or the external act of Wickedness, than his Providence does give
it a negative Permission, because it does not positively prevent it.

The acts of Providence which are conversant about Sin, in the very act of
Commission, are the conservation of our Being and Powers, whereby we are
capable of committing it; The direction and overruling of it to the
accomplishment of his own Will and Counsel; and the determining or restraining
of it within certain bounds and limits; and lastly, after the Wickedness is
committed, the acts of Providence about it are the Punishment or Forgiveness of
it. These are the acts of the divine Providence in relation to Sin, and from
this account it is manifest, that the Providence of God which prohibits,
hinders, overrules, restrains and punishes Sin, does neither effect nor
authorize it.

But though God be not the Author of Sin, yet the Doctor asserts him to be the
Author of all Events; then say I, it unavoidably follows, that he is the Author
of all the Wickedness that ever was, or can be committed in the World; for it
is evident that all wicked Actions, when accomplished, are Events; and if God
be the positive doer of all Events, he is infallibly the doer of all wicked
Actions. Was not Absalom's Incest an Event, as well as his Usurpation? Was not
Cromwell's Murder of King Charles an Event, as well as the Possession of his
Power? Are not all Murders, Incests, Robberies, and all other Villainies that
have been ever acted under the Sun Events? And that we may be convinced of the
lawfulness of Swearing, must we now blasphemously conclude, that God is the
Author of them? Two Evasions may be made use of to elude this Consequence.

1. The old Distinction between an Action in it self, and the Obliquity and
Vitiosity of it. But it is evident that in these actions, which are evil in
themselves, as Blasphemy, Adultery, Oppression, and Usurpation, the act and the
obliquity, though they may be considered separately, are yet really, and in the
nature of the thing inseparable; (for who can commit Adultery, and be free from
all Wickedness in it;) and therefore seeing they are inseparably united, he who
causes the act is the cause of the obliquity, as he that kindles a fire is the
cause of burning.

2. It may be replied, That by Events the Doctor understands the direction, or
the success of Designs and Actions, as it makes for the good or evil or private
Men, or public Societies. He acknowledges, That God cannot be the Ibid.
Author of any Wickedness, and therefore we say he only permits it; but then
when it comes to action he overrules it, and he either disappoints Men's wicked
Designs, or gives success to them, when he can serve the Ends of his
Providence. But still the same Consequence will return upon him; for if God
does not only permit, (for a Permissive giving of Success will here signify
nothing,) but does positively give Success to Wickedness, then he is
unavoidably the Author of the wicked Event, or Action; for the success of a
wicked Design, is nothing else but the actual accomplishment of it, and if God
be the positive accomplisher of all Wickedness that is actually committed, he
is evidently the positive Author of the actual Commission of it: As for
instance, whoever accomplishes, or gives success to a Plot of Murder or
Adultery, is undeniably guilty of the actual Commission of them. It is true,
that God's Providence overrules all the Designs and Successes of wicked Men to
good ends and purposes, to the good and evil of private Persons and Societies;
Punishments and Blessings do proceed from his Will, and there cannot be an Evil
in the City, and the Lord has not done it; he has done it, by not hindering
wicked Men from accomplishing their Designs, and he has done it, by directing
their Wickedness to the punishment of the wicked.

But if this be all the Doctor's Meaning, that Providence does only direct the
wickedness of some Men to the good or evil of others, then it will follow, 1.
That this cannot be sufficient to make God the Author of all Events, and
consequently that can be no Argument to authorize an Usurpation: And, 2. It is
evident that the providential Direction of any wicked Event to the good or evil
of Mankind, can be no proof of the conveyance of God's Authority. The using of
an evil Instrument to a good End, and a divine Commission, are things easily
distinguished, and it is easy to show the inconclusiveness of this arguing by
many Instances. God makes use of Persecutors to chastize his People, Have they
therefore God's Commission to do the Work of the Devil? Even the Devil is his
Instrument to good Ends and Purposes, and God orders and overrules his
Wickedness to accomplish them, Has he therefore God's Authority to govern us,
and when God gives him Power, are we bound to pay Obedience? The Doctor argues,
That all Events are ordered by God to the good or evil of private Persons, as
well as Societies. Thus the Events of Robbery and Murder are often directed by
Providence to the good and evil of private Men, and sometimes of Societies, but
is this a Proof that Murderers and Robbers have God's Authority? The Incest
and Usurpation of Absalom were equally from God's permissive Providence, and
were alike ordered by God as a punishment to David, had he therefore a divine
Commission to lie with his Father's Wives, and to usurp his Throne? For the one
undoubtedly as much as the other, and much the same as have all other
rebellious Sons and unnatural Usurpers. The sum is this; if God be the Author
of all Events, then he is the Author of all wicked Actions; and if he is not,
the overruling them to good Ends is no Commission of Government; and therefore
the Doctor's Argument thus far does either border upon Blasphemy, or is nothing
to the purpose.

However the Doctor thus pursties it, If there were any such distinction as
this, that some Events God only Ibid.
permits, and some he orders and appoints, we ought in reason to asscribe the
Advancement of Kings to God's Decree and Counsel, because it is the principal
Act of Providence which has so great an Influence upon the Government of the
World; and if he decree and order any Events, certainly he peculiarly orders
such Events as will do most good, or most hurt to the World; he must with his
own hand immediately direct the Motions of the great Wheels of Providence, and
not permit them to move as they please themselves. The Doctrine here delivered
is this: That all great Events, such as have an Influence upon the Government
of the World, are God's Order and Appointment, his Decree, his Counsel, and his
Positive Doing. Strange and prodigious Doctrine from a Divine of the Church of
England! for are not all the great Villainies of the World great Events? Are not
all Insurrections and Rebellions, the Murdering of Kings, the Desolation of
Kingdoms, the Destruction of Millions of innocent Persons, and the infinite
Barbarities that are committed in unjust and impious Wars, are not all these
Events, and such Events as do most hurt to the World, and have a great
Influence upon the Government of it? And must it not then be said, that lesser
Wickednesses are fit to be acted by miserable Men, but the great and flagrant
Villainies are the peculiar Works of the Almighty. How the Hand of God does
direct the great Wheels of Providence, is to us incomprehensible, but this we
can easily comprehend, that God is no more the Author of greater than of
lesser Villainies; he did not move Absalom to usurp upon David, nor Athaliah
upon Joash, he directed neither the Hearts nor Hands of Jacques Clemens and
Ravillia^ to assassinate the two Henry's, nor did he order and appoint our
English Regicides to execute the Royal Martyr upon a Scaffold.

It is a false Notion of Providence to think it is more concerned about greater
than about lesser Affairs: Providence has as much to do with Beggars as with
Princes, with Families as with Kingdoms; and it numbers up all the Hairs of our
Head, as well as the Destiny of Empires. All Nations are before God as the
small Dust of the Balance, and are counted less than nothing; neither is there
any difference of great and little, as to Omnipotency and Immensity. Events
therefore are not peculiarly to be asscribed to God, because they appear great
to us; and the Reason why some Events are said to be permitted, and others to
be caused by God, is not because they are great or little, but because they are
morally good or evil. If Usurpation of another's Right be a thing evil in
itself, God must be equally discharged from being the Author of it, in the
case of a Cottage and a Kindgom, God may permit, and may decree the Deposition
of a King, as a just Punishment from him, who is righteous in all his
Judgments, and he knows how to effect it without wicked Instruments but if he
makes use of such Instruments for the execution of his Judgments, if he
punishes a lawful King by the Rebellion of his Subjects, or the Usurpation of
his Throne, Have the wicked Instruments therefore the Decree and Appointment of
God to authorize them? Or, is the Usurpation any more from God than the
Rebellion?

Nay farther, he may decree to advance a private Person to the Throne, as he
decreed to advance David and Jeroboam, and God can certainly effect such a
Decree by lawful ways, as by the Extinction of all former Titles; but if the
Person whose Advancement is decreed expects not till Providence opens a lawful
way to the Ascension of the Throne, but ascends it himself by the way of
Usurpation, can the secret Decree of God either justify his Usurpation, or
give him Authority to continue it? Shall we say that God moved him to this
Wickedness? or not rather, that his Wickedness and his Advancement are only
from himself? God decreed to make David King, yet after the Decree was revealed
to him, he accounted Saul as God's King, and he patiently waited till God made
him a lawful Sovereign, by the Extinction of the former Title. But Jeroboam
anticipated God's Covenant, and advanced himself to the Throne by Rebellion and
Usurpation; and therefore he is generally branded as an Usurper, and of him
among others, it is thought that God himself has said by the Prophet, They
have set up Kings, but not by me. God Hos. 8. 4.
decreed to raise Joseph to great Dignity in Egypt; but if Joseph had wickedly
usurped that Power or Wealth which was the Right of another, Could it then be
said, that God's Decree did give him Authority to keep it, any more than it did
to his Brethren to sell him to the Midi^nites? Thus would it be, if the Decrees
of God were made known to Men; and much more is it so, when his Decrees are
secret and unsearchable, and cannot possibly be known before they are
accomplished. A Distinction there must be, between God's decreeing the
Possession of a Throne to a Person, and giving him Authority to possess it
while it is the Right of another; for otherwise the Decree of God must give
Authority to Injustice. However nothing is effected by the Providence of God,
but as it was decreed by him; and therefore when any wicked Event does happen,
since it happens only by the permissive Providence of God, the antecedent
Decree about it must be permissive also. We can never know whether God's
Decrees be permissive or authoritative, but from the nature of the Events
decreed; we are certain he only permits Wickedness, and he decrees only to
permit it; and therefore if the Possession of a Power which is the Right of
another be Wickedness, we are sure that God's Decree and Providence about it
are merely permissive, and are consequently far from being Arguments of Divine
Authority. But to return to the Doctor:

He endeavors to support his Argument by Providence, by remembering, page 13.
That Kings are God's Ministers and Lieutenants, and are invested with his
Authority; now to give Authority to any Person, does not signify to permit him
to take it, and we cannot but think that God will exercise a particular
Providence in appointing his great Ministers. Under the word Kings he
comprehends Usurpers; and here the Doctor would conjure us into a Circle. He
undertook to prove that all Usurpers do rule by God's Authority, because they
are advanced by his Providence, and now he remembers that they are invested
with his Authority, and from thence he argues that they are advanced by his
Providence. But the Doctor remembers what he has not proved, that all Kings
(comprehending Usurpers) are invested with God's Authority. This we positively
deny, as being here precariously asserted, and therefore the Assumptions and
Inferences that follow ought to pass for nothing. But behold his Ibid.
Subtilty! No Man can have God's Authority but he to whom it is given; and if
the advancement to a Throne invests a Prince with God's Authority, then God
gives him the Throne, and does not merely permit him to take it. If the
Supposition were well proved, the Consequence would be never doubted; but the
Reason on which he grounds it, is either not true, or not pertinent, For no Man
can take God's Authority, but it must be given by him. The gift of God does
generally imply a conveyance of Right by divine Donation, and in this sense his
Assertion is manifestly false; for all Authority is God's, and whenever Men do
assume Power and Authority, which they have no Right to exercise, (as for
instance all Usurpers, Rebels, Pirates, Robbers, and Schismatical Preachers,)
it is evident they usurp that Power and Authority which God never gave them.
But sometimes God is said to give a thing, when Providence so orders it, that
Men have Power to take it. Thus ^^d God give David's Wives to Absalom, as the
Prophet had denounced; but this Permissive gift did by no means authorize and
legitimate his Inoest with them; and in this sense it is true, That no Man can
take God's Authority, but it must be given; that is, no Man can usurp it
without God's Permission. But in this sense his Proposition here is
insignificant; for a Permissive gift is as good a Charter for Thieves and
Cutthroats, as it is for Tyrants and Usurpers.

Nay, says the Doctor, Since Ibid.
God makes Kings now* not by an express Nomination, but only by the Events of
Providence, we must not allow that God at any time permits Men to make
themselves Kings, whom he does not make Kings; for then we can never
distinguish between Kings by the Permission, and by the Appointment of God,
between God's Kings and Kings of their own making. Then in other words he
repeats the same Assertion, and concludes, That there is no direction how to
distinguish them, and the Events of Providence in placing them in the Throne,
are the same in both. Here the Doctor will not distinguish against his own
Hypothesis; but why may not the Permission and Appointment of God be as easily
distinguished in the advancement of Kings, as in the success of Pirates and
Robbers, or in any other Event whatever? Since the only way whereby God does
now give Riches and Estates, is the disposal of Providence, can we therefore
never distinguish between the Possessing them by the Permission and by the
Appointment of God? Does the forge^ of a Will hold his Estate by divine
Appointment, or the Thief the purchase of Robbery? If we cannot distinguish in
such Cases between God's Permission and Appointment, Justice must leave the
Earth again, and a divine Right may be pleaded for all the Injustice in the
World. But if that distinction be allowed in private Property, why should it
not be admitted in the right of Sovereignty also; the Reason is the same in
both, for God can never be the Author of any Wickedness, and as long as the
Possession of any thing is unjust or wicked, we may be sure that Providence
only permits it.

But, says the Doctor, There is no direction how to distinguish between Kings
by Permission and by divine Appointment, and the Events of Providence are the
same in both. If he means direction in Scripture, he knows we are directed
there to render every Man his due; and not only Scripture, but the Laws of
Nature and Nations do direct it also. But though Scripture is no Code of
Political Laws and Rights, yet we want not sufficient direction to determine us
in paying every one his due. Political Laws and Constitutions are the Rule of
Civil Rights, and they direct us how to distinguish between unjust and just
Possessors, and the light of Reason and Scripture does assure us, That an
unjust Possession is only permitted by God, and not appointed and authorized by
him. We have as plain a direction how to distinguish about the Possession of
Sovereignty as of private Property, or as we have to distinguish between the
Usurpers of God's vindictive Justice, and the lawful Administrators of it.
Vengeance is God's, and his Vicegerents, but it is often usurped by Murderers
and Rebels, they invade it by God's Permission only; but the Laws of Nations
teach us how to distinguish them from God's Vicegerents; and if we have
directions to distinguish when one branch of Sovereignty is permitted to be
Invaded, when the whole is Invaded will not the same directions serve? Or is it
easy to distinguish in lesser Usurpations, impossible in greater.

But when a legal Prince and an Usurper are advanced to a Throne, The Event is
the same in both. The Events considered, as Natural actions, may be the same,
but as Moral, they may be as easily distinguished as any Moral good and evil.
Adultery and Conjugal Copulation, just and unjust Possessions, the executions
of Magistrates and Cutthroats, the Beheading of Charles the First, and the
Beheading of Monmouth, in all these actions the Event, considered Physically,
is the same; but, I hope, it is easy to distinguish in these Cases between
Lawful and Unlawful, Permission and Appointment. So it is in the advancement to
Sovereignty, when King Charles and Cromwell were advanced, the Event, to wit,
the Possession of the Sovereignty was the same; but every Church of England
Man, in those Days, could easily distinguish between God's Sovereign and the
Devil's. In short, we can never distinguish Permission and Appointment by bare
Events, but only by the moral Circumstances which denominate them good or evil.

Consequently since Providence it self must be distinguished by the rules of
good and evil, it necessarily follows that Providence of it self can never be a
rule to us. The only rule of our Actions is Law, either Positive, Divine,
Natural, or Humane; but it is impossible that Providence, abstracted from the
Consideration of the moral Nature of Events, should be a Law to us, because it
declares not the preceptive Will, or that Will of God which must be a rule to
our Actions: Whatever Providence works, or is the Will of his good Pleasure, we
must follow that Will which God has signified to us, either in written or
unwritten Laws. God has never prescribed the Dispensations of Providence as a
rule to us; they are often Unsearchable and above our Comprehension, but in no
Case can we understand what God permits, and what he effects and authorizeth,
but by the Moral nature of Events. Providence it self must be measured by the
rules of good and evil, and therefore those must be the ultimate rules of our
Practice. To conclude, Though Success (which is but another word for
providential Events) be a good Argument of God's Approbation and Authority
among the Disciples of the Alcoran, I think, it can be none among the Disciples
of Christ; I am sure it cannot be found in the Volumes of his Religion.

Thus I have considered what the Doctor has advanced about Providence; now,
says he, The necessary Consequence is this; that by what means soever any
Prince asc^nds the Throne, he is placed there by God, and receives Authority
from him. And let the Reader judge, whether the Premises to this Consequence be
sufficiently proved or confuted. The sum of his Proof is this, That God now
governs the World only by his Providence, (which is false if it exclude his
Government by Laws, and however is no Proof that every Usurper does Reign by
God's Authority,) that all Events are from God, and especially great Events,
(which is to charge God with all the Wickedness in the World,) that no one can
usurp God's Authority, unless God does give it him, (which is confuted by all
Murders and Rebellions;) and, lastly, that we cannot distinguish between Kings
by Permission and Appointment, unless all Possessours of Sovereignty have God's
Authority, (which may as well be said of all other Possessours; and contains no
difficulty at all, it being as easy to distinguish Permission and Appointment,
as lawful Princes and unlawful.) This is the sum of his Discourse upon the
third Proposition, and let the Reader judge how well he has demonstrated it. I
need not here reflect on his several ways of conveying God's Authority to
Princes, Election, Succession, and Conquest or Usurpation. These will be
considered hereafter; suffice it here to observe that there are in general but
two ways whereby Princes are advanced by God, Permission and Appointment, this
the way of Rightful Princes, and that of Usurpers.

We are come now to his 4th Proposition, viz. That all Kings page 14.
are equally rightful, with respect to God; which is just as true as this
Proposition, That all Men are equally righteous with respect to God, or that
with God there is no difference between good and evil; or, that with respect to
God, the Thief and the lawful Proprietor are equally rightful Possessors. But
let us consider how he proves it: It is impossible there should be a wrong
King, unless a Man could make himself King whether God will or no. The same
Assertion with that which is confuted already, That no one can take God's
Authority, but it must be given him: And may it not be said with equal Reason,
that all Men must be made wicked by God, unless Men can make themselves wicked
whether God will or no? Or is it impossible there should be a wrong Possessou^
of any thing, unless a Man could make himself a Possessour whether God will or
no. He proceeds thus, The whole Authority of Government is Gods, and whoever
has God's Authority is a true and rightful King, for he has the true and
rightful Authority of a King. But is not every Branch of Sovereign Authority
God's, if the whole Authority of Government is his? Does not every Murderer
usurp the Power of the Sword, the principal Branch of that Authority? And is
the Exercise of that Power rightful with respect to God, or is the Murder
committed by God's Authority? Having God's Authority is an equivocal
Expression; it may be had by Commission, as rightful Princes have it, and it
may be had by Permission, as Assassines, Rebels, and Usurpers have it; and such
a manner of having will never make the Possession rightful, either before God
or Men. To speak properly, the Usurper has not God's Authority, he has Power or
Force, and so has the Murderer, but that is not Authority; and yet because
they exercise a Power which it is not lawful to exercise without God's
Commission, abusively and improperly they may be said to have his Authority.

Prop. 5. The Distinction then Ibid.
between a King de Jure, and a King de Facto relates only to humane Laws which
bind Subjects, but are not the necessary Rules and Measures of the Divine
Providence. This Distinction relates to humane Laws, just as does the
Distinction in all other Cases between Right and Wrong. Humane Laws do declare
and determine what is right, and the Law of God does establish and confirm the
Law of man about it. Thus he who has a Right to an Estate by the Law of the
Land, has a Right to it by the Law of God, and is the rightful Proprietor,
with respect both to God and Man. If it were not so, the Invasion of another's
Property could be no Sin; it could not make a man guilty before God, nor
obnoxious to his Vengeance, if it were no Transgression of his Laws. In private
Dominion therefore the Distinction of a Possessour de Jure and de Facto,
relates to divine as well as humane Law; and why should it not then in the ease
of politic Dominion and the Possessours of Sovereignty? Shall private Injury
be a Breach of Divine and Humane Laws, and an Injury to God's Vicegerents be an
Offense only against the Laws of Men? Does not the Sanction of God establish
the Rights of Sovereigns? Or does his Law take care of Oxen, and not of Men, of
private Men, and not of Princes? What can be the Reason of this Prerogative of
private Rights above the Rights of Princes? Is it because Humane Laws are not
the necess^^y Rules and Measures of Providence? Does not Providence dispose of
them? And is it bound to humane Laws in respect to Property, and free in
respect to Sovereignty? Humane Laws are not the adequate Rule of Providence,
for many things come to pass in God's Government of the World, which cannot be
regulated by them; and yet God's Providence does govern political Societies by
political Laws, sometimes it makes a Law void by extinguishing the matter of
it, but it never directly abrogates it; for as long as humane Laws are Laws,
they do continue to bind Subjects, they are the necessary Rules and Measures of
their Actions, and have the Sanction of divine Authority to enforce them.

Let us consider how the Doctor illustrates and confirms his Proposition: In
hereditary Kingdoms, says he, a Ibid.
rightful King is he who has by Succession a legal Right to the Crown, and he
who has Possession of it without a legal right, is a King de Facto, a King, but
not by Law: That is, he is an unlawful King, or an Usurper. Now if this Law
which creates a Right to the Crown be truly and properly a Law, then it is
certain the Authority of God confirms it; and consequently the King de Jure,
having his Right established by the Law of God, the Usurper cannot claim by
virtue of it; if the legal and divine Right be in another, it is manifest he
has neither, and must be a wrongful Possessour with respect to God and Man;
but if the Law of Succession be no Law, the talk of a King de Jure is Banter,
and there is no such thing as Right or Law in the World.

The Dr. acknowledges, that Ibid.
Subjects are so tied up by the Constitutions of the Kingdom, that they must
not pull down or set up Kings contrary to the Laws of the Land; but (he adds)
God is not bound by humane Laws, but can make whom he pleases King, without
Regard to legal Rights. This is liable to many Reflections.

1. He grants that Subjects must not see up illegal Kings, therefore they must
not set them up, by giving their Consent to the Advancement of them; and yet he
affirms afterward, that Kings de Facto are not set up by God till they are
settled, and that they are not settled till they have the Consent of the
Subjects. Thus the Result is, That God can never set up Kings against Law, for
Subjects must not set them up by their Consent, and there is no other way to
do it.

2. If Subjects must not, is it lawful for others to advance them? May
Foreigners lawfully set up Kings over others? Who made them Judges or
King-makers in other Kingdoms? Or how can they prove any Commission from God to
do it? Thus it can be lawful for no sort of Men to be Instruments in setting
up illegal Kings, and therefore they must be set up by God's Permission only;
for when wicked Actions are done by wicked Instruments, it is certain he only
permits them.

3. If neither Subjects nor Foreigners can lawfully set up Kings against Law,
how shall Providence do it? God must either set them up without Instruments,
which he never did nor will do, or he must allways set them up by wicked
Instruments, and then it must be said, that God can lawfully set up Kings, but
never by lawful means; and whether this be not derogatory to the Goodness and
Justice of his Government, let every one consider.

4. Whereas he affirms, that God can make Kings without regard to legal Rights,
why may it not be as well said, that he can make Marriages, or legitimate
Bastards, or create Judges, Constables, and Freeholders against Law? No doubt
he can do all this by an express Revelation of his Will, and so he can make
Kings against Law, by express Nomination. But providential Events are by no
means equivalent to it; the unjust Possessor of another's Freehold, is in some
sense a Freeholder by Providence; but that can be no bar to an Ejectment by
Law; and so it is in the unlawful Possession of Sovereignty; God's Providence
does not Abrogate the legal Right, nor make an Ejectment unlawful. As I said
before, the Matter of humane Laws is often Subtracted by Providence, and so is
the Matter of divine and natural Laws; but Providence does no more act against
those than these. The bond of Law is the Authority of God, and God is the
Author of Political Society, and the establisher of Law, which is the Soul and
Cement of it; and therefore to say he destroys it by his Providence, is to
represent his Providence as Subverting his Authority, and to make him not the
God of Order, but the God of Confusion.

Prop. 6. The sum of it is Ibid.
this, We can have but one King at a time, and therefore our Allegiance can be
due only to one King. By King he means the Possessor of the Throne; so that
this Proposition is a very wonderful Discovery, that two opposite Kings cannot
at the same time possess the same Throne, which is as clear as that they cannot
be in the same place together, or that two M^^ cannot be one Man; this the
little Writers can easily comprehend; and if it were as clear that Allegiance
is always due to the Possessor, the Controversy would be at an end between us.

Prop. 7. He is our King who is Ibid.
settled in the actual Administration of Sovereign Power; this we deny to be
true, in our sense of King, and his sense of Settlement. But King, he says, is
the Name of Power and Authority not of mere Right. Then the sense of the
Proposition is this, He has Power and Authority over us, who has the
Administration of Power and Authority over us; but if the Doctor will assume an
Authority over Words, it is not for me to contradict it. We know the World did
generally give the name of King to Charles I. and II. when they had only a
legal Right to the Crown, but did not Possess it, and so they do to such a
Prince, who ought by the Laws of the Land to be King, but is not, as the Doctor
understands the name of King. But since he is resolved that King shall signify
Possession of Power only, let him have his Humor, but let him draw no
Arguments from his Arbitrary interpretation of Names. His King can have no
Title to God's Authority against legal Right, which always carries God's
Authority with it.

Here the Doctor proposes an Objection, That it is Hobbisin that Dominion is
naturally annexed to Power; and in Answer to it, he makes show of a distinction
between Hobbs's Opinion and his own. Hobbs makes Power and nothing else to give
Right to Dominion, and asserts that God himself is the natural Governor of the
World, not because he made it, but because he is Omnipotent: But I say that
Government is founded in Right, and that God is the natural Lord of the World,
because he made it, and that no Creature has any Right to govern, but as he
receives Authority from God. He might as well have Answered, That Hobbs makes
Civil Laws the Rules of good and evil, and denies the existence of Spirits; but
I do not. Is there any dispute here about the Grounds of God's Dominion? Is it
not wholly about humane Government? And was Hobbism ever laid to his charge,
for asserting that God's Dominion is founded only in his Omnipotency? The
Question is whether Mr. Hobbs, and the Doctor teach not the same Doctrine about
the legal Right and Possession of Sovereignty, and the transferring of
Allegiance to Usurpers? And whether he can clear himself from Hobbism in the
Points we are now debating? And this charge is so evident, that he had no other
way but to decline it, by answering what was never objected.

Does not the Doctor teach, that our Allegiance is extinguished when the King
has not the Administration of Government in his Hands, and that Allegiance and
actual Government are essential Relatives. Mr. Hobbs had taught the same before
him, That the Obligation of Subjects to Lev. p. 114.
their Sovereign, is understood to last no longer, than the Power lasts to
protect them. The Doctor maintains, That when a lawful King is wrongfully
deposed, he has still a legal Right to the Crown, but the Subjects are absolved
from their Allegiance to him; the Doctrine of the Leviathan is just the same,
The Ibid. p. 174.
Right of the Sovereign is not extinguished, yet the Obligation of the Members
is. The Doctor binds the Subjects to an actual assistance and defense of the
Usurper; so doe^ Ibid.
Mr. Hobbs, The Subject is obliged (so strictly obliged, that no pretense of
having submitted himself out of fear can absolve him) to protect and assist the
Usurper as long as he is able. Thus it appears that they are Fratres
Fraterrimi, and it is not within the Power of Metaphysics to distinguish them.
But what says the Doctor, That Power does not give Right and Authority to
govern; but is a certain sign to us, that where God has placed the Power, he
has given the Authority. And is not this a manifest Confession of Hobbism, That
Dominion is naturally annexed to Power? Mr. Hobbs does often call his Sovereign
God's Lieutenant, and his Vicegerent, and Sovereign under God; he affirms that
he governs in God's stead, and that from him, and under him he has Authority
to govern. He agrees with the Doctor then, that the Right of Government does
flow from God's Authority; so that still it seems impossible to distinguish
their Opinions.

Prop. 8. Is this: Allegiance Case of Alleg. p. 15.
is due only to the King, and the Reason this, For Allegiance signifie^ all
that Duty which Subjects owe to their King, and therefore can be due to none
but the King. He had told us before, That by King he understands the actual
Possessor, and therefore it is his sense of the Proposition, that Allegiance is
due only to the Possessor, a precarious Assertion repeated often and never
proved. But here he pretends to give a very plain Reason for it, the suram of
it is this, That Allegiance is Ibid.
due only to God's Authority, and no one has it but the actual King. And if
this be not a very plain Reason, let every one be judge, that can distinguish
Reasoning from Affirming. But Propositionmaking was by this time grown
cumbersome to the Doctor; he was forced to make up a round number by
Tautologies and Repetitions, and now having exhausted his stock of Postulates,
he endeavors next to fortify them against two Objections, which he imagined
might be raised against them.

Obj. But if this ^e so, What Ibid.
does a legal Right signify, if it do not command the Allegiance of Subjects?
Why according to the Doctor, certainly it signifies nothing; for the legal
Right of the Dispossessed Prince can give him no Right to the Crown, against
the Right of divine Authority; the divine Right to all intents and purposes
must null the legal; therefore if this continue still to be a Right, it is a
Right to nothing. But a great Writer is worth nothing, that cannot defend
Absurdities and Contradictions, and thus the Doctor endeavors it.

1. He answers, that ele legal Right bari all other humane Claims, no other
Prince can challenge the Throne of Right. The plain meaning of this is, That if
the legal Right can be in one Prince, it is not in another; which ^^ an
admirable Proof, that the legal Right does signify something. When Oliver
usurped, Charles II. had a legal Right to the Throne, but no Allegiance was due
to his bare legal Title without God's Authority, and yet this legal Right did
signify something; for if Charles had a legal Right to the Throne, than
neither the French King, nor the Grand Signior, nor the Great Mogull, could
have a legal Title to it; and though Oliver being settled in the actual
Administration of Sovereign Power had a divine Right, yet the legal Right did
signify something to King Charles, though it was nulled by the Divine; and
though it made him not a King, ( for that is the name of Power,) and left him
no Subjects, (because no Allegiance was due to him.) Thus the legal Right of a
Dispossessed Prince is only a Feather in his Cap, it constitutes him only an
Vtopian King, yet without so much as imaginary Subjects. But he tells us.

2. That Subjects are bound to maintain the Rights of such a Prince, as far as
they can, that is, against all Mankind, but not against God's disposal of
Crowns. But who is this such a Prince? Is he a Prince dethroned and
dispossessed of his legal Right? Of such a Prince the Doctor is Discoursing,
and if such a one he means, How can the Subjects he bound to maintain his Right
as far as they can, when they are bound as far as they are able to oppose it;
their whole Allegiance being due to the Possessor? And thus the Obligation to
maintain the dispossessed Prince must be expounded as a Duty to destroy him.
But if his legal Prince be such an one as is not dispossessed, but has either a
Right to the Throne upon the Demise of the Predecessor, or is actually in
Possession; then I say he speaks not to the Objection; for the Objection
relates to the Case of a legal Prince, excluded from his Right, by the
Intrusion of another, the Case which he proposes in the preceding Paragraph,
When he who has the legal Right is not our King. (i. e. has not Possession,)
and he who has not i^. And he asserts upon it, That all our Allegiance is due
to him who is our King, and not to him who is not, though it be his Right to be
so; and upon this Case does the Objection proceed, If this be so, What does the
legal Right signify? So that if here he speaks of a Prince Possessing the
Throne, or Claming it when it was Vacant, Amphoram instituit, urceu^ exit; he
puts one Prince in the Objection, and another in the Solution, and in short he
does not Answer, but Evade and Prevaricate.

Well! but suppose a Prince with a legal Title to a vacant Throne, How can the
Subjects he bound to maintain his Right, since they are not his Subjects, and
owe him no Allegiance? For, according to the Doctor, Subjection and Allegiance
are due only to Possessors, and not to a bare legal Title without it.
Maintenance therefore. In such a Case, can be only a Debt of Justice, because
it is due by Law and Equity, and the same Debt will continue, when the rightful
Prince is wrongfully Dispossessed; for the legal Right is the same, and the
same Law and Equity for restoring a due, as giving it at first. But farther,
suppose that he means a rightful Prince in actual Possession; such a one has
both legal Right and God's Authority; and, yet the Doctor denies afterward,
that Subjects in some Cases are bound to maintain them; and thus as a legal
Right does signify nothing with him here, so neither does God's Authority
hereafter. He eludes and trims, and distinguishes them away as often as he has
occasion; he grants Allegiance to Power without Right, and denies it to lawful
Right and God's Authority together.

The other Objection he propounds is this, If we have Sworn Ib. p. 16.
Allegiance to a lawful Prince, and his Heirs and lawful Successors, How can we
pay Allegiance to any Prince, while He, or any of his Heirs and legal
Successors are living, and claim our Allegiance, without violating our Oaths?
And the sum of his Answer is, That an Oath of Allegiance made to any King, can
oblige no longer than he continues to be King, (i. e. in Possession;) for if it
did, it would oblige us against our Duty, and so become a^ unlawful Oath. I
acknowledge this Answer would be good, if he had sufficiently proved, that
Allegiance is always, and only due to the Possessor; and whether that be done,
let every one judge as he sees Reason. Were it here pertinent, it would be
easy to prove, That our Oaths were intended to bind us to the lawful King and
his Heirs, even in the Case of Dispossession; so all honest Men did understand
them in the Age of Usurpations, and till of late they were never otherwise
Interpreted, but by a few wretched Slaves of the Usurpers. All the faithful
Members of the Church of England thought them Obligatory, when their Princes
were Dispossessed; they thought it no breach of Duty to stick so a righteous
Cause, when it proved Improsperous; and as long as the Man was in bring, they
never looked upon the King as gone. The truth is, they were not wise in their
Generation, and they understood not that Jesuitical Lessius de Jure and
Justitia. p. 79.
Evasion, which would have been worth more than the whole World unto them, That
when the King is deposed, tum definit esse Princeps; which, if it be true
Doctrine, the Consequence of Lessius the Jesuit is unavoidable, quod quidquam
licet in eum attentare, he becomes a private Person, and may be lawfully
murdered.

In the next Paragraph he observes, that we do not swear to keep the King and
his Heirs in the Throne, which may be impossible for us to do against a
prosperous Rebellion. And who was ever so senseless as to imagine that we swore
to keep them in the Throne, when it is impossible to keep them; but I presume we
swore, that in case our King should be thrown out by a prosperous Rebellion, we
would not bind our selves to oppose his Restitution, by transferring our
Allegiance to his Rebel; yet he argues that we did not, because such an Oath
would be unlawful, as contrary to that Duty we owe so the divine Providence,
which conveys God's Authority to the Usurper. Thus the same precarious
Assertions are everlastingly inculcated, but a Million of Repetitions will
never amount to one Argument for them. And now having routed the Objections, he
concludes thus:

These seem to be very plain Propositions, and to carry their own Evidence with
them. Very plain and self-evident Propositions! And why then could not the
Doctor discover them before the publishing of Bishop Overall, and the Battle on
the Boyne? Is it possible so great, so quick-sighted a Writer could be above a
year in finding out self-evident Propositions? Alas! poor, miserable Swearers
and Non-swearers, that cannot see that which is as clear as the Noonday, and
carries its own Evidence with it? How unhappy are they that have not the
Doctor's Spectacles, by which he is able to see clearly through Mountains, and
to discern things dark and invisible to others! But after all, it is well these
bright Propositions do carry their own Evidence and are known by Intuition; for
it seems to me that the Doctor has given them no additional Luster, he has
hitherto proposed them without Proof, and if they are not innate Ideas, they
seem to be altogether as indemonstrable.

But if these Propositions are true, they are a very plain Direction to
Subjects, Ibid.
in all Revolutions of Government. And the Direction in short is this: They
must have no hand in the Revolution, and oppose it as far as they can, and not
be hasly in complying; but when such a Revolution is made, they must pay
Allegiance to the new Prince, as invested with God's Authority. Now his
Direction is every whit as plain as his Propositions; in the days of the
Unlawfulness of Resistance the contrary Direction was then very plain and
evident with him, but it is the singular Prerogative of great Writers to alter
the nature of Things with the Alteration of their Judgments, and in all their
Changes to carry Evidence, Perspicuity, and Demonstration with them. But yet
the Direction is not so very plain neither; for even the Doctor himself was
sensible there remained still a very considerable Difficulty, which he labors
next to remove, and to give us more plain Directions about it.

The Difficulty is to know when a Revolution is so perfectly completed, or when
a new Prince is so fully invested with God's Authority, as to have a Right to
our Allegiance; but the Doctor, according to his way, does very easily resolve
it: Obedience is due to God's Authority, and when we can reasonably conclude,
that God's Providence has settled the new King in the Throne, we must pay our
Obedience to him. But how comes Settlement here to be the only Indication of
God's Conveyance of Authority? Does not all his Reasoning conclude as strongly
for all Possession of Sovereign Power, without respect to Establishment? God
removes and sets up Kings only by his Providence, and he sets up a King
when by his Providence be puts Sovereign Authority in his hands; every
advancement to a Throne, whether settled or unsettled, is an Event, and therefore
ordered by God's Will and Appointment, and peculiarly ordered by him, at having
so great an Influence upon the Government of the World; and this will be
farther confirmed, when we remember that Kings are God's Ministers, and are
invested with his Authority; all Authority is God's, and no Man can have God's
Authority, but he to whom it is given; and yet it is very plain, that Princes
that are not fully settled, are in Authority. We must not allow that God at any
time permits Men to make themselves Kings, whom he does not make Kings; for
then we can never distinguish between God's Kings, and Kings of their own
making; and it is impossible there should be a wrong King, unless a Man could
make himself King whether God will or no: And therefore a King whose Possession
is not firmly established, cannot be a wrong King, because he is a King of
God's making; he has the Authority of Government in his hands, and whoever has
God's Authority is a true and rightful King, and therefore our only King; for
we cannot have two opposite Kings at once, and consequently our Allegiance is
due only to him.

In short, there is not an Argument in his Book which is not equally applicable
to all Possession whatsoever; either they prove Allegiance to all Possessors,
or to none at all; but if they infer Absurdities, rejected even by the Doctor,
they must needs be false and fallacious; and if we cannot reasonable conclude
when a Prince has the Administration of Sovereign Power, that God ha^ made him
King, unless he be thoroughly settled, we cannot possible conclude from any of
the Doctor's Arguments, that a settled Usurper is made a King by God. Let him
show the difference, if he can, let him demonstrate to us the Reason, why a
Prince when he is first advanced has no Right to Allegiance, and has when he is
settled, though the same Providence does advance and settle him; why the same
actual Administration of Government is a Sign of God's Authority when it is
secure, and none when it is in danger; and let him resolve us whether an
unsettled Possessour be not a Power in being, and advanced by God, and
therefore invested with his Authority; whether God's Advancement and Authority
do argue a Right to Allegiance; and whether the public Good, the Preservation
of our selves, and of political Society, are but frivoldu^ Arguments when an
Usurpation is doubtful, and demonstrative when established. If he can unriddle
these Mysteries, and show all his Arguments to be conclusive for a settled, and
not for an unsettled Possessour, I will acknowledge him then to be the greatest
Writer under Heaven: But it is too much for any one to write precarious
Propositions, and apply them by arbitrary Distinctions, and to argue as if all
Mankind were Idiots, and as if there were no Logic nor Reason in the World.

But as the Doctor distinguishes between settled and unsettled, so also between
Settlement and Settlement. In new Governments, he says, there must Page 17.
necessarily be different degrees of Settlement, which seem to require, or at
least to justify different degrees of Submission, till it increases to such
(...)full, and plenary, and settled Possession, as requires our Allegiance.
Thus our Submission is ever to keep pace with Settlement, and to bear a due
proportion to it. Now Settlement consists not in a Mathematical Point, he
acknowledges there are various degrees of it; and I say they are indefinite and
innumerable, for in the Acquisition of new Sovereignty, Power and Stability do
increase like Time and Bodies, by innumerable steps and progressions; and as
the degrees of Settlement ^re innumerable, so must the degrees of Submission,
which is commensurate to it. But the^ this is not a very plain Direction for
Revolutions, that our Submission must grow in proportion to the Settlement; for
it will be impossible to find out degrees of Submission answerable to degrees
of Settlement. For instance, King Steven, Henry IV. and VI. Edward IV. Richard
III. Henry VII. and Cade and Ket, the Rump and Oliver, and his Son Richard, had
not two of them the same degrees of Power and Stability; and is the Doctor able
to find out so many several degrees of Submission for them? Though neither
Mathematical proportion nor Mathematical certainty is here expected from him,
yet he should have directed us in the gradual increase of Submission by some
rules and distinctions, and have showed us in gross, at least, what Submission
is due to an upstart Power that is like to be of short continuance, what to a
Power of weak or doubtful Establishment, what to a Power supported only by
force, or by the consent of a great Party, as well as what is due to a Power
that is thoroughly s^tled by the full consent of the People.

But the Doctor speaks only to two degrees of Setlement; the First Ibid.
is, When the generality of a Nation submit to a Prince, and place him in the
Throne, and put the whole Power of the Kingdom into his Hands, and yet the
dispossessed Prince has such a formidable Power as makes the Event very
doubtful. This we may call a doubtful Setlement; but p. 9. where the Doctor is
discoursing on the Convocation Book, he affirms that this is a through
Setlement; the general Submission of People, the Possession of the whole Power
of the Nation, and the whole Administration of Government, are the Notes and
Characteristicks of it; but here they are owned to be insufficient to prove i^
through Setlement, and notwithstanding a general Submission, and a Possession
of the whole Power of the Kingdom, It ^ay be thought that God's Providence has
not (...) the Usurper, and that Allegiance ^s not due to him; and yet again in
his Vindication, p. 37. by Setlement he understands the Setlement of a
Government within it self, and there he thinks it may be thoroughly settled
before it has a peaceable ^ossession and Settlement. Thus the Doctor makes as
much, or as little go to a through ^et^^ment as he pleases; and when he
pretends that the thing is notoriously evident and sensible, he writes
ambiguously, in^oherently and contradictorily about it.

Now let us consider his Directions about Submission to a Government doubtfully
^^tled.

1. They who live under such a Ibid.
Government are bound (he says) to live quietly and peaceably, and to promise
or swear, or give any other security to do so, if it be demanded. But neither
is this a very plain Direction, For to live quietly and peaceably is a very
doubtful Expression; and if he intends by it an Obligation never to contribute
our Assistance to restore the rightful Sovereign, than it is a promising or
swearing away our Allegiance; and I would fain know what Obligation there can
be to renounce our Allegiance, for a Government that has no Title to it. But if
he means the not attempting any thing against this Government while we are
under its Power, and are certain to be crushed in the attempt, and the exerting
our Allegiance cannot be effectually serviceable to restore our Sovereign; a
Subject indeed may lawfully promise thus to live peaceably, and he might
lawfully swear it, but that it seems to be taking God's Name in vain; for it
would be a vain and trifling Oath, such as would give no Security to the
Imposers, and should be imposed upon none but Madmen.

He add^, It is reasonable we Ibid.
should live peaceably, if we think it reasonable to live under the protection
of the Government. But there is no more reason that we should renounce our
Allegiance for the Protection of Usurpers, than that we should renounce
Political Society for the Protection of Banditi; it is reasonable to live where
we have right to live, and if unreasonable Men will not permit us to enjoy our
Right, without a sinful Compliance, we must live where God's Providence shall
dispose us, and if we cannot live Innocently, it is reasonable to dye so. But
this all Men do, says the Doctor, in an Enemies Quarters, and no Man blames
them for it. No Man blames them for living peaceably, when to live otherwise
would be unserviceable to the Prince, and to them inevitable Destruction. No
doubt they may do so, as long as they are in the Enemies Power, but as soon as
that Power or Force is removed, and the Subjects are in a capacity of exerting
their Allegiance, then the reason of living peaceably ceases, and the paying
actual Allegiance to their lawful Sovereign is an indispensible Duty; and I
believe no one ever denied, that it was lawful thus to live peaceably under all
Usurpers.

2. We must pay Taxes to them; Ibid.
for these are due to the Administration of Government, as St. Paul observes;
for this Cause pay ye Tribute also, for they are the Ministers of God attending
continually on this very thing. The Powers to whom Tribute is to be paid, are
there expressly said to be the Ministers of God, and to be ordained by him; they
are therefore such Powers as have a right to Allegiance, and the Doctor in the
next Section does argue upon that supposition. And yet here he argues from this
Text, That Tribute is due to such Powers as have no right to Allegiance, and
therefore are not God's Ministers, nor Ordained by him. If Allegiance be
always, and only due to God's Authority, (as he affirms in his self evievident
Propositions,) and if they who have not God's Authority are not his Ministers,
nor his Ordinance, and Tribute is due only to God's Ministers, because it is
enjoined to be paid for that Reason only, than the Consequence is, That such
Powers as are not thoroughly Settled have no right to Tribute, because they have
no right to Allegiance. The Apostle requires Taxes to be paid to God's
Ministers; and if they who administer the Government are not God's Ministers,
they cannot claim them from the Apostle. Taxes are due to the Ministers of God,
as attending continually on the Administration of Government; but if they are
hindered from attending it, by the Rebellion or Revolt of their Subjects, Are
the Subjects then discharged from paying them, because they have wickedly
Rebelled or Revolted from him? In a time of Rebellion, Is nothing due to the
Sovereign, because he cannot administer the Government? And if a Sovereign
forfeits all his Rights, when it is impossible for him to administer it, May it
not equally be argued from the Apostle, that he forfeits his Crown, if he is
not a t^^^or to evil Works, but to the good? But if the Doctor still thinks
that to be an unreasonable Inference, he must allow the other to be
unreasonable also.

To the Text of the Apostle he adds this Reason, If we owe the secure Ibid.
Possession of our Estates to the Protection of the Government, let the
Government be what it will, we ought to pay for it. No doubt we may pay Taxes
to an Usurper, as we may deliver our Purses to a Robber; in both Cases it is
lawful to give that which we cannot keep: But to pay Taxes voluntarily when we
can avoid it, is no more our Duty than to present a Robber with our Purses,
when we can easily save them. If it is our Duty, it must be either on the score
of Gratitude or Justice; but since the payment of Taxes must necessarily
strengthen the Usurper, and enable him to resist and to destroy the rightful
Sovereign, it must necessarily be Injustice to pay them, because it is unjust
to support Injustice, and to contribute voluntarily to the overthrow of a just
and righteous Cause. And if the Contribution be unjust, it cannot be a Debt of
Gratitude, for that does never oblige us to Injustice; and consequently though
the Usurpers Protection be a Benefit, (as receiving Quarter from the Banditi is
a Benefit,) yet this cannot oblige me to support him in his Usurpations, nor
pay such Taxes as are raised to establish the unjust Power, and resist the
Rightful: I ought not to receive his Protection on that condition, nor purchase
a Benefit to my self by Perjury and Injustice. If it be a Duty to pay Taxes to
support an Usurper that is not thoroughly settled, Why should it not be a Duty
to pay Allegiance to him? If we asist him with Money, we may assist him with
Counsel, Prayers, and Arms; we may fight for him with our Persons as well as
with our Purses; and if we do all this, we pay him plenary Allegiance. But
since the Doctor does not require Allegiance to an Usurper doubtfully settled,
the Subjects cannot be obliged to contribute their Assistance to support him;
for that is the principal Duty of Allegiance, nor consequently to pay him Taxes
for that purpose, for that is the principal and most powerful Assistance.

3. We must give the Title of King Ibid.
to such a Prince, and this he requires for two Reasons; 1. Because it is a
piece of good Manners. 2. Because he is indeed King while he administers the
Regal Power, tho we may not think him so well settled, as to all Intents and
Purposes to own him for our King. What Title we are obliged to give him in good
Manners. I leave to the Hera^lds and the Master of the Ceremonies to determine;
but till I am better informed, if the Title does not belong to him, I cannot
think it good Manners to call him that which he is not. But if he be King
indeed, then a very little Sense, without Skill in Heraldry, or Casuistical
Divinity, will serve to inform us that we must give him the Title of King; and
this is one of the plainest Directions in his Book, that if he be King indeed,
he has a Right to be called so. But he is indeed King while he administers the
Regal Power; and this is evident from what he affirms in Prop. 7. That King is
the Name of Power: But Prop. 8. This King is one to whom Allegiance is due, and
yet here he is indeed King to whom Allegiance is not due, as being not well
settled in his Government, and who is not to all Intents and Purposes to be
owned for our King. Thus we must give him the Title of King, because he is a
King, or at least half a King, and yet in reality no King, because he has no
Right to Allegiance. But the Doctor may trifle and shuffle with Names as he
pleases, he may give the Title of King, if he will, to every Rebel and Usurper,
to Oliver and Richard and Massaniello, for they administered the Regal Power for
a time: But I hope he will not be offended if others follow not his Humor, if
they call a Spade a Spade, and say that he has no Right to the Title of King,
who has no Right to the Office, and no Right to Allegiance.

4. We must pray for him under Ibid.
the Title and Name of King; for we are bound to pray for all who are in
Authority; and that a Prince is, who has the whole Government in his hands, and
has power to do a great deal of hurt, or a great deal of good. All this was
true of Oliver, he was visibly in Authority, had the whole Government in his
hands, and had power to do a great deal of Hurt or Good, were the Clergy
therefore bound to pray for their Sovereign Lord King Oliver? In those days the
Sons of the Church were of another Mind, they esteemed it infamous and wicked
to thrust their lawful Sovereign out of their Prayers, to make room for the
Usurper; and to style him their Sovereign Lord, their King, or their Protector;
and yet pray for all in Authority was then a Text in the Bible. What does the
Apostle mean by all in Authority? Not certainly all that have the
Administration of it, for then Pirates, Robbers and Rebels will be comprehended
in that Expression: But the Motive or Reason annexed is a clear Limitation of
it, we must pray for them, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life; which
shows we must here understand such Authority as is for the Quiet and Peace of
of Society, and such are all lawful Powers, even the most Tyrannical; but such
are not the Usurpers of that Authority that belongs to others, whether Rebels,
Robbers, or titular Tyrants; for these are the great Enemies of Society, their
Usurpation of their Authority tends to its Subversion, and considering its
natural and ordinary Effects, it can never be expected that a quiet and
peaceable Life should be attained under them. But the Doctor understands by the
Expression, such as have the whole Government in their Hands, though they are
not perfectly settled. And whose Authority have they? Certainly God's
Authority, for according to him, the whole Authority of Government is God's;
but if they have God's Authority, his Propositions give them a Right to
Allegiance; and to what purpose then is his Distinction of a through
Settlement? And if they have not his Authority, how impertinent is the
alleging that Text for a Right to our Prayers? We are bound to pray for all
Men, for private and public Enemies, for Thieves and Murderers, and Usurpers;
but we are principally obliged to this out of Charity to their Souls, and
therefore we must pray chiefly for their Repentance and Conversion, and to pray
thus for Usurpers, (that God would bless them thus with the chiefest of his
Blessings,) is (as says the Doctor) so far from being a Fault, that it is a
Duty, while we do it in such terms as not to pray against the Dispossessed. But
if in the late Usurpations a Doctor had ejected Charles, and inserted Cromwell,
and had prayed in these Terms, Bless we beseech thee our Sovereign Lord King
Oliver, I presume, the Master of the Temple would have been as forward as any
Man to charge Hypocrisy, base Compliance, and breach of Allegiance upon him.
And Reason would have made good the Charge; for to pray for Oliver, as our
Sovereign Lord, is to acknowledge before God and Man that he is so; and to
teach the People to acknowledge him, and to pay him that Subjection and
Allegiance that is due to a Sovereign. Is not Prayer for a King one of the
principal Expressions of Allegiance? And when we pray for the Usurper in the
room of the lawful Sovereign, does not the very nature of the thing require
this Interpretation, that we do not own him for our King, whom we thrust out of
our Prayers, and that we have transferred our Allegiance, where we pay the most
benefical Expression of it? this is the general Sense of the People concerning
it, and he that can satisfy his Conscience to own an Usurper for his King and
Sovereign Lord in the most Solemn Manner that can be, tho he owns no Allegiance
to be due to him, when the Reason for which he does it, the Nature of the
Thing, and the Construction of the People do imply an acknowledgment of
Allegiance, may I think be satisfied in any thing, and need not scruple any
Compliance whatsoever.

Thus far the Directions about Submission to a Government not thoroughly
settled, to which Allegiance is not required; but tho he requires it not here,
in the Sequel of his Discourse he infers it as a necessary and indispensible
Duty: for when he Case of Alleg. p 38.
comes to confute Bp. Sanderson's measures of Submission, his Reasons there do
prove (if they prove any thing) that Allegiance is due to such a Government.
The Doctor here directs us to pay some lower degrees of Submission, but not
Allegiance to his unsettled Usurper; and so does Bp. Sanderson, but his
Arguments against the Bishop's do equally conclude against his own Directions;
and thus I argue after him. Page 39.
If under an Usurper unsettled, the Safety and Tranquillity of Human Societies,
requires any thing of us, it requires and justifies a great deal more; for, 1.
As he states the matter, this destroys Civil Government, and a governed
Society; for seeing Allegiance is not due to such a Prince, it follows he has
not God's Authority, so that to speak properly, here is neither King nor
Subject, and I suppose no Man that considers it well, will ca^ this a Civil
Government, to which God's Authority and Allegiance is essential. 2. I would
ask whether Self-Preservation, public Good, and Gratitude for Protection do
oblige me to obey and submit to the Prince who governs, and to wish and pray
for, and do my utmost to endeavor his Prosperity? if it does I see no
difference between this and Allegiance; if it does not, then I am at liberty to
disturb the Government, nay am under an Obligation by my former Allegiance to
do it, when I can; and how does this contribute to the Safety of Societies? 3.
Suppose such a Prince should require an Oath of Allegiance, and the Subjects
according to their Duty should refuse it, and the Prince had Power to compel
them, what must be the effect of this, but the utter Destruction of the Nation?
But there is no need of transcribing the rest of his Discourse, it will be
obvious to every one that considers it, that it is applicable throughout to his
own Directions for Submission without Allegiance. Thus the Doctor does engage
the Doctor, his Arguments do overthrow his Directions, or his Directions his
Arguments. His Propositions prove that Allegiance is due to every Usurper, his
Directions deny it, and his Arguments against the Bishop do again infer it; let
him choose the one or the other, either Allegiance is due to all Usurpers, and
then he loses Bp. Overal's Convocation-Book, several Pages of his own Book, and
innumerable passages about a through Settlement: Or it is due only to Usurpers
that are settled, and then his Propositions and all his Arguments from
Scripture, and almost all from Reason are irrecoverably gone. The World knows
he can prove which he pleases, but I think he is not so great a Writer, as to
be able to prove Contradictions.

We come next to this summary account of a Government thoroughly settled, and
these are his Notes and Characters of it. When besides the Possession of the
Page 18.
Throne, the Power of the dispossessed Prince is broken, and no visible
prospect of recovering his Throne again; nay, if it be visible that he can
never recover his Throne again, but by making a new Conquest if the Nation by
Foreigners, who will be our Masters if they conquer, and no very gentle ones,
we may then (he concludes) look upon the new Prince as settled by God in his
Throne, and therefore such a King as we ^^e entire Allegiance to. Here then his
Characters of a through Settlement acquired to Possession are these two;
absolute Conquest over the dispossessed Prince, so that he has no visible
prospect of recovering his Throne; and no prespect of recovering it, but by
Conquest of the Nation by Foreigners who will be no gentle Masters. How is it
possible to hang these Characters together? P. 9. he makes plenary Posession
and Submission to be the only Test of a through Settlement; but Page 17.
upon second thought, he owns that to be insufficient; and here again he sets
it first upon the dispossessed Prince having no visible prospect of a
Restoration; then one would conclude that if there is such a prospect, then
there is no Settlement: Not so neither; for though there be a prospect of
recovering one way, there is nevertheless a Settlement, and we must conclude
that God has settled the Usurper, because there is but one way open to a
Restoration: This is just as reasonable as if it should be affirmed, That a Man
who is subject only to Convulsions is well settled in his Health; that an
enclosure is well fenced when there is but one gap; that a Fort is perfectly
secure when there is but one breach for the Enemy to enter at; or that the
wrongful Possessor of an Estate has got a good Settlement, because there is but
one way to eject him. If a little Writer had made such a Settlement, How
unmercifully would the great Judges have treated him, he had certainly lost all
his Credit in conveyancing for ever; and doubtless nothing can be more absurd,
than to pretend that a Deed of Conveyance is a good Settlement, when there is
one way to defeat it; or that a Government is thoroughly settled, when there is
visibly one way to overthrow it. Why should not a visible prospect of
Restoration by Foreigners spoil a Settlement, as well as a prospect of
effecting it by Subjects; is it because Foreigners will be no gentle Masters?
We remember well when the Government of rebellious Subjects was the most cruel
Tyranny that ever the Nation felt. But be they hard or gentle Masters, what is
that to a Settlement? The point is not whether the Government of the restored
Prince will be gentle, but whether there be a prospect of Restoring him, for if
there is, it is a plain Demonstration that there is no through Settlement. This
reflection then upon Foreigners, was in the bottom only an Amusement; it was
intended for nothing but to throw Dust in our Eyes, and to create a weak
Prejudice, to supply the want of Argument.

We return then to that which is the only colorable Proof of a through
Settlement; When the Power of the dispossessed Prince is broken, and there is
no visible prospect of a Restoration. Nothing is more arbitrary and various,
than the prospect which Men have of future Revolutions; almost every Man has a
peculiar Prospective through which he looks, and every one looks through his
own Organs and his own Prejudices. Men of Sanguine Complexion, whose Spirits
are brisk and volatile, as they happen to be prepossessed, will judge a
Prince's Condition to be hopeful, or desperate upon every little turn of
Providence; the Melancholic and Timorous, on both sides, will be always
anxious and aboding the worst, either despair of a Restitution or eternally
fear it, and never think the new Government to be settled enough: Even Men of a
well balanced Temper, of sedate and prudent Judgment, will yet have a
different prospect of Things; some will think a Prince irrecoverably lost, and
others who have as a good foresight, will think his recovery probale. Not the
diversity only of Temper and Judgment, but also the intricacy and obscurity of
the Matter and Object, and the constant vicissitude of humane Affairs, must
necessarily occasion difference of Opinions; even the most able and skilful
Politicians are often deceived in ballancing of Governments, and passing
judgment on their Strength and Stability; and if hereunto we add, that the
Decrees of God, who governs Governments, are unsearchable; that his Providence
is an unfathomable Abyss; that he often lifts up the Poor out of the Dust,
and levels proud Usurpers with it; that in History there are innumerable
Examples of Princes and Governments Reestablished and Exalted from the very
bottom of Despair; and in fine, that we are assured by Experience, that the
most improbable and unexpected Events do happen almost as often as those that
are most probable and most certainly expected. When all this, and much more is
considered as it ought, it must needs be acknowledged, That the Judgments
concerning the final Depression of a dispossessed Prince, and the secure
Establishment of an Usurper, must be exceeding difficult, various and
uncertain; and then the result is, that seeing it is hardly possible to be
assured of a through Settlement, as the Doctor understands it, and seeing Men
of the best Judgments are often mistaken, and are never unanimous about it, and
a very small part of Mankind can be thought capable of judging it, the
Consequence is, that a through Settlement is no sufficient direction for
Allegiance.

The Doctor gives this description of a through Settlement, to determine the
present Controversy about Allegiance; but whether the dispossessed Prince is
so broken, that there is no visible prospect of his Restoration, we may be
determined by the visible Hopes and Fears of the opposite Parties. It Is plain
his Power is not totally broken, and it is a palpable absurdity to say that a
Prince, who is still carrying on a War, is absolutely Conquered. Let not him
that girdeth on his Armor boast himself, as he that puts it off; the Event
of War is always doubtful, and when the War is finished, it will be time enough
to triumph, and to talk of a through Settlement. If the Doctor thinks it may
commence sooner, his Opinion is contradicted by Experience and common Sense,
for no Man that has any Title to it, will believe that the purchase of War is
secure before the War is over; or that an Usurper is thoroughly settled in his
Throne, when the deposed Prince is pursuing his Right to it by War: That
Restoration for which we have an annual Thanskgiving, was once esteemed morally
impossible without a Conquest by Foreigners, and the Destruction of the Nation,
but with God it was not impossible, and that which has been may be. The Doctor
has formerly told the World, That though Case of Resist. p. 132.
God for wise Reasons may sometimes permit such Usurpations, yet while his
Providence scoures the Persons of the deposed and banished Princes from
Violence, he secures their Title too; as it was in Nebuchadnezzar' s Vision,
the Tree is cut down, but the stump of the Roots is left in the Earth. The
Kingdom shall be sure to them after they shall know that the heavens do rule,
Dan. 4. 26.

In those times the Right and Title of the natural Prince were of such
importance, that there could be no Settlement of the Usurper, as long as a
stump of the Tree remained; but Times and Principles are altered, and now says
the Doctor, We must not take the Case of Alleg. p. 18.
consideration of Right into the Settlement of Government; for a Prince may be
settled without legal Right, and when he is so, God has made him our King, and
requires our Obedience. The Doctor, no doubt, may consider Settlement without
Right, and then declare that a Prince may be settled without it: But any one
else may consider it with relation to Right if he pleases; for a legal
Settlement is, I hope, a Settlement; and it is as certain that the extinction of
all legal Claims and Competitors, will contribute much to a through Settlement.

We may consider Settlement in a natural, and in a legal, or moral Sense, in
relation to Possession, and in relation to Right. He that dwells in a House,
and keeps out the right Owner may be said to be settled in it, because he keeps
Possession, but enquire in Westminister-hall whether this be good Settlement,
and the query will be easily resolved. Oliver was settled in some sense at
White Hall, so he was in the Government; but that Settlement was thought to be
of no validity in Law and Conscience, nor did it give him a divine Right to the
Palace and the Throne. Settlement is a Word of manifold and ambiguous Meaning,
and must be always interpreted according to the nature of the Matter to which
it is applied; when civil Property is the subject Matter, the very nature of
the Thing requires it to be understood in the civil or legal Signification of
it, and then (as it has been well observed) it denotes two Things, peaceable
Possession and legal Right. This is undeniable in relation to private Rights,
And why does it not require that Interpretation in respect to politic
Dominion? Is that the sense of all Lawyers when they speak of private Estates?
And is there any Lawyer that ever applied that Term to a Government usurped and
possessed without Right? Is there any other good Author that called such a
Possession a through Settlement? The Lawyers have always considered Right as
necessary to the firm Establishment of any Possession, and it would be a
contradiction to their Profession to consider otherwise; for if Right be not
requisite to the Settlement of Possessions, there is an end of all Law, and
there is no need nor use of it in the World.

When a Man is Possessor malae fidei (and such are all Usurpers) the Lawyers do
not account him to be thoroughly settled in his Possession; for as he is bound
in Conscience to Restitution, so he may be ejected by Law; and they never look
upon him as settled till he becomes a lawful Possessor and has acquired a legal
Right by Prescription of a 100 Years, or time immemorial, in which they presume
a Dereliction of the true Proprietor. Their Doctrine is the same concerning the
Possession of the Rights of Sovereignty; they never supposed it to be
established without Right; they affirm the Usurper (as long as he is such) is
bound to Navarre. 26. Tom. 3. p. 228. Arnisaeus de Rep. l. 2. c. 3. s. 27.
Restitution; that the rightful Prince may lawfully eject him by Grot. de ju.
belli. l. 2. c. 1.
War; that the presumption of Law is always for the lawful Prince; that the
Usurper cannot prescribe a Right, Covar. pars. 2. Rel. c. Possess. Malaef.
dereg. s. 2. n. 13. p. 449.
( nisi accesserit praescriptioni scientia patientiaque ipsius Principis,)
without the knowledge and permission of the Prince, and lastly, that these are
never to be presumed, but in case of perpetual and undisturbed Possession Ibid.
p. 451.
for a 100 Years, or a time exceeding the memory of Man. Tyrants (says De Rep.
l. 26. o. 7.
Petrus Gregorius) after they have Dethroned the true and rightful Princes, are
yet desirous of their Titles, and they make use of Parliaments or Assemblies of
the People to acquire them; yet they are Tyrants still, and are comprehended in
the Laws that relate to Tyrants, unless (as some think) they abdicate their
Power, and submit to their Judgment who can confer lawful Sovereignty upon
them; or unless after their Usurpation, they with their Posterity, prescribe a
Right to the Sovereignty by the Possession of a 100 Years or more. Thus the
Civil Lawyers: And, if we may believe Grotius, their Doctrine is confirmed by
the Law of Nations:

He says De ju. belli, l. 2. c. 4. s. 9.
it is probable that this Law was introduced by the consent of Nations, that
immemorial Possession peaceably enjoyed without Interruption, Omnino dominium
transferret, should to all intents transfer Dominion; he shows by many
instances that this was often pleaded by Nations; those out of Isocrates Ibid.
s. 2.
are apposite to our Purpose; in his Archidamus, he argues the Right of the
Lacedaemonians to Messana, from their Possession of it for some hundreds of
Years, and he lays down this Rule as most certain and confessed by all; That
Possessions, both private and public, become proper and patrimonial, if they
have been held for a long time; and in his Oration to Philip, (...); When
length of time had made the Possession firm and settled. These and other
Instances that might be produced, do show it has been the Sense of Mankind,
that Prescription is requisite to establish Possessions without an original
Right, and that there could be no Settlement till a new Right were introduced;
for if Dominion might have been transfered without Right, the introduction of
the Right of Prescription, by the Law of Nations, would have been superstuous.

But the Law of England is yet more rigid in requiring legal Right, it differs
from the Civil Law in Matter of Prescription; ( Finch's Disc. of Law, p. 132.
for by the Common Law Prescription makes no Right in Land,) but the
difference is in favor of Right against Possession, which cannot in any tract
of time advance to a legal Settlement, when an antecedent legal Right can be
made out against it. And can we think that the Law is more careful of private
Property than of Sovereignty, of Lands and Tenements than of the Royal Crown
and Dignity? That it has provided that the Rights of the Subjects be Sacred,
Inviolable, and Eternal, and has left the Crown to every one that can catch
it, though all the Estates in the Realm are held in Fee of the Crown, and are
derived Originally from it? On the contrary, the Favor and Presumption of the
Law is always for the King; no time is allowed to prescribe against his Rights;
it is the first Case of the Postnati, p. 36.
Principle of the Law that his Crown is Hereditary, it is entailed on his
Posterity for ever. Ibid. 68.
Descent is declared to be a Title stronger than all others, it being an
undoubted Title made by Law, it cannot be defeated by any other Title. Cook in
Calvin's Case.
Allegiance is not due to the Crown, but to the natural Person of the King,
which is ever accompanied with the Politic Capacity; Judge Jenkin's Works, p.
22.
it is due to the natural Body by Nature, God's Law and Man's Law, cannot be
forfeited nor renounced by any Means, it is inseparable from the Person; and it
has been said to be due to him, Postnati, 104.
even when he is driven out of his Kingdom. And lastly, we have the Resolution
of all the Lord's and Commons in the Case of the Claim of the Duke of York
against Henry the Sixth, that an illegal Settlement of the Crown by Acts of
Parliament, and the Settlement of 60 Years Possession without interruption,
were not sufficient to defeat the legal Title, nor to settle the Usurper's
against it.

Further it appears from the whole S^ies of our History, from the constant
practice of Usurpers, and from the Acts and Recognitions of their Parliaments,
that no Possession whatsoever without a legal Right was ever esteemed a through
Settlement by the Parliaments, the People, or by the Usurpers themselves; they
have always pretended to a Legal Right, and got themselves to be declared Kings
dejure, by their Parliaments, for the satisfaction of the People: to what
purpose, but that they knew it was the surest Foundation of their Power, that
the People could never be brought to a plenary Submission, nor their Government
be thoroughly settled without a general Persuasion of it. These Recognitions of
Parliaments were as illegal as the Usurpations, they could not alter the nature
of things, lawful Parliaments did always declare them to be invalid and null,
the whole Body of the Nation have rejected and made no account of them, and
they never yet were effectual to establish Usurpation: But they who had no
Right thought the Pretente and Opinion of it necessary to a Settlement, they
knew that Parliaments were the best Instruments to delude the People, and
therefore they made them to recognize Force and Usurpation to be Right and
Inheritance; and this constant practice of Usurpers is an evident Proof that it
has been the Universal Sense o^^ the Nation, that without a Legal Right there
could be no hopes of Settlement.

Lastly, I appeal to the Sense and Reason of Mankind, whether according to the
natural course of things there can be a through Settlement of an Usurped Power,
while the rightful Prince is actually prosecuting his Right. Mankind are not so
degenerate nor so much in love with Oppression and Injustice as to have no
regard to Right, nothing is more natural than to commiserate and assist the
Oppressed, and that may well be expected in the case of a Rightful Sovereign,
to whom the Subjects have sworn Assistance, and whom they know to be wrongfully
deposed. The generality of Men will never so far shake off the bands of Reason
and Equity, as to think they are loosed from the Obligations of rendering every
Man his due, and doing as we would be done by. Brave and Generous Spirits will
never be wanting, who will dare even to dye for a Righteous Cause, and will
scorn to abandon a Prince because he is unfortunate. Men may be c^^eated and
deluded for a while with the plausible Pretenses of Religion and (...) Public
Safety, but time does always discover the Imposture, and when once the
Fig Leaves are removed, the Usurpation and Injustice will be exposed naked to
their view, and their Abhorrence will be heightened by the Briars and Thorns,
the Sweat and Labor and Misery they have produced* and then they will strive
who shall be the first in bringing back their King, all this is natural to
imagine, what has often happened, and what may be reasonably expected. Usurpers
are always in the state of Robbers, they may be well armed and strongly
fortisied, but they can never be secure, Usurpation will never want Enemies,
not Right its Friends and Defenders. Nature and Religion and the Common
Interest of Mankind do conspire for Right and Justice, against Injury and
Oppression; and it is not likely they should be established in spite of so
powerful a Combination. Lastly, it was never yet known in this Nation, that a
Legal Right to the Crown, when prosecuted, was totally deserted, or a through
Settlement acquired without it, and therefore I conclude that Reason and
Experience do assure us, that Right is necessary to a through Settlement.

The Result is this, that seeing the Civil Law, the Law of Nations, the Law of
England, the Practice of Usurpers, the constant Sense of the People, and even
Reason it self do unanimously agree in proving the necessity of Right to
Settlement; it is very unreasonable to consider Settlement without it, or when
we meet with it in any Author, to give it such an Interpretation as is
warranted by no good Writer, and is contradictory to Law and Practice, Reason
and Experience; and when on the contrary it may fairly be interpreted in a
sense agreeable to them.

The Doctor concludes this Section with repeating his former Prejudice, and
insinuating a new one, That his Principles Page 18.
are so very useful in all Revolutions, that Subjects have reason to wish them
true, and to examine over again those strict Principles of Loyalty, which if
pursued to their just consequences, must unavoidably in some junctures
sacrifice whole Kingdoms, at least all Subjects who pretend to this degree of
Loyalty and Conscience to the ill Fortune of their Princes. Now this is nothing
but Wheedling and Prevaricating; if his Principles be false, it is certain they
are not useful to the Good of Mankind, and it is as impious to wish them true,
as to wish that Vice were Virtue, as absurd as to wish that an Ox were an
Elephant. His Principles are useful enough to them who think sleeping in a
whole Skin should be preferred to all Obligations; and such is that Principle
which was once vouched by the Devil, Skin for Skin, and all that a Man has,
etc. But the strict Principles of Loyalty are such as may sacrifice Kingdoms to
the ill Fortune of a Prince; so may the Principle of Passive Obedience to the
Cruelty of a Prince; so may the Doctrine of the Cross to the Fury of a
persecuting Prince; so it is possible that Obedience to any Law of God o^
Nature may in some junctures be the destruction of a Kingdom; must the Laws of
God and Nature be therefore cancelled? Must the Doctrine of the Cross and of
Non-resistence be therefore rejected, as destructive to Society? Must the
Principles of Honor, Loyalty, and Fidelity, be sacrificed to ill Fortune? Is
our Allegiance due to Fortune? And if a righteous Cause be unsuccessful, is it
our Duty to abandon, and bind our selves by Oaths to oppose it? We may thus
briefly answer his Objection: We will discharge our Duty, and leave the Event
to God.

But as for the Doctor's Principles, they are exactly the same with Mr.
Ascham's, and because he professes greatly to reverence the profund Judgment of
Bishop Sanderson, I will conclude this Section with his Reprinted in the 2d Pt.
of the Hist. of Passive Obedience.
Censure of them in these words, That they evidently ^^nd, 1. To the taking
away of all Christian Fortitude and Suffering in a righteous Cause: 2. To the
encouraging of daring and ambitious Spirits to attempt continual Innovations*
with this Confidence, that if they can possess themselves of the supreme Power,
they ought to be submitted to. 3. To the obstructing unto the oppressed Party
all possible means without a Miracle of recovering his just Right* of which he
shall have been unjustly dispossessed. And, 4. To the bringing in of Atheism,
with the Contempt of God and all Religion, whilst every man by making his own
Persuasion the measure of all his Duties and Actions, makes himself thereby
his own Idol.

Examination of SECT. 4.
IN the former Section the Doctor has laid down Propositions which he asserts
to be plam, and to carry their own Evidence with them; but if that be true, the
rest of his Pamphlet is Supererogation: for what need of lighting Candles to
the Sun, of adding more Evidence to the greatest Evidence that can be, and of
confirming selfevident Truths by such Mediums as are not self-evident. Indeed
the Doctor was conscious that they were not evident, but that there was need of
urging more Arguments to confirm them, and of answering material Objections
against them. He begins first with Arguments from Scripture; and here

He observes, That the* Scripture has given us no directions in this Case, but
to pay all Obedience to the present Powers, and that it makes no distinction
between rightful Kings and Usurpers; but the general Rule is, Let every Soul be
Subject to the higher Powers, for all Power is of God, the Powers that be are
ordained of God; whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation,
Romans 13. 1, 2. To say that the Apostle here speaks of lawful Powers is gratis
dictum, for there is no Evidence of it. Thus ou^ Author.

This Passage of the Apostle has ever since the days of Cromwell been made use
of by all the Advocates of Usurpers, it is the (...)cipal Fort and Bulwark of
their Cause, and if we can wrest it from them, they have no Shelter nor Defense
for their Opinion in Scripture. Before the late Revolution there is not one
Writer of the Church of England, that expounds this passage as requiring
Allegiance to Usurpers; the whole Church in the late age of Usurpations,
thought the higher Powers in the Apostle to be the rightful Powers, who were
then dispossessed, and they acted accordingly in defiance of Consiscations,
Prisons, and Gibb^t^. But the Revolution has turned Men's Heads round, and
together with new Lords and Laws, we have new Reasons and new Resolutions of
Cases, and to support a new Government, new Interpretations of Scripture. The
Doctor himself has expounded otherwise in his Case of Resistance, and in those
Days his Exposition was authentic, and the current Doctrine of the Church. But
now Cases are changed, The Case of Allegiance confounds the Case of Resistance,
and Usurpers whom he once excluded out of the Text, do in their turn exclude
the rightful Powers, and which is more, that which was then thought manifestly
false, is taken now for little less than Demonstration. We will try however to
rescue this Text to the rightful Powers attain, and it will be the more easy
to do if, because we may have the Doctor's Assistance.

It is observed before, that the Doctor's new Exposition does take in all
Powers whatsoever, as well settled as thoroughly settled; and his Reasons are
applicable to both alike. The Scripture has made no distinction between settled
and unsettled Powers, but the general Rule is, that all Power is the Ordinance
of God, unsettled Powers are certainly Powers in being, and to say the Apostle
here speaks of settled Powers ^s gratis dictum, for there is no evidence of i^:
There may be Kings and Rulers who exercise suprime Authority without through
Settlement, yet St. Paul has made no exceptions against them, and the
distinction being unknown in Scripture; if he had intended i^^ he ought to have
said it in express Words, or else no body could have understood him only of
Powers that are thoroughly settled: For then in order to the fulfilling of this
precept, it would be necessary for Subjects to be well (...)lled in Politics,
and to know exactly how much goes to a through Settlement, that they may know
to whom they ought to pay Allegiance; And let any Man judge in what
Perplexities this would involve the Consciences of Men? Besides this, the
reason the Apostle gives for Submission to higher Powers, is not a through
Settlement, but the Authority of God; and to this I add that this distinction,
that only settled Powers are of God, had made the Apostle's direction signify
nothing, for the great Question would still have been undetermined, what Powers
are of God, and what Powers they must obey, if some Powers are of God, and some
not. Thus the Doctor's Arguing does hold for all Usurpers, or for none; but if
notwithstanding all these Reasons, the Rule must be restrained to Powers
thoroughly settled, then it is certain those Reasons are Fallacious, for they
equally conclude against all Restrictions, and a Reason that proves too much,
does prove nothing at all.

But it is absolutely necessary that the Rule be understood with some
Restriction. These Propositions, There is no Power but of God, and the Powers
that be are ordained of God, if they be understood as simply universal, will
comprehend the Power of Robbers, Pirates and Rebels, the Papal Power, the Power
of Antichrist, and the Power of the Devil. It is universally true, that there
is no Power but it is of God, and St. Austin, nay the August. in Ps. 32. Conc.
2.
Scripture it self, declares it to be true even of the Power of the Devil; And
is this a good Reason for being subject to the Devil? Does it bind us to be
subject to the Pope, or Antichrist? Or does it enforce Subjection unto Thieves
and Rebels? The whole scope of the Apostle, the manner of his Expression, and
right Reason, do require that these Powers be excepted out of the Rule; and let
us see now whether there be not* the same necessity for excepting of other
Usurpers.

1. The design of the Apostle, and his manner of Expression do require it. His
design was to enforce Submission as due to the Roman Emperor, the Power then in
being over the Romans: Thus the Doctor himself in his Case of Resistance, P.
107.
At the time of writing this Epistle the supreme Power was in the Roman
Emperors, and therefore when St. Paul commands the Roman Christians to be
subject to the higher Powers, the plain meaning is that they should be subject
to the Roman Emperor: And again, P. 121.
According to the Apostle's Doctrine those Princes who where then in being,
that is, the Roman Emperors, were advanced by God; the Powers that be, i. e.
the Princes and Emperors who now govern the World are now ordained and
appointed by God. Now if the Roman Emperors were lawful Powers, it is plain the
Apostle required Subjection unto lawful Powers, and not unto Usurpers; and the
former general Proposition, There is no Power but of God, must be restrained by
the later, The Powers that be are ordained of God. The later Proposition shows
what Power he speaks of in the former, and restrains it to this Sense, There is
no lawful Power but of God: This Interpretation is natural and agreeable to the
common Rules of Interpreting, and to the common Sense and Reason of Manking; if
the Apostle had lived in the Reign of Charles I. and required the English
Christians to be subject to the King then in being as ordained by God, Would
this have been a good Argument for Subjection to the Rump and Cromwell as the
Ordinance of God? Could the precept which required Allegiance to a lawful King
be of any advantage to an Usurper? And would not such an Interpretation have
appeared unreasonable and unnatural? The Doctor excepts unsettled Powers out of
the Rule, but he can give no other Reason for it, but that the Powers then in
being were thoroughly settled; he must allow then that the same Reason will hold
good for the exception of Usurpers, if the same Powers were lawful.

He saw himself that this Consequence was unavoidable, and therefore to prevent
the Force of it, he denies the Roman Case of Alleg. P. 20.
Emperors to have been lawful Powers; affirms that for many Ages together the
Titles of the Roman Emperors were all of them either stark naught, or the very
best of them very doubtful, and I believe he is the first that ever affirmed
it. What, were their Titles naught, and were they all Usurpers for many Ages
together? What Historian, Lawyer, or good Author, what Demonstration or even
probable Argument can be produce for so incredible an Assertion? But what have
we to do here with the Emperors of many Ages? he knows that either Claudius or
Nero were the higher Powers to whom Subjection is required by the Apostle, and
it was plainly his business to speak to their Titles, if he intended to speak
to the purpose; but he declines this, (for it was impossible to prove them
Usurpers;) he says only in general, (and without proof he says it,) that the
Emperors Titles were either stark naught or very doubtful. And is there no
difference between no Title and a doubtful Title? the Laws of Nature and
Nations, and I believe the Municipal Laws of all Societies do allow Possession
to be a good and lawful Right where the Title is doubtful, and the antecedent
Right cannot be sufficiently proved; if the Titles therefore of the Emperors
were doubtful they were lawful Emperors, and if Allegiance be due to such, it
is no good Consequence that Allegiance is due to Usurpers.

He should have proved that the Emperors were manifest Usurpers of that
Sovereignty which was the Right of others, and he should have proved this
particularly of Claudius and Nero: But the Title of these Emperors was
unquestionable; for, 1. They had no Competitors who claimed a Right to the
Empire, and therefore either there was no better Right, or it was extinguished
by Dereliction. 2. Neither the Senate nor the Roman People had a good Right
against them, for they had not that which they had parted with; that Right
which they had, by their own Acts and Deeds they conveyed upon the Emperors.
The Lex Regia which is mentioned in Dion Cassius and Justinian's Code, and some
Remains whereof are published in Gruter's Inscriptions, is an authentic
evidence of this Translation of their Right. It is very probable that this Law
was renewed at the advancement of every Emperor, and it appears plainly from
the Remains of it, that Augustius, Tiberius, Caius, Claudius, and Vespasian,
had the Imperial Power conferred on them by a written Law, and therefore they
were lawful Emperors. It is certain they had all of them the concurrent
agreement of the Roman Senate and People; Claudius was first set up by the
Soldiers, but the Senate soon consented to his Advancement, and swore Fidelity
to him, and the Roman People, and all the Provinces received him as their
Emperor; and the same universal concurrence there was to the Advancement of
Nero, without any Opposition. Thus the Senate and People by express Law, or by
their Submission and Oaths of Fidelity (which were as evident Declarations of
their Will, as any Law could be) had transferred their Right upon the Emperors,
and therefore had not that which they transferred, and there is no pretense of
Right for any others; and then it is evident those Emperors were Rightful
Princes, because they had a Lawful Right, and because no other Right could be
made good against them.

The Doctor insinuates this Prejudice against their Right, that the consent
Page 23.
of the Senate was extorted by ^ear, or Flattery, or other Acts. But their
Consent however was voluntary and therefore valid against themselves: Consent
extorted by Fear or Flattery is as obligatory a^ that which proceeds from Love,
or ^varice, or Ambition, or any other violent Passion; and if all Contracts in
which Fear or other Passions have a share are ^ill, there is an end of all
Justice and Faith among Manking. But the Consent of the Senate and the People
of Rome to the advancement of the Emperors, may be justified by Reason, and
Necessity, and the public Good; there was no other way to prevent Civil War
and the Dissolution of the Empire. We find in History that this Reason
prevailed upon the wisest of the Romans; and since there are rational Grounds
for their Consent, why should it be ascribed to Fear and Folly, rather than to
Reason or Wisdom. In the consent of a Multitude there may be as many Reasons as
Men; and therefore we must have regard only to their Act of consenting, and not
to their Reasons; otherwise no consent of a Multitude will be valid, for the
Reasons of many of them will be always invalid, and such as may be resolved
into some Passion or other. The Doctor adds, that it is plain Ibid.
the Romans themselves were great Usurpers, and had no other Right to the
greatest part of their Empire, but Conquest and Usurpation. The Romans always
pretended Justice in their Wars, and if their pretense was true, and the Right
of Conquest in a just War be a good one, they had a just Right to their
Acquisitions; they obtained a just Right to many of their Provinces by the
dedition of the former Sovereigns and by express Compacts with them, and by the
extinction of all Competitors. But in short, it may suffice to answer, that
when St. Paul wrote this Epistle to the Romans, they had a Right to their
Provinces by Prescription, and the Law of Nations declares that to be a good
one.

This is all that the Doctor has objected to the Title of the Roman Emperors,
and for any thing he has objected, their Title was just and lawful. He says,
if we Ibid.
must obey such Powers as the Roman Power was, I know very few Powers that we
may not obey; and he had said it to some purpose, if he had proved that Power
to be Usurpation. But I know no Powers that are more lawful, and if we are
required to obey such Powers only, we are under no Obligation to be the
Subjects of Usurpers; if the Powers intended by the Apostle were lawful, then
he required Subjection only to lawful Powers, and to say that he speaks of such
Powers is not gratis dictum. for there is evidence of it; if I were the Doctor,
I should say there is little less than Demonstration for it.

2. That the Rule of the Apostle must be restrained to lawful Powers does seem
evident, as from the Powers then in being, so also from the Nature of the Duty,
and the Apostle's manner of expressing it. Subjection or Non-Resistance is the
Duty required; but Scripture it self and the Law of Nations do allow Resistance
of Usurpers; and therefore this Rule of Scripture ought not so to be
interpreted as to prohibit that which is allowed by Scripture and by the
Consent of Nations, especially when it may be interpreted in a Sense agreeable
to them: Who can doubt but that the Recuperative Wars of the Israelites against
the Nations that usurped upon them, recorded in the Book of Judges, that the
Resistance of Absalom by Joab, and other Loyal Subjects, and the Deposition of
Athaliah after a Settlement of six Years Possession, are approved in Scripture?
Does Christianity any where forbid such Recuperative Wars? Have not all Nations
ever allowed and practiced them? And are not they allowed by all Divines and
Christians, excepting Quakers, Anabaptists and Socinians? But if such Wars for
the recovery of usurped Dominion are lawful; it evidently follows, that
Usurpers may be lawfully resisted, and therefore they are not such Powers as
are declared by the Apostle to be God's Ordinance, and unresistible. Nothing
can be objected to this Argument, but that a Recuperative War may be lawful to
the dispossessed Sovereign, and yet unlawful to the Subjects; and this indeed
is Case of Alleg. P. 26.
asserted by the Doctor. But here it shall suffice to reply in short, that if
an Usurper be God's Ordinance and Minister, he has a Divine Right to the
Throne, and therefore a Recuperative War against him is a War against God; it
cannot be lawful to dispossess any one of a Power for which he has God's
Authority, no Truth and Principle can be more evident than this, and so the
Result must be, either that the Usurper is not God's Ordinance, or that a War
to dispossess him is absolutely unlawful; if the Doctor choose the former, he
overthrows his Book, if he choose the latter, he contradicts Scripture, the
Law, and Practice of all Nations, the Judgment of all Lawyers, and almost all
Divines, and asserts a Proposition of which the L. Considerations touching a
War with Spain
Bacon has said, That no Man is so poor of Judgment as to affirm it.

3. It should be considered that an Usurper is (...), one that resists,
opposes, and fights against Authority; he is so, much more than a Rebel; for
his Opposition is greater, and his Usurpation is only prosperous Resistance;
all the Iniquity of Resistance does lie in the Usurpation of that Power which
by divine Ordinance is invested in another; for when Resisters have a lawful
Right to the Power of the Sword, there is no Iniquity in their Resistance, and
they are not within the Apostles Prohibition; that which makes them liable to
Damnation is the usurping the Power of the Sword, and using it against those
who have a divine Commission for the Exercise of it: There can be no Resistance
without Usurpation, and therefore Usurpers must be condemned by the Apostle as
well as the Resisters, and if the Resister in the Apostle does comprehend the
Usurper, it is impossible he should be God's Ordinance, and have a Right to
Subjection by virtue of his Authority.

To this it will be objected, that the (...) is he who resists a Sovereign in
Possession, that such a Resister usurps the Power of the Sword, and is liable
to Damnation; but if by a prosperous Resistance he gets Possession of Sovereign
Power, he cease to be an Usurper, and has God's Authority; and the former
Power is no longer the Ordinance of God, but is deposed by him. The force of
this Objection consists in these two Propositions: 1. That Subjection is due to
all Possessours of Sovereignty. 2. That a lawful Sovereign ceases to be God's
Ordinance, when he is dispossessed. But neither of these Propositions are
affirmed by the Apostle; he says not that every Sovereign in Possession is
God's Ordinance, but (...), there is now no Power over us, but of God, and
(...), the Powers now in being are ordained of God. It is very obvious that
these Propositions are limited to the Powers then in being, and the former
Propositions included in the Objection are universal, and every one that has
but natural Logic, does know that Universals are not comprehended in
particulars. As to the 2d Preposition, the Aposile has given us no intimation
how a Sovereign that is God's Ordinance can cease to b^ so, ^or has he taught
us, that when he is wickedly deposed by damned Resisters, he is deposed by
God's Authority also. This Doctrine is neither taught by the Apostle, nor by
any of the inspired Writers. The whole Scripture is a perfect Stranger to these
two Propositions, and the great Writers for Usurpation cannot produce any Text
of Scripture, which contains them either expressly, or virtually. To except the
Usurpers of Sovereignty out of the number of Resisters, is therefore a
precarious Exception, that has no Foundation in the 13th of the Romans, nor in
any Chapter of the Bible.

4. Let us then suppose that Reason is the sole Judge of this Controversy,
Whether a Sovereign dispossessed is no longer God's Ordinance? And whether a
prosperous Resister, who has usurped the Sovereignty, is ordained by God, and
has his Authority to govern? These are not Propositions that carry their own
Evidence, and from what Topics shall we deduce them? From the politic Good
and the Preservation of humane Society? But this Proof will be as doubtful at
least as the Propositions to be proved; not only because it is a great
Question, whether the public Good can set up Kings and depose them; but also
because it will seem evident to many, that the Encouragement of Resistance and
Usurpation by conveying divine Authority upon every prosperous Resister, and
the unavoidable consequence of frequent Wars, the greatest Evil to Society,
which will often end in Anarchy, and the Dissolution of Society, are the things
which are most destructive to the public Good, and the Preservation of Society.

Are those Propositions then to be deduced from the Topic of Providence? We
all acknowledge that the World is governed by Providence; but this can be no
Proof, that whoever gains any thing by any concurrence of Providence has God's
Authority to keep it: If it were, these two Consequences would be inevitable,
1. That God does authorize all the Injustice, and all the Wickedness in the
World, for no Man can commit Wickedness without some concurrence of God's
Providence, and if that be a proof of his Authority, then it necessarily
follows, that God does authorize it. 2. That there is no such thing as the
Obligation of Justice; for i^ there be, no doubt it binds us to render to every
Man his due; but if it is impossible to get the Possession of any thing without
God's Providence, and that is always a Conveyance of his Authority; then he who
has the Possession of another's Property, has acquired a Divine Right to it,
and there can be no Obligation upon him to restore it. And in short, nothing
can be due to a Man, which he has not in his Possession; and therefore since
suum ouiqu^ cribuere is the only Office of Justice, and that Office is
impracticable, it follows, that Justice is only an empty Word, that has no
significancy in it. These are the desperate consequences of that Doctrine which
overturn at once the very Foundations of all Religion, civil Society, and
Morality; and therefore we are as sure that it is false, as that God is holy,
that Justice is a Duty, or that Wrong is not Right, nor Vice Virtue.

Providential concurrence thereof to the gaining of any Possession, is in its
self no Proof of the conveyance of divine Authority, it neither deprives the
former Possessor of his Right, nor transfers it to the new one; this is
undeniable in the Case of private Property, and there is equal Reason to allow
it in the Case of Sovereignty. Private Property and Sovereignty are different
Things indeed, but the notion of Right applied to both is the same, and the
concurrence of Providence to the acquiring of both the same; and therefore if
Providence extinguishes not the Right to one, neither does it so to the other;
if it gives not a divine Right to Robbers, neither does it to Usurpers: Since
the influence and cooperation of Providence is the same in bringing any one to
the unjust Possession of a Purse, a House, a City, and a Kingdom; and it is
impossible for Reason to observe any difference as to the conveyance of Power,
(though there be a difference in the extension of Power proportionably to the
Usurpation,) it necessarily follows, that from the precise Consideration of
Providence, Reason cannot possibly distinguish between God's Ordinance and
Permission, his conveying Authority upon an Usurper and not upon a Robber, his
establishing the Possession of a Throne by divine Donation, when he gives no
Establishment to the Possession of a Robber.

But on the contrary, Reason seems to assure us, That God's Providence does
never give Authority to Injustice; that Robbery is not God's Ordinance; that
great Robbers are no more authorized by him than little Robbers; that as
Stealing of it self introduces no Right, so neither does Rebelling no^
Usurping; that Prosperity in Wickedness is no Proof of a divine Commission;
lastly, that if resisting God's Ordinance be unlawful, it is unlawful to carry
on and continue that Resistance, it is unlawful to resist a King so far as to
depose him, and to usurp his Throne; and if it be unlawful to resist and to
usurp, it is unlawful to continue the Usurpation by keeping Possession against
the rightful Sovereign; for that is only a continuation of his Injustices which
increases his Crime; and if it be unlawful to resist a lawful Prince, to depose
him, to usurp his Throne, and to continue the Usurpation; it seems evident
beyond all Contradiction, that an Usurper while he is such, is never
established by God's Authority; for that is never granted to unlawful Acts or
Possessions. In short, If it be unjust to usurp, the Usurper is bound to
Repentance and Restitution; he who has unjustly invaded another's Right, is
bound in Justice to restore it: And if the Usurper is bound to restore the
Power he has usurped, he cannot have a divine Right to that which he is bound
to restore to another, and consequently cannot have the Establishment of divine
Authority. This to me is the voice of Reason; and if Reason is so far from
proving that an Usurper is God's Ordinance, that it proves the contrary; if
that Proposition is not to be found in the 13th of the Romans nor in any part of
the Bible; if an Usurper be properly a Resister of God's Ordinance; if the
Examples in Scripture, and the Law of Nations do prove it lawful to resist him;
and finally, if the Powers to whom the Apostle requires Subjection were lawful
Powers, than it is evident that the Rule of the Apostle must be understood of
lawful Powers, and that there is as much evidence for excepting of Usurpers, as
there is for excepting Thieves or Rebels. Thus there is Reason to except
Usurpers out of the Rule; and this will appear more reasonable when we have
examined the Doctor's Arguments against it.

1. He objects that the Criticism Page 19.
between (...) and (...) will not do, because they signify the same thing in
scripture either Force and Powers or Authority. But he has produced no Instance
to show that (...) when it denotes Civil Authority, does signify Possession of
Power without Right; he knows the Word is derived from (...), licet, and
therefore properly it must signify only Phavorinus thus explains the Word,
(...). It is a Legal Commission, a Power invested with Authority by a grant
from God.
Lawful Power: (...) is far from being spoken concerning Civil Authority, and
when the same Apostle declares that our Savior was exalted (...), not only in
this World, but also in that which is to come; I hope he spoke not of Usurped
Powers, unless there are such also among the Angels in Heaven. Every one knows
that Force and Authority are two different things; and if (...) be applied to
signify Force, and (...) Authority, the Propriety of the Words will bear it*
but we depend not upon that Distinction to exclude Usurpers; though it is
manifest that (...) in Scripture must be sometimes necessarily understood to
signify only Lawful Power, as Matthew. 21. 23. and I have shown there is a
necessity of understanding it to in the 13th of the Romans.

2. But the Doctor observes, that (...), those who exercise Authority, and the
(...), the Rulers, ve^. 3^ the Ministers of God which bear the Su^rd, ver. 4.
in St. Peter, the (...) and (...), the King and Governors; and thence he
infers that (...) does evidently relate to the exercise of Civil Authority, not
to a legal Right. I think it relates to the rightful exercise of Authority; God
gives Authority and Power that it may be exercised, but if wicked Men obstruct
the exercise of it, the Gift is not forfeited, though the End is accidentally
defeated. In a Rebellion, which is the Parent of Anarchy, the Sovereign cannot
exercise his Authority; But does he then cease to be th(...) (...) which is
God's Ordinance? Or ar^^ the Rebels then Licensed to resist him? The same is
the case of Usurpation; the Usurper obstructs the exercise of God's Authority,
and his own Wickedness can give him no Right to continue it. The exercise of
God's Authority is often hindered by the Wickedness of Men; as for instance, his
Authority in a Father when his Children are Rebellious, in a Husband when his
Wife, in a Master when his Servants are Disobedient, and in a Bishop, or
Pastor, in the Cases of Schism, Usurpation, and Persecution; and yet still the
one remain^ a Father, the other a Husband, the other a Master, and the other a
Bishop, though those are names which relate to the exercise of Authority, as
well as Rulers, Kings, and Governors.

3. He insists much upon the Ibid.
silence of Scripture, as to the distinction between rightful Kings and
Usurpers; he affirms there is no such distinction to be found any where in
Scripture, and thence he argues, That if St. Paul had intended any such
distinction, he ought to have said it in express Words, or else no body could
have reasonably understood him to intend this precept of Subjection only to
legal Powers. To this Objection the Doctor himself has given a sufficient
Answer. What he has observed of our Savlour in his Case of Resistance, is as
true of his Apostle; We have no Case of Resist. p. 43, 44.
Reason to suspect that Christ would alter the Rights of Sovereignty -- This
was no part of his Commission to change the external Forms and Polities of
Civil Governments. -- He who would not undertake to divide an Inheritance
between two contending Brethren; Luke 12. 13, 14. Can we think he would attempt
any thing of that vast Consequence, as the alterations of Civil Power, which
would have unsettled the Foundamental Constitutions of all the Governments of
the World? Again, What Rights Ibid. p. 55, 56.
he found Sovereign Princes possessed of, he leaves them in the quiet
Possession of; for had he intended to make any change in this Matter, he would
not have given such a general Rule, to render to Caesar the Things which are
Caesar' s, without specifying what those Things are. And therefore he leaves
them to the known Laws of the Empire to determine what is Caesar' s Right;
whatever is essential to the notion of Sovereign Power, whatever the Laws and
Customs of Nations determine to be Caesar' s Right, that they must render to
him, for he would make no alteration in this Matter. Now, say I, if our
Savior, or his Apostles, had enjoined Subjects to adhere to Usurpers against
their legal Sovereigns, They had altered the Rights of Soveverignty, and
unsettled the Fundamental Constitutions of all Governments: But on the
contrary, they leave all Princes in the Possession of their Rights, they have
given (...) this general Rule, that we should render them their dues; and what
those are, they have left to the Laws of Nations to determine, and whatever the
Laws and Customs of Nations determine to be a Prince's Right, that the Subjects
must render to him, for the Gospel has made no alteration in this Matter. And
if this be good Reasoning, then the point is, whether Allegiance were due to
Usurpers before the Gospel, for if it were not, the Gospel has made no
alteration in this Matter; nor made that to be a due, which before was none:
But the Examples of Scripture, the Law and Consent of Nations, which have
always allowed the Resistance of Usurpers, do put that out of Question; and
therefore supposing the Gospel has given us no distinction between rightful
Princes and Usurpers, that silence can be no Argument against it; for the
Gospel has left the Rights of Princes as it found them, it requires Subjects to
render them those Rights, and if by the Laws of Nations Allegiance is the right
of lawful Princes, it is their Right also by the Gospel.

Where may we find in Scripture any Distinction between a true and a false
Father, a lawful Husband or Master, and such as usurp those Characters? Yet
Subjection is required to Fathers, Husbands, and Masters, as well as to
Sovereign Princes: but there was no need that the Scriptures should declare,
that it was due only to real Fathers, and to lawful Husbands and Masters; or
that it should give Rules to distinguish them from the Usurpers of those
Authorities; common sense is sufficient to inform us, that such a Distinction
is necessary to be made, and in ordinary cases it is easy to distinguish them.
The Scripture requires Obedience to Parents, but tells us not who they are, nor
distinguishes real Parents from pretended, and yet no one thinks that final
Obedience is due to the Usurpers of that Authority. Suppose it to be in the
Case of Subjection to Civil Powers, the Scripture requires it, but
distinguishes not between lawful Powers and Usurpers, Must we therefore
conclude, that it requires Subjection to Usurpers? And why may we not conclude
alike for the Usurpers of paternal Authority? Is it because Sense and Reason do
agree that Usurpers must be distinguished in the one Case, but not in the
other? But Reason tells me plainly, that Obedience is not due to the Usurpers
of Civil Power; for he who has no Right to Power, has no Right to Obedience.
The Foundations of Paternal and Civil Authority may be different, but in both
the Duty of Obedience must be founded on a Right to Obedience: nothing can be
due to him who has no Right; as an Usurper of paternal Power has no Right, so
neither has the Usurper of Civil Power; he has neither a legal nor natural
Right; and as for the Right of Providence, both the Usurpers may lay an equal
Claim to it, for they are both advanced by the same way of Providence. There is
no more Reason therefore to pay Obedience to a Civil Usurper, than to the
Usurpers of the Power of Fathers, Husbands, or Masters, and where there is a
plain necessity of making a distinction, the silence of Scripture is no
Argument against it.

There is no express Distinction in Scripture between the legal and illegal
Possessor of an Estate, there are only general prohibitions of Injury and
Injustice, and general Precepts of rendering every Man his Due, but what Estates
or Properties are due to every Man, is left to the Civil Laws of Nations to
determine; and yet the Silence of Scripture in these points, is no Argument
against the Distinction of Right in private Possessions, and how can it hold
good against the same Distinction in respect of Sovereignty? There is the like
Reason and Necessity for admitting it in the one case, as there is in the
other; if there be any difference, it is on the side of Sovereignty, which is
the preserver of private Property, and of much greater Importance; and
therefore in reason ought to be better secured, and the right to it be more
inviolable; however if there be no distinction in Scripture about the Rights of
Sovereignty, so neither about the Rights of Property; and therefore the Silence
of Scripture is of itself no Argument against it.

Let us suppose the Throne to be vacant, and two Competitours claiming it, and
claiming a Right to our Allegiance, how shall the Conscience of the Subject be
directed in this Dispute? Here the Scripture is perfectly silent, and gives him
no particular Directions; but the Laws of the Land, and the Oath of Allegiance
will direct him to pay his Allegiance to the true and lawful Heir, if he knows
him; and the Doctor acknowledges, Case of Alleg. p. 52.
that the Laws of the Land are the Rule of Conscience, when they do not
contradict the Laws of God. And he acknowledges also, that in such a Case we
are bound to oppose the illegal, and to assist the lawful Title; thus far the
Laws of the Land are the Rule of Conscience, though the Scripture makes no
distinction between a lawful and unlawful Heir. But suppose farther, that the
false pretender does actually usurp the Throne, and the lawful Heir does still
demand our Allegiance: Here again we suppose the Scripture to be silent, and
that there is no distinction in it between rightful Princes and Usurpers, and
then it is evident, we can have no other direction but the Law of the Land, and
if the Law determines our Allegiance to the rightful Heir, we are certainly
bound to obey the Law, because it contradicts not the Laws of God.

But the Doctor will not allow, that the Scripture is perfectly silent in this
matther; for he objects, That the Apostle generally affirms, that all Vindicat.
p. 57.
Power is of God; and therefore if he had not intended that we should
understand this as universally as he expresses it, he should have limited it to
legal and rightful Powers. This I have answered already; there is no necessity
of understanding the Apostle's words universally, of all the Powers that ever
were, are, or shall be in the World; it is very probable he spoke only of the
Powers then in being, viz. the Roman Emperors; the Words will fairly allow
that Construction, and it is impossible to confute it: And therefore since
there is no necessity of understanding the words so universally, as to take in
all Usurpers, it is evident, That Text is no sufficient Rule to direct us in
that Difficulty; and if there is no plainer Direction in the Bible, we are left
only to politic Laws; and if these direct us to pay Allegiance to the lawful
Prince, they are a Rule to us, and we must regulate our Actions by them.

In short, the Scripture directs us to render to Sovereign Powers their due,
and not to resist them, as it directs us to pay Obedience to Parents, Masters,
and all that have Authority over us: But which are the higher Powers, and who
are our Parents or Masters, or are invested with any Authority over us, the
Scripture does not determine; but when there i^ any Competition, we are left to
Moral Evidence, to Political Laws, and to the Laws of Nature and Nations to
direct us; and it is no imperfection in Scripture, if it does not determine
such Controversies, if it supposes us rational Creatures, and embodied in Civil
Societies, and under the Direction of Laws sufficient to determine them.

4. The Doctor urges, That if the Apostle had intended Case of Alleg. p. 19.
such a Distinction between rightful Princes and Vsupers, to the fulfilling of
his Precept, it would be necessary for Subjects to examine the Titles of
Princes, and to that end to be well skilled in the History and Laws of Nations,
and to be able to judge between a pretended and real Right, and to know exactly
what gives a real Right: But th^se are great Disputes among learned Men, and
how should unlearned Men understand them? And I cannot think that the
Resolutions of Conscience in such Matters at all Mankind are concerned in,
should depend on such Niceties as learned Men cannot agree in.

The Force of this Objection, as far as I can apprehend it, is this: That
learned Men who are skilled in Law and History do often differ in their
Opinions of a legal Right, and it cannot then be supposed that unlearned Men,
who are the greatest part of Mankind, should be able to judge of it; and
therefore it cannot be a Rule to them. But is not this Objection as strong
against the Law of God, as against the Laws of Nations? If nothing can be a
sufficient Rule to the unlearned, which the unlearned cannot agree in, Does it
not plainly follow, that the Scripture cannot be a Rule of Faith to the
unlearned, (who are the greatest part of Mankind,) because the most learned do
differ in interpreting it? Is not this to say, (they are his own words,) that
nothing can be clear in Scripture which is matter of Vindicat. p. 48.
Controversy, and thus we m^st be either Scepticks in Religion, or seek an
insallible Interpreter? Thus Heretics oppose the Ar^^^^es of Faith; thus
Papists Dispute against the Scripture's being the Rule of Faith* and yet I
think it would be unjust and uncharitable to insinuate, (as he does against his
Adversary,) that the Doctor has an Inclination to Rome, because his Argument
looks kindly toward it.

But the Doctor easily eludes this Consequence, I grant indeed that the
Resolution Ibid. 49.
of Conscience ought not to depend on such Niceties of Law and History as
learned Men cannot agree about, and that is a Reason why legal Rights should
not be the Rule of our Obedience to Princes; but is this a Reason to reject the
Directions of Scripture too, because some Men will dispute the plainest Texts?
Well, but are not Law and History in many things as plain as the plainest Texts
in Scripture? And if those can be no Rule of Conscience because learned men do
raise Disputes about them, does it not follow, that the plainest Texts of
Scripture can be no Rule of Faith, if the learned raise a Controversy about
them; if nothing can be a sufficient Rule which has been disputed by the
learned, neither Law, nor History, nor Scripture, nor even Sense or Reason are
sufficient Rules: for inextricable Difficulties have been raised about them by
perverse Disputers. He will say, that legal Right depends on the Niceties of
Law and History, but Articles of Faith upon plain and evident Texts of
Scripture; and yet even those evident Texts are many of them perplexed by the
Niceties of Criticism, and the subtle Interpretations of Heretics. The
Scripture evidently teaches the Divinity of Christ; but the Doctor knows, (and
no Man better) that the Socinians who deny it, do elude the plainest Texts, and
by their Skill in Criticism do wrangle them into Niceties. A Rule then may be
plain and sufficient, though learned men do pretend it is difficult and
obscure, and say it depends on Niceties, and the Question then is, Whether
humane Laws may be a plain Rule to determine the Rights and Titles of Princes;
for it is certain the Rule may be plain in its self, though learned Men may
make a Nicety of it.

But nothing can be a more palpable Absurdity, than to say that Law cannot be a
plain Rule of Right, for that is to say, that the Law giver cannot plainly
declare his Will, and that no Controversy about Right can be determined by
Laws; and if the Law may be a plain Rule to determine the Rights of Subjects,
may it not be a^ plain about the Rights of Princes? Have not our Laws plainly
declared the King to be irresistible? Do they not plainly invest him with the
whole Power of the Militia? I know that learned Men do not agree in these
Points, but I think the Doctor will grant that the Law is clear about them. And
in the nature of the Thing there is no Reason, but it may be as clear about the
Right and Title to the Crown; for may it not be plainly declared by Law, that
the Crown shall descend by Hereditary Succession, and that he who invades the
Crown without this Right is an Usurper, and has no Legal Right to Allegiance?
this we believe to be our Law, and we believe it to be a plain and sufficient
Rule to the Subjects: But when we say that the Law is plain, we do not deny but
learned Men may have another Opinion of it, we intend that the Law is plain in
it self, and may be made plain to Men of common Understanding, who will take
the pains to inform their Judgment, and judge without Byas^ and Interest. The
very design of Law is, that it should be a plain Rule of Right and Practice,
and it is a Rule to the common People as well as to the Lawyers; it is presumed
they may understand it, if they will, and the ignorance of Law is always
presumed to be affected, and to be culpable as well as the Transgression of it.
To say therefore, that the Law cannot be a plain Rule to the unlearned who are
bound to obey it, is a plain Contradiction to the very nature and end of the
Law, and is to charge it downright with Folly and Barbarity.

There are many Difficulties in Law, as there are in Religion, and in both the
unlearned must consult the learned, the Lawyers and Divines; but they must
judge also for themselves, and judge rightly at their peril; if a Lawyer, or a
Judge, advise a Man to commit Treason, and tell him it is lawful, the Law will
nevertheless cond^mn him as a Traitor. The Law no doubt requires our Allegiance
to the legal King; but he who should pay his Allegiance to another King, though
he should think him to be the legal King, his Mistake would be no good Plea in
Law against an Indictment for Treason; the reason is, because the Law is
supposed to be sufficiently promulg'd to all, and therefore the ignorance of it
is inexcusable. In short I demand, was not the Law of the Land sufficient to
inform all Men, that K. James the First had a legal Right to the Crown, and
that Charles the First and the Second, had it successively after him; was there
any honest understanding Man in England who ever doubted of their Right, and
that when the two last were actually excluded from the Possession of it? Nay,
was the Right of K. James the Second, either unknown, or uncertain to any of
that Character? I think the Doctor will confess that the legal Right of these
Princes was among all honest Men certain and unquestionable; and thence it
evidently follows, that the Law of the Land may be a clear Rule of the Prince's
Right and the Subjects Obedience, and if the Law may sufficiently direct us how
to distinguish between Rightful Princes and Usurpers, there is no need of any
other Direction.

But though the Law be in it self a sufficient Rule as far as the intention of
it reaches, yet Controversies may also arise, a^ in other things, so in the
Right to the Crown, of which there could be no foresight, and therefore no
Provision about them; and further, it sometimes happens, that when the Law is
clear, the due application of it is doubtful and difficult, the matter of Fact
being disputed, when the Rule of Right is uncontested. Thus in those Kingdoms
where there is a known and uncontroverted Rule of Succession, yet there are
sometimes Controversies about the matters of Fact which are necessary to the
application of it; as for instance in Hereditary Kingdoms, who is the right
Heir; in Elective, who is duly elected. When such (...)ases happen as are
beyond the Provision of Law, and for which there could b(...)o Provision, as in
the Disputes of Fact, if there be no Legislative Authority to determine them, (
Puffendorf de Ju. Not. and Genesis lib. 7. c. 7. s. 15.
as it is thought there can be none in the Disputes about the right to
Succession,) there is no other way but for every Man to judge for himself, to
examine the Competitors Evidence for their Claim and Title, to judge
impartially, and to act accordingly. But it follows not hence, that Law is an
insufficient Rule, because it prevents not, or decides not all Controversies
about Right; for neither can Scripture, which we acknowledge to be a sufficient
Rule in Religion, decide all Controversies that relate unto it; for instance,
it requires Christians to obey them that have the Rule over them, not every one
surely that intrudes himself into the Office of a Ruler, but only those that
are lawfully called to it; but who those are the Scripture does not determine,
that is a dispute concerning matter of Fact, and must be decided by such
Evidence as can be had concerning it.

But when the matter of Right and matter of Fact is clear, (as ordinarily they
are in the Rights of Sovereigns to their Crowns) then there is a plain
Direction for the Allegiance of Subjects: But in cases extraordinary, when
Right and Fact are doubtful, and there is no such Evidence concerning them as
may direct honest and understanding Men to the right Object of their
Allegiance, in such Cases it is agreed, That if either of the Competitors be in
Possession, the Subjects must pay their Allegiance to the Possessor, for the
Laws of Nature and Nations, declare Possession to be a just Right when there is
not a better, and Allegiance certainly is due where there is a just and lawful
Right to it. And thus the unavoidable Defects of Political Constitutions are
supplied by such Rules, as are founded on the Law of Nature and the Consent of
Nations; and therefore if the Scripture has only required Obedience to the
higher Powers in general, and has left us to the direction of other Laws, to
determine which those Powers are to whom our Obedience is due; we are not left
to Niceties and Uncertainties, but have as clear and plain direction as the
nature of the Thing will admit, and reasonable Men will expect no more.

5. Farther it is objected, That Case of Alleg. p. 20.
the Reason the Apostle gives for Submission to the higher Powers is not a
legal Right, but the Authority of God; that all Power (or every one who
exercises the supreme Power) is of God, and the Ordinance of God, which seems
plainly intended to wave the Dispute about the legality of the Powers. But, 1.
This Objection does conclude as strongly against his own Principle as against
his Adversaries; he requires Allegience not to every one who exercises the
supreme Power, so did Oliver; but to a Possessor thoroughly settled by the
general Consent of the People: But the Reason the Apostle gives for Subjection
to the higher Powers, is not a through Settlement or the Consent of the People,
but the Authority of God; that every one who exercises supreme Power is the
Ordinance of God, which seems plainly to wave all Disputes about Settlement and
Consent. He can make no reply which will not serve his Adversaries; if he says
that Settlement and Consent are not the formal Reason of Allegiance, but only
the Signs of God's Authority to which it is immediately due; we say the same
for our Principle; we confess that the Duty of Allegiance must be ultimately
resolved into God's Authority; we only affirm that a lawful Right is a Sign of
that Authority; we maintain that Allegiance is due to God's Authority, and thus
far we are agreed; But how shall we know when a Prince is invested with this
Authority? When he is settled, says the Doctor; when he has a lawful Right,
say others; and here lies the difference between us: If the Apostle had
required Subjection to all Possessors for the sake of Possession, there could
have been no Dispute about the legality of Powers; but since the Apostle's
Reason of Subjection is not Possession, but the Ordinance of God, and he does
not say that every one who is in Possession is ordained by God, (for every one
who exercises the supreme Power is the Doctor's saying, and not the Apostle's,)
it remains a Question what Powers in the meaning of the Apostle are ordained by
God, whether lawful only, or also unlawful Powers; and if he means lawful only,
the Dispute about Legality is unavoidable.

The Doctor in the Vindication Vind. p. 56.
of his Arguments from Romans 13. demands, How God does invest any Prince with
his Authority, whom he does not immediately nominate? To this he Answers
himself, and confutes himself, but my Answer is, That God annexes his Authority
to those Princes who have a lawful Right to govern, or to execute the Regal
Office. And what says the Doctor? If God's Authority be annexed to the Regal
Office, a Prince must be in the actual Administration of the Regal Office,
before he can have God's Authority; as a Man must be actually Married before he
can have the Authority which the Divine Laws give to a Husband. By Regal Office
either he means the Duty in the Abstract, and whoever said that God's Authority
was annexed to the Duty; or he must mean a Right to execute it, or the actual
Execution of it; if he means the former, he asserts a manifest Absurdity, That
he who has a Right to an Office must be in the actual Administration of it; if
the later, he only asserts. That a Prince who actually administers the Regal
Power must be in the actual Administration of it; and thus this show of
Argument is nothing but an Amusement, and so is the similitude of an Husband;
for the Relation of a Husband is subsequent to Marriage, and no Man can have
the Authority of a Husband before he is a Husband: But the Relation of a King
is not founded upon Possession, but upon a Right to govern, which implies a
Right to Obedience, and we acknowledge that a King must actually have that
Right, before he can have God's Authority; but this very instance of a Husband
is a convincing Proof, that God's Authority may be given to those that cannot
exercise it, for that is the condition of many Husbands.

He urges farther, That to call Ibid.
a Right to the Crown the Authority of Government, is contrary to the Sense of
Mankind, when they speak of Sovereign Princes: For he has actual Authority, who
actually administers the Government, and it is actual Authority which is God's
Authority, not Authority in Fancy and Idea, for God does not give Authority to
govern without the Power of Government, which is a very fruitless and
insignificant Authority. The Reply is very obvious; a Right to the Crown is a
Right to govern, and that implies Authority to govern; and a Prince may have
actually this Authority, and yet not actually administer it: And this is so far
from being contrary to the Sense of Mankind, that nothing is more consonant to
it; for all Men know that there may be Power without Authority, and Authority
without Power, and there is no Man in his Wits but can easily distinguish them;
and this is not an Authority which subsists only in Fancy, for it has a moral
Efficacy and obliges to Obedience, and it might as well be said that all Duty,
Law and Right, are nothing but Fancy and Idea; but to say that God never gives
Authority to govern without the Power of Government, is an Assertion manifestly
false; Have not Parents, Masters, and Husbands, Authority from God to govern,
when they cannot govern those that are ungovernable? Had not David God's
Authority to govern when Absalom forced him to be Abdicated? Had not Charles I.
Authority to govern the Parliament, and the Regicides? And have not all Princes
the same Authority over their Rebellious Subjects? But God's Authority without
Power is fruitless and insignificant; that, I think, is no fault of God, or his
Authority; the Grace of God is fruitless, much more than his Authority, and his
Authority in Parents, Husbands, and Church Governors, is too often as
insignificant as his Authority in Princes; but woe to them who render God's
Authority insignificant, For their Damnation slumbereth not. And this may
suffice to his Objection about God's Authority. But he endeavors farther to
support it by observing,

6. That the Pharisees made this Objection against Submission Case of Al. p. 20.
to the Roman Powers, that they were bound by the Law of God not to submit to
them, as being unjust Usurpations upon the Privileges and Liberties of God's
People; and therefore the Apostle tells them, that all Powers are of God, and
the Powers that be are ordained of God. Let it be granted now that some such
Objection was made by the Pharisees; How does it appear that the Apostle
intended to oppose or answer it? Was that Opinion maintained by any of that
Sect after they were converted to Christianity, or by any of the Roman
Converts, or by any of the Christians at all? That the Doctor will not affirm,
and if he does it, it is impossible to prove it. And why should we then imagine
that the Apostle designed to confute an Error, which appears not to have been
maintained by any that he wrote to, which he never mentions in his Writings,
and of which he has not given any intimation.

However the Doctor doubts not but St. Paul knew that the Vind. p. 57.
Pharisees made this Objection, and for that very Reason he affirms that all
Power is of God, and that they must be subject to the higher Powers without any
distinction; which he would not have done, if any distinction ought to have
been made, when he knew the Dispute was about the Romans, whom they looked upon
as Usurpers over them. Well, but if St. Paul had that Objection in his view,
Can we imagine he would not have expressed it, nor have given the least hint of
it? If that was the Reason, for which he affirmed that there is no Power but of
God, one would wonder why he should not express it, and why he did not directly
determine that Controversy, by condemning the Distinction. And besides his
Words can never be proved to affirm any more, than that the (...), the Powers
at that time in being, were ordained by God, and this was sufficient to confute
those Pharisees who taught the contrary; and therefore allowing that the
Apostle intended to confute them, there is no reason to extend his Words beyond
their scope and intention, which we suppose was to condemn the Pharisees, who
pretended the Roman Powers were Usurpers, and in opposition to them it was
enough to affirm that they were God's Ordinance, and therefore Subjection was
due to them.

But after all, This Reasoning from the Apostle's design to condemn the
Pharisees has no certainty in it. That the Apostle had that Aim is affirmed by
no ancient Writer or Expositor. St. Chrysostom affirms that the Apostle's
Design was not to show that Christianity did not tend to overthrow civil
Polity, but rather to establish it better; Theophylact, that the Gospel did not
teach Men Disobedience and Rebellion, but Quietness and Obedience; and this is
the common Sense of modern Expositors, that the Apostle here intended to
vindicate Christianity from the Imputation of Disloyalty and Rebellion with
which it was reproached by the Jews and Gentiles. Calvin observes, that there
are always tumultuous Spirits in the Church, who think the Kingdom of Christ
cannot be advanced, unless all earthly Powers be abolished; but the Jews above
all others thought it an Indignity that the Seed of Abraham, who were a
flourishing Kingdom before the coming of their Redeemer, should after his
Manifestation continue still in Servitude: And not the Jews only, but also the
Gentiles thought it absurd to ackgowledge those for their lawful Governors who
did cruelly persecute them, and endeavor to destroy the Kingdom of Christ:
This last Objection is mentioned by Origin as aimed at by the Apostle; and for
these Causes, says Calvin, it is probable he was induced to give so strict a
Charge of Subjection to Governors. Thus it appears that Expositors have
Foundations, Designs, and Occasions for this Precept of Subjection: But as for
the pretended Objection of the Pharisees, it is at best but guessing, and no
Argument can be deduced from it.

7. Farther he urges, that Cas^ of A^. p. 20
There is no Reason to confine the Words of the Apostle unto legal Powers,
unless it were evidently the Doctrine of Scripture, that usurped Powers are not
of God, which is so far from being true, that the contrary is evident, that the
most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will,
Dan. 4. 17. He ci^es also to this Purpose Dan. 2. 21, 37. It is he that
changes Times, that removes Kings, and sets up Kings; therefore all
usurped Powers are of God, that is the conclusion; and in some sense I grant it
to be true, and to be rightly inferred from those Testimonies of Scripture. We
acknowledge that God sets up Usurpers, and gives them a Kingdom, Power, and
Strength, and Glory; but he gives and sets them up as he sets up Robbers,
Murderers, and Rebels, by granting them Power and Strength, and permitting, or
not hindering them from the Abuse or wicked Exercise of it. In short, when
Providence sets up Usurpers, it is not by the conveyance of Authority, but
only by giving them power and liberty to abuse it; the Power whereby they are
enabled to subdue their Opposers is from God, but the Abuse of it, to remove a
rightful Prince, and to usurp his Throne, is merely from themselves, and is no
otherwise from God than are all other Acts of Usurpation and Injustice. There
are two ways then whereby God removes and sets up Kings, and gives the Kingdom
of Men to whomsoever he pleases; by the Permission of Power, and the Conveyance
of Authority; he permits a Prince the Possession of a Throne, when it is unjust
and unlawful for him to possess and keep it, and he conveys Authority when his
Providence opens a way to the lawful Possession of it; and if the Passages
insisted on may be understood in this sense, they are far enough from proving
that Usurpers have God's Authority.

And that it is reasonable to understand them in this sense, will appear by
comparing, them with other Passages of Scripture which assert the divine
Providence in the Government of the World: The Lord makes rich, he brings
low and lifts up; he raises the poor out of the Dust, and lifts up the
Beggar from the Dunghill, to see them among Princes, and to make them inherit
a Crown of Glory, 1 Samuel 2. 7, 8. Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, both Riches and
Honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thine Hand it is to
make Great, and to give Strength unto all, 1 Chr. 29. 4, 12. The Lord gave and
the Lord has taken away, Job 1. 21. and Ps. 75. 6, 7. Promotion comes neither
from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South, but God is the Judge; he
puts down one and sets up another. It would be endless to produce all
those passages, which affirm that Riches and Possessions, Honor and Promotion,
do proceed from God; but these may may suffice, for they undeniably evince,
that the Wealth and Advancement of private Persons is as much directed by
Providence, as the Advancement of the greatest Monarchs; that God gives Riches
as well as Kingdoms to whomsoever he will; and that when private Persons are
Enriched and Promoted by the Ruin of others, it is God that puts down one
and sets up another. But now it follows not hence, that every one who is in
the Possession of Riches and Preferments, does enjoy them by such a Gift of
God, as conveys Right and Authority to possess them; for then there could be no
unjust Possession of any Thing, seeing every Man would have a divine Right to
what he actually Possesses; and therefore there is a necessity of Expounding
those Passages so, as to discharge God from being the Author of Injustice, to
reconcile his Providence with the Rules of Right and Wrong, and to distinguish
it according to the moral Nature of the Possession to which it concurrs. When
Riches are taken away from the rightful Owner, we may say as Job did, that the
Lord has taken them away, and that he has given them to the wrongful
Possessor; but this must be interpreted only of his permissive Providence,
unless we will say that all Robbers have God's Authority and Commission. But
when God's Providence, together with the Possession of Riches, conveys a Right
to possess them, we are sure this Providence is more than Permissive, and that
Riches so acquired are properly, and strictly the Gift of God. Undoubtedly it
may be said of Riches, that God gives them to whomsoever he will; but it would
be plainly inconsequent to conclude from such Expressions, that every one who
possesses Riches does hold them by a Divine Right, and by God's Authority.

And this is a manifest Proof, that when God is said to give Kingdoms, to
remove Kings and set up Kings, it does not necessarily follow from those
Expressions, that all Possessors of Kingdoms have God's Authority to keep them;
for if the mere force of the Words could advance it, since the very same may be
applied to Riches, and the same thing is actually affirmed concerning them, in
Words equally express and forcible; it would follow that all who have Riches,
have a divine Right to them; but this Proposition is inconsequent from those
Words, and therefore so is the other, that all Usurpers have a divine Right to
their Kingdoms.

There is no material difference in the Expression; there may be difference in
the subject Matter, or nature of the Things, to which it is applied, and the
same Expression may require different Interpretations according to the
diversity of the Matter. Thus it may be objected, that when God is said to give
Riches, and to give Kingdoms, the nature of the thing does require, that when
Riches are given without a lawful Right to them, we should look upon it only as
a permissive Gift; but when God gives Kingdoms, it is reasonable to understand,
that he confers a Right to possess, and Authority to govern them. Now if the
necessity of this Interpretation could be demonstrated from Reason and the
Nature of the Thing, I acknowledge we should be bound to embrace it as the
genuine Sense of Scripture: But I have shown that it is impossible to prove
that Doctrine from Reason, and to find any difference in the nature of the
Thing, between the Concurrence of God's Providence to the unjust Possession of
Riches, and to the Usurpation of a Kingdom.

But since the Expression of God's giving a Thing, does not always imply a
conveyance of Right and Authority to possess it, and in the Case of a Kingdom,
there is no way to prove that it does but by an appeal to Reason; it is plain
that the Objection from those passages of the Prophet, which pretends to be
drawn from Scripture Testimony, must at last be resolved into Reason: It is no
where declared in Scripture, that God's giving of Kingdoms is to be understood
otherwise than his giving of Riches; and if nothing but Reason can show, that
giving of Kingdoms must always signify a conveyance of Authority, then it is
Reason (and not those Prophetic passages) which proves, that all Usurpers have
God's Authority; and therefore those passages ought not to be urged as Proofs
from Scripture, nor be brought to prove that it is the Doctrine of Scripture
that God does give Authority to Usurpers; for the result of that Proof must at
least be this, that Scripture teaches it, because Reason teaches it.

Those passages do assert no more, than that God's Providence does rule the
World, and particularly Kingdoms, and that they are not governed either by Fate
or Fortune, or merely by the Conduct, Power, and Policy of Princes.
Nebuchadnezzar ascribed his Greatness to himself, as the building of Great
Babylon, so his Empire and his Kingdom to the Might of his Power, to his own
Strength and Policy; he gave not Glory to God, nor had any regard to his
Providence and Dominion; and therefore God admonishes him by Dreams and
Visions, sends a Prophet to convert him, and when he still persisted in his
Atheism, he punishes him with the loss of his Reason and his Kingdom; and the
end of all this Discipline, was to convince him, that the most high rules in
the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will: Of which Words the
best Explication is, that which Nebuchadnezzar himself did make after his
Conviction; that God's Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and that he does
according to his Will in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the
Earth, Dan. 4. 34, 35. Now what can be inferred from these passages, but only
that God governs the World, and that his Government, or his Will is
irresistible? But are we therefore forbidden to distinguish between his
positive and permissive Will? Far be it from us to deny God's Sovereign
Dominion, let him be Anathema that does it; we maintain only that God is not
the Author of Wickedness, that his Providence is unsearchable to us, and that
Law is the only Rule of our Actions.

But let us consider what the Doctor offers in the Vindication of these
passages. To what he urges concerning Vind. p. 50, 51.
God's removing and setting up Kings; I reply, that those general Expressions
do prove only that God's Providence is always concerned in the Advancement and
Depression of Kings; but sometimes his Providence is only permissive, and that
extinguishes no Right, nor conveys any Authority: He should therefore have
proved, that God does always remove and set up Kings by his positive and
authoritative Will, and that the Text does say so; for if the Text does neither
say it expressly, nor virtually, it is impertinent to produce it.

But this is evidently the Prophet's Ibid. p. 51.
meaning to attribute all the Changes and Revolutions of Government to the
divine Providence. I grant it, for it is certain no King can be removed or set
up whether God will or no: But when God is said to give Kingdoms to whomsoever
he will, Does whomsoever Ibid.
signify those only who have a legal Right? Does giving suppose an antecedent
Right in him to whom it is given? Does giving to whomsoever he will signify
giving it only to those to whom the Law gives it? Do we use to say a Man may
give his Estate to whom he will, when his Estate is entailed, and he cannot
alienate it from the right Heir? We should think this a very absurd way of
speaking among Men; and he insinuates it is absurd, To expound God's giving a
Kingdom to whomsoever he will, to signify his giving the Kingdom to the right
Heir. It may suffice to answer, That a legal Right to a Kingdom is a Gift of
Providence, and God invests it in whomsoever he will; what is it which brings
any particular Person to legal Right, but Providence? God that conferred it
upon Charles the First, might have given it to Cromwell, or to any other Man in
the World; and therefore when it is asserted that God never gives a Kingdom
without a lawful Right to it, this is very well consistent with that Assertion
of the Prophet, though it be understood of God's Authoritative Gift, and in the
utmost comprehension of the Words; for though God's Authority be annexed to
Right, yet he gives that Right to whomsoever he will.

But farther, he instances in the giving of an Estate, and that instance will
lead us to a Resolution of his Questions. God gives Estates to whomsoever he
will; this Proposition is contained in Scripture, and is undeniably true: it is
nevertheless certain that no one can have a Divine Right to an Estate, when the
legal Right is another's; and then though God's Providence gives Possession of
an Estate, that Gift is no conveyance of Right or Authority to keep it. But
then the Doctor bri^kly demands, does whomsoever signify those only who have a
legal Right to an Estate? does giving it suppose an antecedent Right? does
giving an Estate to whomsoever be will, signify giving it only to those to
whom the Law gives it. The Answer is obvious, God gives Estates by his
permissive, and by his positive Will; by the latter to those only who have a
legal Right, by the former to every one that gets Possession; in respect to
this Gift whomsoever may be taken universally, but must be limited to a lawful
Right in respect to the other.

Thus in the disposal of Kingdoms, every one who has Possession, has a
permissive Gift, but not a positive or authoritative Gift, which always attends
upon Right; in relation to the former, God does give Kingdoms absolutely to
whomsoever he will, without regard to Right; in relation to the latter, God
does give Kingdoms to whomsoever he gives Right to possess them. In short, he
gives them to whomsoever he will, but God's Will is either positive or
permissive; and it is impossible to distinguish by which of them he gives any
Possession, but by considering the Right to possess them. When an Estate is
entailed, the Possessor cannot give it to whomsoever he will, for he has no
Right to alienate it from the Heir, neither does Providence properly give it to
those who have no Right to it: But nevertheless God can give Estates to
whomsoever he will, by permitting Power, or conveying a legal Right to possess
it: God can do both, when it is not in the Power of a Man to do either; and
therefore there is a great Disparity in this Case, between God's giving and
Man's giving.

And now what Absurdity is there in saying that God gives a Kingdom to
whomsoever he will permit the Possession of it, and conveys his Authority on
whomsoever he will confer a Right to possess it? does the Absurdity lie in
distinguishing between his permissive and authoritative Will? that is a
Distinction generally received, and hitherto I see no Reason why it is not
applicable to the disposal of Kingdoms. Is it absurd to say that God gives a
thing when he only suffers the taking it? that is the Language of Scripture,
thus says God himself unto David, I will give thy Wives unto thy Neighbor,
and he shall lie with them; I will do this thing before all Israel, and before
the Sun. But surely no Right was hereby given unto Absalem to his Father's
Wives. The Actions of seducing, deceiving, and moving unto Wickedness, of
blinding and hardening Men in it, are expressly attributed to God in Scripture,
and if such Expressions may be reasonably expounded only of God's Permission,
or his being the accidental cause of such Effects; there can be certainly no
Absurdity in expounding God's giving a Kingdom without Right, by granting Power
to Usurpers, and permitting them to abuse it. Lastly, Does the Absurdity lie in
restraining whomsoever he will unto rightful Princes, when we speak of God's
giving Authority? But if God gives a legal Right to whomsoever he will, then
there is no Restriction, because none are excepted. God gives Riches to
whomsoever he will, but he always gives a legal Right when he gives Authority
to keep them; and in fine, it is no Absurdity to restrain the general
Expressions of Scripture when the matter does require it. Thou have wrought all
our Works in us, says the Prophet; if we understand this of God's positive
Operations, wicked Works must be excepted: He hardneth whom (or whomsoever) he
will, says the Apostle; and I think the Doctor will not think it absurd to
restrain the Words, to those who make themselves obnoxious to the Divine
Vengeance, by their obstinate Incredulity: and if this Expression may be
restrained in one place, so it may in another, if there be equal Reason for it.
In short, it is no Absurdity to restrain such general Words, when it is absurd
to understand them without Restriction.

But the Doctor argues, that Case of Alleg. p. 20.
these Passages relate to the Four Monarchies, which were all as manifest
Usurpations a^ ever were in the World, and yet set up by the Decree and Counsel
of God, and foretold by a Prophetic Spirit. Here he affirms that the most
manifest Usurpers that ever were in the World, were set up by God; conseqently
they had God's Authority to govern, and therefore a Right to Allegiance;
otherwise Usurpers are never the better for being set up by God, and those
Passages are produced superfluously to prove it. But if the most manifest
Usurpers in the World are God's Ordinance, what shall become of his distinction
between Usurpers settled and unsettled, such as Cromwell was, and such as those
that are enthroned by a full Convention, such as have and such as have not the
consent of the People: If all Usurpers have God's Authority, these distinctions
are perfect Banter; but if all have it not, certainly the most manifest
Usurpers that ever were in the World were without it: But let this pass for an
Hyperbole. I answer,

1. It appears not, that those Monarchies were Usurpations: I grant they were
such in sieri, those, I mean, who set them up, were Usurpers in doing it, and
for some time, it may be, after their Advancement: but they soon became
rightful Sovereigns, by the extinction of the former Right; and if at first
they were Usurpers, and afterward rightful Sovereigns, How knows the Doctor
that those Passages in the Prophet, relate to the four Monarchies, as
Usurpations, and not as rightful Governments? He affirms, that the Vind. p. 51.
Prophet tells us with respect to the very Revolutions, which were nothing else
but Force and Usurpation, that God changes Times, and removes and sets up
Kings. Then it follows, that even the unjust and violent Changes of Governments
are acted and authorized by God; for if in respect to them it is said, that God
changes Times and sets up Kings, and setting up is the act of God, and
conveyance of Authority, then it is certain that God does act and authorize
Changes; then those very Usurpers, whose Government is founded only upon Force,
without the consent of the People, have God's Authority; and then rebellious
Subjects, and ambitious Princes, who overturn a lawful Government by Force,
have God's Authority for it; for in respect to that Force and Violence he
affirms, that Governments are destroyed and set up by God. Thus in the
transport of his Anger, the Doctor forgets his own Principles, and the
Convocation's.

2. Suppose those Passages do relate to Usurpers, and to the very Force and
Violence by which Empires are overturned; How does it appear that God's setting
up Kings, and giving of Kingdoms must be expounded of God's positive, and not
of his permissive Will, of his giving of Authority, and not of his concession
of Power, whereby Rebels and Usurping Princes are enabled to accomplish their
wicked Enterprises: If those Passages relate to the very Revolutions of
Governments, and the wicked Force and Violence by which Usurpers are advanced,
then certainly they must be understood of God's permissive Providence, unless
we will make God the Author and Abettor of the highest Wickedness and
Injustice. The Doctor will not affirm that those Passages do prove that
Usurpers are set up by God, when they are making their way to the Throne, nor
when they actually place themselves in it; for till they are settled in it by
consent, he himself does allow that they have not God's Authority; and yet they
will prove this, if they prove any thing for Usurpers; for they limit not God's
setting up, to Consent and Settlement, they make no difference between Kings in
sieri, and in facto esse, between their ascending to the Throne, their fitting
and their settlement in it; they intimate that all the Gradations and Steps of
such Revolutions are alike from God, that he brings about the whole Change,
and that the Invasions and Rebellions by which Kings are removed, are as much
from him as the Advancement of a new King to the Throne, and his Establishment
in it: And therefore if they prove that Usurpers have God's Authority, they
prove it for Rebels and Invaders also.

But perhaps the four Monarchies which we supose to be Usurpations were set up
by God's Authority, because they were set up by the Decree and Counsel of God,
and foretold by a prophetic Spirit. I have observed before, that some of God's
Decrees are permissive, and such are his Decrees about wicked Events, among
which I reckon unjust Violence and Usurpations: But they were foretold by a
prophetic Spirit; And what then? Have Usurpers therefore God's Authority,
because God, who is omniscient, and sees future things as present, does behold
them committing Wickedness, and foretells it by a Prophet; or is God's
Prescience a Conveyance of his Authority?

Among other Changes and Revolutions foretold by Daniel, in the Judgment of
very learned Men, the setting up of Antichrist is predicted, and that under the
name of a King, Dan. 11. 36, 37, 38, 39. and I see no Reason why the setting up
of this King may not as well be asscribed to God's Decree and Counsel, as any
other King in Daniel. However it is said expressly of the Beast in the 13th of
Revelations, which is supposed to be the Antichrist, that Power was given him
over all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations: Here we have his Commission for an
universal Empire. And Power was given him to continue forty two Months: Here is
a Settlement for a long Tract of Time. And all that dwell upon the Earth shall
worship him: Here is the Consent and Submission of the People to establish him;
and if this King has not God's Authority upon the Doctour's Principles, and by
virtue of as express words of Scripture, as any he produces for Usurpers, I
wonder who can have it? Let us know whether this Power of Antichrist was not
given him of God, and whether he could have it without his Will and
Appointment? A Power over all Nations must certainly be given him by God; and
yet I think this giving of Power is no Conveyance of Authority upon this
Usurper, nor does it infer any Obligation to Obedience: and this Instance
overthrows all his Arguments from God's giving Power and Kingdoms, for here is
a Power and Kingdom which is given by God, to which we cannot be Subjects
without Apostasy from him.

The Doctor observes, That under the fourth Monarchy the Case of Al. p. 22.
Kingdom of Christ was to be set up, and Antichrist was to appear, and the
Increase and Destruction of the Kingdom of Antichrist is to be accomplished by
great Changes and Revolutions in humane Governments. Hence he infers, That
since God has declared, that he will change Times and Seasons, remove Kings,
and set up Kings, to accomplish his own wise Counsels, it justifies our
Compliances with such Revolutions; he should have added, for otherwise
Antichrist could neither be advanced nor destroyed. Thus it was once argued for
Resistance, That God's hiding J. Goodwin in his Anticavalierism.
the lawfulness of it from the primitive Christians was necessary to help
Antichrist to his Throne: and now Compliance with Usurpers is urged to be
lawful, as necessary to set up and pull down Antichrist, that so God's
Counsels may be accomplished; and may it not as reasonably be inferred, that
since God has declared he will make Revolutions, remove and set up Kings, that
therefore Rebellions and unjust Invasions are lawful, because they are the
ordinary ways of effecting Revolutions? No, says he, we must not, contrary to
our Duty promote such Revolutions upon a pretense of fulfilling Prophecies, but
when they are made and settled, we ought to submit to them: What! Can it be
contrary to our Duty to promote Revolutions which God decrees, promotes, and
effects? Is it lawful for no one to promote them? And how then shall they be
accomplished? But why is it lawful to submit to them when they are made and
settled? Why, because God has decreed them, that must be a Reason for it, or
his Decrees and Counsels are here impertinently urged. But we are sure that God
has decreed the Kingdom of Antichrist, and when his Kingdom is settled, must
all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations, pay Subjection to him? If God's Decree be a
a Reason for Submission, we have no more to do, but to fall down and worship,
when we see his Decree accomplished in the Advancement of Antichrist. And if
this be not Enthusiasm, there is no such thing in the World.

How vain is it to distinguish between promoting and submitting in respect to
the fulfilling of Decrees and Prophecies? Does not he that submits promote? And
what Ground is there for that Distinction in Scripture? It was God's Decree
that Cromwell should have the Administration of Sovereign Power, and he might
have foretold it by Prophecy; but it was impossible it should have been
accomplished without a general Submission: Was that therefore a general Duty,
and was the Nation bound to it, to fulfill Decrees and Councils? What have we
to do with God's unsearchable Decrees? Our Rule is Law, the Laws of God and
Nature for religious and moral Actions, the Laws of Kingdoms and Commonweals
for those that relate to Civil Society. As for God's Decrees, they are unknown
to us, till they are fulfilled, and when they are, we can never know whether
they are positive or permissive, whether they require our Submission or
Resistance, but by the nature of the Events. Usurpations are decreed by God,
and so are Robberies, so is Antichrist; and if there be no difference between
these Decrees, as there may be none, and there can be none gathered out of
Daniel, or out of any other part of Scripture, it follows necessarily, that
God's Decreeing of Usurpers infers not any Obligation of Subjection to them.
Thus I have done with his Argument from Dreams, Decrees, and Prophecies; and I
hope it appears, that the Doctour's Commentary upon Daniel does by no means
make good his Commentary upon the Apostle.

8. He argues farther, That this Distinction, that only legal Case of Al. p 21.
not usurped Powers are of God, had made the Apostle's Direction signify
nothing; for the great Question had still been undetermined, what Powers are of
God, and what they must obey, if some Powers be of God, and some not. The
Apostle directed the Roman Christians to be subject to the Roman Powers then in
being; and if there was any Dispute whether they were lawful Powers or
Usurpers, he plainly determines it, by declaring they were God's Ordinance, and
that Subjection was therefore due to them; he tells them the Powers then in
being were ordained by God, and that was enough to silence all Disputes about
them. The Doctor confesses, That had the Apostle confined himself to the then
present Powers, it would have directed them at that time; but, says he, it
would have been no general Direction to Christians in other Ages to obey the
present Powers; it would have been very convenient for some Men, if the Apostle
had given such a Direction; but what if he has not? Why, then we have no
Direction in Scripture, what to do in such disputed Cases unless by a Parity of
Reason. Well, suppose that we have not; the Direction is sufficient, if we will
be content with what may be reasonably expected: St. Paul required the
Christians to pay Subjection to the Roman Emperors who were lawful Powers;
and the Reason upon which he enjoins it, extends the Obligation to Subjects in
all Ages and Nations who are under the government of such lawful Powers. But
the Apostle has not directed us to distinguish what Powers are lawful; neither
have we any Directions to find out true Parents, lawful Husbands, Masters, and
Pastors; and yet, I think, the Scripture is not to be charged with
Imperfection: The Scripture prescribes the Duties of these several Relations,
but gives no Rules to distinguish the Relatives, the True and Lawful from the
False and Counterfeit, that depends upon the infinite variety of Fact, of
Customs, and of Laws, and therefore cannot be comprehended in general Rules; so
does the Distinction between lawful Powers and unlawful, it depends upon the
various Constitutions of Civil Politics, and often upon Matters of Fact; and
therefore that Distinction could not be bounded and defined within Rules, nor
consequently be determined in Scripture. In short, it may be inferred, by
parity of Reason from the Apostle, that the supreme Powers in every civil
Government are God's Ordinance and irresillible; But which are the supreme
Powers he has left to be determined by the Laws of every Government? The
Doctor himself has told the World, That whatever Case of Resist. p. 111.
Power in any Nation, according to the Fundamental Laws of its Government,
cannot and ought not to be resisted; that is, the supreme Power of that Nation,
the higher Powers to which the Apostle requires us to be subject; And is there
any Nation in the World, which has made an Usurper irresistible by a
Fundamental Law? The Doctor may recant this, but he will pardon me if I am
still of his Opinion.

But the Doctor is sure the only Case of Al. p. 21.
Direction in Scripture, is to submit to those who are in the actual
Administration of Government. And I am sure there is no such Direction there;
and which is more, the Doctor himself is sure of it, for he is sure that
Usurpers who have the actual Administration of Government, without the consent
of the People, have no Title to Subjection. He seems to lay stress upon those
Words of the Apostle, At God's Ministers attending continually upon this very
Thing; the Emperors were then actually Administering the Government, and that
was their Business, as God's Ministers: But does the Apostle say, that
Sovereign Powers are not God's Ministers, when they are hindered from their
Business, though they are still attending upon it, and endeavor to remove the
Impediment? Do they cease to be God's Ministers, because their Subjects are
Rebels? Obedience is required to Spiritual Rulers, because they watch over
Souls, Heb. 13. 11. Are the People then discharged from their Duty, if they
will not suffer their Pastors to watch over them, but separate from them? And
are the Pastors no longer God's Ministers, because they cannot exercise their
Function?

But there is not the least notice Ibid.
given us of any kind of Duty, to a Prince removed from the Administration of
Government, whatever his Right may be. Neither, say I, is there any the least
notice of paying any Duty to Usurpers; no more is there of paying Obedience to
a Father, or a Master, removed from the Government of their Families, or to a
Bishop removed from his Church by Persecution; there is no more than this, that
the Scripture requires Obedience to them, and neither Scripture nor Reason does
teach us that when they are violently removed from the actual Administration of
their respective Governments, the Relation ceases and the Duty with it. And
thus much may be said for Sovereign Princes; Subjection is required to them,
but neither Scripture nor Reason do inform us, that the Relation is
extinguished when they are violently deposed: On the contrary, we are expressly
required to give Princes their dues, and what those are we must learn from the
Laws of Nature and Nations, for the Scripture has not taught us.

But we have no Example in Ibid.
Scripture, that any People were ever blamed for submitting to Usurpers. In the
2d. of Samuel we have the People of the Jews submitting to Absalom; in the
13th. of Revel. the People of all Nations to Antichrist, but in neither do we
find that they are blamed for it. But I wonder when he was heaping up these
negative Arguments, that he did not remember, that if they are good for any
thing, they overthrow his own Hypothesis; he maintains that Allegiance is not
due to all Usurpers (though all his Arguments from Providence and Scripture do
prove it) but only to those that are settled by a general consent; and yet there
is no Rule, no Example, not an Iota for this Distinction in Scripture. But this
was not convenient to be remembered, for then he had lost these pretty
Arguments. But in Scripture we have Examples Ibid.
of Subjects being condemned for refusing to submit to Usurpers. This indeed is
to the purpose: But where are these Examples to be found? in the Prophecies of
Jeremiah, and the Discourses of our Savior with the Scribes and Pharisees,
about paying Tribute to Caesar. Let us now examine these Examples.

Our Savior's Argument relies wholly on the Possession of Power, whose Image
and Superscription has it? and if this be a good Reason, it is good in all
other Cases, that we must submit to all Princes who are possessed of Sovereign
Power. I refer the Reader to our Savior's Discourse, and let him satisfy
himself, whether this Proposition is in it, That Allegiance is due to all
Princes in Possession of Sovereignty, or this other, which is contradictory it
to, That it is due only to these Possessors that are settled by the consent of
the People; that I think cannot he inferred from the Image and Superscription,
for Usurpers may coin Money before they are settled; neither is it any Proof
that a Prince is in Possession, because his Coin is current; if it is,
Allegiance is due to King JAMES, or at least all the Money that has his Image
and Superinscription. Is the Doctor sure that the Coin presented to our Savior
had the Image of Tiberius? Others say it had the Image of Augustus, and then
our Savior's Argument could not rely upon Possession, for the Coin of a
Prince deceased could suggest no Argument that Allegiance was due to the
Possessor.

Dr. Hammond I take to be the better Expositor; thus he upon those Words: Whose
is this Image and Superscription? The Inscription on the Coin is Caesar
Agustus, such a Year after the taking of Judaea; this being a Record of the
Conquest of the Romans ^ver this Nation, and the Right by them acquired, by the
dedition of Hyrcanus, and an expression of the Years since that taking, about
90 Years, (for so long ago did Pompey subdue and take Jerusalem,) show that now
it is unlawful to seek change, after so long continuance of that Power, so
fairly and legally settled. So the excellent Dr. Hammond; and in his Annotations
he evinces historically, the Legality of the Roman Government over Judaea. Dr.
Sherlock on the contrary, supposes that Caesar was an Usurper, and that our
Savior reproved the Pharisees for not submitting to an Usurper; but he was
pleased only to suppose it; and I presume to affirm, that it is impossible to
prove it: For an Usurper must have some Competitor who claims a right to the
Sovereignty, and let him name us that Person, if he can, that was Caesar's
Competitor; if he cannot, he may suppose, but he can never prove him an Usurper.

His other Instance is out of the Prophet Jeremiah; and here he acknowledges
that his Argument for Submission is Prophecy, or an express Command from God to
submit to the King of Babylon: And was Nebuchadnezzar then an Usurper, if
Allegiance was required to him by God's revealed Will? Was he not King over the
Jews by particular Nomination? Did not the Sin of the Jews consist in their
Disobedience to God's express Command? And how can he prove that the Prophet
would have condemned them, if they had refused to submit without express
Revelation, or that he himself would have advised them to submit without it.

Before the first Conquest of Judaea under Jehoiakim, the Jews could be under
no Obligation to submit to Nebuchadnezzar; but when their Kings had made a
voluntary dedition to him, and confirmed it by an Oath, then their Obedience
was due to him as their lawful Sovereign: Their Revolt is afterward styled
Rebellion, and the Violation of that Oath was punished with final Captivity and
Destruction, Ezekiel. 17. The Doctor pretends there was a necessity of an express
Command to submit, because they could not without it subject themselves to any
other Prince, while any of David's Family were living, because God himself had
entailed the Kingdom upon his Posterity. But this is a groundless Fancy, and
contradicted by himself; for in his Vindication he maintains, That whether
there be a Divine Entail or no, it is always lawful to submit to Force, and
then sure there was no need of a Revelation. But where is that Reason to be
found in Scripture? Does the Prophet Jeremy mention it? Had the Jews any
Scruple then about a Divine Entail? The Prophet declares from God, that if
Zedekiah would submit to the King of Babylon, he should live in Safety, chap.
38. and after his Captivity, and the Destruction of Jerusalem, he assures the
remaining Jews, that if they would still abide in the Land, God would deliver
them from the King of Babylon, chap. 42. The only Motive which he urges to the
King and People is an assurance of Safety by Submission: But it appears from
the Prophet Ezekiel, that they were bound to it by Oath and Covenant, and they
are therefore branded by both the Prophets with Rebellion, because they
revolted from their lawful Sovereign.

But the Doctor argues hence, That where the Entail of the Ib. p. 22.
Crown is only by Humane Laws, there is no need of Prophecy to direct the
People to submit to any new Prince whom God sets over them. Well, suppose there
was need of Prophecy in case of a Divine Entail; how does it follow there is no
need of Prophecy when an Entail is by Human Laws; perhaps it may follow from
something else, but I am not subtle enough to discern how it follows from his
Premises: It will follow as well, that because a King by a Divine Entail cannot
be deposed without Prophecy, there is no need of Prophecy to depose a King of
Human Entail; or because Abraham could not lawfully Sacrifice his Son without
an express Command, therefore* other Parents may murder a Son without it. When
God sets up a Prince by his positive Will, there is no need of a Prophet to
prescribe Submission, but there is need of a new Revelation to inform us, when
it is his Will to convey Authority to an Usurper, for the Event* is no
Indication of it.

But since the Prophet's Motive for Submission to the Jews was Safety, may we
not for the same Reason submit to any King in Possession? I answer the Case may
be different; for, 1. The Jews were bound to submit to the King of Babylon; for
they were his rightful Subjects by Dedition, and by God's express Appointment;
and though Safety is a good Argument to enforce Duty, it is none against it. 2.
The case of absolute Conquest, when the Lawful Prince is a Captive, the
Government dissolved, and no possibility of restoring it, is manifestly
different from the case of a People deposing their lawful Prince, advancing an
Usurper, supporting him by their Power, opposing their Rightful Sovereign, and
still in a capacity of restoring him; their Safety in this case is no Argument
for persisting in Rebellion; and if they are under any Necessity, it is of
their own making and continuing. 3. Submission is not Allegiance, and though
the former is lawful, when it is to no purpose to resist, yet it is no more
lawful to assist an Usurper to the destruction of a Rightful Prince, merely for
my own Safety, than it is to assist a High-way-Man to save my own Purse, or to
compound for my own Life, by assisting an Assassine to destroy my Neighbor's,

Thus I have considered all the Doctor's Arguments from Scripture, but there is
one Text more to be considered, which the Doctor propounds as an Objection
against his Principle; the place is Hosea 8. 4. where God himself does thus
complain of the Israelites, They have set up Kings but not by me, they have
made Princes and I knew it not. Here we are assured, that all Kings have not
been set up by God, and this is as plainly and expressly declared as Words can
do it, and how then is this reconcilable with the Apostle's universal
Proposition, there is no Power but of God? I have intimated that this
Proposition is restrained by the following Words unto the Powers then in being,
which were lawful Powers: And thus the Texts are easily reconciled, and there
is no Contradiction between them, if we understand the latter of lawful Powers,
the former of Usurpers; or if we distinguish between Kings set up by God's
Ordinance and Authority, and Kings set up by his Permission, and the general
Concourse of his Providence. But what says the Doctor?

1. Those Words in Hosea Case of Alleg. p. 35.
are not true of all the Kings of Israel, after their Separation from the Tribe
of Judah; for Jeroboam and Jehu were set up by God's own Appointment. This is
contrary to the general-Sense of Expositors, Calvin, Rivet. Mercer. Piscator.
Tarnovius, cited by Dr. Pocock: To which add Zanchius, Junius, Pareus, Diodate,
Geneva Interpr. Annotations of Divines.
who apply this Speech to to Jeroboam especially: But did not God declare by
the Prophet Abiah, that he would give him the Kingdom over Israel? It is
answered, though Jeroboam had a Prediction of his Advancement, yet he did not
tarry for God's farther direction about it, as David did; he possessed himself
of the Kingdom, not by God's Appointment* but by the Gift of the People, who
had no Command nor Direction from God to depose Rehoboam; and whereas another
Prophet declared, that the Thing was from God, this may denote, that God
permitted and ordered the Rebellion and Usurpation for the punishment of
Solomon and his Son, and such a permitting and overruling Providence could be
no Conveyance of Authority, for thus the Cursing of Shimei, and the Usurpation
of Absalom, were also from God.

2. One of these Kings was Baasha, who made himself King without God's express
Nomination; and ye^ God tells him, I exalted thee out of the Dust, and made
thee Prince over my People Israel. This might have been said of Cromwell, who
yet had no Title to God's Authority; and it may be understood of the general
Concurrence of God's Providence, and the concession of Power to usurp the
Throne. But as for these Kings, if God did actually deprive the Family of David
of their Right to the Kingdom of Israel, then they were lawful Kings, because
Possession was a Right when there was no other; if he did not, (which seems
very doubtful,) they were certainly Usurpers upon a Divine Right; and therefore
though they were exalted by God's Providence, yet they could not be invested
with his Authority.

3. The true Answer is this: Israel was a Theocracy, and therefore they ought
to have received their Kings from God's Nomination; but instead of that, they
submitted to any who could set up themselves over them; and this, he says, was
a great Crime, it being in effect a renouncing their Prerogative of having
Kings set up by God's Nomination, and putting themselves into the common
condition of the World, where Kings are set up only by his Providence. This
contains the force of his Answer, and at most it is only conjecture, and such as
has little show of Probability. No doubt it was a Crime not to consult God,
when they might have consulted him; but upon the Doctour's Principle it could
be no fault to submit to any who could set themselves over them; for he says
himself concerning those Princes, that they were set up by God, and surely it
could be no fault to submit to his Ordidinance. He affirms expressly, That in
Judah and Israel God did sometimes set up Kings only by his Providence, and
these providential Kings had all the Rights of other Sovereign Princes of Judah
or Israel; consequently they had a Right to Submission, and therefore it was no
fault to pay it; and if it was a fault to submit to those Kings of Providence,
then certainly they were not invested with God's Authority; and then the
meaning of the Words in debate is this; they have set up Kings by the
Concurrence of my Providence, but not by me, but without the conveyance of my
Authority. As for the Prerogative of receiving Kings by express Nomination, I
understand not upon the Doctor's Principles, how that could be any Prerogative;
I am sure it could be no advantage; for if Kings of Providence have divine
Authority as much as Kings by Nomination, where is the difference? Cannot good
Kings be made by Providence, as well as by a Prophet? Is not the one God's Act
and will as much as the other? There can be no Privilege or Advantage in a
singular way of making Kings, if all are made by God and enjoy his Authority:
and therefore in the nature of the thing it self, it could be no Crime to
forego it. I hope it appears now, that his Scripture-Proofs are as ill grounded
as his Propositions; I might well spare the Labor of examining his other
Reasons, but if they be not answered, they may be thought unanswerable, and
therefore I will briefly consider them.

2. The Doctor observes, That his Hypothesis gives the Oase of Al. p. 23.
easiest and intelligible Account of the Original of humane Government; that
all Power is from God, who is the Sovereign Lord of the World. Having observed
this, he recites the various Opinions about the Origin of Monarchy, and
confutes them severally, and concludes at last, That he cannot see where to fix
the Foundation of Page 24.
Government, but in the Providence of God, who by the choice of the major or
stronger part of the People, or by Conquest, or Submission, or the long
successive Continuance of Power, or by humane Laws, gives a Prince and his
Family Possession of the Throne, which is a good Title against all humane
Claims, and requires the Obedience of Subjects, as long as God is pleased to
continue Him and his Family in the Throne; but it is no Title against God, if
he please to advance another Prince. To set this Matter in a clear Light, I
observe,

1. That our Dispute with the Doctor is not about the Origin, or first
Beginning of Government, whether it began in Paternal Authority, or by Original
Contracts; but about the Resolution of Government and Obedience, whether they
must be resolved into Right or Possession.

2. The Dispute is not whether the Power of Government is derived from God, or
whether it is founded upon this Providence. We acknowledge that the Authority
of Government is derived only from God, and from him no otherwise but by a
Providential Conveyance of his Authority upon particular Persons; and thus far
we are agreed: But then the Question is, Whether God's Providence does invest a
Prince with his Authority by the conveyance of Right, or by the conveyance of
Possession without it? In short, whether every Prince in Possession is invested
with God's Authority: We affirm that Government is founded in God's Authority,
but we deny that God conveys it upon every Prince in Possession.

3. When we say God's Authority is annexed to Right, we do not confine this to
a Right by political Laws of particular Governments; the adaequate Rule of
Right is Law, and whatsoever is Law may create a Right, and consequently Right
may result not only from political Laws of this or that Government, but also
from the Laws of God, of Nature, and Nations; the Will of God revealed is a Law
to us, and therefore when God nominates a King by express Revelation, he has a
Right to the Possession of Sovereignty and the Obedience of Subjects: In a
state ^f Nature, as they call it, wherein Men are under no Government nor
Obligation of Subjection, they may choose a Sovereign, and when they have
chosen him, he has a Right to Sovereignty by the Law of Nature: By the Law of
Nations it is generally said, how truly I dispute not, that Conquest in a just
War does create a lawful Right. And lastly, when political Societies are
Constituted, and a Rule of Succession Established, either at the first, by an
Original Agreement, or afterward by Prescription or positive Laws; that Law of
Succession does create a Right to the Sovereignty, which is confirmed by the
Laws of God, and Nature, and Nations; but if this Law be violated, and an
Usurpation is made against it, the Usurpers may acquire a Right by
Prescription, which implies an undisturbed Possession, and a Dereliction of the
former Right; and this new Right (which commences from the extinction of the
former) is such by the Law of Nature, which is Equity, and of Nations, which is
the Consent of civilized Societies.

Lastly, Where there is no Rule of Succession, or no Right in any Person to the
Sovereignty, as when a Royal Family is extinguished, in Dr. Sherlock's Case of
Res. p. 129.
such Cases The Possession of Sovereign Power is Title enough, when there is no
better Title to oppose it; for then we may presume that God gives him the
irresistible Authority of a King, to whom he gives an irresistible Power. When
there is no other Right, Possession is a Right by the Law of Nature and
Nations; but Possession of another's Right has been always pronounced invalid,
by the voice of Equity and the suffrage of all Nations. These Two last Rights
may perhaps be reduced to the Second, the Consent of a free People; for they
suppose them to be discharged from all former Obligations; and Possession of
Sovereignty supposes Submission of the People, and that is nothing else but a
Consent to be governed, which in a free People, I have observed, does create a
Right to Sovereignty by the Law of Nature. And now let us consider what the
Doctor does object against these Titles to Sovereignty.

Against the Choice and Consent of the People he objects, That then no Man is a
Subject, but he who Consents to be so, for the major Vote, says he, cannot
include my Consent unless I please; that is, the effect of Law and Compact, or
Force, not of Nature. I answer, when a free People choose a Sovereign, if they
consent to choose, it is presumed (unless it be otherwise provided) that they
consent the major Vote shall determine the Choice; this presumption is grounded
upon manifest Equity: But if any one refuses to be determined by a Majority, he
refuses to enter into the Society, and may remove out of it; but if he will
live within the Government of the new Sovereign, he accepts him for his
Sovereign, and is bound to Obedience. He urges farther, That if Subjects give
their Prince Authority, they may take it away again if they please. Bp.
Sanderson propounds this very Sand. de Oblig. Conse. Prael. 7. sect. 21.
Inference, and his Answer is this, Contra stat ratio, and omnia jura, omnia
for a reclamant, scilicet legitima pacta non esse rescindenda. It is the Voice
of Reason and of all Laws, and of all places of Commerce, that lawful Compacts
are not to be res^inded at pleasure. But another Answer is also Ibid. sect. 20.
given. The Subjects are only instrumental Agents, God is the principal Agent
in the making of a King, the People design the Person, and God conveys the
Authority. It is God that makes Kings, the People are his Instruments, but he
has given them no Power to depose them. The Doctor himself Vind. p. 16.
affirms, That the Consent of the People are the means by which Princes gain a
Right to their Thrones; and I affirm no more; the People may be a means of
conveying Right, though it be God alone that confers the Authority, and if God
alone does* make Kings, he alone can depose them. But farther, Upon this
Principle there can be no Hereditary Monarchy, one Generation can choose only
for themselves, their Posterity having as much Right to choose as they had.
True; if there could be no Right to Sovereignty without the constant Election
of the Subjects; but that is no Principle of mine, and I am not bound to answer
for it; but this I will answer for, that a Law made a Thousand Years ago may be
Obligatory now, and that it may create a Right to a Person now living, and that
it may be a Sin to deprive him of it, though it be done by the help of Providence.

His Objection against the Right of Conquest, supposes it to be effected by
unjust and violent Force, and I easily acknowledge that unjust Conquest gives
no Right.

Submission, he says, is only a forced and after Consent not to make a King,
but to own him who has made himself King; and what Right can that give more
than Force? He shall Answer this himself, The Consent and Submission of Ibid.
the People turn that, which was Originally no more but Force into a civil and
legal Authority, by giving themselves up to the Government of the Prince; by
this means Princes gain a Right to those Thrones, to which they had no
antecedont Right; this is certainly true where the People are under no
antecedent Obligation.

The continuance of an Usurpation can never give a Right, unless that which is
Wrong grow Right by Continuance: That Maxim of the Law, to which he refers, has
this Exception, Unless a new Cause intervene, which of Gr. de Ju. bell. l. 2. c.
4. s. 11.
it self can create a Right. Now that which makes way for a new Right, is the
Extinction of the former Right: The continuance of an Usurpation of it self may
never give a Right, but if the Usurpers enjoy quiet Possession of a Ibid. s. 6,
7.
100 Years together, it is a presumption in Law and Equity, that the former
Right is relinquished. But it is also affirmed by Lawyers, That quiet and
immemorial Ibid. s. 9.
Possession is a Right by the positive Law of Nations; and if that be true,
then a wrongful Possession may become rightful by Continuance. But though the
former Right be extinguished, Though no body else has any Right to the* Crown,
How does this make him a rightful King who has no Right? I answer in his own
Words, Possession is Title enough, Case of Res. p. 129.
when there is no better Title to oppose it; it is a Right by the Law of
Nations, and it may be founded also on the Consent of the People, for they are
free to Consent, when the former Right is relinquished, and they actually
consent by submitting to his Government.

This Right of Prescription the Doctor will not understand: He demands, Vind.
p. 7.
will an uninterrupted Possession of an hundred Years make the Usurper a
Rightful King, without the Death or Cession of the whole Royal Family? I answer
a Cession is presumed by the Consent of Nations, and by Equity it self; because
it is reasonable to believe that he has relinquished his Right, who suffers
another to enjoy it without interruption; and because it is Grot. ibid. sect. 8.
the Interest of Societies, that the Controversies about Dominion should at
length be ended. How then, says the Doctor, does the Royal Family come to lose
their Right by an usurped Possession? And if an Usurpation will destroy their
Right, why not a short one as well as a long one? Their Right is lost by
Cession, not by Usurpation; and the Cession is not presumed by the Law of
Nations when the Usurpation is of short continuance; short possession of an
Estate is no right in any civilized Society, but a long Possession is a right
almost all the World over: So it is in Kingdoms; and this consent of Nations
will justify this Distinction, though the Doctor will not understand it. He
demands farther, How the People shall be justified in consenting that the
Usurper should reign while their rightful King is living? If they cannot hinder
him from reigning, they need not justifying; if they can and will not, and
therefore cannot be justified, who can help it? And what is that to the matter
of Prescription? But how long must the Usurper reign before the People consent
to it? Till they can reasonably be persuaded that the former Right is
extinguished. Lastly, he asks again, Whether an hundred Years Possession be a
good right against a better claim, or how this better claim comes to expire
after an hundred Years Usurpation? And I answer again, that Prescription
supposes the former Right to be extinguished, which is so far from being a
better, that it ceases to be any Right; the extinction of it may be grounded
upon Equity, or the positive Law of Nations; as to the time of its expiring, an
hundred Years is not always necessary; if the Cession can be proved, that will
suffice without respect to time, but without other Proof, by the consent of
Nations, undisturbed Possession for a hundred Years does entinguish the former
Title.

We come next to Hereditary Right, and thus he argues against it, it Case of
A^^ page 24.
is either a continued Usurpation which can give no Right, or a Right by Law.
How Usurpation may produce a Right is considered already, and what says he
against a Right by Law? why, that is by the consent of the People to entail the
Crown on such a Family, which (he has observed before) cannot be done; for what
Right had my Ancestors three or four hundred Years ago to choose a King for
me? Here a Question is made, whether an Act or Law made by our Ancestors may
oblige their Posterity? He gives no Reasons to prove the Negative, but supposes
it Self-evident. But the Reason and Practice of Mankind suppose the quite
contrary; if Children cannot be bound by the Acts of their Parents, the
Authority of Parents does signify nothing; but we need not this Authority to
enforce the Obligation of Laws: every Human Law does oblige the whole
Community, or Political Society, to which it is a Law, and therefore the
Society being still the same it was four hundred Years ago, the Obligation
reaches to every Member of it. Thus Mr. Hooker, to be commanded we do consent,
Eccles. Pol. 1st Book, p. 88.
when that Society, whereof we are a part, has at any time before consented,
without revoking the same after by the like universal Agreement: Wherefore as
any Man's Deed past is good as long as he himself continues; so the Act of a
public Society done five hundred Years sithence, stands as theirs who
presently are of the same Societies, because Corporations are immortal: We were
then alive in our Predecessors, and they in their Successors do live still.
Even the public Good and Interest of Societies is a sufficient Foundation for
the extending the Obligation of Laws to Posterity. If the Acts of Predecessors
cannot bind their Successors, standing Leagues between Nations are
impracticable, a King in being cannot be obliged by the Acts and Grants of
former Kings, the public Faith of a Society is a public Cheat, for the
Society can never be bound by it for a* Week together; and lastly, where the
explicit Consent of the People is required to a Law, it is plain that all Laws
must expire as soon as born; for the People are in a continual Flux, and they
are not the same to Day as Yesterday; so that absolute Necessity seems to have
introduced an universal Agreement in all Societies (...) that the Obligation of
Laws should be extended to Posterity. This is the undeniable practice of all
Nations; every Act of Parliament is intended to oblige the future as well as
present Generation, till it is repealed. In the Recognition of James the First,
the Lords and Commons do submit and oblige themselves, their Heirs and
Posterity for ever, until the last drop of their B^oods be spent, to his
Majesty King James, and his Royal Progeny, and Posterity for ever.

Here it is plain, this Parliament thought they had a right to make Acts and
Vows for their Posterity; and we have not a Parliament only, but also the
Reason and Practice of all Nations against a single Doctor; and I think he is
the first Doctor that ever undertook to prove that Hereditary Right is no
Right, and that there is no Right to Sovereignty but Possession. But I think
also that the Doctor does contradict the Doctor, for he allows that in an
Hereditary Kingdom the lawful Heir has a legal Right to the Crown before he is
in Possession, and even after he is dispossessed, and when the Crown is vacant
he acknowledges the Subjects are bound to maintain the Succession, and to set
up the lawful Heir: And if this be true, then it is evident, that an Hereditary
Right without Possession may lay an Obligation upon the People, and
consequently the People may be obliged by this Right, though they did not
personally consent to it.

He urges farther, that this Hereditary Right must be ultimately Case of Al. p.
25.
resolved into the Authority of the People to make Kings, which it is unjust
for God himself to overruled and alter, for a legal Entail is nothing more than
the Authority of the People, and if the People have Authority to make Kings,
they will challenge as much Authority to unmake them. A Legal Entail may be
founded on the express consent of the People, or upon Bp. Bramhall's Works, p.
527.
a long continued Prescription, which implies a full Consent, and derives a
good Title of Inheritance both before God and Man; but though the Right be
founded on Consent, yet the Authority of Government is only from God. The
People have Power to consent, and when they have consented, Reason and Equity
do dictate that they are bound to observe their own Pacts and Covenants. But to
speak properly, this Obligation does Vide Seld. de Jur. Genesis l. 1. c. 7, 8. p.
93, 105.
not arise from Consent and Reason, but from the Authority of God; for
Obligation is the effect of Law, and nothing can be Law without the Sanction of
superior Authority, which in the Laws of Nature (such as that is, which
requires that the People stand to their Pacts, and to those Forms of Government
which they have entered into) can be God alone. And thus as the Authority of
Government proceeds from God; so the Obligation of the People, to adhere to
that Entail which their Consent has made, does proceed only from God's Sanction
of that natural Law, which makes their Consent irrevocable; and for that Reason
though they have some Power in making Kings, they have none to unmake them.

But then if Consent be necessary to Right, and God's Authority is not conveyed
without Right, Is not this to Case of Alleg. p. 25.
say, that the Right of Government is not derived from God without the Consent
of the People? For if God cannot make a King without the People, or against
their Consent declared by their Laws, the Authority must be derived from the
People, not from God; or at least if it be God's Authority, yet God cannot give
it himself without the People, nor otherwise than as they have directed him by
their Laws. And this, says the Doctor, is very absurd, and what those Persons
abhor the Thoughts of, who insist so much upon a legal Right. But where is this
horrible Absurdity? Is it that God cannot make a King without the People? That
indeed is an Absurdity, but asserted by no one; the Question is what God wills
or does, and not what he can do. He can make a King out of Stones, he can make
him without the People, without any Instruments, and without any antecedent
Right; but this he never does, and what he can do is nothing to the purpose.
But does it not then follow, that the Authority must be derived from the
People, not from God; derived from the People only as Instruments; but then
God cannot give it himself without the People, which indeed is a self-evident
Consequence; for if God cannot make a King without the People, it follows
plainly, that God cannot give Authority without the People: He adds, nor
otherwise than as they have directed him by their Laws. He should have said, as
God himself has directed, for the Direction or Obligation of Laws proceeds from
God alone. But where are we? Is it not his own Doctrine, that God does never
make Kings without the Consent of the People? No matter whether this Consent be
Law or no, it obliges the People, and Providence never sets up a King without
it; and how then can he acquit himself of these imaginary Absurdities? If he
says the Consent of the People is the effect of God's Choice, is his
Instrument, or the Sign of his Conveyance of Authority, the same say I for a
legal Entail, and his own Distinctions will answer his own Arguments.

3. To justify the Doctrine of Allegiance to Usurpers, he urges this Argument,
That it is founded Case of Alleg. p. 36.
on the same Principle as the Doctrine of Nonresistence, and therefore both
must be true and false; for it is founded on this Principle, that God makes
Kings, and invests them with his Authority; which equally proves, That all
Kings who have received a Sovereign Authority from God, and are actually in the
Administration of it, (which is the only Evidence we have that they have
received it from God,) must not be resisted. This Reason depends upon his
former Proofs, and falls together with them* it is finally resolved into this
Assertion, that they who are in the actual Administration of Sovereign Power
have received Authority from God: An Assertion which makes all Usurpers the
Ordinance of God; which divests Charles I. and II. of God's Authority, and
assigns it to the Rump and Cromwell; which gives the Sanction of divine Right
to the greatest Wickedness and Injustice, which is contradicted by almost all
Divines and Lawyers, by the Voice of Nations, and by the Doctor himself; for
he acknowledges that God's Authority is not always annexed to the actual
Administration of Sovereign Power: Here he asserts, that it is the only
Evidence we have of the receiving Authority from God; yet when he comes to
account for Cromwell, he confesses it is no Evidence, and makes the Consent of
the People to be the only evidence of it. We grant that Nonresistence is
founded on God's Authority communicated to Sovereigns; but we say, that it is
always communicated with Right, that all just Rights are established by God's
Authority, that actual Administration is only matter of Fact, which is
different from Right, and that Usurpers may have it by God's permissive Will,
which is no Conveyance of Authority. But Nonresistence it seems is Nonsense,
unless it be founded on this new Principle; if it must be so, who can help it?
We must acknowledge, that Dudley Diggs's, Dr. Fern's, Dr. Hammond's, Bishop
Sanderson's Archbishop Bramhall's Defenses of Non-resistence, are Nonsense, for
they defend it upon another Principle; which is more, that all the Church of
England Writers, for at least ^0 years together, even Bishop Stillingfleet,
Doctor Sherlock, and the other Worthies of the Age, have erred in the
Foundation of Non-resistance, and have preached nonsensically, and writ
nonsensically for it; and which is more yet, that no one Writer of the Church
of England, before the late Revolution, has defended the Doctrine of the Church
upon that Principle, which by a new Light is discovered to be the true
Foundation of it; I cannot believe this without Demonstration; but for that I
am sent to the Clouds, and to the unsearchable Abyss of Providence.

What the Doctor urges about receiving Authority from Ibid. p. 37.
the People, is answered already; the 13th of the Roman^ is also considered,
and Bishop Overall's Convocation-Book is fully vindicated from his Glosses, and
I am not now at Leisure for Repetition.

4. To say that when the Divine Providence has removed one King, and Ibid.
set up another, we must not pay the Duty of Subjects to him, if he have no
legal Right, is to deny God's Authority to remove Kings, or set up Kings
against humane Laws. This he propounds as a 4th Reason, but it is only a
repeating of what he had said in his 5th Proposition, and there it is answered.
Here it will suffice to answer that removing and setting up Kings are equivocal
Expressions, which signify either God's suffering or doing, his Permission of
Power, or his Conveyance of Authority: An Usurper is set up by permissive
Providence, and to deny him Allegiance is no Opposition to God's Authority. But
God cannot make a King, if he cannot oblige us to obey him; nor remove a King,
if he cannot discharge us from our Allegiance to him. He can make and remove
Kings by his permissive Will, without transferring our Allegiance; if the
Doctor can prove that he makes Usurpers otherwise, we are ready to shift sides
with Providence. But those are bold Men, who will venture to say in plain
contradiction to holy Scripture, that God cannot remove or set up Kings. As for
me, I am none of those bold Bayards; I believe that God governs the World, and
that he removes and sets up Kings; he removes Kings out of the World, and out
of their Thrones, he sets up lawful Kings, and he sets up Usurpers. Henry the
Great he removed by Ravilliack, and Charles I. by a High Court of Justice; he
set up Charles H. and King James, and he set up Cromwell and Massianello: All
this is true; but it follows not hence, that he does all this by his positive
Will and Conveyance of Authority.

Our Church has taught us otherwise in the Office for King Charles's Martyrdom,
his Death is there always asscribed to God's permissive Will. Albeit thou did
suffer them to proceed to such a height of Violence, as to kill him, and to
take possession of his Throne, yet did thou in great Mercy preserve his Son,
whose Right it was, and at length by a wonderful Providence bring him back,
and set him thereon. The Removal of King Charles, and the setting up the
Usurpers, are both attributed to God's permissive Providence; but the setting
up of him, whose Right it was, to his positive and active Will: He suffered the
Usurpers to take Possession of the Throne, but he set the rightful Heir thereon.

But here again the Question is not, what God can do, but what he does; he can
give a Man's House, and his Wife, his Ox and his Ass, and any thing that is
his, to another who has no Right to them, and so he can give his Crown and
Kingdom: But the Question is whether God does give them by the bare Events of
Providence? Whether he who has Possession of another's House, or Wife, or
Kingdom, has a divine Right to them? I will be bold ^o say that he has not; and
yet I pretend not to confine God's Providence, he governs the World as he
pleases, but he obliges us to be governed by Laws; he can transfer any Man's
House, or Wife, or Kingdom to another, by his permissive Will, as when they are
usurped; by his positive, when he conveys a Title to them. The Doctor affirms,
that God never sets up Kings without the Consent of the People; others add,
without their lawful Consent, or against a lawful Right; if Consent be no
Confinement of Providence, neither is Right and lawful Consent; and if this
Opinion be a contradiction to the Scripture, so is the former. But,

5. This limits the Providence of God in governing Kings, and protecting Ibid.
injured Subjects: We say the punishment of Sovereign Princes is peculiar to
God, and that if they abuse their Power, God will punish them for it; but it
seems God has no way to do this, but to take them out of the World, for he
cannot remove them from the Throne. The Doctor is very careful that bad
Princes may be punished, and their Punishment in another World does not
satisfy him: He pretends to make them accountable to God only, but that is a
Complement; he elsewhere makes them accountable to their Subjects; for if
Princes govern not according to their liking, they may withdraw their sworn
Allegiance from them, suffer them to be deposed, and then abjure them. But has
not God ways enough to punish Princes without licensing their Subjects to
abjure them? Cannot he punish them as he did David, by raising Evil against
them out of their own House and Bowels; as he did Jeroboam with the loss of his
Son, Vzziah with Lepro^ie, Nebuchadnezzar with Frenzy, and Herod with a most
loathsome and tormenting Disease? Is not God's Power of punishing confined by
not resisting as well as not abjuring? Or is it any Argument against
Non-resistence, that then God cannot license Subjects to rebel against their
Sovereign? Is it a Confinement of God's Power to punish lewd Husbands, because
it is not lawful for their Wives to commit Adultery; or prodigal and tyrannical
Parents, because their Children cannot hang them, or in respect of both,
because Obedience is due to Husbands and Parents as long as they are living? In
all the Succession of the Roman Emperors, which were as wicked and tyrannical
as any Succession in the World, not one of them was punished by the Translation
of the Empire, while they were living, and against their own Consents, and yet
God's Judgments were never more remarkable upon any Succession of Monarchs. God
has ways enough to punish Princes without taking his Measures from the Doctor,
he ^an punish them without the Wickedness of Men, and he can punish them by it:
though he never makes it lawful for Subjects to rebel and depose their
Princes; yet he can punish them by Rebellion and Deposition, by withdrawing his
Protection, and giving Success to Rebels and Usurpers; he can punish them
likewise by hardening them in their Wickedness, by suffering Subjects to abjure
the King they have deposed, to raise Taxes and Armies to oppose, and even at
length to murder him* and can any Man wish for more ways of Punishments? Are
not these enough for God to execute his Vengeance? Or is his Providence cramped
or limited, because it is not lawful for men to do evil?

But if Subjects cannot translate their Allegiance, when an evil Prince is
removed from the Throne, then his removal is no deliverance to Ibid. p. 38.
them, They are never the better for it, for they must not own another Prince,
though he would be never so kind to them. Well, and what if they are never the
better for the deposing of their Prince? This is often the course of God's
Providence to give and to take away a King in his Wrath. When the Romans
thought to make themselves happy by deposing Tyrants, they were usually plagued
with greater; Saevior and intestabilior semper est exortus. When God deposes a
rightful Prince, and leaves him a right to the Throne, he has a right to
Allegiance; and therefore his Subjects cannot transfer it to another Prince,
though he be the sweetest, kindest Prince under Heaven, for kindness and good
Nature are no Right to Allegiance.

Yet this seems very hard, that when God has actually Ibid.
delivered us, we must refuse our Deliverance, that we will not allow God to
deliver us, unless he do it by Law. This is pretty and passionate, but, to use
his own Eloquence, is a very nothing. It is often a Duty to refuse Deliverance
when God does deliver us; we are sometimes bound to suffer Martyrdom not
accepting Deliverance. A Master of a Family does cruelly treat his Wife, his
Children, and Servants; God delivers them, by suffering a Robber to drive him
out of his Possessions, he offers to govern them gently, if they will swear to
resist the former Possessor, and accept of him as a Husband, Father, and
Master. A Prince oppresses his Subjects, many of them rebel and bring
Deliverance to the rest with this Condition, that they will swear to join in
the Rebellion; In these Cases is it lawful for the oppressed to accept
Deliverance? When a Deliverance is offered, which cannot be enjoyed without
Sin, it is God's Providence that offers it, not for our Compliance but our
Trial; and to accept of such a Deliverance will make us liable to his
Vengeance. The Question then is, whether it be a Sin to abjure our lawful
Sovereign, and to assist an Usurper against him, we believe that it is a Sin
against humane Laws, and against the Laws of God and Nature, and if it be a
Sin, then interests of Flesh and Blood cannot make it lawful; and therefore to
talk of God's Deliverance, when the only Question is about the lawfulness of
abjuring a lawful Sovereign, is in plain English only Cant and Banter.

His 6th Argument, wherein he undertakes to confute Bishop Sanderson, has
fallen into better Hands, and there I shall leave it; the sum of it is this,
That we must renounce our Allegiance to the dispossessed Prince, for the sake
of the public Good, the Necessity and Ends of Government; and I shall only
observe that here he Argues upon the Fundamental Principle of the Jesuits,
Republicans, and Fanati^ks, who have written for Resistance, and if the Doctor
expects it, I will make good this Charge against him.

His 7th Argument is this, These Principles answer all the Ibid. p. 43.
Ends of Government, both for the security of the Prince and Subjects, and that
is a good Argument to believe them true. These Principles, What are they?
Nonresistance, Non-assistance, and Allegiance to Usurpers: A Prince who is in
Possession, is secured in Possession by them (as far as any Principles can
secure him) against all attempts of his Subjects, who must submit to him
without Resistance, though they are ill used. On the contrary, here is no
Security for even the best of Princes; his Subjects are indeed forbidden to
resist him, but if any attempt be made against him by Subjects or Foreigners,
he may be left to duel them all, and to sight his Battles by himself against
all his Enemies. He will say that a good Prince must be defended by his
Subjects, and so say the Republicans that he must never be resisted and
deposed: But it is the unavoidable Mischief of their Principle, that the
Subjects are made the Judges of their Sovereign, and they will often judge the
best of Kings to be Tyrants. And is not the Doctor's Principle liable to the
same Mischief? If Subjects have a Page 27.
very bad King who notoriously violates their Rights, they are not bound to
defend him; and are they not plainly then the Judges of his Crown? They may
judge the best of Kings to be a very bad one, and then David look to thy self,
for Absalom, or Sheba, any Rebellious Son or Subject may destroy thee at their
Pleasure; there is but little difference between Resistance and Non-Assistance,
as to the Security of Kings, the one exposes them defenseless to be murdered
by the other, this brings them to the Scaffold, and that chops off their Heads;
and it is the same thing to Princes whether they are betrayed or resisted,
abandoned or deposed, assaulted by Assassins, or exposed naked to them. But,

The Doctor's Principles will not serve the Revolutions of Government, Page 43.
to remove one King and set up another, and why so? the Revolutions of
Government are not the Subjects Duty but God's Prerogative; that is, God may
make Revolutions, but the Subjects must not promote them, and if God can change
Governments without the Subjects Assistance, why may he not do it without their
Compliance; But yet Subjects must comply and transfer their Allegiance, and
then the new King is secure, till he disobliges his Subjects, for then they who
have Power from God, will think they have a Call to execute his Prerogative,
and the rest will say in their Hearts, let him go if he cannot defend himself;
and if Page 27.
sighting by himself he chances to ^e beaten, then God removes him, we must
^dore the rising Sun, and Allegiance must ^e always a Lacquey to Success. These
^re Principles sure that Princes have reason ^o be jealous of, for whatever
Service they may do them at one time, they may do them as great disservice at
another; they advance Usurpers to the Throne, and then tumble them headlong
from it.

But when any Prince is settled in the Throne, these Principles put Page 43.
an end to all Disputes of Right and Title, and bind his Subjects to him by
Duty and Conscience. I may answer in his own way, it is evident that these
Principles were either unknown to the Page 44.
World, (and that is an Argument against them) or else, that they cannot put an
end to Disputes of Right and Title; for there have been such Disputes in all
Ages, and I believe will be to the end of the World: If this be trifling; let
the Doctor answer for it. But admit his Principles were generally received, it
is evident they can never put an end to Disputes of Right, nor bind the
Subjects by Duty and Conscience to an Usurper; for he expressly acknowledges,
that the Providence Page 26.
of God removes and sets up Kings* but alters no legal Rights, nor forbids
those who are dispossessed to recover their Rights. The dispossessed Prince has
still a legal Right and Claim, which he may lawfully prosecute by War; And is
not here an admirable end the Controversy about Right? Oh! but this Controversy
is between the Princes only, upon these Principles it can be none among the
Subjects, for they are bound by Duty and Conscience to the Prince in
Possession. And what are they bound to? Non-Resistance and Submission? Is that
any Security to the Sovereign when he is invaded by the lawful* Prince? Are
they bound to Allegiance, or to an actual defense of the Usurper against him?
That they cannot be, for it would be a bond of Iniquity; if the dispossessed
Prince has a just cause of War, and this is evident to the Subjects, Is it
lawful for them to support an unjust Cause against a just Cause? It is
generally agreed, that a War cannot be just on both sides; Grotius gives this
Reason, because in the nature Lib. 2. c* 23. sect. 13.
of the thing there cannot be a moral Faculty unto contrary Actions, a right in
one side to invade, in the other to defend; and Vasquez Tom. 1. Dis. 6^. c. 3.
this, because that a War be just on one side, it is requisite there be
injustice on the other, for herein consists the reason of War, that he who
deserves it should be punished by vindictive Justice: If the War of the legal
Prince be therefore just, and the War of the Usurper unjust, these Consequences
must inevitably follow. 1. That the Usurper is bound to restore the Crown he
has usurped, for if it be unjust to defend it, it must be unjust to keep it. 2.
If he is bound to restore it, he has no right to it by God's Donation. 3. He is
responsible for all the Blood that is shed in an unjust War, his Soul must
answer for all the Persons that are killed, as for so many Murders. And, 4.
The Subjects cannot lawfully assist him in murdering Innocent Persons, and
much less in executing a Sentence of Death, (for such in effect is War) upon
their innocent Sovereign to whom they had sworn Allegiance, and who seeks for
nothing, but what is justly his own.

And now upon the whole, is not this Scheme of Principles an incomparable
Security for Princes? Subjects must not depose their Princes, but they may
stand by and see them deposed and murdered; if the best of Princes be
unfortunate, they may lawfully abjure them, and swear Allegiance to the
Usurper, and then contribute their Purses, Prayers, and Arms to destroy their
lawful Sovereign. But let the Usurper be sure to be fortunate still, and not to
invade our Properties and Religion, let him look to it, or most Men will say,
let him go if he cannot defend himself; that he is placed in the Page 26.
Throne at present, does not prove that it is God's will it should always be
so. The dispossessed Prince has a lawful War against him, and if he gets a
Battle, he is God's Ordinance again, and our Allegiance is due to his Victory.

On the contrary, if Principles are to be judged by their being for the
Security of the Prince and Subject, an immovable Allegiance to our lawful
Prince, will appear to be the truest, for it is the best Principle to prevent
all Revolutions of Government; and all the Mischiefs of Civil War and Anarchy
which usually attend them, and therefore is most for the Peace and Security of
Human Societies. But to this the Doctor has several Objections.

1. If this Principle would prevent all Revolutions, it is a demonstration Page
44.
against it, that it is a bad Principle, because it is contrary to God's
Prerogative of reproving and setting up Kings. This Objection concludes as
strongly against Justice and Christianity it self; for it is certain, that if
the Principles of Justice and of Christian Religion were universally preached,
there would be no Usurpations nor Revolutions; and that is a Demonstration with
the Doctor, that they are bad Principles, mere Human Inventions, which cannot
come from God.

2. It is evident, that this Principle was either unknown to the Ibid.
World, or that it cannot prevent the Revolutions of Government. But still it
may be the best Principle to prevent them, and no Man ever affirmed that it
would always actually prevent them. Mankind are not generally governed by
Principles, but by Lusts and Passions: Christianity is the best Religion to
prevent Revolutions, and to preserve the Peace of Societies, but we see, de
facto, it fails of preventing them no less than our Principle of Allegiance.

3. Such Principles as must dissolve Human Societies when such Ibid.
Revolutions happen, and expose the most conscientious Men to the greatest
Sufferings, without serving any good end by them, cannot be true. I answer,
there is no Principle of Morality and Religion but may occasion the dissolution
of Human Societies, but then the wickedness of Men is the proper Cause of it,
and not the Principle. The Doctor has answered this Objection himself, the
Divine Providence Page 34.
takes care of all such extraordinary cases, and there we must leave them. And
even his own Principle is liable to the same Objection; for till the new Prince
is settled, no Allegiance is due to him, and therefore in that Interval which
may last for an Age or more, since no Allegiance is due there can be no
Sovereign, nor Subject, and consequently no Society. As for the Sufferings of
conscientious Men, that is their Portion here, but great is their Reward in
Heaven; and whereas he says those Sufferings can serve to no good end; the
keeping of their Consceinces void of Offense, is one good end, and the
promoting the public good of Human Society in general, is another. But does
not this Principle tend to dissolve Societies? No otherwise than as
Christianity tends to set Men at variance in the same Household, not naturally,
but contingently, not in its own Nature, but in the Event of Things, and by the
Wickedness of Men.

4. Is the Right of any Prince so sacred, as to stand in competition page 45.
with the very Being of Humane Societies? I answer, That the Sovereign is
comprehended in the Society, and ought not to be opposed to it; that we must
not do Evil that Good may come of it; and that Perjury and Injustice,
Revolutions, Civil Wars and Anarchy, are against the Interests of Society. Must
we defend the Prince's Right with the destruction of the Nation, and the Ruin
of his Subjects? This perhaps may be a Case in the New Atlantis or Vtopia: But
I ask another Question, may we abjure and sacrifice a lawful Prince for the
safety of his Rebels and Enemies? Which is most necessary, that the Nation
should be governed, or that such a Prince should govern it? And if he be driven
out of his Kingdom and cannot govern, must we th^n have no Government? Or how
shall the Nation be governed, if the Subjects are bound to pay Allegiance to no
other Prince? Let us remember the Rump and Cromwell, and all these Questions
are answered. The Loyal Members of the Church of England in those days thought
it necessary that the Nation should be governed by the lawful Prince, they
reserved their Allegiance for him when he was driven out of his Kingdom, and
could not govern, and they refused to pay Allegiance to Usurpers. In short, it
is better to be without Government, than to do Evil for the sake of those who
will not be governed by their lawful Governors. But this is to make all
Mankind the Slaves and Properties of Princes; as if all Men were made for
Princes, not Princes for the Government of Men. To this I oppose some other
Sayings of the former Dr. Sherlock, in his Case of Resistance: If the King be
God's Minister; he is upon that Account as much greater than all as God is.
page 104. The whole Nation is as much Subject to the higher Powers a^ any
single Man. page 107. Sovereign Power is inseparable from the Person of a
Sovereign Prince. p. 200. We must not deny Duty to be Duty, because we may
suffer by it. p. 215. And we must patiently submit to a Prince, though he
persecute and oppress us. p. 220. The Doctor may reproach us if he will, for
preaching the Doctrine of the Bowstring, and making all Mankind the Slaves and
Property of Princes: But then he should renounce his Nonresistence and his King
together; for that Doctrine is equally loaded with those Reproaches, and our
Principle will be as easily discharged from them.

I have now done with the Doctor's Arguments; there are some others which are
scattered in his Book, but they are reducible to these I have examined. I have
answered them fairly, and to my own Reason satisfactorily, and all ingenuous
Men I hope will be satisfied, that if I am in an Error, I have some show of
Reason for it, though I pretend not to Demonstrations, and self-evident
Propositions.

But I must not give it over thus; for the Doctor has endeavored to vindicate
his Arguments: the greater part of his Vindication relates to Bishop Overall's
Convocation-Book, the Case of Athaliah, and the Case of Obedience to the late
Usurpers; and these Disputes will be managed better by others: It is my
business to answer his Arguments from Scripture and Reason; what he offers in
his Vindication from Scripture is considered before, and now we must examine
what he offers farther from Reason. Our Dispute, as far as Reason is concerned,
depends upon this single Question, Whether it can be proved by any Arguments
drawn from Principles of Reason, that every Usurper who is settled, is invested
with God's Authority? But the Doctor pretends not in his Vindication to
produce new Reasons for the Affirmative, he only repeats his former Arguments,
and fortifies them with new Evasions.

His fundamental Argument from Reason is contained in his 3d Proposition, and
the sum of it is this, That God governs the World, and sets up Kings, when by
his Providence he advances them to the Throne, that he never does this by his
permissive Will, because all Events, and especially such as will do most good
or hurt to the World, must be asscribed to his positive Will, his Order, and
Appointment; and hence he concludes, that all Usurpers being advanced by God's
Providence, are invested with his Authority. I have endeavored to confute this
Argument, and in his Vindication I meet with a long Discourse Vind. p. 58. to
62.
about Providence where he endeavored to defend it.

He demands, How God does Page 58.
make Kings in England? he sends no Prophets to anoint them; therefore he
makes them no other way but by the Events of Providence, and how does God make
Kings by his Providence? Truly this can be done no other way but by placing
them in the Throne, and settling them there with the general consent of the
People. And hence he infers, that when God makes a King by this Providential
Settlement, he invests him with his Authority, and makes it the Duty of
Subjects to obey him. I reply to all this, that God makes Kings in England
only by his Providence, is true; but there are two ways of making Kings by
Providence, by Permission and Appointment; by the conveyance of Right and
Authority, or of bare Power and Possession: an Usurper is made the wrong Way by
God's Concession of Power, and Permission of his Wickedness. But thus the
Doctor argues against the Advancement of Usurpers by God's permissive
Providence, A Prince, says he, may ascend the Throne, page 59.
and govern a Kingdom for many Years, (it may be 100 Years) without God's
Authority, and then it should seem that God does not rule in these Kingdoms,
which he does not dispose of by his own Will and Counsel, but suffers Usurpers
to take the Government of them. Now if this be an absurd or impious
Consequence, the Doctor himself is bound to answer for it: he maintains that a
Prince dispossessed is divested of Gods Authority, and an Usurper is not
invested with it, till he is thoroughly settled; but this Interregnum may
continue 100 years, or more; he acknowledges himself, that in England there was
no Settlement for near 20 years together, in the times of the late successive
Usurpations; and it should seem then that God did Ibid.
not rule in this Kingdom, when he only suffered Usurpers to take the
Government of it, and that God did not govern it, when it was not governed by
his Authority or Minister. How the Doctor will answer this I know not; but
this I know, that God's Providence does govern in times of Usurpation, of Civil
War, of Anarchy, and in those Countries where there is no Civil Government at
all; and one may safely affirm, that God governed this Kingdom in the time of
Cromwell, when yet it was not governed by God's Minister, or by his Authority.
But does Providence and Government signify only his Permission? Ibid.
No man says it; does God look on, and see Men snatch at Crowns, and take them,
and keep them, and exercise an Authority which he never gave them? And does God
then inspire and authorize usurping Princes to snatch at Crowns, and possess
them? Does he only look on and see infinite Villainies and Impieties every day
committed? Does he suffer Schismatics, Rebels, Pirates, and Murderers, to
exercise an Usurped Authority which he never gave them? But to resolve
Providence into a bare Permission, especially Ibid.
in matters of such vast consequence is to deny God's Government of the World.
But we resolve not Providence into a bare Permission; it is our Faith, and our
exceeding Comfort, that Providence overrules Men's Wickedness, and brings Good
out of Evil; but we believe also that God is not the Author of Sin, be i^
great or little, and that all wicked Actions, though of never so vast a
consequence, are only permitted by him for wi^e Ends and Purposes: in short,
we maintain God's Government of the World, but not in Derogation to his Justice
and Holiness.

But the Doctor endeavors to answer this Objection against his Principle, That
to say that prosperous Ibid.
Usurpers, when they are settled in the Throne, are placed there by God and
have his Authority, is to make God a party to their Wickedness. The force of
the Objection consists in this; that since according to the Doctor's Scheme of
Principles, it is Wickedness in an Usurper to ascend the Throne, and it must be
Wickedness also to keep it, because the legal Right of the former Prince
remains, which to detain from him is Injustice; hence it follows evidently,
That if God authorizes the Usurper to possess and keep the Throne, he gives him
Authority to commit a Sin, which he will punish with Damnation, and is
therefore the principal Author of the Wickedness.

And how is this Objection Answered? First we are told, It is an Argument
against God's Government of Ibid.
the World, and this is the Reason, for if God cannot direct and overruled the
Wickedness of Men to accomplish his own Counsels, without being the Author of
those Sins, whereby such Events are brought to pass, there is an end of God's
Providence and Holiness; for the most glorious Designs of Providence have been
accomplished by very wicked Means, even the Crucifixion of our Savior himself.
Now this is a great Truth, but nothing to the purpose; God can certainly
overruled Wickedness without being the Author of it; But what then? Does God's
overruling Providence convey Authority to persist in Wickedness? Or does it
alter the nature of Good and Evil, and make the unjust Detention of another's
Right to be no Injustice? We have no dispute about God's bringing Good out of
Evil; We maintain that it is unlawful to detain another's Right, and that God
cannot give Authority to do that which is unlawful, because it is contrary to
his Goodness and Holiness: And to say that God authorizes no Man to be wicked,
I am sure, is no denial of his Providence, nor any Argument against it.

But the Doctor speaks particularly to the Case of transferring Kingdoms; he
supposes, No Man will Page 60.
deny, but that God as the supreme Lord of the World may give the Kingdoms of
the World to whom he pleases, without doing Injustice to any Prince, who can
have no Right, but by his Gift. This I grant is his unquestionable Prerogative.
Then, says he, the only dispute can be, about God's bringing such Events to
pass by the wickedness of Men. I Answer, we have no dispute about it; no doubt
it is God's Perogative to give Kingdoms and Riches to whomsoever he pleases;
but the Question is, whether God does properly give them when they are unjustly
Possessed, and when it is a Sin to keep them; if he does, we think the
Consequence is, that he authorizes Wickedness, and to this the Doctor Answers
nothing; but he laboriously proves what is nothing to the purpose, that it is
Just for God to bring Good out of Evil. God permits Robberies for good Ends,
but this proves not that Robbers have a divine Right to their Booty, it is a
Sin to keep it, and as long as it is so, we are sure they have not God's
Authority for it.

He supposes farther, that God may permit ambitious Princes to depopulate
Countries, to depose Princes, and subdue their Kingdoms; and then he asks,
Which most becomes the divine Page 61.
Wisdom to suffer such Men, when they please, to overturn Kingdoms only to
gratify their own Lusts; or to give prosperous Success to them when he sees
fit to new model the World, to pull down such a Prince or to chastise such a
Nation? And thus he Answers his own Question, I am sure this much more becomes
the divine Wisdom, than a bare Permission of such Violence without any further
Design, which does not become it. Thus he still disputes against his own
Imaginations; for no one else does imagine, that God permits the deposition of
Princes without any other Design, than to gratify the Lusts of Usurpers; there
are many good Ends for which he may permit it, the Chastisement or the
Punishment of the Princes themselves, and of their Subjects, the Disciplining
of them by Afflictions, the Trial of their Faith and Patience, the Illustration
of his own Glory, and many other Ends that are worthy of the divine Providence.
When Charles I. was deposed and murdered, that execrable Violence was permitted
for wise Ends; but this was no Proof that God had authoritatively transferred
his Kingdoms to his Deposers and Murderers: And this is a plain Demonstration,
that it may become the divine Wisdom to suffer Princes to be deposed, and
Kingdoms to be subdued, without any Design of transferring them to Usurpers.

But why may not God give them those Kingdoms which he has overturned by them?
Undoubtedly he may; he may give them by the Conveyance of a lawful Right, or by
express Revelation; but the dispute is not, what God may do, but what he does,
and whether he does properly give Kingdoms to Usurpers. But the Doctor supposes
again, That it is as agreeable to the Sovereignty, Wisdom, Ibid.
and Justice of God, to give a Kingdom to an Usurper, as to suffer a wicked
Tyrannical Prince to ascend the Throne with a legal Title. This he supposes but
without Proof, and against Reason; God by Virtue of his absolute Sovereignty
may give a Kingdom to any one, as he can give any Man's Estate, or Wife, to any
Man by the same Sovereign Dominion: But First, The Possession of an Estate,
Wise, or Kingdom, is no Evidence of God's Donation: And Secondly, When God does
really give a Kingdom, all former Rights are extinguished by a divine Right,
and it is no Injustice in him to whom it is given to possess and keep it. But
according to the Doctor's Principle, the Right of the former Prince is still
valid, and he may prosecute it by a lawful War, and therefore it must be unjust
in the new Prince to detain it from him; and this does make a great difference
between the Doctor's Usurper, and a Tyrannical Prince with a legal Title; the
later has lawful Authoririty from God which he can keep and exercise without
Sin, the Tyrannical abuse of it is yet wholly from himself, and is only
permitted by God for Ends agreeable to his Wisdom and Justice. But the Doctors
Usurper has Authority given him by God, and yet the Possession and Defense of
it against the lawful Prince is unjust and unlawful; now this is a plain
contradiction in the nature of the Thing, and to God's Wisdom and Justice also,
for hereby God is made to authorize that which is formally unjust, which is
contradictory to his Justice; and to give a Prince a Kingdom, and yet oblige
him to restore it, which is disagreeable to his Wisdom. But in short, let the
Doctor prove if he can, that it is no Sin in an Usurper to possess himself of
the Throne, and that he is not bound to restore it, and there shall be an end
of this Controversy; I will acknowledge that he has God's Authority, and that
his Principle does not charge God as being the Author of Wickedness; but if
that be impossible to be proved, he may wash and varnish, and lay on Colors
till he is weary, the Ethiopian will still retain his Skin, and the Leopard
his spots.

The next Objection he labors to remove is this, That his Principle justifies
an unreasonable and wicked Ibid.
Doctrine, by making the Acts or Permissions of Providence a Rule for practice
against Right and Justice. The sum of his Answer is this; He acknowledges that
it is impious to justify Actions from Success* or to conclude that is God's
Cause, which Providence prospers, because it confounds the difference of Good
and Evil, and destroys all the standing Rules of Right and Justice: But yet it
is a necessary Duty to discharge those Duties which the Providence of God lays
upon us according to the Nature and Intention of the Providence; and thus God's
Providence may in some Sense be a Rule of Practice, and may make or extinguish
a Duty by changing our relations or condition of Life; as in the present Case
he must transfer my Allegiance when he changes my King. In another place he
states it Vin. p. 44.
thus, The Laws of God are the Rules of Good and Evil to us, not his
Providence; but Providence lays new Obligations upon us by creating new
Relations: The Laws of God prescribe the Duty of Subjects to their Prince, but
the Providence of God makes him. I Answer,

1. That impious Doctrine which teaches, that the Cause, which Providence
prospers, is God's, does seem the unavoidable Consequence of the Doctor's
Principle; for he teaches that all Events are God's doing, and that he
positively decrees, appoints, accomplishes all Usurpations: But if all Events
are God's doing, he is certainly the Author of that which he does; and in such
Events which are necessarily and inseparably accompanied with Iniquity, he must
be the Author of the Iniquity too: And as to the Event of Usurpation, if he
decrees, assists, and accomplishes it, if he does all this for Usurpers, we
must needs conclude, that their Cause is Gods', for it is impossible for God to
do more than this for any Cause whatsoever.

2. If the Laws of God, and not his Providence, are the Rules of Good and Evil
to us, then it follows undeniably, that Providence of it self can never direct
us how to distinguish between Good and Evil; and therefore when the Question
is, whether an Action be lawful or not, we must have recourse to Laws, and not
to Providence, to determine it: Thus when we dispute about Allegiance to
Usurpers, the Question must be, whether there be any Law that requires it; and
if there be no such Law, it is certain there is no such Duty. It is true that
the divine Providence does change our Condition and Relations, and by
introducing new Relations, does oblige us to new Duties: But it is also certain
that all Changes which befall, our Selves, or the Persons to whom we are
related, do not extinguish our Relations and Obligations to them, and therefore
we must have some other Rule besides Providence to instruct us when they are
extinguished. When I am in Prison, or my Father i^ in Prison, here is a
providential Change, but no Cessation of Relation or Duty. When the Course of
civil Government is interrupted by Rebellion, and the Prince cannot actually
administer; here is a providential Change which affects my Sovereign, but is no
discharge of my Allegiance.

And how then shall I know when the Events of Providence do extinguish my Duty?
My Duty does not cease upon every Change in the condition of my Sovereign that
is made by Providence, and it is impossible that the Events of Providence
should direct me, when it is extinguished by any Event of Providence: And
therefore I must be directed by some other Rule, which may inform me, when any
Duty is extinguished by a Change of Providence, and that Rule can be nothing
else but Law, either divine or humane Law. Thus it appears that though a Change
is made sometimes in our Duties, by the Events of Providence, yet our only
Direction is Law, and thither we must appeal at last in all our Controversies
about the Change of Duty; and the result is, that if there be no Law that
requires Allegiance to Usurpers, the Events of Providence cannot make it to be
a Duty. Providence, it is true, does make Kings, and God transferrs my
Allegiance when he changes my King: But the Question is, whether Providence
does not make Kings by Permission, and whether when my lawful Prince is
dispossessed, my Relation to him is extinguished; and the only way to determine
those Doubts, is by appealing not to Providence, but to Law and Reason.

The Doctor tells us, That we must conform our selves in the discharge of those
Duties that Providence lays upon us, according to the nature and intention of
the Providence. But how shall I know that it is the intention of Providence,
when an Usurper is advanced, that I should pay Allegiance to him? I know that
God disapproves Usurpations and strictly forbids them, and declares that he
will punish them; and I know also, if Usurpation be so great a Wickedness, that
God's Providence does not assist or authorize it, though he does not interpose
his irresistible Power to hinder it, this I am taught by natural and revealed
Religion, and I find no Precept in either to assist any Man in his Wickedness;
in the whole Progress of the Usurpation I find nothing but Injustice, in the
Rebellion or Invasion, in setting the Usurper on the Throne, and in supporting
him on it; and therefore I have reason to conclude, that since my Assistance is
unlawful, neither the Nature nor the Intention of the Providence does require
it.

There remain some other Objections and Evasions in the Vindication which
relate to Providence, and I will consider them as they occur.

He objects against our Principle, that it opposes Providence to Providence;
the force of the Objection is this; God does settle the Crown on any Vind. p.
43, 45.
Family no otherwise but by his Providence, and when an Usurper is settled in
the Throne, he is advanced by Providence too; and therefore to oppose an
Hereditary Right which is made by the overruling Influence of Providence,
against God's setting up an Usurper by other Acts of his Providence, is to
oppose Providence against Providence, his former Providence against his later
Providence. Now there is no absurdity at all in opposing Providence to
Providence: A Divine Entail is nothing but an Act of Providence, and yet the
Doctor thinks that the Providential Advancement of an Usurper is of no validity
against it, and thus himself does oppose Providence to Providence. God's
Providence may make Kings by Nomination, by the conveyance of a legal Right,
and by granting Possession without Settlement, and Possession with it: And if
it be no Absurdity to oppose and prefer the first to all the others, and the
fourth to the third, why is it absurd to prefer the second to the third and
fourth: It would be absurd indeed if the latter Providence were as clear a
Declaration of God's positive Will as the former, but that is the great
Controversy between us: All Men are agreed, that when a lawful King is on the
Throne he has God's Authority; but not that an Usurper settled or unsettled is
invested with it. I am sure there is a Providence that is only permissive,
which conveys no Authority, which we cannot possibly distinguish, but by the
moral nature of Events; and I think it is no absurdity to distinguish
Providence, nor to oppose Wrong to Right, a permissive Providence to a legal
Right, which is established by God's Authoritative Providence. And this single
Observation, that* for all that yet appears, an Usurper is advanced only by
permissive Providence, is a sufficient Answer to all the Reflections which he
makes upon our opposing Providence to Providence.

He observes, that this is to shackle and confine Providence, Page 45.
and that we will not allow God's Providence to change and alter. We only
maintain that God's permissive Providence is no discharge of our Allegiance,
and that we may not abjure and resist our lawful Sovereign, because God has
suffered others to rebel, or to depose him: We confine not God's Providence,
but we confine our selves to that which is just and lawful, and we hope it is
no shackling of God, to say he is not the Author of Iniquity.

He observes that when lawful Kings and Usurpers are advanced, Ibid.
it is all but Providence still; and he desires to know, why the Providence of
an Entail is more Sacred and Obligatory than any other act of Providence, which
gives a settled Possession of the Throne? And is not an unsettled Possession an
effect of Providence too? Is a Divine Entail any thing more than an Act of
Providence? It is all but Providence still. But the Answer is obvious; it is
God's Authority, and not Providence, which is Obligatory; we are sure that
Lawful Kings have his Authority, but not that Usurpers have it, they are
advanced by God, but by his permissive Providence only.

Lastly, He raises a great Dust about opposing Humane Page 43.
Rights and Laws to God's Authority. I will not dispute with him about the
Obligation of Humane Laws; it is enough to answer, that he supposes what he has
not proved, that Usurpers have God's Authority, because they are advanced by
his Providence; and if this is not true, all his Harangues about Humane Laws
and Providence do signify nothing. I have often urged the Case of Robbery, and
the unjust possession of private Estates and Properties, to show the
unconclusiveness of all his Arguments from Providence, and to prove that
Possession by Providence is no Evidence of Divine Right or Authority. But the
Doctor has found out Distinctions and Evasions to take off the Force of these
Instances, and now I am at leisure to consider them.

The Substance of his First Answer is, That the Dispute is Case of Al. p. 34.
not about legal Right but about Authority; no Man pretends that Thieves and
Pirates have God's Authority; they have Force and Violence which every Man may
submit to when he cannot help it: but Sovereign Power is God's Authority,
though Princes may be advanced to it by no honester means than Theft or
Burglary. I answer, 1. That no difference is here assigned between the
Usurpations of Sovereignty and private Property, but only this, that Sovereign
power is God's Authority: I have answered all his Arguments whereby he would
make good his Proposition, and if this Proposition be unprov'd, the Evasion
that is founded on it must needs be insufficient.

2. This Evasion is at last a begging of the Question; the Fundamental Dispute
is, Whether God's Authority is always annexed unto Sovereign Power? His
Fundamental Argument from Reason, is that all Providential Events are God's
Appointment; it is objected that Piracy and Robbery are Providential Events, as
well as Usurpation; and the sum of his Answer is this, That Sovereign Power is
God's Authority, which is nothing but arguing in a Circle, and is plainly
petitio principii.

3. Thieves and Pirates have often Sovereign Power; they exercise the Power of
the Sword, they make Laws, decide Controversies, and assume all the Properties
and Badges of Sovereign Authority; and to make them absolutely God's Ordinance
according to the Doctor's Principle, the Sovereign Thieves and Pirates are
settled in their Administration by the voluntary Consent and Submission of their
Subjects; such there have been in the World, and such there may be, and
whenever they shall be, they will have as good a Title to God's Authority as
any Usurper, for Sovereign Power is God's Authority, and when once the Subject
Thieyes have consented to their Sovereignty, upon pain of Damnation they must
pay* Allegiance to them.

4. It has been answered, that Thieves and Pirates have God's Providence as
well as Usurpers, though they have not God's Anthority. A Thief cannot take a
Purse whether God will or no, and he must have the Concurrence of God's
Providence to take it, and if these are Arguments of God's Will and
Appointment* if Providence give a Divine Right, it is certain that the Thief
has it, as well as the Usurper, for they have both the same evidence for it.

To this the Doctor replies, That there is a great difference Vind. page 54, 55.
between these Cases, which is this, that to the settlement of an Estate,
nothing more is required but a mere legal Humane Right, and though the
Providence of God allots Men's private Fortunes, yet he gives no Man a Right to
an Estate which he has got by Fraud, Injustice, and Violence; but leaves all
such legal Rights to the care of public Government. But on the contrary, it is
God's Authority which makes a King, and not a mere Humane Right, and God's
Authority is not inseparably annexed to Humane Entails, for he can make a King
without a Humane Right; if mere Law made a King, as it makes an Heir to an
Estate, it were very unjust to own any but a legal King; but if God can remove
a legal King and set up an Usurper, then it is no Injustice when God does so,
to transfer our Allegiance. This contains the force of his Reply, and in Answer
to it I observe,

1. That this is no Reply to the Objection, which is only levelled against his
Arguments from Providence, the sum of it is this; that the Usurpation of a
Crown and an Estate are effected alike by Providence, and that it is impossible
to find any difference in the Concurrence of it, and therefore if Providence
proves a Right, the Usurper of an Estate has a divine Right to it. The Doctor
replies, that a legal Right is sufficient for an Estate, but to make a King he
must have God's Authority. Admit this to be true, what does it signify to the
Dispute about Providence? How does it show that there is not the same
concurrence of Providence to the Usurping of an Estate and the Usurping of a
Kingdom? As God can give Kingdoms, so he can give Estates to whomsoever he
will, and if the mere providential Advancement to a Kingdom, is a proof that it
is God's Will to give it, why is not the same providential Advancement to an
Estate, a proof of the divine Donation also? If God may give the Possession of
an Estate without a Right to keep it, so he may give Kingdoms; and if God's
Providence does not overruled and cancel the Obligation of Laws in the one
Case, how shall it appear that it cancels them in the other? he acknowledges
that Providence gives no Right to the unjust Possession of an Estate, and yet
the unjust Possession is certainly an Event; and therefore he must quit his
fundamental Argument, which is drawn from the Events of Providence; for he must
either confess that all Events are not God's Doing, or that his Doing, his
Giving Possession of any thing is no Evidence of any Right or Authority to
possess it. In short, his Reply is a Confession that his general Arguments from
Providence are unconclusive. God's Providence is nothing when it conveys the
unjust Possession of an Estate; but when it conveys a Crown to an unjust
Usurper, it is an uncontrollable Evidence of his positive Will and Authority;
this Distinction cannot be deduced from Providence itself, for in both Cases
the Concurrence is the same, he must go to something else to prove it, either
Reason or Scripture, and all his Arguments from both I have examined already.

2. The same difference that is assigned in the Reply between a Crown and an
Estate, may be applied to other Cases; I will instance in a Bishop's Right to
his Temporalty, and to spiritual Jurisdiction; to the former nothing is
required besides a mere humane Right, but to enjoy the later, he must have
God's Authority; suppose now that both are usurped by an illegal and
schismatical Intruder, who is certainly in some sense Episcopus divina
Providentia: The Dr. will confess, that Providence has given him no Right to
the Temporalties; the Question then is, whether ^^ has a Right to the Spiritual
Jurisdiction, which is God's Authority? It may be urged, that there is indeed
an ordinary lawful way, whereby Bishops are invested with that Authority; but
God's Authority is not inseparably annexed to that ordinary Vocation, he can
make a Bishop without it, and when he does so, a mere lawful Vocation is not a
sufficient Reason to adhere to a Bishop deposed by God, nor can the want of it
^ustisie the disowning of a Bishop whom God has advanced. The plain Resolution
of such a Case is this: God can make a Bishop without an ordinary Vocation, but
this he never does, and he that pretends to an extraordinary Call, is bound to
prove it by indubitable Evidence; if he cannot, we must reject the
extraordinary, and adhere to the ordinary Bishop, and they that do otherwise
are schismatical Dividers of Catholic Communion. And thus it is in the Case of
Kingdoms; God can depose a lawful King, and set up an Usurper without
antecedent Right; but before we can transfer our Allegiance, we must be sure
that God has done this: The pretender to an extraordinary Commission must
produce extraordinary Evidence, but the ordinary Events of Providence are not
sufficient to prove it; for the Thief and the schismatical Bishop are in
Possession by Providence, as well as the Usurper; and many things do happen
under the Direction of Providence, which God himself does condemn and punish,
which Men are bound by God to resist to the utmost of their Power.

3. There is no such great Disparity, as is pretended, between Right to a Crown
and Right to an Estate. Right in general is a moral Quality, whereby we may
possess or do any thing justly, it extends to Government of Persons, as well
as possession of Things, and when it is applied to the former it is called
Authority: the Rule and measure of Right is Law, and the Obligation of all Law
does proceed only from the Authority of God. A Right to an Estate is a moral
Power of possessing and enjoying it justly; a Right to the Government of a
Family or Kingdom, is a moral Power to command those Societies; and where there
is no Right to command, there can be no Obligation to obey; these Rights may be
acquired by the positive Laws of God, the Laws of Nature, and the Laws of Civil
Societies, which are only so many several ways of God's revealing his Will to
Mankind; and therefore all Right either to Government or Estates, must be
ultimately resolved into the Authority of God, the only Lawgiver; concerning
the Right to govern there is no Question; and as to Estates and other private
Possessions, it seems evident, that no humane Law, considered as merely humane,
can create any Right to any thing: for humane Law is nothing but the Will of
Men, and the Act of one Man conveying a Possession to another, cannot oblige a
third Person to abstain from it, and therefore cannot appropriate it as the
Right of the other; the Obligation must proceed from some Authority superior
to both, which does bind the one by the Act of the other, and that can be no
other but God's Authority. In short, Right is the Effect of Law, and Law has
its Obligation from God; and hence it follows, that as God's Authority is
necessary to make a King, so is it necessary likewise to create a Right to an
Estate; and therefore in this respect there is no difference between the one
Right and the other; for both are ultimately founded on God's Authority. God by
his Sovereign Dominion can dispose of Estates as well as Crowns against Law,
but humane Laws cannot dispose of either without God's Authority, but the Power
of God to do a thing is no Proof that he does it, and Providential Possession
is still as good Evidence of God's Authority to an Estate, as of his Authority
to govern.

There remains yet another Reply to the Objection, which must also be
considered, it is this: That all private Injuries are reserved by God Vind. p.
46.
himself to the redress of Civil Government and Courts of Judicature, and
therefore his Providence has no effect at all on such personal Rights: But the
nature of the Thing proves, that when such Disputes arise which are too big for
humane Judicature, which God has reserved to his own Judgment, as the
Correction of Sovereign Princes, and the transferring of Kingdoms; here the
final Determinations of Providence in settling Princes on their Thrones, does
draw the Allegiance of Subjects after it. This contains the force of his
Evasion, and the first Answer to the former may sustice to this; that though
this difference be admitted between private Robbery, and the Usurpation of a
Crown, yet there is no difference between them as to the concurrence of
Providence; for Robbery is a providential Event, and if every Event is God's
Will and Appointment, the Robbery is confirmed by God's Will, and if the Civil
Magistrate does redress it, he fights against God, by contradicting his Order
and Appointment. But,

2. There is often no such Difference between Robbery and Usurpation; there is
none when the Banditi are so strong and powerful, that the Civil Powers are
not able to subdue them, for then their Injuries are too big for legal Redress;
there is none in a state of Nature when there is no Civil Government; there is
none when Anarchy is introduced by Civil War, and the Administration of Justice
is obstructed by Rebellion; and lastly there is none, when the injurious
Possession of an Estate cannot possibly be cleared by legal Evidence: In all
these Cases it is impossible that Oppressions, Thefts, and Robberies, should be
redressed by humane Judicature; it is God alone that can redress them, and
therefore according to the Doctour's way of arguing, the final Determination of
Providence does in such Cases create a Right, and the unjust Possessour is not
bound to Restitution.

But, faith the Doctor, to make the Cases parallel, he who Page 47.
unjustly seizes another Man's Estate, must be thoroughly settled in it; but
that no private Man can be who is under the Government of Laws, and has not
ligal Possession, and when he has, whether Right or Wrong, he must not be
violently dispossessed again. But, 1. If we may suppose a state of Nature, we
may suppose a private Man, who is not under the Government of civil Laws, to be
thoroughly settled in an Estate, which is by Right another's, and then the Case
is parallel; the unjust Possessor has a Providential Right, and being under no
Government, his claim by Providence is the same as the Doctor makes for
Usurpers, and it proves a divine Right to the purchase of Injustice. 2. When an
Estate is unjustly possessed, and yet the just Right cannot possibly be proved
by legal Evidence, here is a through legal Settlement of the unjust Possession,
for which there is no legal redress, and therefore this Case is parallel in
that respect to the Usurpation of a Kingdom; the Question upon it is, Whether
the Intruder has a divine Right by Providence, and may therefore lawfully keep
what God has given him? It Is true the injured Person cannot restore himself by
Force, because he has no Authority to use if, but it is certain the unjust
Selzor is bound to Restitution, though the Law cannot compel him, and therefore
has acquired no Right by his providential Possession: And so is the Usurper of
a Crown obliged in Conscience to restore it, and that is a plain Demonstration
that he has no Right to it; but if he will not restore it, the dispossessed
Prince has Authority to compel him, he may make a lawful War upon him, he has
still the Power of the Sword, and that is a Demonstration that he has God's
Authority: And thus much concerning the Objection about Thieves and Pirates.
But there remain somethings more to be considered.

The Doctor observes in his Vindication, That his Adversary Vind. p. 11.
is blundered for want of clear and distinct Notions concerning legal Powers,
and he pretends to clear all the Difficulties by stating the Terms. Now, says
he, We may understand legal, either with respect to the Laws of Nature, the Law
of Nations, or the Law of a particular Kingdom; and in this last Sense legal is
understood by all Men, who understand themselves in this Controversy of legal
Powers. Well, if I understand not my self, I cannot help it, for I understand
as well as I am able, and by legal Powers I have always understood such Powers
as are according to Law, either the Law of God, of Nature, of Nations, or of
political Societies. In the present Controversy the great Question is, to what
Powers our Allegiance is due, we think it is due to legal Powers, and if it
would be clearly proved, that an Usurper is a legal Power according to any Law
whatsoever, this Controversy would be ended.

He grants however, That legal Powers may be understood Page 12.
in a larger Notion, as that may be said to be legal, which is agreeable to the
Laws of Nature and Nations; and he adds, In this Sense Submission may make a
legal King of him, who by the Laws of the Land can be only King de Facto. Now
this, as he says, is worth considering, and a very little consideration will
show the Inconsistency of this Doctrine. For according to the Doctor's
Hypothesis, the King de Facto has a legal Right by the Laws of Nature and
Nations, and the dispossessed Prince has still a legal Right by the Laws of the
Kingdom: And hence it follows undeniably, that at the same time two opposite
Kings may have a legal Right to the same Throne, the one by the Law of Nature
and Nations, and the other by the Law of the Kingdom. But it is easy to show,
that this does imply a manifest Repugnancy, and I will exemplify it in the
instances of Charles and Oliver. Charles is the legal King by the Law of
England, and Oliver (who is in Possession with the Submission of the People) by
the Laws of Nature and Nations; and hence it follows that Charles has a Right
to be King, and Oliver has a Right to be King; but Charles has no Right because
it is in Oliver, and Oliver has no Right because it is in Charles. But though
Charles has a Right to the Crown, yet he has no Right to possess it, for Oliver
is a rightful Possessor of it, and yet he has no Right to keep it, because
Charles has a Right to take it from him. There cannot possibly be a greater
absurdity either in Law or Nature, than to say that the Possessor and the
Dispossessed, the Plaintiff and Defendant, have at the same instant a true and
real Right to the same thing in Question. When two opposite Rights are pleaded,
the one is undoubtedly none, if the Possessor has a good Right by the Law of
Nature, the Right of the Dispossessed must needs be extinguished, for he cannot
have a Right to possess that which is another by the Law of Nature, and if he
has no Right to possess, he has no Right to recover, and his legal Right at
last is only a Right to nothing. If the Doctor therefore can prove that his
Usurper has a Right by the Law of Nature and Nations, I will acknowledge that
Allegiance is due to him, and there is an end of the Controversy; but in all
his Harangues about the state of Nature, the state of Force, and the Submission
of the People, there is no Argument that proves it. In a state of Nature, when
Men are free from any Government, a free Consent, or a forced Submission, are
enough to make rightful Princes by the Law of Nature: But the Case is
different, when rightful Princes are established, and Subjects are sworn to pay
Allegiance to them; for then the Subjects are not sui juris, they have no Right
to consent, and therefore their Consent is nothing.

But a state of Force the Doctor thinks is parallel to a Vind. p. 13.
state of Nature, and when a Nation is Conquered, or private Subjects are under
the Power of an Usurper, then he thinks that force will justify Submission;
and so do I too, and his own instance does sufficiently prove it, for he tells
us, When we happen to fall into the Page 14.
Hands of Robbers, where the Government cannot protect us, we may very
innocently for our own Preservation, promise and swear to them such Things, as
are against the Laws of the Land, and which i^ would be unlawful for us to do
in other Circumstances. It is lawful no doubt to submit to Robbers, and in some
Cases it may be lawful to dispense with a humane Law for our own Preservation,
because it wa^ not the intention of the Law given to oblige in cases of
Extremity. But hence he infers, as he thinks, with greater Reason. That if the
Government cannot protect it* Subjects from a greater Force, they are al liberty
to submit to the greater Power. Where the greater Reason lies I know not the
force of an Usurper is no greater than the force of a Robber is to those who
are under it, and if Force does justify Submission, there is the same Reason
for Submitting to both: But what is all this to Allegiance, which is a great
deal more than Submission? Force will justify Submission to Robbers, but will
it justify the assisting of Robbers, or the joining in Robbery with them? Or
will it justify the assisting of an Usurper against a rightful Sovereign?

But our Obligations to Hitmane Government are reasonably Page 14.
supposed to except the Case of greater Force. What, in all Cases whatsoever?
The Casuists teach us, that there are many Cases in which Humane Laws do oblige
even unto certain Death, as Bp. Tailor Due. Dub. 448. Suarez d^ Leg. lib. 3. c.
3. n. 5.
particularly when to undergo the danger of Death is the express Obligation of
the Law, and such is the Obligation of legal Allegiance, as appears from the
ancient Oath of Ligeance, wherein the Subject is sworn, to bear true Faith to
the King of Life, and Member, and terreite Honor, that is, (as the Lord Coke
expounds it) until the letting out of the last drop of Calvin's Case.
our dearest Heart Blood. 2. When it is notorious that the Tyrant Power
threatens Tailor, ibid. 4^9. Suare^* ibid. n. 7.
Death to Subjects, to tempt them to transgress the Law, and to bid defiance to
the Authority of their Superior, they are then obliged to obey and dye, the
Law does then require our Fortitude and Patience, and the Lawgiver cannot be
presumed to allow the renouncing of his own Authority, or to make an Exception
that Subjects may become Enemies to it.

But the dissolution of the Government, or the Power of Vind. p. 14.
the Prince to protect himself, or his Subjects in his Government, puts an end
to the Obligation of Oaths. This Assertion depends on his Fundamental
Principle, that a dispossessed Prince has no Right to Allegiance, and with that
Principle it stands or falls: I shall only observe that it follows thence; that
our Oaths are cancelled by every Rebellion, for that (as far as it goes) is a
dissolution of the Government; and it follows also that when a Subject falls
under the Power of Robbers, who require him upon pain of Death to renounce his
Sovereign, he is then at liberty to renounce him, and to swear Allegiance to
the Robber; for the Prince has no Power to protect his Subject in his
Government, and that puts an end to the Obligation of his Oath.

He asserts that every private Page 18.
Man, or any City, or Garrison, when they are overpowered, may submit to the
Conqueror, and become his Subjects, which implies that they may lawfully
transfer their Allegiance to him. But page 40. he affirms, that while the
Prince is in the actual Administration of the Government, though the Subject be
violently torn from him, yet this relation of a Subject may still continue,
because he has a Prince to whom he is related* and thence it necessarily
follows, that he owes the Duty of a Subject to his lawful Prince, and therefore
cannot tranfer it to the Conqueror. How shall we reconcile these Repugnanc^es?
But if his Arguments from Force are valid, they will justify the Translation of
Allegiance wherever there is Force enough to exact it; as he says himself, it
is no matter from what quarter the Force comes, if a Man Page 1^*
is under a Power which he cannot resist, which will undo^ and ruin him if he
transfer not his Allegiance; it is allone to him as if his King and Country
were absolutely conquered, and these are invincible Arguments for Allegiance
not only to a Ket, a Cromwell, or a Mussianello, but also to a Captain of the
Banditi, or the Rapparees, when he gets a Subject in his Power.

But we have nothing to do with the Cases of irrisistible Force and Conquest;
suppose a Nation in America under a King acknowledged by all to be lawful, and
the Subjects bound to him by the strictest Ties and Oaths of Allegiance;
notwithstanding which they call in a Foreign Prince to invade him, actually
rebel against him, and force him to leave his Kingdom for the Safety of his
Life; afterward a Convention of the Estates assembles, which solemnly depose
their Sovereign, and place his Enemy in the Throne, and proclaim him over the
Nation, and enjoin all that have Offices and Preferments, upon pain of
forfelting them to swear Allegiance to him, and this they voluntarily do
without any force upon them: In such a Case as this, to talk of Force and
Conquest is only Banter; the Subjects voluntarily rebel, depose, and abjure
their Sovereign; and if all this be Perjury and the highest Injustice, i^ can
be no Warrant or Excuse to particular Persons, that if they had not complied,
they had lost their Preferments, or that they follow a Multitude to do Evil.

The Doctor lays the whole stress of the Controversy upon the Consent and
Submission of the People, he annexes and limits God's Authority to it, it is
his great Criterion of a Settlement, and he makes it a Legal Right by the Law
of Nature and Nations. But what he means, or whether he means the same thing by
Submission and Consent, we are left to conjecture; we know that Oliver had the
entire Submission of the Nation, the Doctor acknowledges that it was lawful to
submit, and since they actually submitted, it follows from his Principle that
Oliver See Vind. page 15.
had a Legal Right by the Laws of Nature and Nations. A National Submission, as
he says, Page 69.
must be declared by one means or other: I confess Submission to Oliver was not
declared by a Recognition of a Free legal Parliament; but it was declared by
the quiet and peaceable living of all the Estates, and of the whole Nation
under his Government, by their paying him Taxes to support it, by their taking
Commissions, and receiving Justice and Protection from it, and if all this be
no declaration of Submission, there can be no such thing in the World; no
Recognitions nor Oaths of Allegiance can be equivalent, for those we see are
taken and made in many Senses, they are often obtained by Menaces and Promises,
by Cabal and Faction, and it is clear from History that the Nation never
thought themselves obliged by them to adhere to Usurpers; and yet the quiet and
peaceable Submission of a whole Nation to a Government in the Case of Cromwell,
is of no validity with the Doctor to entitle him to a legal Right, and God's
Authority.

There is another Difficulty about Consent and Submission, which the Doctor may
resolve when he pleases, whether the Consent of the whole, or the major part of
a Society, be required to the translation of Allegiance, or whether a lesser
Part, a County, a Hundred, a Village, or a City, may submit for its self, and
make a King by it self, and pay their Allegiance to him* If a single Town
should make a little King for it self, according to the Doctor's Notion, there
would be, a Settlement of the Government within it self, so he says,
Alexander's Authority was settled at Page 73.
Jerusalem, before Darius was finally conquered, and yet Jerusalem was no more
to the Persian Empire than a Village is to England; and thus upon the late
Abdication, as we are taught to call it, there might have been a new Heptarchy
of Governments, nay as many as there are Counties, Towns, or Villages in the
Kingdom, every Government would have been thoroughly (...) in it self, even
without a peaceable Possessim and Settlement. Thus when Monmouth was at
Taunton, and the People generally submitted to him as their King, his
Government was settled in that Town; and private particular Men, being under the
Power of the new King, might have lawfully paid Allegiance to him.

The Doctor thinks it very absurd to found the Right of Government upon Humane
Laws, or the Legal Consent of the People, but if they consent against Law,
their Consent does make a Lawful King by the Law of Nature and Nations; he
accounts it a monstrous Absurdity to say, that God cannot give his Authority
Case of Al. page 25.
himself without the People, nor otherwise than as they have directed him by
their Laws; if Princes receive their Authority from Humane Laws, he cannot
imagine that their Power is any more than a Trust, Page 36.
for which they are accountable; he thinks it a bold Contradiction Page 37.
to say, that God cannot remove or set up King's against Law: This is shackling
of his Providence; and in fine, whoever will confine the Power of God in
setting up Page 20.
Kings, to Humane Laws, ought not to be disputed with. But now instead of
Humane Laws, insert the Consent of the People against Law, and all these
Absurdities and Contradictions are easily reconciled to Reason and Religion,
and he that will not shackle God's Authority and Providence to Submission and
Consent, shall not be thought fit to be disputed with.

I grant that the Laws of Nature and Nations do make him a lawful King, who has
the Consent of a Free People who are under no antecedent Obligation; But when
they are, they have no Power to Consent, and then their Consent is a Nullity by
the Law of Nature it self; for it is a Rule in that Law, That Actions which are
forbidden by it for defect of Bp. Tailor Duc. Dub. 197.
Power are not only unlawful, but also void; this is true in Contracts and Acts
of Donation, in Vows and Dedition, and all rely upon the same Reason. He that
cannot give, (...) he that cannot be given, cannot contract, or be contracted
with. Therefore in what Cases soever, the People have no Power to consent to
the advancement of a new Sovereign, their consent is nothing in Law, and
therefore cannot make a rightful King, according to the Laws of Nature and
Nations.

No(...) suppose as before, that a Rebellious People by the assistance of
Foreign Power drive their King out of his Kingdom, refuse to restore him, or so
much as to treat with him, and then set up an Usurper over them; here the
Question is, whether their Advancement of the Usurper was lawful, and whether
they had Power to consent to it; if the Doctor can prove the People have Power
to rebel, depose, and set up Usurpers, let us see him prove it; but if he
cannot prove it, he will never prove that such a People had Power to consent,
or that a consent which is nothing can effect any thing, can create ^a lawful
Right by the Law of Nature or Nations; their consent is void and unlawful, it
is a breach of their Allegiance, and that cannot absolve them from it; it is
Perjury, and that is no release from* their Oaths, and in short it binds them
only to Repentance and Restitution.

He allows that the lawful Prince, who is dispossessed has Case of Al. p. 26.
a lawful Right to make War for the recovery of his Kingdom: I demand, Is not
this lawful by the Laws of Nature and Nations? It h^ lawful by those Laws, or
by none; for it is no proper Matter for political Laws, and they prescribe
nothing about it. But the Doctor will grant that, and if he will not, it is
easy to prove it by a cloud of Witnesses, and by the practice of Nations: But
now if the dispossessed Prince by the Law of Nature, and Nations, has a Right
to recover his Kingdom, he has certainly a Right by the same Laws to possess
it; and consequently the Usurper has no Right to it by those Laws, unless they
are contradictory to themselves by giving two incompatible Rights to the same
Possession. And this is a plain Demonstration (whatever becomes of the Usurper
in the Vindication) that the Usurper in the Case of Allegiance is not a
rightful Prince, according to the Laws of Nature and Nations.

One thing more may seem necessary to be considered, because it looks like
Argument from Reason, and that is the Discourse concerning Vin. p. 37, 38, 39.
the Relation between a King and a Subject; but I have the Doctor's Warrant to
let it pass as a logical Banter; the result of it is this, that the Fundamentum
Relation^s is God's Authority, and that, says he, is always annexed to the
settled Possession of the Throne; but this again is the Fundamental Proposition
in Dispute between us; I have endeavored to answer all the Arguments that are
drawn from Scripture and Reason to prov^ it, and the Reader is left to judge
whether they are sufficiently Answered.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Reader may please to take Notice, That the following Postscript does not
relate to this Book, nor yet to the Author; but it was an Addition to the
Answer to Dr. Sherlock, in Defense of the Case of Allegiance to the King in
Possession, and written to the same Friend; but the Impression of it being then
prevented, it was thought convenient to annex it to this.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT will, Sir, be no small Surprise to you to tell you, after all, that the
Case of Allegiane^ to a King in Possession, with all the Mistakes, Nonsense,
and Trifling which the Doctor now discovers in it, had notwithstanding the
Doctour's Imprimatur before it saw the Light, as you may fully assure your self
from the following Testimony of a Person of very good Credit, who some time
since gave me this following Account.

The Case of Allegiance to a King in Possession in M. S. was recommended to Dr.
Sherlock, who read it over, and mightily approved it, and wished it were then
actually printed, especially for the sake of Dr. -- who had written a Letter to
him (which he also then read) wherein he endeavored to persuade him that
Allegiance was due to the Regnant Power. He urged to have it printed as soon as
might be, and that Care might be taken that Dr. -- should have a Copy; which
shows a strange Temper in the Master, to treat a Book and an Author at such a
rate, which a little before he did so approve and commend. The Author ought to
take this for a very great Honor done him by the Doctor, as great as if the
Book had been Licenced under his hand; and it will be some Comfort to him, to
hear that once he stood so fair in the Doctor's Opinion, notwithstanding his
customary Complements of Nonsense and Trifling. But it is more material to
observe, that the Doctor seems by this Account to have been more busy against
the Oaths while he refused them, than he is willing to acknowledge. He
disclaims being ever engaged in any Faction against taking the Oaths, or making
it his business Pref. p. 2.
to dissuade Men from it, or seeking out Men to make Proselites, but confesses
only that he declared his Thoughts against them when he was asked. But it seems
to be a little more; for a Man to be a Party to the Printing of a Book tending
to dissuade Men from taking the Oaths, and to make Proselites against it, for
him to wish it were actually printed, to urge the printing it as soon as
possible, and to direct whither a Copy should be sent. If this be more than
what the Reverend Doctor would seem to own, he may have forgot that he was so
far engaged in one Overt Act for the making Proselites against the Oaths; and
it would be more charitable for him to distrust his own Memory, than to cast a
Slander upon the Inventions of his Neighbors.

I would beg your leave to add one thing more, with regard to the Doctor's
Raillery against the Notion of Presumptive Consent. He says, it is a very
pretty Notion, p. 58.
and serves a great many good turns; i^ makes Laws, makes Treason, and gives
Authority to the inauthoritative Acts of a King de facto. It serves a great
many good turns; so that the Dr. looks upon it as a Notion fit for no purpose
but to serve a turn; and one would think then, that he above all Men should not
ever have made use of it to serve his turn upon occasion. And yet if we look
back into his former Writings, we shall find that no other Author has served
himself of this Notion in a more peculiar manner than the Reverend Dr. In his
Ed. 1682.
Vindication of his Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet, he asserts the Validity of
the Ordinations by me^r Pres^yters in the foreign Reformed Churches, which have
no Bishops. And upon what does he ground the validity of their Orders? Why
truly, upon the Force and Authority which the Presumptive Allowance of the
Church has in Cases of page 345.
Necessity. He takes some pains to prove that the Church's Consent may be
presumed to these Ordinations, from the Reasonableness of the Thing, and from
the Practice of the Church in parallel Cases; but makes no Difficulty in the
least to conclude, that the Church's presumed Consent has sufficient Force and
Authority to make these Ordinations by mere Presbyters, and the Administration
of the Sacraments by Persons ordained by them, valid and effectual. His word^
are, If the Church may be presumed in Cases of Necessity to allow Persons to
perform such religious Offices and Minist^ries, as otherwise (...) are not
qualified to perform; then this very Allowance supplies the Incapacity of the
Person^ and does virtually confer. that Authority upon him, which in other
Cases he had not. And (...) consider his farther prosecution of this Argument*
it will appear that the Doctor would make as little difficulty to assert, that
the Administration of the Sacraments by mere ^aymen, in a Church where they
have no Bishops or Pres^yters to administer them, is mad(...) valid and
effectual by (...) of the same Presumptive Allowance of the Church.

No(...) will the Dr. be pleased to look back upon his way of arguing in that
Treatise, and see ho(...) all his present R^^ll^^y ^^ directly levelled against
it? The Presumptive Allowance o^ the Church is a very pret^y No^ion, and serves
a great many good turns; it makes (...), and it makes Prie^^^* it makes Orders
conferred by simple Presbyters true Orders, and it makes the Sacraments
administered by Persons who have not Episcopal Ordination (nay even by mere
Laymen) true Sacraments, and it makes a Church without Bishops, nay without
Bishops or Presbyters, a true Church; it gives Authority to the inauthoritative
Acts of Ordaining in mere Presbyters, and to the inauthoritative Acts of
Administering the Sacraments in Persons ordained by Presbyters, nay eve^ in
Laymen, where they have no Bishops or Presbyters. Does now the Dr. take this
Raillery for a sufficient Confutation of his own pretty Notion of the Church's
Presumptive Allowance? If he does not, why must we take it for an Argument
against Bp. Sanderson's Notion of the Presumed Consent of the King de Ju^e? Can
the Church's Presumed Consent do all this, and must the King's Presumed Consent
do nothing? And whence is it that the Dr. asscribes so great Force and
Authority to the Church's Presumed Consent?

He grounds it upon the Church's Power to dispense with positive Institutions
in case ^ Ibid.
of Necessity, and by her own Approbation and Authority to supply the Defects
and Irregularities of such Administrations. But why must the Church have such a
Power? Why? Because otherwise the Power of the Church is more defective than of
any other Society of Men. Then other Societies of Men, i. e* Civil Societies,
have such a Power, by the same reason as the Church has it; and if this Power
in the Church implies so great Force and Authority in the Church's Presumed
Allowance, then the same Power in the State implies as great Force and
Authority in the Civil Magistrate's presumed Consent.

I do not look upon it as so very strange, that the learned Dr. should
contra^ict himself thus at the distance of 7 Years, because in that time a man
may become another Person, and his very Principle of Unity, i. e. his
Self-consciousness, may be changed: But it looks ^ery odly, that others should
be lashed with the Dr's Raillery, and run down with his Confidence, for no
other Reason but that the Dr. is not at leisure to review his Writings 7 Years
backward, and so forgets and contradict^ his old Notions. He is very free to
say, he has renounced no Principle bu^ one that ever he taught; but Pref.
(...).
ever is a very long time, and within a little more than 7 Years we find the
learned Dr. tripping, and renouncing one more pretty Notion besides that
Principle. He declares now, that for his part he lays no stress upon a Presumed
page ^1.
Consent; but then he was pleased to lay the greatest stress upon it, to make
it the ground of the Validity of the Orders and Sacraments in the foreig^
Reformed Churches, which have no Bishops, and consequently the ground of the
very Being of those Churches. Now he is pleased to expose the Notion which then
did him such (...) Service, as a Notion good for nothing but to serve a turn:
And is not this very pretty (...) after all the Dr. himself seems to be the
only Person who has made use of this Notion, to serve a turn? for he said the
greatest stress upon it once, when it was for (...), but declares he lays no
stress upon it, nay thinks sit to ridioule and explod^ it, ^ow that it is not
for his turn.

FINIS.

