THE RESTITUTION OF PROPHECY; THAT Buried Talent to be revived.

By the Lady Eleanor.

John 16. He shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall show
unto you.

Printed in the Year, 1651.

To the Reader:
THis Babe, object to their scorn, for speaking the truth, informing of things
future, notwithstanding thus difficult to be fathered or licensed. That
incission to the quick, has under gone; without their Benediction, in these
plain Swathe-bands, though commended unto thy hands.

No spurious offspring of David's, but the Son of peace. This Oblivions Act,
Messenger thereof. Be of good cheer, O my people, (Isai. 40.) O ye Prophets,
says your God, Tell her, That her Travel is at an end; Her Offense is
pardoned, our Jubiles deliverance: Sirs, to be plain, as in the first place,
His Commission. He first of the new Prophet; so his and hers both: She the last
of the old. Confesses likewise, or bears record of his presence, Born in the
flesh; of whose Kingdom no end.

Although not in a Stable brought forth, yet a place like restless; a hard
choice between extremes or streits of that kind to distinguish. No Inferior
Prison, or of obscure Denomination; whereof that street carries the name: not
the least, honored with no less then the Temple for one.

Where belonging to passages of Inns; The one frequented all Hours, and
Drinking, not more free then the others darksom grates close; famished there no
few. But requisite Bridges, and the like, the true Narrow way (by suffering)
that leads to life: From him a proper passage or mention. Straits of the
Virgins-Womb had passed; besides Seafaring-persons his followers in that way
not unexperienced, before arrive the welcome Haven.

And so far Reader, for these excluded their Approbation, where paralleled the
Broad-way, Ebrieties leading to destruction: Those Gates put into the
reckoning, and such holds chained up, etc. and for this nonplus also; unwilling
to transgress the bounds of a Preface, Showing as by those Vigilent Shepherds
(published) a Savior: Their peace then required likewise a pass for these from
ours, as appears, witnessed thus, I give thee charge in the sight of God, which
quickneth all things, etc. That thou keep the Commandment until the appearing
of our Lord Jesus Christ; which appearing in his time, he shall show, That he
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, (1 Timothy 6.) So in another place, For the
testimony of Jesus, is the Spirit of Prophecy, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, the Holy Spirits presence namely: But arrogance begetting incureable
blindness, these savored but as non-scence, not material. Galio cared for none
of these matters, etc.

December 25. The Fleet. Postscript. But blessed is he not offended, etc.



MATT: 25. The Book of the Restitution of Prophecy: the great Account, etc.
THe secrets of the Gospel under Allegories covered and Parables, precious
Leaven, generality or scope whereof reflects, although on the day of Judgments
severe account, unknown day and hours reserve: Nevertheless, days preceding
their proper Lesson, a warning piece for them.

Which Unum Necessarium inestimable Pearl, the Kingdom of Heavens purchase,
that Manna, the unknown Bdellium likened to: who sold all to compass it,
requires Artificials none either, presumes cannot be frustrate, or by all
trodden under foot: of which an essay as ensues tendered, as to watch all or
wait: so to beware if wise, how they quench the Spirit, where not unlike his
dream of good consisted and bad, both because the thing Established repealable
not, then their Decree, much less to be changed, etc. Dan.

That consists not in meat and drink those Externals, unto a wedding likened so
many Handmaids, his Kingdoms Epitomy at hand, or forthwith to appear Virgins,
their's the priority: five perfection of Numbers: Her quickening time, till when
concealed, etc. (Luke) a prime period, alluding to the Senses.

Five were wise, other five were foolish; no lame similitude, ten in number,
its full time (as it were) or reckoning had gone out: To whom how befell those
that were out of the way, saying, Our Lamps are out or quenched, dreamt not an
answer that way insufficient a point of what consequence to say, They had not
thought or supposed, etc. cast in the teeth with Spiritual Chandleries an Item
thereof.

In what obscurity all without the Spirit manifesting without contradiction as
appears: The Bridegroom while tarried all slumbred and slept, bidden be
watchful: Therefore watch, for ye know neither the day nor hour, etc. as that
for another, Could ye not one hour refrain: our caveat bids sleep on, who allow
the Spirit not transmitted beyond the Primative bounds, what real demonstration
soever, as if any thing impossible with him: and thus the blind conducting the
blind, emblems what posture Synods and Churchmen found in: How provided of
the wedding garment: when that summons, Come now for all things are ready: The
Spirit and Bride, saying, Come, gates of Paradise wide open, no more curse,
etc. the Tree of Life, attained its Maturity, living waters grates Aurum
Potabile as free, no longer to be fasting then.

And so much for their farewell restless good night, Lord, Lord, etc. knows
their voices as much as they discern (read by them) the Prophets theirs, etc.
unworthy of the oderiffrous Mariage-gloves, or a taste of those transcendant
Confections, even departed from the faith: Depart ye follish Galatians, who
has bewitched you: wherewith verily, The Kingdom of Heaven expressly unto what
Nation or Kingdom to be revealed obvious as those Solemnities: under the notion
of a Wedding, Revels not returnable often: Whenas some supernatural anointings
or Conception, as by that Mid-nights Alarm shaddowed forth, in due time
administered: After the way of old illustrated, when the Word of the Lord came
unto them, Recorded in such a Year of their Reign, and in what Month; pointed
to a Jubile's moiety, Five times five. The years prime Anniversary Feast,
blessed throughout all Generations: her VVedding-day, faithful Handmaid the
Virgin Mary, her Five and twentieth of the Month, as bears date 1625. Year of
Grace: His very Proclaimed Reign, Coronation accompanied with unhappy Nuptials:
He aged 25. she Fifteen, etc. graceless voice, Twenty four from the Conquests
Bastared Generation (complete Anno 24.) matched witha Yoak-fellow, and could
not come: five Yoke of Oxen of his Oxford Commons an Item, must attend on her
Ladyship, roaring Sabbaths Mid-nights works: No Stranger subject to be unmaskt,
and Farmer Bishoprics weekly Alarms.

While she as free with her impostures to communicate our Heavenly Saviors
homage to Idol blocks doted on painted Popets, for whose name, woe to the House
suffices the Dogs in the same place licking his Blood: Moreoveras in this Maps
Circumference contained, of unappy memory, Her five years Fiery Bloody days, of
the name such knows none charming Letanies (good Lord, good Lord) they know not
what, ave gratia, etc. Pater Noster and Creed alike intelligible, to her sorrow
Matched in her after days.

By her Virgin Sister succeeded, in the Five and fortieth of whose unmatchable
Reign was Interred at the Virgins Annunciation, etc. those plentious times
farewell: The Bridegroom Sun and his Virgin Spouse, parting the hours ushering
the Obsequies.

So proceeding with the subsequent parable, whose Divine Nature as defcended to
a habit of Flesh: So by this way of Domestique Affairs, unto the vulgar
capacity condescends the Kingdom of Heavens Title to coroberate, presidents
produces of the present the fire Talents (to wit) in what Reign.

Where those three of no obscure quality: Their Lord as though returned from a
far Country, had acquired some great Prize or Victory, otherwise some Merchants
return.

Called in the first place a prime Peer of the Land, so highly preferred
Audeley E: of Castlehaven, even to hold up his Hand at the Bar, with two of his
Servants Arraigned and Eexcuted all three on this wise.

He charged with the Rape, a Page protested at the last cast, a Virgin came
into his Lords Service, and went away a Virgin thence. The other an Irish
Papist, a Vagrant: The Footman said, had he thought Lords of the Council bade
him speak for the King, have served him so, would otherwise been advised for
his Pardon called on St. Dennis, whose Oath taken contrary to Law and Justice,
refusing an Oath of Allegiance: As Hers not at all, upon whose Accusation
before the Privy Counsel; taken away her Husbands life, that in Court appeared
neither that day.

Anne Strange Heretrix, of that extirpated House, Isle of Man: In which
preferred Bill, this long Process wherein shuned, Anatomized that mankind
Grandams merry, and hers like Daughter, etc.

As shows in the day of his wrath, wounding even Kings, etc. Sit thou on my
right, etc. thy Sentence (as much to say) until upon them be accomplished (
Revel. 13.) Even the brutish Beast wounded in the head, his mortal wound: And
Hers ( Rev. 17.) where one of the seven Angels which had the seven vials
(namely the last of them) saying, Come, I will show thee the Judgment of the
great Whore or great bellied Harlot sitting on many waters: The Cities Bridge
on Arches, this Map as displayed person, and place, Circumstances none more
necessary: And some Haven Town from whence derives her Title of Honor. So from
the Title great infers a Grandmother. Then that imperious Hell-hound, more
Mother Jezebels then one.

And with the Holy Spirit moving on the waters: Thus proceeding dispelling
Mists and Darkness, saying, Wherefore do thou wonder, or marvel'st thou (as
it were) at this Sea Monster, not more strange then true, The Mother, etc. I
will show thee the Mystery of the Woman. And the Beast that bears or carries
her, etc. Expressly Herals their Mystery which demonstrates: And present Century
the seventeenth. As behold whose Arms? And they shall eat her Flesh and burn
her with Fire, besides hers some four-footed rather. Skull, palms and feet, no
Dog would touch, in reference to Feasts. What Bruit or Flesh of Beast in most
request, Eaten, etc. Points to so many Stags Heads born in a Bend, or their
Skulls, etc. Touching whose Arms suffices so much referred to Sign Posts: the
Red Deer that Scarlet Beast also; and Babe in its scrimson bearing Clothe, a
Relic to these days; in her custody: Who cried out as much as she (Gen.) him
solicited daily: By whom his garment laid up, etc.

And so what do thou here Elijahs enlightening days, founded in whose, Our
Capital City LONDON, of old called TROY, A compound of Babylon the Great: As
written Son in her Forehead or Frontispiece. Where from His Greatness or Lord
Mayorship, not only derived Title of Great Cuckold; but Great Britain its
addition; since exchanged Anglia for Brute, no less then undone, most proper
from him (one change pursuing another) embrewed in that way of his Hounds and
restless Hunting to prefer the Beasts name, accords but with his Minions that
of Buckingham.

So running with him Ahimaz, The way of the Plain or present Wave^ing Goths,
Sarazens, and Knights of Rhodes out of date, and Romes situation remote: As
they to their Father. See whether this thy sons coat, etc. whose City on a
River no slender one, with its Appurtenances (from which Allegory of carrying)
Ships called Bears and Tigers, Sea-Horses, fraught with Tyerian in Grain,
Pearls, Precious Stones, Gold, and Wines in that abundance, etc. With Her Cup
of poison arrayed Cleopatra like, sitting on Seven Headed Nilus: The Beast with
so many Heads and Horns.

The Woman and Beast with so many Heads and Horns, etc. Church, Court, and
Cities description, with Kings, their obeisance to her; beside in what Century:
Also his Seventeen years Reign, until ( Anno 41) Lead away not unknown, by what
means: our Domitians days: in whose, this City made an open example: As behold
whose Bridge fired, shunning the fire to cast themselves into the water,
forced; Eaten by fish, their flesh. Since when others suffering, no few. The
Towers Blow for an other, with Lightnings and Thunder claps, like Doomsday,
etc. the Bridge at the same time Burnt: when she no ordinary Whore, charged
with a Husband, Blood: worthy of no other Cup, Naked and Burnt. Credible
Witness of the Churches Apostasy, Figures in her later Days what a faithful
Spouse; sealed with Sabbatical Heads of the Scarlet colored Beast (Cruelties
Character) with Oxford and Cambridge, no mean Strumpets, whose Denomination
interrested in the Ten Horns: Their Tithe an Assembly sitting at Westminster;
also carried by Water in their Gowns, belongs thereto.

Furthermore, as this Cities Feastivals and Funerals all set upon this
reckoning, such flocking then to behold her Pomp, styled, The great Whore with
her Cup of Drugs: Carried in what State, By Cerberus Headed Hounds, her black
Steeds. She siting on the Waters, Her Habitation or Title: By Kings at Arms and
others, To give attention to Preaching Parasites: whereas compared to the
Block-headed Beast going to the slaughter. Man in Honor, as easy for a Camel
to go through an Needles eye, as for such to enter, etc. When made
notwithstanding the Beasts Image: Laid before them: Adored Obsequies for costly
Blacks bought at such a price. VVelcome Image of the Beast, Saint, or Devil,
Whore, etc. Honored a like, Sackcloth when more seasonable then Muld Sack of
late. Of which Sexes more remarkables then one deceased.

So withal (part of the Bag and Baggage) of Saints-days abused as much by the
rotten Whore: Eaten, etc. That Mistress of mischief, and her Servant the
roaring Beast wel-matcht: Vermillian Livery in Grain, then Simon and Judes
Commemoration: The Floods doings rather and Sodoms; crowed on both sides, as
though never seen before or heard their Horn-pipes attended; whose going by
water retained to these very days Trojean Games: a world of Coaches, Belconies
filling and Windows, Spectators and to be seen; because Jacobs Flock spotted,
like marks by the foul spirit set on them: the tokens imitated, Churches by
Pastors thus prepared; a like for Theators and his Temple. Varnished with
poisonous spells, or paint (she trodden underfoot) her accursed Pictures; or
some carted like dashed, etc. fit Guests, etc. On the other side
restless-swearing Cooks about Firs, and other like Catch-poles; appurtenances
of the Scarlet Beast, for this narrow Table too voluminous: Also
Christmas-boles, All-nights Gameboles; Dancing and Dicing, scored on the Horns,
with Goldsmiths-hall and Skinners, from the Cup of beaten Gold; a health to
them too.

Through whose streets formerly carried in state by Scarlet Liveries, from all
parts flowing to have sight of her person or presence: Totally stripped of Purple
array, Margaret Pendants, Bracelets and Chains: some Kings Daughter as though,
or one of the Blood: became as deformed, dispicable and desolate: Hated as
formerly, followed with their Leopard skins, the naked House of Lords,
concerned not lest; beside plundered Pay: Houses, Kings and Lords, those.

As moreover, she none of the lest, that mother of Witchcrafts, branded for a
Baud, whose Babel-Pyramid fired. Fictions of fresh edition, University
Excrements daily, whereby oppressing Shops and Presses with them: overflowing
too shameful, whilst Close-Stools set to sale, lined through with Scriptures
old and new: When Turks, lest Gods name therein, refrain to set their foot on
a leaf of Paper, whose Alcoran Mahomets the false Prophets, Cum Privilegio,
etc. Accursed Jerocho's reedified Gates, in the mean while Jerusalems VValls,
waste, etc.

So sends greeting Pathmos Isle, to this Islands City. He when unexperienced in
those Hieroglyphick Demonstrations Saints days, signifying beyond Paganism
Rites celebrated. St. John stricken or transported with such admiration and
marvel (O strange) and ugly: What Strumpet, Baud, etc. As points to that
fiction: of ravished Europia, carried on the Bull into the Sea: true as the
others Rape, etc. in Maps and Tapistries ordinary; so to another not long since
no fiction on this River. Those Brace of Spaniels, Her Graces swimming match.
And Knight Errand, no small Bull: supported by his Hand; laid upon her, etc.
Requisite as any in our Cities Map to be displayed. That Esprit Order, conjured
up again, entered in them as into that Cities Swine: because the good Spirit
moved on the waters also Apishlike by the evil spirit, and Witches, those, etc.
With his Venetian, she free of the aforesaid three Stags Heads; the Horns his
too, etc. with her Cup of Viper Wine, that never awakned, whether Drunken or
no, etc. The Floods days not equivolent.

All which copied out by that Piece, when his butcherly birthday kept, bound
himself, etc. Instructed by her Mother Baud, dancing her lacivious Jigs and
Tricks: beheaded the Baptist; late by her, and her Ladies not only
Hermophrodite acting mankind; but sworn by his precious, etc. And wounds by
their base Players. Let us eat and drink, to morrow is our last: More true then
aware of, notwithstanding a Mote in another Eye perceive, so returning to his
last account, made even, or confession on Tower Hill, arrived the Haven above.
This day be thou with me, etc. Enter thou into thy Lord and Masters joy. Easter
Term, An. Dom. 31.

Between those twain Sacrificed, he charged but as an accessory: Had the honor
nevertheless, of first entrance. Next Term theirs Bradway the innocent Page,
and the other, etc. Who in those times thought full little of (Jud.) Bradshaw.
When thirsted after his Vineyard, Mervin Earl of Castlehavens. So many Manor
Houses, to few or none inferior: This Kingdoms forerunner; or what should him
befall: His Enemies likewise those of his own house (to his last) swearing at
every word cursing, etc.

This man never once charged with Oath, other then truly and verily: Taxt with
injustice neither, or owing unto any: Paid and rewarded all.

By means of alteration in his Religion, as much disclaimed; and mismatching
himself: scandalized by others misdemeanor. They who worst reproached him, was,
That he had the best things in him, of any man, as well as the worst.

Stumbled at the Church upon point of Antiquity: By reason whereof stood in
Poperies defense, or Romes.

That Fathers aspersion undergone, Origens, That when he wrote well, none could
do better; when he wrote ill, no man so bad.

Envied among them, Court Motions that ever distasted, styled to be Pharoahs
Son, or accounted the Creature of Fortune; to whose potent adversaries, no
slender or mean advantage. Cast by a Jury of Peers: His unnatural Jury of
Brethren, as sold him, figure of the Lamb, called the Dreamer: scorned and
stripped of his Garment. Also between those two, through her lust. Blood of the
Grape, as sealed the ones pardon the life therein. So the other the heavy
Famins forerunner hanged up: by Birds betokened on the Wing, his flight, etc.

In the end tasted Egyptian slavery, themselves Straw-gathers: Types of the
scattered Jews not only; but of a spiritual Famine, proceeding from
forgetfulness, etc. Parables, consisting of a twofold-like Construction; as
those aforesaid Fellow Servants, in one day said to have their Heads lifted up
both, who advanced so. All knees to bow, etc. Afterward biding them not be
sad; for their preservation sent thither: So much for the word throughout all
ages, and the world through. Also touching his leave taken at Tower Hill, so
highly rewarded. Well done good and faithful servant.

Follows the second a Lieutenants turn next of Ireland, Strafford no shallow
Brain-piece, overpowered by the old Serpents policy. Papist by reason in
highest Offices, had his quietus est, Easter Term ( Anno 41.) Sealed with no
ordinary Arms, the Ax: Neither wanting after his ability of what Faith or
Belief, Kingdoms slippery places, as unto her a second Eve; for her
forwardness, ye know not what ye ask: VVhilest on the other side as backward.
This piece interlined, as shows, when presented the Lord General herewith, a
Manuscript prayed to be privileged, by him referred to the Bar: Lodging in
Ax-Alley, where about three weeks space waited on. Other use of which (as
though) had not made, returned them, not vouchsafest the value of a word. No
Babe in long Coats, though bewrayes, barbarous alike, not to bless where they
ought, and to contemn or curse: No less then cowardice also in a high degree,
what should be improved to Hide, etc.

In the mean time unburied Lord Deputy Iretons, sad welcome rung out, landed,
whose Corpse.

Farther giving to understand, had advertised him what befell immediately before,
signed with Whitehals Powder mischance. Bidden to shake of their dust, that
have but ears for a show: How in the same month October, etc. about the same
hour at Night, etc. wherein delivered to His Excellency by her a Book,
Entitled, Babylons Handwriting, bearing date Anno 1633. Printed beyond Sea;
by the same token with Specticles put on, read by him. That watch word
superscribed, Is a Candle to be put under a Bed, etc. (useless and unsafe) He
that has Ear hear this Piece. Contents of the said Book ( Dan. 5.) contained
in a sheet of Paper, sometime served on the late K. C. after his return from
Scotland, Anno 33. Crowned, etc. concluded with Charles Be, from his name,
attended with his Riotous Lords, Belshazer the last (to wit) Beheaded, etc. to
beware his Banqueting Houses salutation; Great Babylons exchanged Feast, into
such confusion, instead of kissing hands, stamped a hand writing, subscribed,
Great Britains Lamentation Mourning and Woe.

VVhereupon like his killing and slaying Decree, Dan. 2. etc. She to appear and
answer forthwith, as by that Babylonian reference annexed, Signed Sydney,
Mountagne, for presuming to prefer and imprint, That detestable, etc. An. Dom.
1633. October, Whitehals no petty Trespass.

Of which Babylonish Garment hidden as it were in his Tent to this day.

So much by the way for that, and of his Kingdoms no delay admitting, as by the
foresaid Advertisement to the speechless Dr. Ba. Balams madness reproved, when
served or sufficed from those Ears. Did I ever serve thee so before: put to
silence by the dumb Ass: all as swift that way; but Midas Ears, their long Hair
hides not, or Perwigs either.

And thus in reference to the premises, from a Wedding, its late hour. That cry
also after a long time his return, of a cried Court-day. Officers they called
to appear, called Thou flothful servant Dr. Laud, as appears, He the last Arch.
B. of Canterbury. The one Talent even buried by his hand, Achans graceless
Scholar.

In the Earth: he buried in the Valley of Achor: a heap of Stones Dunghil-like;
his Monument and theirs consenting thereto: Had not alone troubled Joshua,
expostulating in rent clothes: Wherefore, etc.

Root of all Evil, filthy lucre confesses did covet: Thus and thus, etc. In the
Valley of Trouble, took up his Lodging. Sign of the Spade, fitter for it.

And thus after a verbatim way, for our hiding days in season: Servants such of
Mammon or Money. Weeping and howling their Portion: Of the Spiritual Calling,
or Clergy voice, as follows: Called Thou sloathful, etc. One in ten theirs,
reaped where sowed not; gathered where had not strawed. A severe or hard man,
counted every Sheaf, etc. Tithe gatherers (to wit) far and near, with usury ten
in the hundred; not wanting their Trade; known in others Name.

In relation to whose Name these, even the Beast out of the Loathsome pit
ascended ( Rev. 17.) And they shall wonder whose names not in the Book of life,
etc. (or Church-book) namely, That of Canterbury derived from some Grace-makers
occupation, below the Dung-hils office. As at first every Creature after its
properly.

As hence appears how had occupied, etc. That dug and interred, shrouded it
in the ominous Napkin to their Napery pointing, or ghostly array withal.

And one thus unfolding another, as that farewell of his. Bidden, the dead to
bury the dead. Either because rich and concealed it, or might allude to his
name: In like case as Canterbury or Salisbury.

The Title of Grace Buried, neither in silence or forgetfulness. That Paradox
for another, as implies.

His own bare measure meted or returned him; he without excuse, knew his Lords
severness nevertheless: Lo there, That is thine, etc. As from him that has
not, saying, Even that he has shall be taken away. Of Parentage obscure, as
much to say, His Graceship digraded shall be (Jan. 10.) a day and hour not
aware of, to Preach his own Funeral Sermon, not mentioned in his Diary. That
Fridays Christmas Cup, gnashing of Teeth: Who hated the light, depended upon
the former days provission, Star Chamber Decrees and Articles, was cast into
the prison of utter-darkness; besides Extortion added to Usury; Covetousness
very Idolatry, also with Gluttony charged: Emblem'd the Napkin, their excess
and concealed Bags; so of which one Talent assigned; in short thus, saying,
Lord he has ten: Disputed as though some other better deserved it; answered,
He that has, more shall be given him, or shall have abundance, etc. Even Anno
Dom. 1631. Easter, (to wit) had the superabundant honor to be the heavenly
Lamb; ancient of days Figure, foreshewing by a Harlot Spowse, Remonstrates not
only Romish Massacres, that Smoking Clarret; but by Protestants, how? to the
brim filled, etc.

Wherewith a word of the said Prisoners present release, by the figure Ironia,
recommended, etc. delivered by His Majesty's Chaplains, His gracious Message
and royal Favor toward him.

He whereas was to have suffered as a common person should die, now like a Peer
of the Land, beheaded, etc. appointed to sift him, no others admitted, having
been under Inquisition so long; upon their information, had thrice taken the
Sacrament upon it, was innocent of those crimes for which adjudged to lose his
life: whereupon thanks not omitted, replied, Would esteem it a collar of
precious Stones should draw him up to him, embraced the Tree, to his Feet.

And by these Jews, our High Priests, in what Execrable manner Crucified on
their Altars, prepared for that purpose; roaring with one consent, Sacrifice
and Eat, both one, or indifferent; also Altar and Table.

Like as in Golgotha, That fatal Fridays dismal day, (end of the week) bowed
then the knee. Chams accursed seed, by whom a Giant-crucifix Goliath like, not
the value of a Napkin to cover, etc. Horrible to behold, eclipsed light,
covered the Ten Commandments, under color of an Altar Hanging, wanting no
nailing either: Of course Woollen, Purple, etc. fastened down, lest those
precious Tables an eye sore. VVhilest mounted over the Lords Table, to kneel
before it, with the Centurion: No Dwarf mounted on his Courser or Beast, to be
worshipped to, superscribed a true Copy, brought over by Father, etc. in his
Holiness Chapel done thereby; Lietchfield Minster for one, were forced
afterward for fear of the Parliament Forces, those Clerk-Vicars, to bury it in
the Dunghill, not one would harbor it. As this added, the very hidden Talent,
his Lords buried Goods, accords with the Tables of the Law, from no causeless
jealousy, as Extant in our Bibles ordered, except the Book of Apocalypse, and
other like, least edifying, may be best spared; allow others read every
Sabbath, etc.

Besides how many silenced imprisoned, other some Crucified on Pillaries,
whilst he and his Panders, eating and drinking with the drunken. Item, Oxfords
Roast, three hundred Dowes or Deer at a Chancellorships dinner, with Spiritual
Courts abominable Bribery taking on both Hands from those stripped of their
livelihood, Widows, but Tenants for life; no Commiseration for such,
especially, present pay, or else turned out.

Unto which annexed his vow of Chastity, styled, Pater in Christi, etc. Verily,
false Christ's shall deceive many, whose names not written from the foundation,
etc. (Rev.) Exchange commodities; those Virgins Canonized in his Tables admire,
Laud his name, etc. the apprehended old Serpent, alias Satan, whose false Keys,
as though his succession. Iron Gates opened of their own accord, were in their
custody ( Apoc. 20.) The Key whereas of the sealed Abbyss, whose proper Seal.

And thus proceeding, a complete Jury, their Verdict with one consent, Prophets
and Apostles; Touching our Nations story. English, Irish, Scottish and French,
every one as heretofore heard in their proper Language, fulfilling nothing so
secret and covered, that shall not be revealed and made manifest.

Including withal Times reign or reckoning, Five thousand five hundred years
complete since the Creation. Secondly, Two thousand years before the Law, and
Two thousand under the Law. Lastly, Complete One thousand under the Gospel,
from those entrusted Servants account, which would have amounted (had not he
fallen short) to One thousand years more, or had it not happened into slothful
hands. The Three Ages otherwise equally Two thousand years unto each allotted.

Whereof thus ( Apoc. 17.) concerning place, time and persons concomitants:
Five are fallen; one is, the other is not yet come: And when he comes, shall
continue a short space: Namely, the sifteenth century past and gone; the
sixteenth bears the name, the other not complete to be, but shortened. Here is
the mind that has Wisdom (viz.) to number the time, Psalm. reflects on King
James the Sixth. Others as weak as he wise, From a Parliament called by
himself, to absent his person, here signified, Of one mind, called by write;
others by most voices, Chosen ones. And as rewarded for the most part
afterward, who hate the Whore and make her desolate: A Widow, as much to say,
Utterly stripped of all, by the Ten Horns, fulfilling such a time, amounting to
ten years space. As moreover, For God shall put into their hearts, to fulfill
his will, etc. repented as it were; alluding to which words, Have mercy upon
us, and incline our hearts, etc. or Write thy Laws in our hearts we beseech
thee; where acts against Idolatry and Adultery, made death that act, put into
the list of the aforesaid ten Horns, so many years fulfilling.

And so proceeding with his relation hereof, who wrote to her styled so highly,
The Elder, To the Lady Ele: etc. in our British Language, as to the full
expressed, Apoc. where accompanied with insatiable Tyrant Times Mystery (Eating
all things) his displayed Arms: also the Stuarts Arms or Coat; The Bulls-head
blazoned, that sign in Taurus, giving to understand farther of Europes Apostate
Churches, returned to wallow in the mire, all from her sitting on the waters of
Babylon, with enlarged skirts, those of hers as before showed; computed by the
floods execrable Age, Hearts as Buff: Signed and sealed with Babylons Great
Seal, The Beasts heart: That fulfilled seven times, not to be Cancelled either.
How long before his reason to him returned a Jubiles seven times seven, where
included.

Lastly, What affinity between them, fixed place as signified from her sitting
posture, etc. So restless time by the weary Beast. Names written on both their
foreheads, That City Mistress as upon Hers, Mystery Babylon or London: Also
Mars, Mercury, Venus, etc. Names of Blasphemy on his, all her most humble
Servants. The Scarlet Beast, Anno Etatis, etc. when her downfall withal.

By persons represented of no obscure decent: Namely, House of Derby, matched
with the House of Oxford, armed on both sides with the Horns: no secret, either
he bearing the Stags heads metamorphized into a Bear: Father of him who
suffered. On all four acting in their likeness; and other of that kind on
Stages in Pastorals, tumbling to the admiration, etc. A blessing by the mothers
side: So wherefore wonderest thou at signs, etc. Rev. 17.

And sotish Bathe, another like odium of the Beast, forerunners of Great
Britains unlucky derivation, not only from Brute, but of Cities names their
sympathizing, called after theirs, or participating.

And so far for these literally prefigured, The present Age sent to School to
the Ox, Ass, and Camel; In their Litter knows its owner, better observes the
time, and for times Mystery and Seasons. The weaker Sex preferred more proper
for them, requisite for former days neither: To whose Disciples not a little
earnest (answered) A thing not in his dispose, he was but the Word; but his
Fathers where he pleased, a Conception; as much to say, By special Grace:
Witnessed to be by them though.

And shunning Circumlocution, where like theirs under terms Enigniatical,
concealed by way of Numbers and Figures numberless. Whosoever understands any
one, serves for the master Key to that hidden Treasure or Quintesence.

Of the third or last similitude, as follows, The last days dreadful alarm
likened unto that Sessions day, attended with a guard of Angels, by a King
sitting on his throne: On the right hand faithful to him that stood in defense
of the cause; on the left that took up Arms against him: which remarkable days
of ours compared to a Shepherd, Jacobs separating the sheep from goats. Our
Nations prime Commodity, Wool, Sheep, no mean fence against Hunger and Cold;
also pointing to such a year and season: viz. The distance between the Suns
entrance into Aries, the crowned Ram; probable when as the Worlds Creation. And
that of the Tropic Capricorn, the Hoary bearded Goat: Character of Spring and
Winters approach; whereby slaughtered sheep as betokens an execution day, at
hand; from the fold to the scaffold, etc. So foreshewed to be the very year,
aforehand revealed.

His sinister reign shadowing forth from 1625. March, until his arraignment
after Christmas, the late Charles his doleful note, imprisoned, harborless, not
worth a House: A Stranger (to wit) of another Nation, where by way of
retaliation as he had close imprisoned others, unresisted The blessed Lambs
voice, and Decembers, etc. Made it his own case, in as much, Had not visited
the least of those his Lambs, Hunger, Starved and Cold: For any mercy on their
part, Rebels proclaimed to his Kingdom, alluding to the flaming sword; That
Doomsday when they expelled thence, whose Valediction depart, etc. The never
departing sword and smoke their portion. The Righteous on the other side, or
Roundheads pointing to Paradise their return to peace: As those Thunderclaps
then, and Lightnings, August 23. Ao 51.

So much for mittigating this Mittimus to Hell, expressed by way of Terror, his
Judgment day, the Escape Goat, no Purgatory pardon: whose Funeral attended with
those three, Hamilton and Holland, etc. made by them; No private Account,
Extends to oppressed Prisoners Christmas Cry, Verily Sterved and Rotting, so
over charged those Penfolds; under any color or pretense buried quick, by
accursed Cutthroats daily, and imprisoned Anno 45. Whose Twenty three years
Reign, from Anno 25. until Anno 48. The Scepter when resigned the Hand: Table
of bounty turned to a blow; as by the Fruitless fatal Tree Mythologised, of
three years standing before came under the heavy lash; besides a Lease of three
years more ex-pired; Also a warning to Churches, his House, for usurped Keys
resignation. Enemy to the Nations cure, the Tree of Life: Scepter and Keys
both. The Epilogue or End of which subject or excommunication, concluded with
his voice, The inthroned Lamb in Bethlehems Manger, concerning othersome in
this burdensome age; as unto those groaning restless Companions, overcharged
by their unmerciful owners. Come unto me also ye heavy laden, and (your
intolerable Tax) I will ease you, and insupportable Bonds, those Yokes, saying,
Behold I come quickly: Whose righteousness like the strong Mountains, etc.
Judgments like the great deep, to be manifested, etc.

Thus much for their Analogy or likeness, unexpectedly also come upon us unto
the last great days account likened. And for this Antichristian Beasts
sevenfold names of blasphemy, namely Saturn and Jupiter, etc. Days of the week
christened in theirs, and Months in their commemoration Ethnicks; after Julius
C and August, containing VICLVVVI. Those Members no inferior ones of the Roman
breed, Hours of the Month 666, whose number also pointing to the days of Noah
1656. By so many Months amounting unto 55 years and a half. Then Treasure
liable to Plunder, of more consequence to count those at hand, including his
reign of 55 years and odd Months succeeded him, wounded not least by his
begotten Brutus.

So then how passes for current, or accords together, that such taking upon
them to be qualified with humility and fear of God, do prohibit swearing in
others and blaspheme themselves. Make Laws for strict keeping the Sabbath,
notwithstanding so stupid and carnal, stop the ear against his Word and Law,
Thou shall have no other gods.

VVhilest the simple deluded by assumed Titles of Saviors, and the like;
called Defenders of the Christian Faith, An Antichristian Authority otherwise
called, The Blood thirsty devouring Beast, rising out of the Water in the Lambs
Rose colored Robe; wounded (as it were) with the Crown of Thorns: whose
Baptism and Sabbaths exercise, edifying as their Bells, Feasts and Fasts, part
of the Forty and two Months reckoning; and breathing the Holy Ghost, witness
the three abominable Frogs for another; with the gift of healing, Miracles by
succession, the Image of the Beast worn, etc. So of Elias Alarm, Fire causing
to come down, etc. ( Apoc. 13.) in the sight of men by lightning as burnt so
many Barns, last Harvest fulfilling; also the Harvest great, but Laborers few:
Put to their Heels for the Press then, not to be forgotten. Subscribed I am A
and O, etc. And have the keys, etc. As our Liberty proclaims; and the Holy
Ghosts reign for evermore, sent in his name the Spirit of truth, otherwise
called The Lamb; likewise by their Synagogouges how confined within Iron gates:
Whose Angelical presence signifies, as declares, He was in prison; Depart ye
cursed: So blessed are they, called unto Lambs marriage supper.

Qui se humiliaverat, ipse exaltabit.

Ele: Da. and Do. Fleet. Candlemas.

Her Purification. 1651.

Principium and Finis.

