The Triumph of Christianity: OR, THE LIFE OF Cl. Fl. Julian THE APOSTATE: WITH
REMARKS, contained in the Resolution of several Queries.

To which is added, REFLECTIONS upon a Pamphlet, called, Seasonable Remarks on
the Fall of the Emperor Julian. And on part of a late pernicious Book,
entitled, A Short Account of the Life of Julian, etc.

Thanks be to God, who has made us always to Triumph in Christ.

LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham, for R. R. and are to be sold by Hugh Ellis,
Bookseller in Oxon, 1683.

THE PREFACE.
TO add to those many Arguments which prove and demonstrate this great Truth,
That the Religion of the Holy Jesus is Divine and most certainly true; I have
not without reason judged, that the Life and Death of Julian the Apostate, is a
great demonstration of it. The Christian Religion was more opposed by this
Emperor than by any preceding Heathen Persecutors: By those same means which
establish and aggrandize this Religion, he designs to ruin it. The Religion
given us by the Holy Jesus is incomparable for the Holiness of its Laws: a
Religion in the whole frame and model of it, suitable to our natural faculties;
a Religion rendered so admirable by its public Rites and Form of Divine
Worship: a Religion made so illustrious by that universal Sanctity which
appeared in the times of the Primitive Christians: and is now, though a
degenerate age, conspicuous. In no age the Shades of Darkness so overspread the
Church, in which no Stars did appear. To revive the Pagan Superstition, he
endeavored to make it resplendent, by making the Worshippers of Idols to
imitate the admirable conversations of Christians. The Religion of the Holy
Jesus carries the Signatures of Heaven; it has the impress of Gods Omnipotence
in Miracles; of Gods Omniscience in Prophecies. That he might give the
precedence to Paganism, he with his Philosophers who attended him, addicted
themselves to all sorts of Divinations; and likewise they gloried in Miracles;
but how false the one, and ridiculous the other were, this History fully
manifests. There was another Divine Character in the Religion of the Holy
Jesus, to which they could not pretend; The Infinite Holiness of God. Holiness
being his chief attribute, was elucent in the enabling so many Millions of all
sorts, Sexes, and Ages, not only to lead the most exemplary lives, but to choose
and endure the most lingering Torments, even unto death, rather than they would
violate the Law of the Lord Jesus, or be Apostates from the Religion which
gives the best rules for living well, and from whence springs the sweetest
comforts. Produce any Religion, in any Age, which glories in so many Martyrs as
the Christian does. So true is that of Trajane the Roman Emperor, No people
suffer so much for their God as Christians do. Pythagoras a great Philosopher,
and of eminent conversation, gained such an esteem, that he sometimes had
Divine worship given him, and was ambitious to be esteemed Apollo. By his
followers he was honored as a Demi-God: His Disciples took from him, the name
of their lofty and refined Sect; which flourished in Magna Grecia, now
Calabria. Chilo, the Cratonean, a rich and potent Epicurean, being incensed
against them, raised the Arms of that City, and cut them off: his fury did not
there cease; for he led his forces, and destroyed them in other Cities. Let
History be appealed, then it will be evident, that Christianity has gained by
persecution, and according to my Reading, never was there such a School of the
Pythagoreans before or after that Slaughter of them. Here Julian was at a loss
to ruin Christianity; he opened the Schools of Philosophers, encouraged the
flowing Tongues and Pens of Orators: yet nothing could raise the minds of
Heathens to do and suffer, as the Christians did, for the Glory of God. Add to
all his Stratagems, his bloody Persecutions, he must really be judged one of
the greatest persecutors in the World: Yet this Christian Religion Triumphed.
Christians by their Divine Philosophy and Gracious Lives; the Patience and
Courage which they showed in their greatest Persecutions; they bafled the Pens
of Philosophers, and blunted the Swords of Tyrants; and the Laurel of the
Church flourished, notwithstanding the Artifices which this great enemy of our
Faith used to extirpate it. But now Christianity is opposed by another sort of
persons: The School of Epicurus is now revived and opened; that School which
was laughed at, not only by Christians, but by all the wisest Men in the world,
now seems to flourish. The first that encouraged it, as appears to me, was
Beregard at Pisa, which is delivered to us in his Pisane Circle. It gained a
greater strength and esteem in the world by Gassendus, his Dissertations upon
the Tenth Book of Laertius; they both were great men, and really had been as
great as any of their Age, if their Sentiments had not given a desperate wound
to Religion, and made way for Hobs and Spinosa's Impieties. If there be a Fatal
necessity, as Hobs and Spinosa directly affirm, How can Moses his Narrative of
the Worlds Creation be believed? And indeed, what Religion, Justice and Virtue
is there? and whether that which Beregard and Gassendus speak, de facto
liberate primi Motoris, according to Epicurus his Dogma, intimate not the
same, I am vastly mistaken. Religion, which is confirmed by Miracles and
Prophecies, receives an Authority from the Broad Seal of Heaven. They who deny
both, vainly endeavor to give a fatal wound to the Eternal Gospel. He that
Reads what Beregard says of Miracles, and his scoffing at Chariots of Fire,
comparing them to the fiction of Orlando Furioso; and what they both affirm
concerning Fate and Liberty of the Will, may easily conjecture what they
intend. In words they expressly acknowledge both; but aver what is a real
Miracle or Prophecy cannot be known, but by the determination of the Church.
Hobs rejecting this, he, that he might not seem to deny Miracles or Prophecies,
does so speak of them, as they must not be esteemed so, except the Supreme
Magistrate says they are so. Spinosa throws off the vail, and makes all
Prophecies to be but mere conjectures: And tells us, that a Miracle cannot be
granted in Truth: If the being of a Miracle depended upon the Judgment of the
Ecclesiastical or Civil Power, there was no Miracle or Prophecy; for either the
Sentence they pass is true, or not: if true, then the existence of a Miracle
precedes the determination of the Church, or Civil Power. The determination of
the nature of a thing, cannot depend upon the determining, but upon the nature
of the thing it self. That is a true judgment, which agrees with that thing on
which the judgment is passed. This is a most unreasonable and absurd
Paralogism, on which depends, and runs through, the Divinity, Ethics, and
Politics of Hobs and Spinosa; That the worship given in Religion is Divine,
because determined by the Magistrate; or a Law just, because established by
Authority; or the public management of affairs is prudent, because the
Magistrate thinks so: If not true, then their Sentiments are so; for there may
be a Miracle and Prophecy which the Magistrate judges not so. Let them cast
what vail they please over their Sentiments, it may easily appear to a prudent
Eye, that they believe there is no Miracle or Prophecy. These are the persons
who employ their Natural and Acquired parts to destroy Christianity: Nay, to
extirpate the true ground of Justice and Civil Society, they cast a Reproach
upon God and Humane Nature. Satan gives, I hope, his last effort, which will be
of no long continuance, by reason that those weapons which have lain in
corners, and become rusty and unsuccesful for some Ages, he has Furbished,
Polished and Whet, not only to banish Christianity, but Goodness, true Reason,
Justice, and the lasting Ligatures of well-regulated Societies. This makes a
true Christian to glory and triumph, that Christianity cannot leave the World,
before its dissolution, (i. e.) whilst Men are in the World, who by Reason are
guided, and by whom just Laws are Enacted. The Enemies with which the Greek and
Latin Fathers, persons of prodigious Learning and Piety, contested, and
vanquished, acknowledged a God, a Divine Providence, the Immortality of the
Soul, Divine Predictions and Miracles: that Goodness and Justice took their
measures from an Eternal Reason. They granted that God ought to be appeased by
Sacrifices, and honored with all Oblations of Praise and Obedience. With these
the Christian Heroes fought. The Controversy is stated in the Remarks. But must
our glorious Religion be Eclipsed by the Shades of Darkness, which issue from
the bottomless Pit, through the Pens and Tongues of those who have revived the
Dogma's of Epicurus? The Narrative which Speizelius gives, Cap. 18. de Atheismo
Literatorum. The Blasphemies which are belched in some Atheistical London
Clubs, and the Impieties which are gloried in, at many Tables, makes the hairs
of good men stare! Such frequent Blasphemies, strikes persons with the greatest
horror, and makes our Tears to be our Meat and Drink, whilst they so wickedly
say, Where is God? Be not discouraged, God Reigns a King for ever; the Church
will remain as the faithful witness in Heaven. The Church is a Golden
Candlestick; the Candlestick may be removed from one place to another, but it
will continue, since the Candlestick is of Gold, a durable metal. Atheism is
the most malignant pestilence; but not so diffusive as Antichristianism. My
Lord of Rochester thus, All my life long I had a secret value and reverence for
an honest man, and loved morality in others; but I had formed an odd Scheme of
Religion to my self, which would Solved all which God or my Conscience might
force upon me: yet was I not ever well reconciled to the business of
Christianity; nor had that reverence for the Gospel of Christ as I ought to
have.

Certainly he who has an eye, and understanding to behold and contemplate this
universe; quo nihil Illustrius, when he seriously considers the Magnitude,
Order, Beauty of the World, the Luster, motion and influence of the Heavenly
Bodies, must needs conclude, that they were the product of Infinite Power,
Beauty and Goodness. The spreading infection is Antichristianism: the business
of Christianity gave the greatest trouble to my Lord Rochester. Amongst those
wicked persons who have debauched their reason, nothing more frequent than
cavils against, and jests thrown upon Religion. Hence how witty are they, when
they jeer, Light is come into the World, hang out your new Lights. The greatest
mysteries are those of the Trinity, and Incarnation; In these Christianity
glories and Triumphs: it owns, as certain, that the Son of God, who assumed our
nature, is Coeternal with the Father. To hear an addle head, to say, Can a Son
be as old as his Father? is to hear that, than which, nothing is more
ridiculous. A gross mistake to measure a Carnal, by a Spiritual Generation; as
soon as ever there is a Sun there is light. The Wise God being Eternal, the Son
of God, who is his Wisdom, and Word, must be Eternal. Must we boggle at our
Glorious Religion, by reason of these Mysteries; when every thing presented to
us, to understand the nature of it, is difficult? To scruple at that Religion,
(which in the whole frame, is of so Divine Composure) because of some
mysteries, is a greater frenzy than by reason the explanation of the nature of
the Sun, and its motion, is attended with a Thousand difficulties, to refuse
its light and influence. Admirable are the words of Picus Mirandula: Magna
insania Evangelio non credere, etc. It is a prodigious folly not to believe the
Gospel; the Truth of which the blood of Martyrs Seals; the Tongue of the
Apostles proclaims it: Miracles establish it: inanimate Creatures, nay, the
Devils themselves acknowledge it. But it is a higher pitch of frenzy, to
embrace the Gospel, and yet to live as though he was satisfied in the falsity
of it. Christianity having, for near Seventeen hundred years; continued her
Triumphs; the victories which our Religion has gained over all sorts of
Enemies, manifests its veracity, and the Divine Power protecting of it. What
methods were used under this Apostate Prince to destroy it? the Devil had
gained to himself a great Soldier, and a great Scholar. As I have seen Julius
Caesar drawn, standing upon a Pedestal, having a Sword in one hand, and a Book
in the other, with his Lemma ex utroque Caesar. So I may say of Julian, that he
was tam Mart qua Mercurio. This person, thus accomplished was invested with
the Roman Empire: whereby Learning and Policy, Valor and Vigilance, Dominion
and Power, were prepared and concurred to destroy that Gospel which is Eternal,
but all in vain. Shall Atheism now be prevalent? or Antichristianism gain in
those Kingdoms, where Jesus Christ is adored? God forbid. Nor can they, except
the evil Lives of Christians cause the Divine anger to waste his own Vineyard,
and remove his Golden Candlestick. Christianity gives the most effectual means,
and the highest motives. The duties of it are the most excellent; Faith, Hope
and Charity are terminated through Jesus Christ in God: by whom there is a
clear knowledge of God. Through Faith there is a raised confidence and Hope in
God: by these are produced a Heavenly and Seraphic Love; and it is a shame for
those who profess this Christianity, not to lead more Celestial Lives. It is
most necessary for Christians to vindicate their Religion. Christianity will
conquer all its Adversaries. The Laurels of which will never wither; whose
Triumphs are Eternal. Its the undoubted interest of every person, cordially to
embrace it, and seriously to profess it. Blessed, says our Lord, is he, that
is not offended in me. It Is for every Christian with Sincerity, to say, Who
shall separate me from the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus? He that lives
to Christ, governs his conversation by the most excellent Rules of Wisdom: he
Lives to Felicity, he Lives to Eternity.

The Order of the BOOK.
1. THE Life of Julian. 2. The fruitless Artifices which he used to destroy
Christianity. 3. The Character of Julian. 4. The Queries in order: 1st. Whether
did Constantius politickly in creating Julian, CAESAR? 2d. Whether there were
any thing Divine in the Death of Julian? 3d. Whether there be true Miracles or
not? 4th. If Christianity be so excellent in it self, how comes it to pass that
virtuous Heathens should so direfully persecute the Professors of it? To which
Question is added,
Reflections on the Two Books mentioned in the Title Page.
5th. If Christianity has such an innate purity, how comes it to pass, That
Christians should so violently persecute Christians? 6th. Wherein the Christian
Graces have a real preferency to the Pagan and Philosophical Virtues?

THE LIFE OF JULIAN THE Apostate.
CONSTANTINE the Great left Three Sons, Constantius, Constantine and Constance;
he had, amongst his other Brethren, one Constantius, who was Married to Two
Wives, the first of which was Galla, of whom Gallus; the second Basilina a
Religious Princess, of whom Julian was born in Constantinople An. 332. Some
good Authors report, that Constantine was killed by Poison, which his Bro-thers
Constantius and Abenblavius had given him, which caused him to give Letters to
Eusebius, formerly Bishop of Nicomedia, then of Constantinople, to deliver to
his Son Constantius, in which he advised him to have a Severe Eye upon his
Uncles. After he was invested with the Eastern-Purple, he cut off both his
Uncles; and had proceeded to the Destruction of Gallus and Julian, if the
Sickness of the one had not been reasonably guest, that Death would spare the
hands of the Executioner: and the other was so young, that his tender Years
were Orators for him. This severe humor in Constantine, was mitigated by the
Barrenness of Eusebia, which moved him, in case he had no Children, to leave
his Empire to his Cousins: both which were sent to a place called Marcellum, a
stately and Royal Palace, at the foot of the Aegoean Mountains, which was
adorned with most curious and delicious Gardens, and those enriched with the
Silver Streams of most pleasent Waters: There was nothing wanting for delight,
exercise, and retirement: And there they had Masters appointed to instruct them
in all sorts of Learning; and to fit them for business, they were taught those
exercises, which were Congruous to their Age.

Julian's Master in the Liberal Sciences was one Mardonius, a Scythian, and
Eunuch, that taught his Mother Homer and Hesiod: It was he, who first instilled
Paganish Principles into Julian, to whom he would often say, I know one way to
make a man good and happy, and no other will I Learn. Constantius was jealous
least his Kinsman might waver in his Riligion, and therefore appointed some of
his Courtiers diligently to observe him, and ordered by all means possible to
find out his inclinations: And that he might be confirmed in the Christian
Religion, he was committed to the care of Eusebius, Bishop of Nicomedia, who by
the Mohers side was allied to Constantine the Great; by reason of which
affirnity he was very much in favor with the Emperor. This Eusebius was one of
the Lapsi, who sacrificed, during the Persecution, an Arrian, and very much
advanced that Heresy; and by him Julian might take some distaste at
Christianity, for he was a cruel and evil person. To the Liberal Sciences,
Julian added the study of Christian Philosophy, by reading the Scriptures, and
attending to the Lectures of Christian Divines, and pretended thereby, not only
to endeavor the obtaining the knowledge of those Divine things, which conduce
to Speculation; but likewise of those, which compose the manners of men, and
render their Conversation Heavenly. In his 16th Year, he entered into
Holy-Orders, and was made Deacon, and publicly read the Holy-Bible; he
enriched Churches, and vastly offered at the Tombs of Martyrs, but all his
pretensions were merely Hipocritical; for by these Colors he endeavored to
ingratiate himself into the savor of Constantius, that he might not suspect
him to have any intentions of aspiring to the Empire: But the Heavens detected
his Hipocrisy; for as he intended to build a Temple to Mammantus a Martyr, an
Earthqunke; hindered him from laying the foundation: which was a Prophesy of
those Indignities which he intended to do to Christians and Martyrs. In his
education, Maximus suceeded Mardonius, an Ephesian Philosopher, with whom he
went to Pergamus, where he fell into the acquaintance of Edesius, and
Jamblicus, great Philosophers, and greater Enemies to Christianity. These
confirmed him more in Paganism, and he to dissemble his intentions, and deceive
Constantius, applied himself more industriously to the study of the sacred
Books; not to comfirm his Faith, or regulate his Life, but to furnish himself
with Arguments out of the Holy Text to confute it. Constantius having out off
Gallus, was suspicious of Julian, and therefore commanded him to appear at
Millain, where he was accused for being a joint Conspirator with his Brother
Gallus: And to increase the suspicion, it was alleged, that he left the Palace
Marcellus, and went into Asia; to which he answered, that he did nothing
without the Emperors knowledge; who gave him leave to see his Brother, and
encouraged him in his travails into Asia, for the acquisition of Learning.
Constantius his Courtiers urged his Ruin, which was prevented by the Empress.
Thus avoiding the danger, he was sent to Athens, then the most flourishing
Academy in the World; This not only pleased him for the sake of Learning, but
Paganism, where in both he thought to make a proficiency. At Athens he was
initiated among'st the Elusinians to perform their Sacred Rites to Ceres, and
was one of the Priests of the Eumolpidoe. These things he transacted secretly,
and there he was known to Basil and Nazianzen.

The barbarous Nations having past the Rhine, entered into Gaul and dreadfully
wasted that Country; the news whereof being brought to Constantious, he
professed himself unable to manage the Empire alone, and therefore acquainted
his Council, that he was determined to create Julian, Coesar: From which his
Council endeavored to dissuade him, by proposing to him the Example of Gallus;
and encouraged him to sustain the burden of Empire, by enminding him of those
great Victories, that he had obtained against Rebels and Barbarians; but
nothing could prevail, for he was resolved to create a Coesar: and the Empress
urging the preferring a Kinsman to any person else, he recalls Julian from
Athens, changes his Philosophical Cloak into the Purple, and gives him his
Sister Hellena to Wife. They were married at Vienna; from thence Julian was
commanded to carry his Army into Gaul, where he pretended to give a favor to
the Othodox Christians. In the East, the famous Nazianzen commended
Constantius: In the West Hilarious writes a bitter Invective against him. The
Endeavors of Julian were, by a deadly policy, to Encourage Christians against
Christians. The Western Church was not much disturbed by Arrianism: Constantius
favored that Heresy. Julian being constituted Coesar in the West, his aim
being at the Eagles, endeavored to incense the Western Christians against
Constantius, whose Courtiers being for the most part Arrians, persuaded him to
persecute the Orthodox Christians. By this device Julian imagined there was a
way made to disunite Christians; but I cannot find any of the Western
Christians favoring his Rebellion against his Master. After Julian was created
Coesar, he presently betakes himself to Arms, marches into Gaul, subdues a
great part of it; and after he had obtained some small Victories, he goes to
Sens (now Triers) thither the Barbarians bring a numerous Army, whom he durst
not fight, by reason some of his Legions was absent, and therefore he contains
himself within the City which the Barbarians beseiged: but he contemning their
presumption, prepares to to fight: both Armies meet, the fight was bloody, a
long time dubious, at last victory hovered over the Romans, of whom in that
Battle dyed 243. The Almains fled, of whom 6000 bodies were found lying in the
field; besides multitudes of Corpse that could not be reckoned, were carried
down the River. Conodamarius King of those Barbarians being taken, was civilly
received by Julian, and sent to Rome, where he died of a Lethargy immediately
after the Victory, by an universal Acclamation of the Army, he was saluted
Emperor: but his design being not as yet ripe he severely rebuked the Soldiers.
He often fought with the Almains, whom he frequently discomfited, and at last
at their humble request, he concluded a firm Peace with them. He baffled the
Franci, and settled Gaul; Constantius, being troubled at the fame of Julian, and
fearing lest he might create some new troubles, sent Decentius a Tribune to
fetch away from him all his old Soldiers: the rest of the Army was against it,
but Julian pretended a great desire to satisfy the Emperor: whereupon he
ordered them to march by Paris, where he then lay; he fails not to meet them in
a Village near the City, and as his manner was, by commending those whom he
knew, and putting every one in mind to do valiantly, in a pleasant Oration he
animated them to go cheerfully unto the Emperor, whose power was very ample,
and by whom they should get signal rewards; and the more honorably to treat
them that were thus to depart, he invited the principal Officers of them to a
Feast, and willed them confidently to prefer what lawful Petition they could
readily think of, wherein he might pleasure them. They being thus liberally
entertained, took their leave of him extraordinarily troubled, that they should
be separated from so exellent a Prince, and from their Native Soil: This was a
perfect discovery of Julians intentions. At night the Soldiers, being incensed,
hastened to Court, and with impetuous clamors called Julian, Augustus; but he by
a seeming anger dissembled his intentions, and dismis'd them till the morning;
as soon as it was light, they repaired to Court again, and with more fervant
acclamations, unanimously saluted him Augustus; he pretended a refusal, which
more increased the Soldiers acclamations: whereupon though he feigned a greater
unwillingness, yet he assented to their importunities: They desired him to
produce a white Diadem, the Ensign of the Empire: He said he had none. They
required his Empresses, he refuses it, being a Feminine Ornament: whereupon
one Marcus took his Collar from his neck, and put it upon the head of Julian:
he pretends he could make no resistance. Thus with high dissimulation he
receives the Empire, bountifully rewards the Soldiers, and commands them to
appear the next morning in the Fields, where he made to them an eloquent
Oration, in which he commends their former actions, and promises repeated
Obligations.

Constantius, after he had created Julian, Coesar, went to Rome, to see the
Glory of that City; he was transported at the sight of those curious and great
pieces, which were the beauty of it: He thought many of them to be unimitable:
Coming to the Forum Trojanum, in the midst of which stood the Great Horse, on
whose back Trajan was engraven, viewing this, he said, he would cause the like
to be made: To which Hormisda, a Persian Prince of the Blood Royal, replied,
Command, O Great Emperor, a stable to be built equal to this, and then let the
Horse come after to take up as Large a Room in it. This Prince being asked,
what Opinion he had of Rome, replied, That in this he took content, that their
Men were also Mortal. The pleasures, and repose, that he intended to receive in
that City, was disturbed by the News, that the Barbarous Nations, beyond the
Isther, took Arms to disturb the Empire; upon which he leaves Rome, goes to
Illiricum, and from thence to Sirmium, where he keeps his Court, and puts his
Soldiers into Winter quarters. At the Spring of the Year, he carries his Army
beyond the Isther, and destroys the the Quati, and Sarmali, for which, in the
acclamations of his Soldiers, he was called Secundus Sarmaticus. Whilst he was
busied, Julian threatens him with a Civil-war, and Sapor, King of Persia with a
foreign. He being truly informed, that Sapor had brought a Vast Army to the
Banks of Tigris, Sapor being busied with sacrifices, delayed the passing of his
Army over Tigris, 'Till the Priest had assured him of Victory by lucky signs:
News was brought to Constantius, that the Priests gave Sapor no encouragement,
but told him the Omens were unlucky, and that thereupon he had returned to
Persia. Constantius (being thus freed from that danger, and having heard that
Julian had passed Italy, and Illiricum, and was hasting into Thrace) returns
with all imaginable speed, to Hieropolis, where, when his Army rendevouz'd, he
summoned them to appear before him; and standing upon a high Tribunal, with a
cheerful aspect, and with most pathetick words, he encouraged them to march
with him, and fight with singular unanimity and valor, against Julian, whom he
justly charged with ingratitude and rebellion. The Soldiers testified their
resentment of his Oration with most applauding acclamations; and with
indignation, shaking their Spears, passionately desired to be led against
Julian. The joy which he conceived at this affectionate carriage of his
Soldiers, caused him immediately to march to Antioch, from thence to Tarsus,
where he fell into an Ague, which not being vehement, he throught by his
Travail he might remove. Though dangerous and troublesome ways he carried his
Army to Mopsue in Cilicia at the foot of Mount Taurus, from whence on the
morning he attempted a removal, but his disease grew excessive, the Fever
violently increased, all medicines proved ineffectual, and there on the 44.
year of his age according to Victor, in the 40. to Marcellinus, he dyed October
the 5th.

Julian being raised to the Empire, whilst Constantius was embroiled in
foreign Wars, endeavored to strengthen his interest, and obliges his Soldiers
to him by an Oath, which none refuses except one Nebridius, not out of
aversness to Julian, but tenderness of his of Oath; to whom he thus addresses
himself: Sr, I am bound by my Oath to pay all Loyalty to Constantius, to whom I
am further engaged for those many Favors he has showed unto me; against whom,
if I should take up Arms, I should be ungreatful, and irreligious: At the
hearing of which words, the Soldiers would have torn him in pieces, if he had
not been protected by Julian, at whose feet he throws himself, and begs his
right hand, to testify that he should be secured; to whom Julian generously
replies, I give you liberty to go wether you will: but if I give you my right
hand, what shall I keep for my Friends, in case you attempt any thing against
my Person and Empire? Thus with all speed he carries his Army against
Constantius, possesses himself of the Straits of Thrace and Illyricum; defeats
Lucinianus one of Constantius's Generals; comes to Constantinople, which City
receives him with all the Testimonies of Honor: from thence he wrote an
Invective against the Senate of Rome, which Tenullus Prefect of Rome read in
the House: to which the Senate answered with Submissiveness, Authori tuo
Reverentiam regamus. Nigrinus with two Legions winters at Aquileia, to hinder
the progress of Julian, who was very much troubled at this Act.

The news of Constantius's death was brought to Julian, then at Constontinople,
and from thence to Aquileia, which was no sooner received, but the Citizens and
Soldiers threw open their Gates to Immo, Julians Commander of that Army that
then besieged it; and to obtain their pardon, Nigrinus and two of there
Principal Citizens are delivered into their hands, who commanded Nigrinus to be
burned, and the other to be Beheaded. If I durst conjecture the reason, why
both old, and new Rome so suddenly revolted to Julian, I would not impute it to
the instability of Citizens, but to Constantiu's severity a against the Orthodox
Christians, and Julian's Hipocrisy: For whist Constantius (miserably seduced by
his Arrian Flatterers) persecuted those who defended the Holy Trinity; Julian
favors them, not out of love to Religion, but Ambition. Hilarious, in Gaul,
received no trouble from Julian, which perhaps might be the Cause of that holy
Man's too severe Invective against Constantius. Whilst Julian aspired to the
Empire, he made a profession of Christianity, and was certainly a man of great
Spirit and parts. Though he was very Superstitious, attending to dreams and
prophecies, yet after he was created Coesar, when at Paris shaking his Spear,
the roundle fell down, and the handle remained, his Courtiers looking upon it
as Ominous, he with a present Courage says, Let no Man be difraid, I have that
sure which I hold. Nothing more becomes a Great Prince, than an undaunted mind,
which is able to raise the Spirits of his Soldiers, dejected by a present
Accident. What greater Vice is there, than that of Hypocrisy? Julian with the
greatest privacies applies himself to Idolatrous practices, and devotes himself
to all Paganish Divinations: yet at the same time he keeps the Christian
Festival, peculiarly the Feast of Epiphany; and performs his devotion to
Christ, in the Congregation of Christians.

The news of Constantius's death being spread through the East, he was with
wonderful applause and unanimous Acclamations received by the
Constantinopolitans: and to ingratiate himself into the affections of the
People, he punishes some of Constantius's Soldiers and Friends, whose Ambition
and Avarice had wasted the Provinces with grievous Taxes and Tributes; which he
released, and furnished the Cities with infinite store of grain, and all sorts
of Provision. That he might reconcile Christians to him, he restored the Bishop
which Constantius had banished. The occasion of his fear being removed, he then
discovered his Intentions, and ordained that the Temple should be set open,
that Beasts for Sacrifice should be presented before the Altars; and that the
Worship of the gods should be revived: and to effectuate, and strengthen this
design, so digested, he admitted the Christian Bishops (which were at
dissension, together with the people, (which were divided into Schisms) unto
his place, and gave them this Admionition, that having appeased and ended all
civil discords amongst themselves, every man should confidently follow his own
Religion, without any impeachment whatsoever: Which was for this end, that as
this liberty increased dissentions, so he might not fear the multitude of them:
Accordingly Julian commanded, that confiscated estates should be restored to
the owners, that no person should offer an injury or disgrace to the
Christians, and that they should not by any violence be forced to sacrifice.
This he did not in favor of the Christians, whom he implacably hated; for his
vizar being thrown off, this monstrous Apostate (who very well knew what deadly
enemies the Christians were to Idolatry, and he himself being versed in the
Mystery of Christianity) endeavored to disgrace them, and ruin their Religion.
He fastidiously called the Christians, Gallileans. He opened the Temples of
Idols, repaired the ruinous, rebuilt the demolished; he erected Altars, revived
the Paganish Laws and Customs, instituted Orders of Priests, encouraged all
persons who professed Idolatry, received Heathen Philosophers with great
honor, and entertained Maximus the Cynick with a carriage, which showed him
more Ambitious than Philosophical.

From Constantinople, which he the more loved, because it was the place of his
Nativity (after he had animated his Soldiers by an eloquent Oration, and large
Donatives) he marches to Antioch, the beauty of the East. The multitude of
People that there waited on him, filling the Air with loud Acclamations,
transported him with extraordinary joy, which the Rites in the Festival of
Adonis allayed: for the Heathens celebrated the Murder of Adonis with
Lamentations and outcries, which Julian esteemed an ill presage. He Winters at
Antioch, to make all imaginable preparation for the Persian expedition, to
revenge those injuries which were done by the Persians upon the Roman Empire.
He was impatient of rest, Ambitious of Glory; and dreamed of nothing but
Battles and Triumphs: and was extraordinary desirous that the Surname of
Parthicus might be inserted amongst his Titles of Honor. His intimate
Favorite Salustius, Prefect of Gaul, dissuaded him from that enterprise, from
which he was also discouraged by some ill Omens; but nothing could move him.
Ambassadors from several Nations promised him assistance, whom after he had
generously entertained, he sent away with a Complement, saying, That in no wise
it became the dignity of Rome, to want the aid of strangers; but that it was
her glory to defend and assist them when they were cast into any danger.
Arcesses King of Armenia, who was a Christian, commanded to attend him with a
sufficient Army. In his Letters to that Prince, he dealt insolently with him,
basely abusing Constantius, and blasphemously traducing Christianity. In March
he left Antioch: at the beginning of April he brought his Army into Persia,
where notwithstanding his unprosperous Omens, he continued his March. The day
before, according to the mood of the Romans, he made an Oration to his Army,
which was so received, that he was assured of Victory, and of the speedy
dispatch of the whole undertaking. He retires to his Pavilion, and sleeps part
of the Night; and by then it was day he causes the Trumpets to Sound: nothing
but Gallantry and cheerfulness was seen in the Counteance of his Soldiers. When
he entered the Marches of Assyria, he rides in the head of his Army, that by his
own Example he might encourage his Soldiers. To furnish his Army with
provisions, he had a brave Armad^ Sailing upon Euphrates: Some strong Cities
Seated upon the bank of which he presently took. He laid a Bridge made of
Ships, on which the Army passed over Tigris: then the Persians gave him Battle,
which was courageously fought from morning till night: But the Roman Valor
made the Persians to yield: the Victory was gained with little loss to the
Romans: Though Two Thousand and five hundred of the Persians were slain, only
Threescore and Ten of the Romans were killed. This made him more confident,
whereupon to reconcile Mars, he prepared many Sacrifices, all which were
Ominous. Ten Bulls, the fairest that could be procured, were intended for the
Oblation; Nine of which, before they could be hailed to the Altar, fell down
dead: the Tenth broke his bonds, and running away, with much difficulty was
brought back again; but being slain, gave Ominous signs, which being perceived
by Julian, threw him into such an indignation, that he swore by Jupiter, he
would offer no more Sacrifices to Mars; which Oath his sudden death made him to
perform. He was not yet discouraged, but brought his Army to Tesiphon, a City
placed on the farther banks of Tigris; at the sight of which he conceived a
vast Joy, and promised to himself so great a Conquest, that he had swallowed up
in his hopes all Persia. But before the Walls of this City, his Victories
received a Period: for Tesiphon is judged inpregnable, and thereupon his
Council of War diswade him from laying Siege to it. Nazianzen relates, that a
Noble Persian (in imitation of Zophyrus, who pretended a defection from Cyrus,
that he might have the opportunity to deliver Babylon into his hands) flies to
Julian, ingratiates himself into his favor, and encouraging him to continue
the War against Persia, persuades him to burn his Ships: withal promising, that
he would be a faithful guide to his Army, to conduct them safely through those
ways in which they were to March. Julian therefore commands his Ships to be set
on fire, reserving only Twelve of the less, for the making of Bridges; the
reason that induced him to this fatal Action, was a fear, lest if his Navy was
left behind, it might turn to the benefit of his Enemies. He Judged that 20000
men would do him better Service at Land, than when employed in Ships. His great
admirer Mars, justifies him by the Examples of famous Princes, who have burnt
those Ships which have carried their Soldiers into foreign Countries, that if
their innate Virtue did not make them Valarous, yet desperation should. By such
facts, they let their Army know, that no other Liberty was given them, but
either to Conquer or Dye. But this fact of Julians was so impolitick, that it
may be justly esteemed an Act of the Divine Providence, to infatuate the
Council of a politic Apostate; for it proved fatal to the Roman Army. By this
means he wanted materials to make Bridges, and his Army for want of provision
was reduced to great extremities; by the advice of his guides leaving Tigris in
his March on his left hand, he passed into fertile Countries, but those the
Persians had destroyed; they burnt the very Trees, and left nothing that was
necessary to sustain either Man or Beast. Julian, to encourage his Army, lived
upon thick gruel: the Army being pressed with these exigences, he in his sleep
was terrified with a dream of a falling Star, concerning which, consulting his
Southsayers, they advised him to stay in the Camp for some hours, but he would
not. The Persians glad of this occasion, fell upon the Roman Camp in several
places. They who gave the assault upon the Arrear, disturbed the whole Army; of
which Julian being advised, with the greatest have rides to recover the Battle:
but amidst his flying Soldiers, he was struck with a Horsemans Javelin, of
which wound he not long after dyed. This wound so enraged his Soldiers, that
their revenge and anger were testified by their rattling of their Shields: For
with an invincible courage they flew upon the Persians, resolving either to
conquer or dye with their Emperor: a rare courage in the Romans. Many times it
happens, that the Death of a General is the rout of an Army; but contrary was
the fortune of that fight: for though the Persians heightened their courage at
the News of Julians fatal wound, darkened the Sun with the volleys of their
Arrows, and opposed their Elephants, yet by the Roman Sword there were slain
Mercena and Malaodares, two great Commanders of the Army, 50. great Persian
Lords, and most part of the Common Soldiers. The like instance we have in the
late Wars of Gemany, in that memorable fight of Lutzen, when the invincible
Gustavus received the fatal wound, and thereto added a most ample testimony of
humane vanity; he that was esteemed a god, whom the world judged to have
Victory and Triumphs attending on his Sword, his Corpse were so miserably trod
on, that after the Battle was ended, there could hardly be a discovery of them.
His fall was so far from dispiriting the Sweeds, that it edged their Swords,
that had not night prevented the luster which the Duke of Fredland gained by
his Martial Valor and Policy, they had then received a fatal Eclipse, and the
Emperial Army a total overthrow.

The loss of the Spanish General in the Isle of Rugen, gave an eminent Victory
to the Sweeds, which revived the drooping concerns of that Crown.

Julian being carried to his Pavilion enjoyed the company of Maximus and
Priscus, who animated him against the fear of Death, by profound discourses
concerning the Sublimity of the Soul. The wound being great, caused such
Tumors in his Veins and Artries, that hindered circulation and motion of the
Spirits. The exorbitances of heat caused such pain, that he desired about
midnight cold Water, which being brought him, immediately after drinking of it,
he dyed in the 32. year of his Age.

The Artifices, which Julian the Apostate used to Destroy and Disgrace
Christianity.
THe measures which Julian took in his persecutions were different from those
of the Pagan Emperors, his Predecessors. Apostates are cruel and politic. He
endeavored by all fineness of Wit, to conceal his cruel Methods. In Disgrace
of our Lord, he called Christ, the Carpenters-Son, and the Man of Galilee; and
Christians, Galileans, that by odious names he might discredit the Gospel. He
endeavored to make his Courtiers and great Officers Apostates, by proposing to
them Rewards, Dignities, and preferments: and assaulted them with all
Imaginable Wit and Eloquence. Cesarius, Brother to Nazianzen, was a Physician
at Court, a man of very great parts, and of a Singular life, an able Physician,
and a profound Philosopher. Him Julian, for his learning and endowments, very
much honored, and endeavored by all means to draw from the faith of Christ,
but all in vain: for no eloquence, no force of Argument, nor the powerful
Rhetoric of Rewards and Honors could move him; for he evades all the
Artifices of Julian, by this free confession, I am a Christian. Julian never
published any Sanguinary Edict against the Christians, whom he knew would
endure all sorts of Tortures for the Honor of their Master generously and
joyfully. The effects of Dioclesians Butcheries made him understand, that no
Garden being Seasonably watered, more flourishes than the Church of Christ,
when the blood of Martyrs was poured on it: Yet he delighted in the Blood of
Christians. Murders were committed in popular tumults, which he did not punish,
or prevent, but would palliate his cruelty, not with Religion, but the pretense
of Criminal Offenses. Helbidius, the chief Commander of the pretorian Guard, by
reason he found him constant in his Religion, he removed from his Command, and
being desirous to put him to an ignominious Death, laid Treason to his Charge,
condemned him to be drawn by Wild-Horses, and afterward to be burnt to Ashes.
Christians (who during the Empire of Religious Princes, had thrown down
Idolatrous Altars, demolish't Temples, and hindered the Oblations to Heathen
gods) were hurried before the Courts of Judicature and condemned: and if one
that persisted in Christianity, was but accused of such actions, though he had
no hand in them, he was condemned. He commanded all Physicians, Orators, and
Soldiers, either to abjure their faith, or leave their profession; he permitted
no Christian to be of the Pretorian Guard; by this means he showed his most
deadly hatred of Christianity. If persons, on such an account, would abjure
their faith, they would render themselves ridiculous to the world, by
preferring riches to faith: If they generously persisted, their Victory was not
glorious; for what great matter would it be, for the sake of Religion, to
contemn an Art, or Profession? He removed the Cross from the Imperial Zebarum,
and instead of it placed the Axcilia; and to his public Images, he caused the
Image of Jupiter to be affixed as a god appearing out of Heaven, and reaching a
Diadem and Purple to him. Mars and Mercury were drawn looking upon his Picture,
to testify by the cast of their eyes, that in him Eloquence and Military
discipline Superlatively met; which he out of a deep policy commanded that
unwary Christians which were in his Army, by that means should be induced to
Idolatry. It was a Custom in the Army to show Reverence to the Images of the
Emperors, which if according to the Ancient mode, they did, they then gave
Reverence to the Heathen gods: not many of the Christians perceived this fraud:
for if they denied the doing of Reverence to the Images of the Emperor, they
were punished as Malefactors and Enemies, and Seditious Innovators to their
Prince. If they did, they were in Danger of Idolatry: Thus did he varnish his
impious designs. It was usual at some set times of the year, for the Roman
Emperors to reward their Soldiers. Julian, when the Largesses were appointed to
be given, commanded that Fire and Incense should be prepared, that when the
Soldiers received their donatives, they might cast incense upon the fire. By
this device he entrapped the Covetous and unwary Soldiers, who being caught in
this snare, fell into Idolatry. Some perceiving this cunning trick, preferring
Religion to all gain, or honor, refused the Emperors Largess: Some through
fear, others bribed by Coveteousness, wittingly communicated with Pagans in
their Rites: others were deceived, and through Ignorance complied. Of these,
some coming to a Feast with their fellow Soldiers, when they drank, according
to the Holy manner of Christians, invocated the name of Christ: to whom one
that was present, returns, how dare you invocate that Christ, whom you have so
lately denied? For when you received the Emperors Money, you offered Incense.
At which words they were struck with horror, and ran up and down the Streets
bitterly bewailing that fact, calling God, and all his Saints to witness, that
they did it out of Ignorance: that they were Christians, and did remain in the
Faith of Christ. When they came to the Emperor, they threw the Gold at his
feet, and desired that they might expiate their Crime by Death: and as by fire
they Sinned, so by fire they might Suffer: But Julian, though grieveously
incensed, did not not put them to Death, but cashiered and banished them. To
discountenance Christianity, he prohibited Christians to execute any Civil
power, saying, that those that deserved Death, ought not to be trusted with the
Sword of Justice; Though he made an Edict, that no Christians should remain in
the Army, yet some for their valor and fidelity, he retained in his Service;
as Jovian, who was a great Commander in his Army in the expedition against the
Persians and Valentinian. In the Cathedral Church, at Constantinople, he placed
the Altar of Fortune: upon which, to offer Sacrifice, he went, accompanied with
his Courtiers and great Officers amongst whom was this Valentinian, whose place
being immediately before the Emperor, those to whom the care of the Church, or
holy things was committed, standing in the Porch, with Holy Water, to cast upon
those which came to worship, some of it fell upon Valentinian, which threw him
into such an Holy indignation, that he gave him that threw the water, a box on
the ear, and said, that by that dirty water he was not expiated, but polluted,
and tore so much of his Garment off as the water fell upon; which being done in
the prsence of Julian, cast him into an extraordinary anger, and so he banished
him. At Constantinople, he endeavored to force the Christians to Idolatry, by
famishing them; for though all things, which were for the food of Man, as Bread
and Flesh were publicly exposed to Sale, yet he polluted them by offering them
up to Idols; whereby the Christians must either dye by Famine, or to preserve
their Lives, must give an honor to the Heathen-gods; but being in this danger,
they were rescued miraculously. My Author reports, that they consulted
Theodorus the Martyr as their Oracle, by whom they were counseled, that
instead of Bread and Meat they should eat boiled wheat, which they did, and
were thereby sustained, and freed from the suspicion of Idolatry. Julian Seeing
this device frustrated, permits Victuals freely to be sold. During that Policy
of Julian, the Rich showed their Liberality to the Poor, in the bestowing
bountifully amongst the indigent, boiled Wheat: In memorial of which, at
Constantinople, on the Aniversary of that Martyr, the rich Christians
distribute amongst the poor, boild wheat. After he had tarried at
Constantinople ten Months, coming to Chalcedon, on the other Side of the water,
there came to him from the King of Persia, 3 Ambassadors, Man, Sabel, and
Ishmael, which he against the Law of Nations injuriosly treated. The persons of
Ambassadors are Sacred, and he knowing they were Christians, invites them to
Sacrifice, but they refusing he condemns them to be beheaded as enemies to the
Sun and Fire, the Persian Dieties. He passes on to Nicomedia, which he finds
(for the greatest part) by aterrible Earthquake reduced to dust; the remaining
Inhabitants receiving him not in triumph, but in sad postures and garbs, he
comes to Cesaria in Cappadocia, the inhabitants of which City were almost
Christians. The Christianity which they professed was sufficient to make them
hate them: but their Demolishing the Temples of Jupiter and Appollo, and
afterward that of Fortune, cast him into so deadly a Rage, that he was angry
with the Heathen for permitting it, and commanded all the moneys that belonged
to Churches, to be brought into the Public Treasury, and all the Clergy to be
enrold in the Army, and laid many heavy Taxes upon Men, Women and Children,
that were Christians, and swore, that he would never cease from afflicting that
City, nor suffer the Galileans (for so he contumeliously called the Christians)
to keep their Heads upon their Shoulders, if they did not rebuild those Idol
Temples which they had burnt, and demolished. At Ancira, Basilius a Presbyter
was standing in a Public place, and seeing Sacrifices offered, he expresses a
great anger, and prays to God, that no Christian may fall into that Delusion;
after which, being grievously tormented, he suffered a glorious Martyrdom.
Phrygia, and Thrace, glory in those who suffered for Christ, in the time of
Julian: He then goes for Antioch, where he Wintered in order to his
Persian-War: thither he sends for Artemius Prefect of Egypt, a great honourour
of Christianity, who had broke many Images and Idols in pieces, for which,
after his Estate was confiscated, he was executed. He was a Soldier under
Constantine the Great, and a spectator of that miraculous Cross which appeared
to Constantine. Artemius being Excecuted, the Alexandrian Pagans waited for an
occasion to excecute those Cruelties upon the Christians, which they intended;
which was thus offered: George Bishop of Alexandria returning from the Princes
Court, attended with a numerous train, as he passed by the Temple of Genius,
casting his Eyes upon that curious and fair pile of Building, How long, (cries
he out) shall this Sepulcher stand? the Pagan Populacy hearing those words fell
upon George, dragged him by his Legs, and with the greatest Scorn tormented him.
They seized also upon Dracontius, because he had demolished an Altar set up in
the Mint-house, in which he had the greatest Authority: And one Diodorus a
great Officer, who being constituted Surpervisor of the building of a Church,
cut of the Hair of Boys close to the Head, supposing that the wearing of locks
smelled of Idolatry. These Three the enraged multitude Ignominiously and
barbarously murdered: they mangled their dead bodies, and burnt them; after
which, they threw their Ashes into the Sea. Upon this Tragedy Marcellinus makes
two remarques: First, these persons when they were dragged to Excecution, might
have been rescued by the Aid of Christians, if they had not conceived a deadly
hatred against Georgius, who was an Arrian, and managed his Episcopal
Jurisdiction with pride and cruelty. He was a great Scholar, and had one of
the best libraries in the World. 2. It being the custom of Christians,
religiously to preserve the relics of those, who, to maintain their faith,
endured all imaginable torments, even to a glorious death: and where they
buried those Sacred relics, there they built Churches, and therefore the
Alexandrian Pagans fearing this Honor might be done to these Three, cast their
Ashes into the Sea. Whilst Julian tarried at Antioch, which was full of
Christians, he answered those abuses cast upon him in that famous Invective
called the Misopagan. He affected a long and Philosophical Beard, which gave an
Occasion to call him a Goat. That which most incensed him against the
Antiochians, was the neglect of the Temple of Daphne. He himself was so
extremely given to Sacrifices, that he Offered sometimes an Hundred Oxen at
once, which made him to becalled not Sacricola, but Victimarius; and he caused
on his Tomb to be engraven an Altar and an Ox. He coming to the Temple of
Daphne, found no Sacrifices prepared; for the City had ordained none, and the
Priest had only one poor Goose to Sacrifice; whereupon he makes this complaint
to the Senate, Every one of you commands his Wife to give largely to the
Ga-lileans, but none brings things necessary for the performance of holy
Offices to the gods. When any one celebrates his birthday, he makes a sumptuous
Feast, and splendily entertains his Friends at a rich Table; but on the solemn
Feast of the gods, no one brings Oil for the Lamps, Oblations, Sacrifice, or
Incense. Julian, consults the Oracle of Apollo Daphnick, which was famous for
predictions, but now became silent: The story of which, and the conflagration
of the Temple, we cannot take from a better Pen, than that of Chrysostom, who
gives an account of them in those famous Sermons against the Heathens, and
confirms his Narrative with this public and solemn protestation; There are
many alive which were Eyewitnesses of those things which I am now to relate,
whom I passionately entreat, and beseech, that if any thing by me be added or
falsely spoken, they will come forth and reprove. The Emperor with a grave
composure of Countenance ascends Daphne, with abundance of Oblation and
Sacrifices, a River of Blood was made by the flaughtered Victims, and there,
with a great deal of Fervor, prayed the Oracle to resolve him some things that
were in his mind; to which he had this return, that the many Carcasses with
which Daphne was filled, had rendered the Oracle silent. Julian, extremely
astonished, hastens presently to the Tomb of Babylas, and commands the Coffin
to be taken up, and the Christians to remove the Corpse, which they did, and in
a religious Solemnity carried them about forty furlongs from Daphne, and so
interred them; all sorts of persons, Men and Women, Young Men and Virgins,
Old-men and Children, mutally encouraging one another, and singing Psalms after
the manner of Christiians, Translated the Body of Babylas. In their singing,
they often repeated that of the Psalmist, Confounded be all they that worship
graven Images, that boast themselves in Idols, Psalm. 97. which so enraged the
Emperor, that he commanded the Christians to be severely punished. Salustus
Governor of the City, though a Pagan, dissuaded him from such intentions; but
Julian persisting in his resolution, apprehended several Christians, and threw
them into Prison, and commanded a young man, called Theodorus to be racked, and
his flesh to be torn; but this abated not his Christian courage, for in those
torments he carried himself more like a spectator than a sufferer, desiring
that new and more dreadful tortures might be added Salustus, admiring his
constancy, goes to Julian, whom he counsels to desist from such cruel courses,
for they tended to his ignominy, and to the glory of Christians; whereupon
Theodorus was freed from the Rack, and other Christians from the Goal. The
Power and Grace of God is observable, miraculously comforting those who piously
suffered. This Theodorus being asked by some, what pain he felt during the
Rack, answered, that he was not altogether unsensible, but that there was a
young man, that stood by him, which abated the vehemence of his pain; for with
soft Linen he wiped away his Blood and Sweat, and poured cold water upon his
Body, which asswadged his Grief. Presently after the Translation of Babylas,
that famous Temple of Daphne was burnt, the description of which fire, and the
eloquent discourse concerning it, may be read in the fore quoted Books of
Chrysostom. The burning of the Temple was attributed by Julian to the
Christians, but most falsely, and maliciously; Yet he having this pretense,
racked many Christians, thinking thereby to extort a Confession, but they
constantly and truly denied. His arts and cruelties were in vain. The Priest of
the Temple he dreadfully tortured by Scourges, and the Rack, who when he was
almost torn in pieces, professed that the fire was the product of Divine anger,
not of any humane art, or policy; and after he had suffered various, and
grievous tortures, averred, that he could accuse no person, and that the Temple
was burnt by a fire from Heaven. Theodoret affirms, that some neighboring
Countrymen testified that they saw the Temple set on fire by Lightning.
Chrysostom, with a great deal of eloquence, ascribes it to the prayer and
power of Babylas the Martyr. Julian being informed, that near the Temple
Appollo Didymus in Militus, there was some Churches built in the Honor of
Martyrs, wrote to the Prefect of Caria, that if they were finished, and an Holy
Table was placed in them, he should reduce them to ashes; if half built, he
should demolish the Walls, and raize the foundations To manifest his inveterate
anger against the Antiochian Christians, he seized upon the Sacred Vessels and
Treasures, and shut up their Church-doors. The Instruments of this Action were
three of his Fellow Apostates, Julian Uncle to the Emperor by the Mothers side,
Felix his Lord-Treasurer, and Elbidius his Lord Privy Seal All these once
professed Christianity; but to ingratiate themselves with the Apostate, they
shamefully diserted their faith. No greater Enemy to Christianity, than impious
Renegadoes. This Julian, Prefect of the East, caused all the rich Monuments,
Treasures and Utensils of the Church to be seized on, and banished the Clergy
of Antioch: only one Theodoret a Presbyter would not leave the City, whom (by
reason the Treasures of the Church were committed to his custody) this Julian
apprehended; and that he might make a further discovery of the Churches
treasure, he caused him to be grievously beaten, dreadfully scourged, and
cuelly tortured; and at last, his constant and generous refusal made his Head
to be struck off. This unworthy Apostate, after he had entered into the Church,
filthily and Sacrilegiously pissed upon the Communion Table, and Box'd Euse the
Bishop for reproving of him. Felix seeing the magnificence of the Sacred
Utensils (for Constantine and Constantius provided most sumptuous Vessels for
the Church) belches out this most dreadful blasphemy, How richly is the Son of
Mary served!

God permitted not those impious Blasphemers long to Glory in their villainies:
for Julian the Uncle dyed of a most fearful disease: his excrements and blood
came not out by natural passage, but, as a torrent, run out of his mouth: to
whom his Wife (a Woman enobled by her constancy in the Christian Religion) thus
spoke, O my Husband, you ought to admire Christ our Savior, who by these
punishments you suffer, manifests his power: for he whom you have so dreadfully
opposed, had utterly rejected you, if he had not exerted his wanted Clemency in
inflicting these punishments upon you. Whereupon this miserable person (partly
by his Wifes discourse, and the heavy judgment under which he lay) being
convinced of the cause of his disease, begged of the Emperor, that he would
restore to the Churches what he had violently taken from them; but the Emperor
refused, and he suddenly died. Felix likewse felt the Divine vengeance; for his
blood leaving its natural Vessels, flowed violently out of his Mouth, and so he
died: they both thus miserably perished, when the Emperor was preparing his
expedition against the Persians. Upon their Deaths, Marcellinus makes this
observation; Whilst he was ordering his affairs, behold, he was terrified with
a certain Ominous Sign, that took effect as the event showed most surely, and
with speed: for by occasion, that Felix the Treasurer suddenly died of a Flux
of Blood, Julian himself not long after fatally perished. The populacy in their
acclamations joined Julianus and Felix with Augustus. those having received a
miserable Death which he feared to be the prediction of his own. Elbidius
escaped not the punishment of Apostasy, and Blasphemy. He aspired to the
Empire, for which his Estate was confiscated: his slight caused him not to feel
the stroke of the Executioner, but he escaped not the hand of God; for being
cursed and hated of all, he pined away by an immoderate grief and so basely
perished. The Christian women at Antioch, out of a great Zeal to Religion, and
hatred of Julian's impiety, by Spiritual Songs and Psalms exposed his Idolatry.
Publio, a Noble Matron, with her Quire of Virgins, over whom she was Governess,
as Julian passed by the House where she lived, Sang that of the Psalmist, 115.
4. Their Idols are Silver, and Gold, the works of Men's Hands, etc. and ended
with this, They that make them, are like unto them, so is every one that
trusts in them. At which Julian was so enraged, that he commanded them to be
silent when he passed by: but Publia slighted that Precept, and called together
her Quire of Virgins, who, at her Instigation, with greater alacrity, and
louder voices, added in their singing of the former Psalm, another verse of
David's Psalm, 68. 1. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered: and they
that hate him, flee before him. Which so irritated the Emperor, that he
commanded the Mistress of the Quire to be brought before him, whom (though she
was reverend for her Age and gray hairs) he gave in charge to one of his Guard,
cruelly to buffet with disgrace; but she esteemed it an Honor, and returning
home, persisted with greater Ardour in singing Psalms to the derision of
Idolatry. There was one Porphirius a notable Droll, and Mimick, whom Julian
made use of to disgrace Christianity by bitter jests, and ridiculous postures:
This Porphirius to deride and make a jest of Baptism, was baptized Jocosely;
but God Almighty brings good out of evil, and by a wonderful power converted
this Mimick, so that he seriously professed Christianity, and constantly
persisted in it. Upon which, Julian forgets himself to be a Philosopher, and
was so incensed (that one who exposed Christ should Adore him; and that the
Action which was intended for the scorn of Religion, should so conduce to the
Honor of it) that he commanded his Head to be severed from his Shoulders: such
is the goodness of God, and power of Grace, to make of a deriding Scorner, a
glorious professor of Christianity; of a Mimick, a Martyr of the Lord Jesus. He
caused his Army to keep their Winter Quarters in Antioch, to oppress the
Christians there; and commanded Provisions, which was bought by Merchants at
dear Rates, to be sold at cheap. All the Fountains and Rivers he commanded to
be polluted with heathenish Sacrifices: all sorts of Provision he commanded
likewise to be polluted, defiled with devilish ceremonies, that so the
Christians might either starve, or else by eating seem to give an Honor to
Devils. The Christians detested this fact of Julian, bewailed the condition
that they were reduced to: yet they drank of the Waters, and did eat of the
Meat. The Apostle has resolved the case, in 1 Cor. 10. 25. Whatsoever is sold
in the Shambles, that eat, making no question for Conscience sake. Julian was
very Ambitious of Glory; and though he was the professed enemy of Christianity,
yet he endeavored to gain honor by clemency: He made no Sanguinary Laws, yet
his Bloody designs could not be concealed: for those Cities in which the
multitude of the Heathens were the greater, when in uproars and sedition they
had cruelly massacred many Christians, he did not punish, but applaud them, and
would jeer Christians complaining that their Brethen were slaughtered: of whom
Nazianzen, O! illustious Prince, and full of Clemency, that the righteous Judge
says, what great matter is it that one Grecian kills ten Galileans? Is not now
his cruelty manifest to the world? are not such words a sanguinary Edict?
Nazianzen couldnot but with the greatest reason and justice think, that the
license and impunity in murdering Christians in Popular tumults, was most
equivalent to the most severe Edict of Persecutions: and therefore he thus
bravely accuses him of perscutions, and removes the Vail of his pretended
Clemency and Patience: he set out public Edicts for the Destruction of our
Sacred Churches. Shall I pass by his violent seizing upon the Churches
treasure, a depradation that flows from coveteousness, as well as impiety? The
contumelious handling with profane Hands the sacred Utensils? shall I conceal
the Tortures that Bishops and their Flocks have endured for Religions sake?
shall I not mention the Pillars that have been dyed with the Blood of those
that have been bound to them, and dreadfully scourged? shall I bury in Oblivion
the feral actions of the Sagitary, who running up and down the Cities, handled
Christians more cruelly than they would do their Barbarous Enemies? The mention
of all these things, I will wave. Who is ignorant of the Alexandrian cruelties,
where the Tumultuous and Turbulent people added this to their Impieties, they
filled the Temple with the Blood of Men and Beasts, and that under the command
and conduct of a certain Imperial Philosopher? The seditious Conspiracy of
Eliopolis is known to all: The fearful rage of Gaza is unknown to none; by
which they gained this admiration, Honor and Esteem. The cruel Frenzy of
Arethusa made them, who were otherwise obscure, famous. At Askalon and Gaza,
Cities of Palestine, the Heathens rip't up the Bellies of Priests and Virgins,
and having filled them with Barley threw them to be devoured by Hogs. At
Eliopolis they cruelly massacred Cyril a Deacon, and having cut up his Belly,
tasted his Liver. The Eliopolitans used the sacred Virgins cruelly and
barbarously, they stripped them naked, exposed them to public view, cast all
imaginable disgraces on them, Shaved their heads, and then cut them in two; and
that Hogs might eat their Bowels, they threw Barley on them. At Arethusa very
grievious cruelties were exercised upon the Christians of the City, especially
upon Marcus their Bishop, who having in the time of Constantine caused some
Heathen Temples to be destroyed, Julian being Emperor, by reason of the hatred
which the Pagan Arethusans had conceived against him, had fled; but upon notice
given him, that many of his Flock were cast into Prison, he returned and
delivered himself into the hands of the Citizens, who, after various and cruel
Tortures, anointed his torn Body with Honey, and putting him into an Osier
Basket, hung him up in the Air to be stung to Death by Wasps; but even then he
spoke mildly to them, saying, I am above, and you below: which was Prophetical,
nothing, that glory which he was presently to receive. By the Testimony of this
City of Arethusa, though a Pagan, it appears that the generous constancy of
this Ancient Marcus was the glory of Christianity, and the confusion of
Paganism. This Persecution reached the West; for Constantius had removed the
Altar of Victory outof the Capitol, which the Senators of Rome that were
Heathens redeemed, and the Estates of those Officers and Courtiers of
Constantius, which were Christians, were confiscated, upon pretense that they
grew rich with the Spoils of Heathen Temples. Julian in his Edicts was not
ashamed to insert, that Christians, when they were despoyled of their Estates,
could not complain of Injury done to them, because their Master exhorted them
to Charity, and commended Poverty as the means of Perfection: And if other
pretexts was wanting, this was always ready: so that the Estates of Christians
were not Secure. Unquestionably, Rome and the Western Church, during this
persecution, yielded Confessors and Martyrs: for the Roman Senate was composed
of Christians and Pagans: and the implacable hatred of these was manifest
against the other. In the Reign of Julian, Gordianus, Prefect of Rome, commands
Januarius a Presbyter (whom he had cast into Prison, not as a Christian, but as
a Malefactor) to appear before him; But Januarius was so assisted with the
Divine Spirit, and applies himself to Gordianus in great Piety and Prudence,
with such success, that he converted him; whereupon at Night Gordianus comes to
Januarius in Prison, with his Lady Marina, and testifies his Repentance, and
extraordinary sorrow, that he had been the Author of Shedding Christian Blood;
and therefore upon hopes of obtaining pardon from Almighty God, and that he
might shun Eternal Torment, he desired to be Baptized: wherefore Januarius,
after he had further instructed, and stronglier confirmed him in the Faith of
the Holy Jesus, Baptized him, with his Lady Marina, and Fifty-three others of
his Family; concerning which, Clementianus a Tribune acquainted Julian, who
being extremely incensed, attributes this miraculous grace of Providence to
Magical Incantation; removes Gordianus from his Dignity, and substitutes
Clementianus in his place, who summons Gordianus before him, whom, after
dreadful Torments, he beheads, condemns his Lady to Slavery, and Stigmatizes
Januarius as a Rogue. That nothing might be wanting in Julian to extirpate
Christianity, he prohibited Christians to teach, or to be taught humane
Learning: concerning which, it is Queried, Whether by Julian's Edict Christians
were only prohibited to teach, and liberty permitted that they might be taught?
or whether they were prohibited both? Baronius admires that Lozymen, Socrates,
Ruffinus, and St. Augustine himself should aver, that by Julian's Edict
Christians were prohibited to teach, and to be taught. St. Augustine expressly,
De Civitate, Dei Lib. 18. Cap. 52. speaking of Julian, says, Did not he
persecute the Christians, when he prohibited them to be taught, or teach the
Liberal Sciences: Julian in his Edict, as appears, Epistle 42, only prohibits
Christians to teach. This Law, says he, concerns Governors and Teachers; as
for young men, they that will go, and learn, let them not be prohibited: for
it is unjust to hinder those who are Ignorant, to use those Methods whereby they
might attain knowledge.

Marcellinus relates, that he prohibited Professors in Rhetoric and Grammar,
to teach Christians; for which fact of his, his great Admirer justly styles him
inhumane, and unmerciful. But this difference may without great difficulty be
reconciled. It Is acknowledged that there was in the Edict a Liberty for young
Children to be taught by Pagan Masters, that they might be corrupted; for Youth
is ductile, and easily to be seduced by eloquence, and learned cheats; But
those Children that were confirmed in their Religion, those Christians that
were of maturer years, he permitted not the learning of Oratory, and those
Liberal Sciences.

Nazianzen Steli (who so bravely argues against the Impieties and Cruelties of
Julian with a torrent of Eloquence and reason in those noble Invectives, in
which Oratory and Judgment do contend for Empire) in lively Colors depaints
the execrableness of this Fact. It Is reason that Eloquence should Torture him,
who had committed so great a Crime against it. O Lightest of Mortals! whose
cruelty was so insatiable, that thou should deprive Christians of the
Learning of Rhetoric, and the study of humane Learning! I ask thee, what thou
intended'st by this Decree? what reason moved thee to deny Christians the
liberty of studying Eloquence, and Philosophy? if thou could produce a just
reason, we should be afflicted, but not complain: for as we have learned by
Arguments and Discourse to overcome, so by the same methods to yield and be
vanquished. Upon this Decree Musonius a Christian Orator and Philosopher left
his School. Victorianus (whose great Learning erected him a Statue in the Roman
Forum; whose admirable conversion in his old Age, St. Augustine piously
describes, Lib. 8. Cap. 5.) forsook his Chair, that he might retain
Christianity. It is evident that he interdicted, not only Teaching, but the
study of Languages, and Polite learning. If we enquire into the reason of this
Hellish Policy of Julian, take it from Nazianzen: He feared the confutation of
his Impiety, the strength of which lay only in the Pomps of words, and fineness
of speaking, not in the knowledge of Truth, and depth of Reason. Julianvery
well knew, that Christians teaching their Scholars out of Pagan Authors, could
by solid Arguments demonstrate how vain the Worship of the Heathen gods were,
and so by rendering that worship impious and ridiculous, they might create in
their Scholars a dislike of the Heathenish Idolatry, Theology, and so with more
ease bring them to Christianity: and if Christians were versed in those
Authors, they might easily detect the vanity and impiety of Paganism, This
made Julian so severely to prohibit, not only the study, but the teaching of
humane Learning. Those methods which the Divine Wisdom commanded for the
flourishing of Christianity, he appointed to be exercised for the reviving of
Pagnisme, of which his own Letter to Arsatius the Archpriest of the Heathenish
Superstition in Galatia, is an ample Testimony.

Let us cast our eyes upon the things by which the Profane (thus he
Blasphemously disgraces Christians) religion of Christians did increase. Let us
regard their Hospitality to Strangers, their Religious care in burying of the
Dead, their great disgrace to us in counterfeiting Holiness: Let all these
things be sincerely performed by us; Nor do I only command this to be observed,
but that you cause all the Priests in Galatia, either by compulsion, or
persuasion, to live soberly and gravely, and degrade them that do not, with
their Wives, Children, and Servants; serve the Gods with a most serious
attention. Build Hospitals for the receiving of strangers, not only those who
observe our Religion, but those that are in necessity.

Upon this Edict of Julian, Nazianzen makes these pious reflections. Julian
(says he) perceiving that our Religion was famous for the Heavenliness of its
Doctrines, and greatness of its Miracles, what does he, but (like Rabshakeh,
who would discourage the Jews speaking in the Jewish Language) destroy the
Christians by introducing those rites amongst the Pagans; he caused Schools to
be built in all Cities and holy places, wherein holy Offices might be
performed, Seats higher, and lower, according to the quality of Professors, who
should regulate in their Lectures the manners; or illuminate the understanding
of their Auditors with profound Doctrine; so that by alternate praying, and
singing, they might Worship the gods, according to the discipline of
Christians; and that evil and unjust men might be publikly rebuked and
punished. It infinitely Tormented Julian to perceive, that many of their Wives,
Children and Servants, became Christians: for he found that Christianity gained
an esteem in the World by the admirable conversation of its professors; and
therefore to hinder its Progress, and to make Paganism equally Glorious, he
built most stately Temples, and adorned them after the manner of Christians:
Upon which design of his, Nazianzen makes this excellent remark. Julian's
endeavors (says he) carried only an exterior paint, an outward Pomp and
Beauty; but our endeavors are to embelish the Inward Man; We labor most to
turn the eyes of men to behold those things which are only perceived by the
understanding, and Soul of Man: by these methods we instruct the People. And
indeed, it was easy for Julian to imitate the Christians in the Splendour,
Magnificence and Ornaments of Temples, in Rites, and Ceremonies; these are
exterior: but to imitate our Manners, the Holiness of our Conversations, to
raise the minds of Men to Heavenly designs, to enrich their affections by
making them Heavenly and Divine: this is above the Sphere of Paganish Devotion.

That the Apostate might leave no means unattempted to extirpate Christianity,
he encouraged the Jews to rebuild the Temple; which sumptuous and sacred Pile,
according to our Lords Prediction, was laid in ashes by the Roman Army, under
the Command of Vespasian, and Titus: And though he abused the Jews, and drolled
upon their Religion, yet knowing them to be mortal Enemies to Christians, and
that their advancement would tend to the debasement of Christianity, he
flattered and encouraged them. In his Epistle to them, he desires their prayers
for his good success against the Persians, and that their prayers might be more
fervent and effectual, he released the tribute which Constantius laid upon
them, of which, that there mght be no memorial, he burnt those Exchequer-Rolls
in which the Rates of their Imposition was Recorded; and promises them, upon
his Victorious return from the Persian Expedition, to rebuild Jerusalem, and
fill it with Jews, and inhabit in it himself, that with them he might Sacrifice
to the Powerful and Gracious God. He commanded the Jews to offer Sacrifice, to
which they presently returned, That their Laws would not permit them to offer
Sacrifice out of Jerusalem, and therefore desired him to restore the City, and
build the Temple: which request of theirs he granted, and issued out an Edict
for the rebuilding the City and Temple, and gave the charge of the speedy
dispatch of this affair to Alipius Prefect of Antioch, sometimes Viceroy of
Britain. The Jewish Women with so great a Cheerfulness encouraged this work,
that they sold their Jewels, their Ornaments, and their Clothes toward the
defraying the Charges: they spared not their delicate and tender Bodies, but in
their Richest Attire would carry Mortar toward the building of this Structure.
But God wonderfully frustrated this enterprise. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem,
being returned from Banishment, was not at all dismayed, but comforted his
dejected Flock, by assuring of them, that the Issue of this undertaking would
be the complete fulfilling of our Saviors Prediction, that one Stone should
not be left upon another: And accordingly it happened: for whilst the Jews were
busied in throwing away the Earth, and Rubbish, Flaming Balls of fire issued
out of the Earth, which burnt many of the Workmen, and consumed their Tools and
Instruments designed for the building of the Temple; and as often as they renewed
the attempt, so often they were repulsed by Fire. There were heard hideous
noises, and a prodigious Earthquake, which threw up the Stones that remained in
the old Foundation. This is not only averred by Christians, but likewise by
Heathens.

To this miraculous Fire in the Earth was added a miraculous Light in the
Heavens, which appeared in the form of a Cross, and powdered the Garments not
only of Christians, but Pagans, with Crosses. Thus that Name and Figure which
was contemned upon Earth, appears in the Heavens as a Divine Trophy. Chrysostom
in his 2d Homily against the Jews, after he had given a Narrative of this
miraculous Fire, thus directs his discourse to his Auditors: If you go to
Jerusalem, you shall find the Foundations cleansed: we are all Witnesses of
this, done it was, done not long since, in our time. Consider now the Triumph
of Christianity. This did not happen in the Empires of Pious Coesars, lest any
one might say, that Christians encouraged by their Emperors, might suddenly
fall upon the Jews, and so frustrate their intentions. No, but it was, when the
affairs of Christians were deplorable, when Paganism flourished, when Liberty
was denied us, when we were all in danger of our Lives, when Believers lay
concealed in their Houses, and fled into deserts; then these things happened,
that the most impudent might not have the least occasion to deny, or palliate
this thing. At this Julian was so enraged, that he intended to persecute the
Christians as Magicians: for those cannot see the Methods of Divine Providence,
whose eyes the God of this World has blinded. He was confident of being
Victorious in Persia; he vowed upon his return to put Basil and Nazianzen to
cruel deaths, and that he would build a Theacre of those Materials which were
prepared for the rebuilding of the Temple, in which he would Sacrifice the
Christians to Devils: But God frustrated his cruel designs; his Vows were
impious, and his Hopes a Dream.

JULIAN' s Character.
JVLIAN was born of Constantius (who conspired the death of Constantine the
Great, his Brother; who attempting the Purple, was slain in a Tumult) and of
Basilina, a Religious Princess. Though the Soul be, in its Essence, far superior
to the Body, yet it receives some inclinations to Virtue or Vice from it. Some
may judge it a fond trifle, if I should attribute any thing of Julian's
devotion to Basilina, or of his Apostasy to Constantius: Sure I am, that the
disposition of Parents is many times derived to their Children. It Is a
miserable vanity to attend, with the greatest care, the breed of Cattle,
Horses, nay, Dogs and Swine, and neglect the qualities of those that are
designed for Marriage; the splendour of Gold and Silver, so dazzling the eyes of
Parents, that in the Marriage of their Children, they believe Riches makes the
Deformed, Beautiful; the Lascivious, Chaste; the Fool, Prudent; the Debauched,
Temperate; and the Profane, Religious: Hence Springs a degenerate, weak, and
vicious Progeny. Julian was of a graceful aspect, his eyes lively: he was not
very tall, or bulky, but well compact; he had a good Head; and being of a
strong constitution, was fit for the Sword and Pen: he had prominent Shoulders,
which in his walking he was observed to move and shake; he had a strait Nose;
the Nose is the symbol of sagacity, hence prudent and inquisitive men are
(nasuti:) and it is a commendation for a person to be Emunctoe naris; his Mouth
somewhat with the greatest: He was very talkative, his Tongue was seldom idle;
he had a fat Neck, and bending forward; from the Crown of his Head to the Nails
of his Toes, he carried a just proportion, and an uniform knitting of his
lineaments, whereby he was strong and nimble; his Eyes whirled about; the cast
of them was insolent and fierce; his Nose breathed injury and contempt; his
Legs somewhat crooked, and his Feet were always in motion: The ridiculous
Figure and Composure of his Face gave an indication of his evil temper; he was
always profuse and loud in his laughter; his nodding usually denoting his
assent or refusal. Being known to Nazianzen at Athens, he was a great observer
of him, his gesture and mean; and thus says of him, I know, that I shall not
be an ill conjecturer of him; though by nature, I am not framed for that purpose,
yet the regularity of his carriage, and his frequent commotions (he that knows
well how to conjecture, is a good Divine) manifested, that nothing of Christ
appeared in him; his discourse was with hoesitation and interruptions; his
questions disorderly, and not intelligible: his answers were not superior,
they being not well digested, nor proceeding in a learned method, so suddenly
pressing upon one another. Why should I thus particularly describe them? Him I
saw, before he appeared, whom I beheld thus acting on the Stage: there are
those alive who knew, and heard me speak these things, and will without
difficulty attest it. The Levity of his nature made him inclinable to Revolt.

A good Face carries Letters of Commendations with it. Galba was deformed,
which was hid by his Military Virtue, whilst he was under Command; but made him
despised, when Emperor. The esteem which the Army had for his Valor and
Policy, was lessened by this Sentence, which became Proverbial amongst them,
Anima Galboe male habitat. This Grace of Julian's did argue him effeminate, for
he affected a long Beard to please the Philosophers, which made the Antiochians
reflect on him. Their Satyrs he wittily answers in his Miospogon; the
Antiochians would have him make Ropes of his Beard. He mattered not that Vermin
should run up and down his Beard, as Wild Beasts in a Wood. He valued not the
taking, or giving of a Kiss: Being sent, as Coesar, into Gaul, to defend it
against the barbarous Nations, that dwelt beyond the Rhine, living amongst the
Gauls, who were lovers of, and inured themselves to Austerities, Labors, and
Fighting with hardy and rude Nations, and that in the horrid Woods of the
Hercinian Forest, He gave himself up to a neglect of all curiosity: seldom cut
his Hair, or Nails: his Body was overgrown with Hair, so that he resembled a
Goat. He in his Misopogon commending himself for his austere Life, abuses the
Antiochians for their loose and soft Conversation, and retorts upon them, That
his Beard might make Ropes, if their tender Fingers durst touch the rough Hairs
of it. He so much affected Austerities, that he spent waking-nights on an hard
Bed: so watchful, that when Aristotle held a Ball in his Hand, that at the
noise of its fall, he might awake, and others had their Servants to rouse them;
he could wake when he pleased. That great Christian Soldier Scanderbeg that
miracle of Policy and Valor, never slept above two hours in a Night. Julian
never eat to fullness, and his meat was not delicious: when he was Coesar,
wintering at Paris, the Season being sharper than ordinary, he would not permit
a fire to be made in his Chamber, nor in any Chamber of Note: he was not at at
all disposed to Covetousness: he affirms of himself, that he horded up no
Riches: if his Treasures were considered he might be esteemed a King of
Mimicks, Jesters, or Stage Players He would often pronounce that brave saying
of Alexander, Where are your Treasures? and answer, like a great Prince, in the
Coffers of my Subjects: a saying worthy of an eternal Fame.

Queen Elizabeth had this rare happiness, never to be denied by her Parliaments
any Aid, or Money. In her last Speech (worthy to be writ in Gold and Cedar) she,
out of a Princely mind, remitted two of the Subsidies given her in that
Parliament.

It was an excellent saying of Julian, that It was a shame for a Wise man, that
has a Soul, to seek for Commendation from the Body: he was a severe punisher
of Crimes, by which admirable managing the Empire, he was both loved and
feared. The Crown of a Prince is secured, when defended by the Hearts of his
Subjects: this Love arising from the great goodness, and excellent qualities of
him, raises a veneration and reverence, that they dare not violate his
Authority, abuse his Person, or offend his Laws. In the Ark was the Rod of
Aaron, and the Pot of Manna, to note an excellent Prince, by Religion, by
Justice, and Liberality, is his Subjects joy and maintenance: by his Rod, and
Scepter, he rewarding and honoring men of worth, and discountenancing Vice and
Impiety; his Person and Authority is loved and revered. He was a great
pretender to Justice, and would say, that Astroea, who had left the Earth, came
from Heaven in his Reign.

Amianus Lib 22. Cap. 10. relates that when he himself sat to hear and
determine causes, he would unseasonably enquire of those, whose causes were
depending before him, what God they worshipped, and what Religion they
professed? yet no definitive Sentence was pronounced by him, but what was
consonant to Justice. This was done by him, when he kept his Court, and lay in
his Winter Quarters at Antioch, a City full of Christians, and therefore he
deadly hated it. Notwithstanding all these flourishes; in the History is
reported what Injustice he was guilty of: It will be evidently manifest that
Justice did not guide him: the intent of him was evil. Generally he pronounced
a just Sentence betwixt man and man in civil causes; but what disorders he
permitted in his Court, are before recited; what injustice he exercised against
Christians; how unjust and ungrateful he was to Constantius, endeavoring to
divest him of his Empire, and Life, is declared. In his Misopogon, he takes
notice of Constantius his former favor to him, and his succeeding enmity; and
commends himself for giving an honor to his Manes; yet does not attempt the
palliating his ungrateful Treason. The Antiochians truly accused him of the
highest injustice: hence it was usually spoken amongst them, (...). By those
initial Letters they meant Constantius, and Christ, neither of which injured
their City: which Letters are the Lemma subscribed to King Charles the Martyr's
Picture, drawn before his incomparable Works. Julian replies, Constantius never
injured the City, but by creating me Coesar: but that by the Divine Providence
turned to the Honor of Christ, and the joy of the Antiochians. That Julian's
Justice was not perfect, Marcel acquaints us; that he admitted persons to enjoy
Freedoms, Offices, and Honor in Municipal Cities, whose Birth, and Quality
made them incapable of such priveledges and dignities. The Donatists, who took
on them the name of Christians; famed him for Justice: the Answer to them, take
from the Pen of St. Austin, De Civ. Dei. Lib. 5. Cap. 20. Qui Constantino
Christiano ipse Apostate Juliano, etc. That God, that gave the Empire to
Constantine a Christian, gave it to Julian the Apostate, whose ardent desire of
Command put upon him a fatal Imposture. Ep. 166. Ad Donatistas, Julianus
desertor Christi, et inimicus, etc. Julian the desertor, and enemy of Christ,
at your petitions presented by Rogatianus and Pontius, gave an indulgence to
the destructive Faction of Donatus; but at that time, when he opened the
Churches to Heretics, he opened the Temples to Devils; by this means he
imagined the name of Christ must utterly be extirpated: he envying the Unity of
that Church, from which he Apostatised, permitted Sacrilegious Divisions. This
is the so famed Justice of Julian: from whence it is observable, that he gave
not these Immintives to the Donatists, upon the account of Justice, but to
destroy the Christian Religion. Note, an Universal tolleration is a means to
ruin the Gospel. Epist. 48. Ad Vincent. charges the Donatists with this
absudity, that they could not call him just, whom they confessed to be an
Idolater: to this may be joined, he was devoted to Divinations; his lucky Omens
encouraged him to rebel against Constantius; and his unlucky Omens could not
dissuade him from his ruin. The Philosophical reasons which Marcel gives for
Divinatons, are not tolerable: who can vindicate Julian from this notorious
Injustice, that to give, as he judged, a true prospect of future Contingences,
he would cause the Bellies of Virgins to be ripped up, that he might inspect
their Bowels, whilst they were miserably giving up their last Breath; He was
indefatigably industrious: his Pen and Sword was always employed. As Julius
Coesar would awake at Midnight to Study and Write; so Julian, in the heat of
the Persian War, Wrote his seven wicked, and Blasphemous Books against Christ:
of which thus St. Jerome. Julian Augustus in his Parthian Expedition belched out
Seven Books against Christ; according to the poetical Fable, he wounded himself
with his own Sword. If I should attempt to answer him, I suppose you would
forbid me, lest I should return his Blows with the Club of Hercules; (i. e.)
with the Doctrines of Philosophers and Stoics. In the Battle he was
apprehensive of the Power of our Nazarene, whom he usually called a Galilean: a
Dart being struck into his Bowels, gave him the just reward of his Virulent
Tongue. The Pagans vaunted, that he was adorned with all the Cardinal Virtues,
as so many resplendent Jewels. We have proved him culpable of Injustice; that
they were not in him true virtues, is evinced in the 6th Quaaere. The Luster of
all his natural or acquired endowments, were sullied and Eclipsed by
Vainglory: the immoderate desire whereof, hurried him into those actions, that
have rendered him odious, and his name detestable. It Is true, a Prince ought to
prefer his Honor to his Life: to live, is common with us to Beasts: to live
well, is peculiar to men: a Man's Life is not to be measured by his years, but
actions; what a slave he was to vainglory, the Precedent discourse manifests.
It was this which made him so great a Persecutor.

Trajan the Emperor, as soon as ever he was Informed, that the Christians were
not those persons they were Slandred to be, recalled his Edicts, and the
Persecutions ceased: But Julian, knowing the Rites and Lives of Christians, yet
continued the most enraged Persecutor of them. Certainly vain glory was the
cause he believed, that Cornucopia, and all Felicity waited on him. He did not
at all question, but he should return Triumphant from the Persian Wars: and
since so many Emperors did use their utmost endeavors, and that for many
years, to destroy Christianity, but all their attempts proved vain; he, if
after the accomplishing the Persian Victories, he should triumph over the Holy
Jesus, who was the Son of God, what Glory did not he promise himself then?
certainly, he should be ranged amongst the Stars. In him concurred all those
great excellencies, and vast Dominions which commended him to the World, and
were never in any other. It Is a certain Argument, that the baffling of his
Councils, Arms, and Artifices, and his Divine Death, was an undeniable
testimony of the Veracity of the Holy Gospel.

Qu. I.
Whether did Constantius Politickly in Creating Julian, Caesar?

1. HE had experience of his Brother Gallus's aspiring.

2. By this means he did that action, whereby the division of the Empire was
threatened: and division makes way for ruin. He was so near a Kinsman, that if
he gained the Authority, and won the Soldiers hearts, he was in a fair way to
make himself Emperor. The Barbarous Nations had passed the Rhine, and wasted
Gaul. Constantius saw almost all the Provinces subject to the Roman Empire,
destroyed by the inroads of the Barbarians. The Franks, Almains, and Saxons,
had taken, and sacked Forty Cities seated upon the Rhine; and together with a
great spoil, had carried the Citizens, and innumerable company of the Country
People into Captivity. The Quades, and Sauromatoe made their incursions into
Panonia, and upper Mysia. The Persians in the East began to be very
troublesome. Constantius resolving in his mind what course to take, for he
alone was not able to bear the weight of the Empire, and he durst not create a
Coesar: In Man the desire of command, and dominion is boundless; he could not
think of any that would be faithful to him, but suspected all. His Empress
Vsebia, seeing him thus uncertain, addresses her self to Constantius,
concerning Julian, in this manner; This young Man is of no great Parts, and
has devoted himself through his whole Life to Study, and Letters, and totally
wants the experience of public affairs: the constituting of him Coesar, does
more fit our concerns, than the Creating any other Person; for if he manageth
the Government fortunately, the good success will be attributed to Augustus; if
not, he will dye, and then Constantius will have none left of his Family to be
advanced to so great a Dignity. Zozymus gave this Character of Eusebia, That
she was a Lady of Singular parts; that her Wisdom surpassed that of her Sex;
that she had acquired the perfection of Learning. Constantius being jealous of
Julian, he indeed gave him the name of Coesar, but invested Marcellus and
Salustius with the Power: but afterward, by the advice of the same Eusebia, he
removes Salustius and Marcellus, and solely invests Coesar with the Dominion:
here was Constantius's unpolitickness; he trusted him with Power; whom he had
formerly disobliged. It Is natural to Men to hate those who have injured them.
Constantius in an eloquent Oration commends Julian to the Soldiers; they by
Gestures and acclamations approving the election, Constantius invests Julian
with his Grandfathers Purple: then Julian whispered to himself that Verse of
Homer, which intimated, that he feared Death attended him; and his Dignities,
and Royal Purple, would hasten his Destruction. Zozymus says, Julian was thus
advanced, not that Constantius had a Love to honor him, but a resolution to
destroy him: but this is utterly false: it is an invidious calumny cast upon
Constantius a Christian, by two inveterate Enemies of Christianity, Zozymus and
Eunapius. Constantius designed to put Julian to Death, when he was a Child; and
threatened him with Death at Vienna, for giving his Brother Gallus a Visit; and
yet Constantius advances Julian, Coesar, to the highest Power and Dignity;
contrary to that known axiom in true Policy; A reconciled enemy is never to be
confided in. Julian could not forget the intentions of Constantius to kill him:
from which he was once diverted by reason of his Minority, and afterward by
the powerful intercession of Eusebia the Empress. There is no more mischievous
Policy in the World, than to engage Enemies, and neglect Friends. That Prince
Reigns securely, and under him his Subjects flourish, who is both feared, and
loved. He who sways the Scepter, has usually many fawning Sicophants (alas for
poor Seduced Princes!) whose pretended Service is only self-interest: who under
show of Fidelity and true Allegiance, cunningly design their own advantage: but
a prudent inspection will detect the fallacy of these Parasites; and wisdom
will give him a true estimate of persons. There is no Prince without enemies,
and of those amongst his own Subjects. Valor and Justice makes him feared: and
liberality and bounty bind the hearts to him with an inviolable chain of
affection. The late German Wars give a notorious example of the Treachery of a
reconciled Enemy. Cardinal Richlieu (when Gustavus Adolphus descended into
Germany to revive the ancient glory of the Goths, to perplex Ferdinand the
Third) by a fine Policy insinuated so into the Council of Ferdinand, that the
Emperor removed Wallestine from being the General, and invested Count Tilly
with the Dignity: whose 12 years Laurels withered at the battle of Leipsick,
where the fortune of Gustavus put to flight 24000 Captains, every one of his
Soldiers deserving that Honor, fighting under the Command and Conduct of the
most valiant Tilly; who after he had beaten General Horn, and was passing the
river Leck, was set upon by part of Gustavus's Cavalry: considering the number
on both sides, the fight was the most Bloody of any in Germany, where Tilly
lost his Life, but not his Honor. In this declining estate of the Empire, a
General was to be chosen: none by the Emperors Council was thought fit to
command the Army, but Wallestine; who remembering this removal from the General,
seemingly denied that great employment, politickly covering his ambitious
revenge. The Empire wanted an experienced Generalissimo, and none was so able
to give a check to Gustavus as Wallestine, a Soldier politic and valiant, but
as Capricious as any that ever was in the Head of an Army, after he had left
the World. Know, Gustavus was not immortal: and he having given a check to the
Swedish Victories, opened his tumor, and discovered his Latent revenge: for
his crafty dealings with the Emperor had procured an unlimited Commission at
Aegyra in Bohemia, where he commanded his Soldiers to take an absolute Oath to
himself, not mentioning the Emperor; and to confirm them in this design, he
gave three months pay to the Army: but the Emperor prevented him by securing
Prague. Duke Pernard durst not trust him. Gordon, Leasly, two Noble Scottish
Gentlemen, and Butler, no less excellent an Irish Gentleman, inviting four of
his Principal Officers to Supper, which were his greatest confidents, the
entertainment ending with the life of the Guests, the gallant Butler runs up to
Wallestine's Chamber, Kills the Guard, breaks open the Door, with astonishing
Salutation, O Traitor to the Empire, and Emperor, art thou there! By this
Surprise he makes him incapable of Defense, unable to command his reason, and
by his Partizan destroys him, and throwing his Body into the Yard of the the
Court, reduced an Army of 40000 men to the obedience of the Empire. Marcellinus
enviously charges Constantius with being a Coward, upon what reason I know not:
It Is true, his Arms were not so successful against the Persians, as he desired.
Augustus, called the Darling of Fortune, made the River Euphrates to be the
utmost Eastern bound of the Roman Empire: but whether his fear, or envy, was
the reason of that Determination, the politic Historian says he could not
give a good conjecture. Euphrates was a sufficient defense against the attempts
of the Persians. The passing of that River was certainly fatal to any Prince,
if his Enemy would decline a Battle: for he must fight with Hunger, and Sands.
Julian found the sad experience of this. Alexanders matchless valor became
victorious by the confidence of effeminate Darius. What could withstand the
order and discipline of Tammerlin's numerous Army? How fatal the Turkish
expeditions have been against Persia, the fate of the illustrious Bassa Ibrahim
sufficiently evidences. It Is impossible that Constantius should be justly
accused of Cowardice, who was constantly Victorious over all the Barbarous
Nations that invaded the Empire, destroyed all Rebels, continued a terror to
the Persians, and always fought in the Head of his Army, and in all humane
probability had destroyed Julian, if Death had not prevented him. It seems very
strange, that Constantius did not sooner discover Julian's ambition: so true is
that of St. Augustine, Lib. 5. Cap. 21. De civit. Dei. Qui Constantino
Christiano ipso Juliano Apostatoe, etc. He who gave the Empire to Constantine a
Christian, did likewise give it to Julian the Apostate, whose admirable parts
his Sacrilegious ambition soiled and abused. Constantius sets spies upon
Julian, narrowly to watch him, whether he wavered in his Religion: yet
Constantius appointed Mardonius and Editius to teach him: and in his Journey to
Ephesus he fell into the familiarity of Jamblicus and Proeretius at Athens; he
was a great Admirer of Libanius, these instilled the principles of Idolatry
into him. It seems very strange, that Constantius did not suspect him; for
Constantius was wholly devoted to Christian Religion, and very watchful to
preserve the Dignity of it Companions may discover the humor of a Person;
those spies were certainly faithless: If Constantius had known, that he
conversed with heathen Philosophers, and those that were known Magicians,
certainly he would have suspected him as to his Religion. His own words, and
the acclamations of the People manifested that his design was the Empire. When
he came to Vienna, he received News, that the Barbarians had taken and sacked
Colonia Agrippinoe (now Colen) a great and well fortifyed City, which made him
break out into these expressions, I shall dye invested with Honors, and
encompassed with dangers; words that import the height of his Ambition: for
what is great, that is not difficult? The people encouraged him in his journey
by their acclamations. When he entered into Vienna, an Old Blind Woman, at the
joyful noise of the People, enquired what great Person came into the City? it
was returned, Julian Coesar, she replied, that It was he that should repair the
Temples of the gods. I cannot but wonder that this passage should not be
carried to the Ears of Constantius. Julian, when he was in his Asian journey,
conversed the Heathen Magicians, and by them was instructed in the Heathen
Rites, and in the mystery of Divination, to which he was extremely addicted.
Eunapius says of him, That before he was Caesar none knew what gods he
Worshipped: he did secretly worship the Heathen gods, whilst he publicly
professed Christianity. Hypocrisy is a Virtue becoming an ambitious person; and
this he practiced so perfectly, that he fully imposed upon Hilarious himself.
Constantius adhered to the Arrians, and was an enemy of those who professed the
one Substance, amongst which Hilarious was a great favorour of that Faith; him
Constantius banished: in vindication of himself he writes, and presents an
Apology to Constantius, in which he has these words: Nec levem habeo querelae
meae testem, Religiosum Coesarum tuum Julianum. I have no mean witness for the
justness of my complaint, Religious Caesar, your Julian will sufficiently
testify it. This Eulogium, that he was a Religious Coesar, could not drop from
the Pen of Hilary, if he had not believed Julian a Christian, and a Catholic
Christian. I have showed before, his dissimulation; he favored Hilarious,
restored the Bishops whom Constantius banished. He had Poison in his perfumed
Gloves, as the Stellio has various and beautiful spots upon its back, which it
changes, yet the venom which lies in the Belly continually remains. Thus
Julian, though he altered his enchanting measures, yet his dire intention to
extirpate Christianity continued. It seems no less strange to me, that Julian
being Six years Coesar, Constantius did not plainly and timely detect the
ambition of Julian, as he might easily have done. At some slight suspicion, he
recalled Salustius, believing that the conduct, and the counsel of this great
Commander was the cause of that great success which Coesar enjoyed in the
managing of his Army: but after his departure, the Arms of Coesar was very
successful. He sent Lupicinus, one of his Lieutenants in Britain, to repel the
Picts and Scots, who drove them into their own Country. He built Ships, and
brought Corn out of Britain into Gaul; and after Salustius his departure, the
Saxons, of all the Barbarians, esteemed the most valiant, they were most expert
in Military Discipline; they were very patient in enduring the troubles and
hardships of War: These invaded the Roman Empire, but he repressed them: they
Fought in the Woods, where Coesar was always Victorious by the means of one
Carietto a Son of the Barbarous King taken Prisoner. The Barbarians being thus
broken, they sued for peace, which Coesar granted them, but upon condition,
that they should deliver up all their Captives, which they promised, but
delivered not up all, but retained several, whom in former years they had
carried Prisoners out of Gaul: to detect this fraud, Julian uses this fine
Policy: those that by Flight escaped, he commands out of their Cities and
Villages to come to him, and these by nearness of Kin, or by vicinity of
cohabitation, or friendship, or by some other cause, acquainted him with the
Name of each that remained Prisoner; these his Secretaries write down, which
being done, he carries his Army beyond the Rhine, and commands the Barbarians
to appear before him, ascends his Tribunal, his Notaries being at his Back, he
demands the Captives; they say, that they had returned all: he discovered the
Cheat, by acquainting them with the very names of the Persons that remained
Prisoners amongst them: the Babarians supposing the gods had discovered this
secret to Julian, confessed, promised, and performed the restoring every
Captive that was alive. Julian required pledges, viz. The Son of their King,
and of the Primest of their Nobility: The King fell down before Julian,
miserably crying out, that he had no Son, for he was slain. Julian pities the
King, shows him his Son, whom he had treated like a Prince: and having taken
him, and the Sons of the Nobility for Pledges, he granted them a Peace, upon
condition, that they should never any more molest the Roman Empire. The Fame of
Julian's Victories flying throughout the Empire, the suspicion was greater in
the Breast of Constantius, who sends for two Wings of Julian's best Soldiers:
these march to Constantius. Afterward he sends for four more of the best and
choicest of the Army. Constantius should either have effectually suppressed
Julian, or else not so plainly manifested his Jealousy and intentions: but this
was done by the Wisdom of God, to permit so great an enemy of the Christian
Faith, and the person of the Lord Jesus (Christians he derided, calling them
the Worshippers of the Man of Palestine; whom they esteemed a God, and the Son
of God) to be invested with the Empire, that the Lord Jesus might openly
Triumph over the most Fierce, Politic, Powerful and Implacable Enemy to his
Name, Worship and Servants.

Quest. II.
Whether there were any thing Divine in the Death of Julian?

TO enquire, whether in the death of Julian there was something supernatural,
is not an unbecoming design. It Is Superstition to attribute every thing, which
appears extraordinary, to a Praeternatural Cause: Yet to assign all things to
the usual course of Nature; to neglect and deny the Hand of God, when it is
signally manifest, is Impiety and Irreligion. Mortals are apt to be hurried
with prejudice, byast with passion and private interest; to render their
Enemies more odious, willingly attribute their Calamities to the revenging Hand
of God. To avoid these extremes; and to clear the conceptions of things from
Passions, becomes a Christian. I hope my proceedings shall vindicate my Pen
from such imputations. I will therefore give a just account, what the Heathens
themselves did think of Julian's fatal blow. Julian himself, in his Sacrifices,
had many unlucky Omens, which forced him to complain, that the Gods had
forsaken him. The threatening Appearances are recited in his Life: The Night
before he received his mortal Wound, whilst he was offering his Depulsatory
Sacrifices to the gods, he was so terrifyed by the Sight of a Meteor resembling
a bright Star, that, at the first sight thereof, an universal trembling seized
on him, fear disturbed his Judgment; he imagined it to be Mars; he consulted
his Thuscan Southsayers, who showed him out of Tarquin's Book, this Aphorism,
That if such a fiery Light was seen in the Sky, no Battle ought to be fought,
nor any great matter attempted. He, who to a fond superstition was addicted to
Divination, and adored Augurs (such sort of Cattle swarmed in his Court and
Camp) yet contrary to his menacing Omens, and the advice of his Diviners, he
was hurried, by the Providence of God, into his ruin, which was a certain
argument of his own innate Valor, and of the Wrath of Heaven. Ammianus Marcel
His great admirer, does aver, that from whence that fatal Javelin was thrown,
God himself knew. Socrates relates, that Calistus, one of his Guard, who wrote
Julian's Life in Heroic Verse, and gave a description of that Persian War,
affirms; he dyed, being fatally Struck by some Doemon. That he was not wounded
by any of his enemies, there is this full evidence: The news of his fall being
brought to the King of Persia, a Proclamation was made through his Army, That
if any of his Soldiers wounded the Emperor, he should be honorably rewarded:
but none arrogated to himself that Fact, upon which in the next days Fight, the
Persians upbraided the Romans with the perfidious Treason of killing their
Emperor: but Marcellinus positively says, that Javelin could not come from the
Hand of a Roman: and Julian himself, after he was brought into his Tent, in his
last Speech to the Philosophers, and great Commanders, blessed the gods, that
he dyed not by Treason, nor the hand of a Traitor. Some good Authors aver, that
after he received that mortal blow, he threw his Blood into the Air, and in a
rage cried out, Thou have overcome, O Galilean; O Galilean, thou have overcome!
When his Soldiers found him wounded, they were Struck with horror, and heard
him curse the gods; he cursed the Sun for aiding the Persians, and not himself;
he complained, that Warlick Mars had denied him assistance; that Apollo had
been false in his promises; that thundering Jove did not prevent his fatal
Wound, by casting a Bolt upon him that threw the Dart; that instead of
Cornucopia, and his other Tutelar and happy gods, Paleness, Famine and Death,
those unlucky Deities, were his Tormenting attendants. St. Jer. upon Hab. 3.
15. God divides the heads of Princes; thus comments, We may apply these words
to those Kings, Emperors and Generals, who shedding the Blood of Christians,
have afterward felt the Revenging Hand of God. This we have seen formerly
verified in Dioclesian, Maximinian, and now lately in Julian. When I was a
Child, and instructed in Grammar Rules and Exercises, every City was filled
with the Blood of impious Victims; unexpectedly news was brought of Julians
Death, upon which, I heard a Heathen thus descant, How comes it to pass, that
the Christians say their God is patient, and long-Suffering, when no anger is
more sudden and present than this? For he would not defer his Indignation and
Fury, no not for a little space. If we add the Testimony of Christians, all
unanimously attribute his death to the avenging Hand of God. Holy men,
enlightened by the Divine Spirit, foretold it.

Athanasius, comforting the Christians who were ready to sink under the weight
of Julian's Persecutions, assures them, that the Cloud would suddenly be
dissolved, meaning, that Julian's death was approaching. The like was that of a
Holy man, who being scoffingly asked, How was the Carpenters Son employed?
returned, He is preparing a Coffin for Julian. These Prophesies were confirmed
by his death, which shortly fell out. The notice of his death by Revelations
and Visions that God made to Holy men, are a Singular Testimony of the Truth of
this. Lozo, Lib. 6. Cap. 2. When one was hastening to go to Julian, who was then
in Persia, having seated himself in the highway, by reason there were no
convenience in Houses, he retired into a Church, where he slept; and in his
sleep he saw many of the Apostles and Prophets gathered together, who greatly
complained of those injuries and indignities which Julian did to the Church:
they entered into a consult, and after a long deliberation, whilst they were in
suspense, two of them rose up and bid the rest be of good Courage, for they
would go and put a period to Julian's Empire. The person having received this
Vision, neglected his journey, expecting the end of the Vision; and sleeping
the next night in the same Church, he saw the same company, and two persons, as
stepping out of the way, and coming to them, told them that Julian was slain.
He adds immediately another Vision made to Didymus a person in Holy-Orders, and
very much addicted to Christian Philosophy, who was mightily affected with
those impieties which Julian perpetrated to the ruin of Christian Religion; and
that the Emperor should be so seduced, he betakes himself to Fasting and
Prayer: the following night, as he sat on his Throne, being in an ecstasy, he
saw, as it were, white Horses running in the Air, and heard the Riders saying,
Tell Didymus that this very hour Julian is slain, and let him signify this to
Athanasius. Theodoret gives this account of one Julian, of the same name with
the Apostate, he was a person that lived an ascetick Life, and when he was
Twenty days journey from his Cell to the Army, he had this Vision, Whilst he
was praying to God, who is the great giver of aid, presently his tears were
stayed, he ceased to weep, and became of a cheerful Countenance, the joy of his
Soul appearing in his looks: His Confident asked him the reason of that Change;
he returned, The wild Boar of the Forest, the great enemy of the Vineyard of
the Lord, was dead: on whom God had inflicted a most just punish-men, that he
could no longer continue any designs against the Church of God: which caused
the whole fraternity to throw themselves into an expressive joy. Afterward
they were certified, that the same day and hour, when this most divine and aged
person acquainted them with the death of him who was the plague of Christians,
he was removed into another World. If any one Scruple these Narratives, I must
return, These Historians are not fabulous; and that though miracles and visions
are not so frequent as they were in Apostolical times, yet they never ceased in
the Church of God. Chrysostom is alleged as a person who affirmed that
miracles were ceased in his time: yet I must aver, that those authorities of
his, mean only the unfrequency of them, or else he forgets and contradicts
himself: in several Sermons he confirms believers by them. I will assert, that
the consequence of his death gives an evident Testimony, that it proceeded from
the Hand of God. He was indubitably, a Prince of great Wit and undertaking. God
is the Author of Wisdom; no Prince more abused his natural prudence than he, by
burning his Ships. His great intentions were to destroy Christianity, yet he
would not elect any of his great Commanders, who were Heathens, to suceed him
in the Empire: He closed his last speech to his Commanders with these words, I
wish there may be found a good Ruler after me. He was so confident of the humor
of his Army, that he having so modelled it, did not at least suspect that it
would declare a Christian Emperor. The Army proffered the Purple to Salustius
the Prefect. On a sudden (a long time was not admitted for deliberation)
Jovianus was chosen Emperor. Before the death of Julian; the State of
Christians seemed as most desperate. Sweetly Nazianzen thus, Our (meaning
Christians) Weapons, our Walls, our Strength, was only trust and hope in God:
when we were left destitute, and deprived of all humane aid, who remained to
receive our Prayers, and defend us from injury, but God alone? O incredible
Narratives of the Timerity of Julian! whose hopes caused him to entertain such
bloody designs; he vowed us a Sacrifice to Devils: us the Inheritance of the
Lord, an holy Nation, a Royal Priesthood, to be the satisfier of his Hopes, and
the Crown of his Persian War. Afterward he acquaints us what Christians did,
whilst God was deferring his anger and just revenge: Sometimes we sent up our
Prayers to Heaven, we made our humble complaints to our bountiful and dear
Father; sometimes we were expostulating with him, as persons in great anguish
of mind: Oh God! why have thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger smoke
against the Sheep of thy Pasture? But upon the Death of this Apostate, our
mournful notes were turned into Triumphant Songs. Bell is fallen: Dagon is
broken: Sharon is a Wilderness: Lebanus is hewn down. In the same invective,
at the news of Julian's death, take the Christians joy; in which the abuses
that Pagans cast upon them, and the Rites of Christians are seen. These are the
Lamentations of us Galileans, of us abject and scorned persons; of us who adore
Christ, of us whom the Heathens say, are the Disciples of illitarate Fishermen;
of us who converse and sing with Old Women, and trifle with them our Nocturnal
station, and vainly put away our Night Sleep: yet notwithstanding all the jeers
you cast upon us, we conquer and subdue you. Where are your Counselors, your
Sacrifices, and sacred Mysteries? Where are those Victims which are privately
and publicly offered? Where is that Art of Divination, by inspecting the
Bowels of Animals? Where is the Vanity of their Predictions? Where are, the
Conjuring Omens given by Devils, who have actually entered the Breasts of Men?
Where is famous Babylon, so much commended by great Pens? Where are the
Persians and Medes* who were Captivated? Where are those gods who Commanded and
were Subdued? who fought and defended, yet were conquered? What are become of
those Oracles, and those threatening Predictions against Christians? Where is
that Slaughter designed against them? (the day on which it was to be executed,
and the names of those who were designed to be murdered, were recorded) they
are all become vain, the Ostentations of the wicked are become like a Dream,
which soon passes, and vanishes away. The Church being reduced into straits,
the Heathens insulted over it: on a sudden; the God of the Christians, the Lord
of Hosts; did with his great and long Sword punish the Leviathan, that piercing
Serpent, even Leviathan, that crooked Serpent. Certainly this was the mighty
Act of God, that at his death an Army (though Paganish) should declare a
Christian to be Emperor: one, who, under Julian, refused to Sacrifice; yet for
his Valor and Military Conduct, Julian Judged necessary to keep in his Persian
Expedition, who refused the Purple, until the Army professed themselves
Christians; telling them, it was not fit that a Christian Emperor should
Command a Pagan Army: but they gave a loud acclamation, crying, they were
Christians; then he accepted, and proclaimed his usual Apothegme, Vita Christus
est.

Qu. III.
Whether there be true Miracles, or not?

THe Opinion, that denies Miracles, too much prevails. By a Miracle, I
understand that thing which is extraordinarily produced by a divine Power, it
not being in the Sphere of Nature to be the cause of it. That has the nature of
a Miracle, which is produced by a divine Power. Angels and Men have been the
Instruments of working Miracles; but the principal cause was God. Hobs seems to
assert Miracles, but so as he does other Truths, Ficte and Fucate; for his
opinion of Fatal necessity is inconsistent with that of Miracles; withal he
making the Magistrate to be the sole Judge of Miracles, takes away all
Miracles: for to aver, that a Miracle is not to be accounted a Miracle, except
it have the suffrage of a supreme power, is to aver, there are no miracles:
therefore Sp. says perspicuously, There are no miracles; for thus he
pronounces, nothing can be effected above the power of Nature, otherwise the
course of nature would be destroyed, for all things are carried on by a fatal
necessity: If any thing therefore as a Miracle, should happen, the World would
be everted. To which, I reply, that the course of this World is not managed by
a fatal Necessity: for the conception of a Fatal necessity is contradictory to
the notion of an Eternal Diety: and there can be no conception of Omnipotence,
and Infinite Power, but in a Being that is void of all imperfections, and
includes in himself all Excellencies and Perfections. Liberty of Will, is
without doubt one of the perfections of rational beings: If Almighty God could
have made the World otherwise than it is, or men more perfect then they are,
then there is no fatal Necessity; but God acted Arbitrarily according to the
good Pleasure of his own Will: if not, then he was not Omnipotent, nor
Omniscient: he neither knows how, nor could produce a thing better than it is:
and that Being cannot properly be called Omnipotent, or Omniscient, whose power
and knowledge are limited. From the Divine Attributes therefore is evinced the
possibility of Miracles: and the real existence of them is proved by matter of
Fact* The Nation of the Israelites being brought out of Egypt by the Power of
God, had Manna miraculously rained upon them, which sufficed for the
maintenance of 3000 men every day; and if the measure appointed by the Divine
Wisdom was not observed by any person, who upon an apprehension of a want on
the Sabbath Day collected a double quantity on the day preceding, the Manna by
its stinking would prove hurtful to the takers of it. If such a thing was done,
how could it be but miraculously? that it was done, so many Thousand people
could not but be sufficient Testimonies of it. And it could not be imagined
that for so many years, so many Thousand persons should be deceived. Our Lord
and Savior rose from the Grave, upon the Testimony of which Miracle our
glorious Religion does consist: and his rising from the dead by his own Power,
is a most invincible Testimony of the Truth of his Doctrine. His Apostles every
where went abroad to Preach Salvation, only to be obtained by Faith in the
Lord; and if they were assured of his Resurrection, they had sufficient
encouragement: for what could be greater? they were to pass through the World,
to Preach Religion contrary to the common humors of Mankind: And how could
they expect a success of their endeavors, but by the assurance of him that
rose from the dead, that he would constantly assist them? They were spectators
of his ascension into Heaven, when he promised them his assistance, and nothing
could resist him, who in the sight of Apostles was carried up into Heaven,
acquainting of them, that all Power was given to him both in Heaven and in
Earth: being thus encouraged, they went Preaching throughout the World, with
that success, that within Forty years, some in most places of the world
entertained those Mysteries, and that Doctrine which brings Salvation. What
could induce the Apostles to undertake this employment? were they invited by
Honors? No, they were judged the offscouring of the World. Did Riches? they
were Poor, or reduced to Poverty. Did Pleasures? they exposed themselves to all
dangers, suffered various torments, and at last generally underwent those
cruelties which crowned them with a glorious Martyrdom. These things being
done, and suffered by them, for what end, but the expectation of a future
happiness? And what could make them believe that; but the Resurrection of
Christ from the Dead? which though he foretold his Disciples, yet when he was
apprehended, they all forsook him, one of whom denied him, and was made by a
pitiful Maid so timorous and sneaking, as to abjure him: But afterward he, and
the rest, being eyewitnesses of his Resurrection, were so confident and
magnanimous, that they all freely exposed themselves to the greatest dangers,
torments, and death it self, in the defense and propagating that great Truth.
If Christ be risen again, there is a Miracle: That he did Rise again, no
greater testimony can be given for the proof of any other thing than for this.
Had they any Learning to persuade the World? In what Academy were they brought
up? They Preached the Gospel to every Nation: How came they to know the
Language of every Nation? What Master taught them these various Languages? That
they did know them, is evident by the success their Preaching had in the World.
This is another evidence of Christ's Resurrection; for they were not only
eyewitnesses of it, but received the signal benefit thereby. Those Balls of
fire, and that Earthquake, which frustrated Julian's attempts to rebuild the
Temple of Jerusalem, certainly were miraculous. If the Narrative be true,
certainly the Divine Power was exerted; and that it was true, the unanimous
consent of Historians, not only Christians but Pagans, will persuade us: And
that Julian commanded the Temple to be rebuilt, is evident by his own Epistles
now extant. That the Jews would embrace this occasion, is not to be questioned:
that Julian had opportunity to accomplish his design, is not to be doubted:
that he could not complete his intentions, is, without scruple, solely to be
attributed to the miraculous Power of God. Machiavel himself (no great friend
to Religion) observes, and acknowledges, that before the destruction of any
great Empire, or Nation, there are various Prodigies and Omens: but to what
cause to assign them, he knows not. Julian himself, and those Philosophers
which he admired, and which flourished in his time (which either professed
Platonism; or rather a mixture of Plato's and Aristotle's Philosophy: such were
Porphyrie, Jamblicus, Aedesius, Maximus, etc.) acknowledged Miracles and
Prophesies. Julian was very much addicted to Divination, insomuch that when he
was dead, there was found in one of his Temples a Virgin hanged up, and her
Belly ripped open, that by the inspection of her Bowels, he might discover future
Contingencies. Eunapius relates some prodigious Actions performed by
Philosophers and Philosophical Magicians, which concludes, that there are false
Miracles; that there are invisible Spirits, Beings intermediate between God and
Man, is undoubtedly true: But how they act, or what power they exert, is not
certain to Mortals. That they are superior to the capacities of men, is
certain; but what additional power God confers upon all Spirits, either by
themselves, or by their Instruments, we are not certain: Yet that actions are
done through the Almighty Power of God, by the Ministry of good Angels and Men,
superior to those of evil Angels and Men, is unquestionable: And that those
Actions could not be performed, except those good Angels and Men had been acted
by a power infinitely above their own capacities, is equally true. That there
has been false Miracles, or pretenses, is granted: If no disguise, no real
person; if no lie, no truth; if no hypocrisy, no sincerity. The very pretense
to Miracle, argues, that the whole World agreed in acknowledging that there
were true Miracles. The sum of this discourse is included in these Two
particulars: 1. Whether there is a Wise and Infinite God, which created the
World? The denial of which puts a Period to this Discourse. That this World was
formed by a fortuitous concourse of Atoms, is so ridiculous a conceit, so
fantastic a Delirium, that no person of any Brains can admit. The World being
created in time, attests the liberty of the Divine Will, and the verity of
Miracles. It Is impossible to conceive that the World was eternal, for it is
succesive, and Eternity cannot be thought to have a prius and posterius: for
mutation cannot agree with the action of a Deity: Every thing that is mutable,
is imperfect: Motus est ab immobili motore. The change is in the object, not
agent: The first cause must be libra, and immutabilis: These Miracles cannot
avert the course of Nature, but manifest the Power and Liberty of God: as
unusual methods in an Army do not alter the Discipline, but manifest the Policy
and Power of the General.

Qu. IV.
If Christianity be so excellent in it self, how comes it to pass, that
virtuous Heathens should so direfully persecute the Professors of it?

IT may possibly be queried, If Christianity has a real excellency in it* What
should be the reason, that such virtuous Princes as Trajan, Severus, and some
others, extremely detested it? that Nero, Domitian, and Commodus, who were
Beasts, or Devils in the shape of Men, should hate it, is no wonder, but that
such a person as Trajan was a deadly hater of Christians, and he had gained so
great an esteem for his virtues, that in the acclamations of the People to the
Emperors, these words were used, Sis Augusto Felicior Trajano melior: by which
they signified, No Prosperity could be superior to that of Augustus, no
goodness to that of Trajan: Therefore it must needs be judged, that Christians
were esteemed rather Monsters than Men. Suetonius calls Christians, a sort of
men of a new and mischievous Superstition. Tacitus says, that Christians, for
their impiety, were hated by the People. This does not derogate from, but
advance the Glory of Christianity. For,

1. The Christians were deadly haters of Idolatry, and deriders of those gods,
whom the Heathens adored: It cannot therefore be wondered at, that those
persons, who conceived a real and true divinity of their gods, should with the
greatest fury persecute those that deride them, and esteem them impious and
Atheistical. Princes do most hate these two Crimes, Treason and Sacrilege;
this is the greatest, next to which is Loesa Majestas. On this account those
Oracles of the Law, such were Vlpian, etc. were vehement persecutors of
Christians.

2. In the first Ages of the Church, many Heathens looked upon the Christians
as Jews, and by the name of Jews Christians were signified. The Imperial
Edicts, which were made to expel the Jews, comprised the Christians; for the
first Christians were Jews. Christians came from Judea, and many of the Jews
were really Christians: both Jews and Christians were deadly haters of
Idolatry, which made them hated by the Heathens, who did not at first make the
just destinction between Christians and Jews, as ought to have been made. Dio
therefore relating of Flavius Clemens, and Flavia Domatilla his Wife, assigns
the cause of their death; they were, says he, condemned to dye for Atheism for
turning Jews, but these were really Christians converted by St. Peter, and St.
Paul, and dyed in the defense of the Faith of the Lord Jesus, which Faith
causing as equal an hatred of the Pagan Idolatry, as the Jewish Religion did,
this Pagan Historian accuses them of Atheism and Judaisme. The hatred against
Christians must be the greater, by reason they were thought Christian Jews. The
generality of the Jews was cursed of God, because they believed not on the Lord
of Glory, whom they crucified, and hated. They were Seditious, and tumultuous,
and their wicked Rebellion against the Roman Empire, and those most dreadful
acts perpetrated amongst themselves during the Seige at Jerusalem, rendered them
odious to the Empire, and to mankind.

3. This deadly hatred being conceived against the Christians, it cannot be
thought, but that all imaginable Arts, and all false rumors were presently
contrived, and entertained against them by prejudiced persons. A Fame flew
abroad, that in the private meetings of Christians, all lascivious wickedness,
and clancular impurities were committed; and that in their assemblies they did
eat young Children. Innocence can hardly be cleared before those Judges who are
prepossest.

4. And there were some pretended Christians that were the scandal of the Cross
of Christ, that though they carried the Name of Christians, were really
Antichristians, which were guilty of most dreadful impurity, and horrid
Villainies. This seemingly gave an occasion for Heathens to persist in their ill
opinions of Christians: and what wickedness was acted by some pretenders, was
attributed to the whole Body of Christians. All these, in truth, did advance
Christianity, and make it more admirable in the esteem of Wise and Sober
persons; for if the Opinion of the Heathen Deities was the cause of the
Persecutions of Christians, then the dispute is truly this, Whether the impure
Pagan gods were rather to be worshipped, than the true and only God, the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ? In which it may easily be determined, That
those impure persons, who pretended themselves Christians, and by that pretense
gave a scandal to a most glorious Religion, when they were Challenged for their
Faith, denied it, according to the most virtuous principles of Mr. Hobs. An
Action of the Body, contrary to Conscience, being internal, is justifiable.

5. How is it possible with any reason to condemn Christianity? Look upon the
Laws of the Lord Jesus, can there be any more reasonable, or pious? If several
persons of that persuasion have different lives, that cannot prejudice the
truth, and excellency of Religion. Let God be true, and all Men Liars. That
Multitudes of Christians lived according to the Laws of their Lord, Trajan
gives an evident Testimony; for he would frequently pronounce, that none
suffered so much for their God, as Christians did. And Plinius Secundus his
Proconsul in Asia (astonished at the multitude of Christians, who voluntarily
dyed in the Profession of their Religion) writes to Trajan, and acquaints him,
That the genuine Christians would for no Torments deny Christ; that he could
not find them guilty of any Crime; that they met before day, and in their
Conventions bound themselves in an Oath, not to commit any evil Act, such as
Theft, Murder, Adultery, etc. which advances Christianity. He commands them to
abstain from all private Meetings, and by the Law of the Twelve Tables, all
such Conventions were prohibited. No wonder then, that Trajan was severe
against the Christians, for he was extremely superstitious, and vehemently
addicted to Idolatry, and withal vicious; for although he was in outward
appearance just; and certainly Valiant, and endued with many excellent virtues,
yet these he sullied by his enmity to Christianity; the Principal virtue of man
being Religion. Of his intemperance, and Sodomy, Dio accuses him. Julian
himself in his Satirical reflections upon the Roman Emperors, When Trajan was
admitted into Heaven, Silenus whispers Jupiter in the ear, that he ought to
take great care of Ganymedes. Pliny's rescript to Trajan so influenced him,
that he commanded no search to be made for Christians; but if any Christians
were brought before him, they should be punished: Upon which Tertullian has
this excellent remark: He commands the Christians not to be searched for,
because he knew them innocent; and yet he commands them to be punished, as
though they were nocent: at the same time, when he pretends Mercy, he exercises
Cruelty: when he is extremely severe, he puts on the Vizor of Clemency. In the
last year of his Empire (as Dioclesian after him) he (finding by experience,
that Christianity could not be eradicated by persecutions) issued a Command to
his Proconsuls and Prefects, to put a period to them. To the Honor of
Christianity, it may well be considered, that the Swords of Persecutors were
drawn against Christians; there were vast divisions amongst themselves, and the
Schools of the Philosophers were open against them. Constantine the first
Christian Emperor had his Line ended in Julian the Apostate. The Posterity of
Holy David continued to the Messiah, of him Christ must come according to the
Flesh: But to manifest to the World, that the Glory of Christianity depended
not upon Empires, or a Secular Sword, the Posterity of the great Constantine
did not long continue.

Christians were likewise rendered odious by insinuations; that they were
Enemies to the Empire. To make them detestable, the people were persuaded, that
they were Atheists, Rebels, and most wicked persons; and therefore, if the
Roman Empire was disturbed by the Arms of Barbarians, wasted by Plagues, or
that Fires laid Cities in Ashes; if a Famine was caused by Drought, or
Inundation, then, Christiani ad Leones, their Impieties were the cause of all
the Evils that befell the Roman Empire.

These were grand mistakes; they were men of the most holy Lives, most
abstemious, and greatest contemners of the World.

Tertullian, in his incomparable Apology, Cap. 1. speaking of Christians, Their
Kindred, their Mansions, their Expectations, their Esteem, their Dignity were
only in Heaven. One thing, with a briskness, he requests, That through the
ignorance of its cause it may not be contemned, whilst persons are ignorant of
it; and so truly asserts, That the first cause of the hatred conceived against
the Christian Name, was their not knowing the Faith and Manners of Christians,
which is made perspicuous by the effect the Apologies made for Christians had
upon some Emperors, who raised a Persecution against them. Adrian the Emperor
moved a severe Persecution. Severianus Granianus, Proconsul of Asia, Writes to
Adrianus an Epistle in the behalf of the Christians, and acquaints him, That
its most unjust, that upon the clamor of the multitude, the Blood of the most
innocent persons in the World should be shed. Adrian, at the Reading of which,
writes an Epistle to Minutius Fundanus, whom he substitutes in the Room of
Severianus Granianus, Commanding that no Christian should be punished, except
he was a Criminal; and that if any did accuse a Christian of any crime, if he
could not prove it, he should suffer that same punishment he designed to have
inflicted upon Christians. When Adrian was at Athens, to behold the sacred
Elusinian Rites, then Quadratus Bishop thereof, and Aristides a Christian
Philosopher, did write Apologies for the Christians, and presented the Emperor
with them. Aristides upon the same Subject pronounces an Oration before him,
which assuaged Adrians anger conceived against the Christians; They were so far
from attempting any thing upon the Empire, that in their holy Conventions they
prayed for the long Life of their Emperors, for the Peace of the Commonwealth,
that the Empire may flourish by a wise and faithful Senate, valiant and
victorious Armies. Though many of the Emperors were traitorously slain, yet no
Christians did their Swords in Imperial Blood: Though many Rebellions, yet no
Christians ever engaged in any. Hence Tertullian, ad Scapulum, Cap. 2. Circa
majestatem imperatoris infamamur, nunquam Albiniani, nec Nigriani, vel Cassiani
inveniri potuissent Christiani; A Christian is enemy of no person, much less of
the Emperor, knowing him, to be constituted by Almighty God.

We give that Worship and Honor to the Emperor, as far as it is lawful for us;
and expedient; for he is a Man inferior to God, and whatsoever honor he has,
he has it from God, unto whom he is only inferior. Domitian moved the second
Persecution, of which, out of Egesippus Eusebius thus, Being under the same
fears of Christ, as Herod was, persecuted the Family of David: There were
remaining of that Line, which were the Grandchildren of Judas, near Kinsmen,
according to the Flesh, of our Lord and Savior; These, one Jovianus brought
before Domitian, who asked them whether they were allied to David? they
confessed. Then he enquired of them what Estate they had and of what Calling?
They answered, by calling they were Husbandmen; and their Estate was not in
Money, but in their Farms. He then demanded of them who Christ was, of what
nature was his Kingdom, and in what part of the World, and at what time it
should be erected? To which they replied, that the Kingdom of Christ was not
Terrestrial or Mundane, but Heavenly and Angelical, the visible appearance of
which will be at the end of the World, when the Lord with great Glory and
Majesty shall descend from Heaven, and shall pass a sentence upon both the
quick and the dead, and reward every Man according to his works: upon which he
dismissed them as contemptible persons, and staid the Persecutions. Tertullian
says the same. Eusebius relates that Domitian quenched the Fire of those
Persecutions. Lib. 2. Cap. 2.

No finer way to render Christian Religion odious to Princes, than to prove,
that the Professors of it were Rebels to their Princes: Let the Principles of
Christian Riligion be considered, and the Practices of the Primitive
Christians, and the contrary will manifestly appear. Thus, it is fully cleared,
that no just reason can possibly be given, to vindicate the Emperors that
persecuted the Christians. The Courtiers of Darius, King of Persia, being
emulous of that honor which Daniel recieved from their Master; Two things, to
take away his Life, they proposed; the one was the affairs of the Crown: they
endeavored to charge him with Treason, but no error, nor fault was found in
him. The same is verified of the Christians in the Primitive times. Then they
said, We shall find no fault in him, but concerning the Law of his God, Dan. 6.
4, 5. He that was faithful to his King, was so likewise to his God: for which
slighting the Decree of Praying to his God, he was thrown into the Lions Den,
but miraculously preserved; which occasioned Darius, to decree, that Honor and
Fear should be given to the God of Daniel. Then Christians could not be justly
charged with Rebellion; they were reproved for Sacrilege and Atheism (1.) for
Worshipping God: in the performance of which they continuing, were exposed to
Lions, and all manner of calamities; but Religion was maintained, and
flourished; and the great Constantine put a period to those Persecutions, and
commanded the God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ to be worshipped and
adored.

Reflections upon a Pamphlet; entitled, some Seasonable Remarks on the Fall of
the Emperor Julian.
THere is a late Author; who has put out a Pamphlet, styled, Some seasonable
Remarks upon the deplorable Fall of the Emperor Julian. In which he charge
Christian Religion it self, the best of the Christian Emperors, and peculiarly
the chiefest of the Christian Clergy, as the Causes of it.

To give a full return to this Question, How comes it to pass, that Virtuous
Heathens persecute Christians? It Is necessary, that Christianity, and the
Christian Clergy be vindicated from those aspersions cast upon both by this
Author. If what he says be true, Julian's dreadful Persecution might receive
some tolerable excuse.

1. We will examine the calumnies cast upon the Christian Emperors.

2. The Slanders with which he reproaches the Christian Clergy. And,

3. The Abuses which he puts upon Religion it self.

1. Page 2. To relinquish a Religion of so much genuine piety, and simple
innocence as ours is, for the fond superstitions of Heathens and gross
Idolaters, would be not only unaccountable, but above measure stupendous; Did
we not find the lamentable causes in the debaucht Christianity of those times:
I mean, the times of the two Emperors, Constantine and Constantius.

I will acknowledge, that there was a defection in the Lives of many
Christians; that Constantius fell into Arrianism, is very much to be deplored:
of his Persecutions he repented before he dyed. He was so far from being
debauched, that he was one of the most temperate men in the world; and so far
from being an hypocrite, that though he cannot be commended for being an Arrian,
and promoting that Haeresy, yet he is mightily to be commended for his hatred
of Idolatry, and his zeal in promoting Christianity. In that bloody Battle in
which he fought with Magnensius at Mursum, he threw out of his Army all
Soldiers that would not be Baptized, to show, that his Victory should depend
only upon Christ his Savior. As for Constantine, he was the Pattern of all
virtues: to say, They (meaning Christians) having got ambitious and dissolute
Princes of their Party; it is a most notorious and false calumny, and not
becoming the Pen of any that would be esteemed a Gentleman. Constantine was a
Prince of as great accomplishments as ever swayed the Roman Scepter. It Is
acknowledged, that Julian does traduce this great Constantine. Which of the
Emperors did he spare? Which of them in the person of Silenus does he not
abuse? He drolls upon every one but himself. In the Lives of the Coesars, he
feigns that Alexander went to Hercules; and that Constantine, being unlike to
all the gods, should fly into the Arms of the Goddess of Pleasure. This is a
severe reflection; he lessens the Victories of Constantine, though his plea for
himself was just, his Martial Valor and Conducts confirms it. It Is true, he
took not the Actions of false and impure gods to be his Pattern; but the Copy,
by which that great Prince drew his Life, was the Life and Precepts of the Holy
Jesus, the God blessed for evermore: No wonder he could not associate himself
with those gods, whose Temples he demolished, and Worship he abhorred. That
Julian should accuse him of Voluptuousness, it is strange: From his Cradle he
was a Soldier: His invincible Courage, and Military Conduct was a certain
Argument that he was not Voluptuous. Let Julian endeavor to cloud his fame,
yet it may easily be demonstrated, that his Victories challenged as many
Triumphant Arches, as ever Alexander and Coesar could demand. For many
incomparable Virtues, peculiarly for that Holy Religion he professed, he was
superior to any preceding Emperor. Why does this Author style these two
Emperors Ambitious? What, Did they aspire to their own Purples? Constantine
coming to his Father Constantius Clorus before he dyed, was declared by him
Coesar: and upon his Death received the acclamations of the Army. By his just
and victorious Arms, having subdued Two Tyrants, the God of Heaven gave him the
Eagles and the entire Command of the Roman Empire. Where was Constantius's
Ambition? His Father left him the Empire of the East; and by a lawful
succession, upon the death of his Brothers, became Head of the whole Empire.
Was Julian free from Ambition? Constantius created him Coesar, and he contrary
to his Loyalty; Faith and Gratitude, usurped the Imperial Dignity. Certainly he
was one of the most ambitious and vainglorious men in the World: After he had
made sport with all the preceding Emperors; he concludes that drolling Tract
with this encomium of himself, Mercury directing himself to me, thus says, I
have made thee to acknowledge Apollo thy Father, whose commands obey: make him,
whilst alive, thy secure refuge; and when it is requisite that thou departest
out of this Life, depart with a good hope under the propitious conduct of that
god. How this was verified, the death of Julian does declare.

The then Clergy he dreadfully loads with unjust imputations of Ambition,
Hypocrisy and Sedition. 1. Ambition.

Page 14. This discerning Prince soon saw their design was to erect in all
parts of the Empire their own Mosaic or Ecclesiastic Polity, by themselves
metamorphos'd from a Democracy into an absolute Tyranny; they having advanced
so far already, as to procure of Constantine the sole Jurisdiction over
Christians, and leave to assemble themselves at Nice, to divide the Roman
Provinces amongst themselves, and make a new Body of Laws, called
Ecclesiastical-Canons, to the utter abolishing of the Roman Laws and
Government, and the great oppression of those Gentiles, whom God had not yet
enlightened with his Grace.

1. The Church was never governed by a Democracy.

2. The Convention of Councils was by the mutual consent of Bishops, and the
Churches in use down from the Apostles times.

3. The Emperor being Christian, gave the Christian Bishops liberty to meet at
Nice, where they did not then divide the Roman Provinces amongst themselves,
but confirmed that Division of the Ecclesiastic Government according to what it
was before: Therefore, (...), Let the Ancient custom be observed. Can. 6.
Concilii Niceni. It Is notorious in Ecclesiastic Story, that the Bishops of
those Cities which had the principal command in the Empire, had their dignity
and precedence; therefore Rome first, next Alexandria, then Antioch, and after
that Constantinople, became the Imperial Seat: It was made by the Decree of the
Council of Chalcedon, the second Patriarchal See, and this because it was Nova
Roma. This precedence was observed in the times of Persecution: Carthage being
the chiefest City of Barbary, the Bishop thereof was the Primate of that
Province.

And make a new Body of L -- They did not make a new body of Laws, etc. Under
this Head may I rank this Slander, Page 16. That he could see no person, nor
rank exempted from the dire Anathema; neither could he know, but that the
Sovereign Prince himself might upon a Pique, such as the disgrace of a Potent
Prelate, be on a sudden Paganized, and next Assassinated, even by them that had
advanced him, since he so lately saw Constans armed against his own Brother
Constantius by the Roman Bishop, and the great Athanasius merely because the
latter had been outed his See, though, as some say, for Treason, Sorcery, and
Murder.

If he means, that the Canons of the Church opposed Idolatry, we must grant it;
but that they meddled with the Civil Government, or Law, is to me false. I know
no Canon in the first four General Councils, which does interfere with the
civil Laws of the Empire; nor any Canon was formed to oppress the unconverted
Gentiles: Read the Councils General, or Provincial, in which any Canon or
Decree was made, which concerned the Imperial Laws, or the Civil Estate. It Is
true that Constantine and Constantius discountenanced Idolatry, and did
demolish many Heathen Temples. Constantine the Great, Commanded that all Idol
Temples should be shut, that an access for any person should be prohibited.
Cod. L. 1. Tit. 11. L. 1. and Sacrifices he commands should not be offered: L.
1. That Constantine Commanded the Temples to be demolished; that the famous
Temple of Serapis in Alexandria was destroyed, Eunapius in the Life of Edesius
does complain: but these were Imperial Laws, not the Laws of the Church, which
has nothing to do with such matters. When the Heathen did so violently
persecute the Christians, destroying their Churches, burning their Sacred
Books, inflicting all sorts of punishment, no wonder that Christian Emperors
should prohibit Idolatry, and demolish their Temples; yet Cod. L. 1. Tit. 11.
L. 6. it is Commanded, that no Christian should abuse the Authority of Religion,
to injure any Jew or Pagan that lived peaceably. It is obvious that in
Christian Armies Heathens were advanced to Command: that often under Christian
Emperors Heathens were Prefects in the greatest Cities, as Atticus in
Constantinople was Prefect under Arcadius, and Nobilis Pretextatus in Rome.
It Is not ingenuous to cast this Dirt and Odium upon the then Christian Clergy.
It Is true, there was an Episcopalis audientia granted, and confirmed by
Christian Emperors, but was not till after Julian's Death. Goto. in rubri
Episcopalis audient. That it was not Forum, nor jurisdictio, hence upon Cod. L.
6. Goto. in Civili negotio possunt Laici in Episcopum Arbitrum and Cognitorem
compromitere; ejusque judicium firmum est. The Bishop was to decide more
Arbitri in all this, which was after Julian's time: it was a Power given by the
Emperor, and only over those that were willing, and the Bishop was not a judge,
but an Arbitrator: these things being true, what verity is in his imputation,
is easily discerned. It Is known that no Heathen could be Excommunicated; and
Julian saw no Christian Emperor Excommunicated: what he adds, Page 16. is
notoriously false: he never saw any Emperor slain by virtue of an
Excommunication that was of a Later date.

And what indeed might he not justly fear, when he saw with what bestial rage
the several factions the Bishops formed themselves amongst the People, by whom
they were then elected did massacre each other?

We have vindicated Christianity from that feral rage of Christians against
Christians.

If any Man, as imagine it were at Alexandria, had a design to supplant a more
potent and popular Competitor; no way so likely to ruin him, as by giving out
that he was not a right Christian, but a Corrupter of the true Faith, for that
he used to Read Origin and Plato, unsanctified Authors, and then ten to one but
he was knocked on the Head by the Rabble of the Town, or by Sholes of
Anthropomorphite Monks, who commonly made what Bishops they pleased, and for a
long time made a Prey of the Egyptian Kingdom.

Origin was disliked by many; none in danger of his Life, or suffered in his
Fame for reading Origin and Plato, but for following those opinions which were
not consonant to the Christian Doctrine and Faith: The Anthropomorphites were
more numerous than the other sort of Monks. They moved a Sedition against
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, but that by their Power they elected an
Alexandrian Bishop, or made a Prey a long time of the Egyptian Kingdom, is to
me a Riddle. The Haeresy was begun by one Audius about the Council of Nice; and
Epiphanius, who flourished in the fifth Century, says, there were but very few
left in his time, and those in the utmost Bounds of Chalcis, beyond Damascus
and Mesopotamia.

Page 17. Nothing so much offended him, as the vile Hipocrisy of the then
Clergy, who besides their coining of contrary Creeds in the Reigns of
Constantine and Constantius, and modelling Religion by Court Intrigues, seemed
almost wholly to dispense with morality, placing Sanctimony, not so much in a
good life, as in the strict Observance of the Rituals, and the Symbolical
Representations of our Religion, such as Baptism, the Eucharist, Chrism, but
above all in submitting to the formalities of Confession and Penance, upon
which the worst of Offenses were too easily remitted.

Where was the Hypocrisy? there were two contrary Faiths, one in the time of
Constantine in the Council of Nice, which was then subscribed, and received by
the Orthodox Bishops: another under Constantius at Antioch, there the Arrian
Doctrine was favored: where was the Hypocrisy? this was done by different
Persons, and Parties, both of them maintaining the same Faith they had
embraced: from casting these Calumnies upon the Clergy, he involves them and
the Christian Religion in the same guilt.

Page 15. Let a Christian be never so deeply Criminal, no profane hand must
touch him, nor must he endure any other punishment, than Confession and
Penance; and that when once absolved, he was an Innocent, as the unborn Child.

How severe the Penitential Canons were in those times, is sufficiently known:
This is according to the Law of Christ; and therefore what he says, the Clergy
modelling Religion, etc. It Is a most notorious untruth: If ever in any Age, in
the fourth and fifth Centuries, the Clergy was most conspicuous for Learnning
and Holiness of Life: they looked upon a man as penitent and contrite when he
had a great sorrow for sin, and testified it by acts of shame and
mortification, and by a future Holiness. Certainly this Gentleman did not read,
or at least not seriously, the Fathers and Councils of those times: it was
determined by all, That no pardon without repentance, and no repentance without
true Holiness: To aver, as he does, That the Ecclesiastical Canons being
satisfied, no Civil punishment was, or could be inflicted, is a notorious
falsity, contrary to the Body of the Law, and the usage of the Church and Civil
Magistrate in all Ages. It Is true, Christianity acknowledged, that the most
vicious persons, and the greatest Malefactors may repent; but it does not make
repentance to consist in the submission to some exterior Rites, as Julian
invidiously jeers; but in an hearty sorrow, and real change of the mind, which
austerities and mortification are a sign of, and promote. To make these
reflections upon Christianity, from the Pen of a drolling Apostate, is not
becoming one that is a Scholar, or a Christian; That they who lived in the
strictest Conversation, and contemned the World, and exposed themselves to all
Persecutions, and Cruelties, even to the most Tormenting and Shameful Death,
for their Lord and Master, should think that their Religion consisted in
Rituals, is a thing estranged from the Breasts of Christians. As the Calumnies,
with which the Christians were loaded by the Heathens for promiscuous embraces,
Sacrificing of Children in their Holy Conventions, and eating them, with other
enormities, were abominable Untruths. It Is granted that Christians did say,
that Faith was required; but it was a most unjust jeer to say, I believe,
suffices to make a good Christian; for Christianity says, Faith without works
is dead: It Is acknowledged, that Baptism was enjoined, but not that it is a
mere Ritual: It Is a Sacrament to confer grace: if a person did not retain that
grace, he ceased to be a Christian: when therefore the Heathens jeered
Christians with the (...), washing, they did not consider, that the Christians
received this Doctrine from their Master, that they should be Baptized: to
which Baptism, adult persons being prepared, upon their being baptized, they,
through the Power of the Holy Ghost, were regenerated. And as for Penance, it
was necessary, that persons, who after Baptism had relapsed into Scandalous
Sins, should fall under the Censures of the Church, and recover themselves by
repentance, which is being really sorrowful for their Sins; which sorrow must
assert its self in actions of mortification and revenge upon themselves, and in
an hatred of Sin, and amendment of their Lives. Repentance is the second plank
after Baptism: it appears therefore, that this Paganish jeer of Julian is a
most false slander, viz. (...). Ho! whosoever is either Sodomite, Murderer,
Rogue or Villain, let him dread nothing, but repair hither; with this Water
I Will make him clean in a trice: And if he shall happen to repeat the same
crimes, if he will but thump his Breast, and box his Noddle. I Will warrant him
as innocent as the Child unborn. He adds,

This was the Vengeance Julian took for the barbarous Murders committed upon
almost his whole Family, and Blood; for what Flesh could bear to hear the
Murderers of ones Father, Uncle, two Brotkers, Six Cousin-Germans harangued to
Heaven in Pulpits, as very holy and good men, because (forsooth) absolved by
their own Friends the Priests? since he so lately saw Constans armed against
his own Brother Constantius, by the Roman Bishop, and the great Athanasius,
etc.?

To manifest the falsity of these things, I will give this Narrative. His
Father Constantius aspiring to the Purple, after the death of Constantine, was
slain by the Populacy: he dyed justly for Treason. Ablavius, one meanly born,
paying devout visits to the Bones of dead Friars, calling them holy Relics:
In that age there was given no Honor to the Relics of any but Martyrs, whom
he calls (invidiously) dead Friars. But he that advanced to great dignities and
riches under Constantine the Great, was slain by the command of Constantius. He
married his Daughter to Constans: Constantinus Junior was slain by Constans his
Soldiers: he claiming and invading those places under the Command of Constans,
which belonged not to him. Constans was slain by the Treason of Magnensius, who
himself was a Christian, and Commander of Christian Legions, the Emperors
Lifeguard: During the time of the first Ten Persecutions, no one Christian
Soldier could ever be found, that embrued his hands in the Blood of an Heathen
Emperor; but now a Christian Emperor is assaulted and murdered by Christian
Soldiers. Constans thought himself safe, when his Lifeguard were Christians,
under the command of a Christian; his hopes were in vain: but this Magnensius
was rather in show and pretense, than really a Christian. Constantius, before
that great battle at Mursum, dismissed those Soldiers which would not be
Baptized. Magnensius opened Idolatrous Temples, and permitted Sacrifices to be
offered. This Magnensius caused after the death of Constans, Eutropia, the
Sister of Constantinus, and Nepotianus her Son, to be put to death. How can
this be thrown upon the Christian Religion, or the Christian Clergy? or did any
Christian Bishop advance the names of those that murdered those so near of kin
to Julian? His Authors are not cited: He avers, that upon the persuasion of
Athanasius, Constans took Arms against Constantius, in which there is this
double mistake. 1st. Constans never raised an Army against Constantius his
Brother. 2dly. Nor ever did Athanasius persuade him to such an Action; and this
Constantius did recall Athanasius from his Banishment when he was dying. Indeed
Constans did threaten Constantius, that if he did not recall from Banishment
Athanasius, and Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, he would Arm; but he did not:
That this was by the persuasion of Athanasius, I no where meet with. But to use
these words, that Athanasius was outed of his See, as some say, for Treason,
Sorcery and Murder, is a passage not becoming a Sober Man The Arrians were
dreadful haters of Athanasius; they, out of a most implacable malice and rage,
accused him of those Crimes; but how clearly he vindicates himself, is fully
known to those who are versed in History: the Emperor himself after he heard
his defense, vindicated him. How Witnesses were suborned to swear against him,
is clearly related by Ecclesiastical Historians: a shame for a Christian to
give any credence or countenance to those Accusations of Athanasius, who for
sanctity of Life was one of the Mirrors of the World: of whom Nazianzen says
well; If I should praise Athanasius, I should praise Virtue its self.

Another Reason he assigns of his Apostasy, his paying devout visits to the
bones of dead Friars, calling them Holy Relics. In that age there was given
no honor to the Relics of any but Martyrs; those he (invidiously) calls dead
Friars; but he that fell to Paganism, and worshipped dead men for gods, could
not make that to be a cause of his Apostasy.

Page 19. That I may not be thought to obtrude my own Sentiments, I will
translate an Epistle of his to the Citizens of Bostra.

In no part of Julian's works, nor in this Epistle, is found one word assigning
the Causes by him mentioned to be the true reason of Julian's Apostasy. I will
give the History. Julian using all imaginable Artifices to destroy
Christianity, though he did not at first, either Imprison, or put to death any,
yet that the Christians might not convene to the performance of Holy Actions,
and by that means, in process of time, might by a disuse forget their Religion,
he Commanded the Bishops and the Clergy to be banished: he caused his
Proclamation for the banishing of Titus the Bishop of Bostra, and his Clergy,
out of the City: and the cause which he gave was, that the Seditions which were
in the City arose from the Bishop and his Clergy. Whereupon Titus wrote a
Letter to Julian to vindicate himself and his Clergy; and assures Julian, that
the Christians and Greeks had a mutual and peaceable Conversation, and that
there was nothing Seditious in the City; and that he was so far from being the
causer of any tumults, that he persuaded his people to all unity and concord.
Julian was offended at this, to see the cause by him declared mere pretext; he
wrote a Letter to the Bostrians, urging from this Letter a juster cause for the
Banishment of Titus and his Clergy: To incense the people, he objects against
him, that he arrogates to himself the honor of being the cause of the
Bostreans quietness. I have therefore specified in this my Declaration the
words the Bishop had the face to insert in his Defense; Though the Christians,
says he, were not inferior to the Greeks in number yet I did my best to pacify
them; these are your Bishops very words of you: Mark, I pray you, how he
imputes your quietness to himself, not to you. You are, if he say true,
restrained, not by your own good inclinations, but by his persuasions; expel
him your City as your common Accuser.

The Apostate endeavored by all fine methods to palliate his cruelties, and to
throw a scorn upon Constantius: he therefore upbraids them with ingratitude to
him, that he who had granted the Christians greater Liberty and Peace, than
Constantius had done, yet that those they called the Clergy, continued
Seditious. In the former discourse we have washed away that Paint, and have
manifested, that whatsoever kindness he pretended to show to the Christians, he
politickly did it for to make a fairer way to ruin them; there was no person of
more implacable enmity to Christians than Julian was: If he could raise the
hatred and animosity of Christians against their Pastors, his design was
accomplished. What Army can maintain its Military Discipline without its
Officers? what Church her Religious Rites and Unity without her Pastors? This
therefore he mainly proposed to himself as a certain means to ruin
Christianity; if he could separate the Christians from their Bishops and
Clergy. What crime was Titus guilty of? He did say, that the Christians in
Bostra were numerous, yet they were peaceable, and that by his means, (1.) he
did exhort them in his Sermons, and example them to peace and unity. But is
this therefore to charge him with Sedition, and to render this fair comportment
of Titus, to be the reason of incensing the people against him? He persuaded
them to Unity; but does this argue that the Bostrean Christians had no
Inclination to Peace by their own dispositions? No: what Christianity commanded
them, he more firmly inculcates. It Is clearer than the day, that he takes all
occasions to the destruction of Christianity, and therefore pitifully urges the
quiet disposition of Titus, to instigate the Citizens to Banish him, which they
did. He pretends, that in his time many who suffered exile, persecution, and
imprisonment, were called home, and restored to their Liberty; but he always
continued his severity against the Clergy. In his Epistle to the Alexandrians,
he says thus, We have permitted a return to the Galileans into their Country,
but not to the possession of your Churches: I hear Athanasius an impudent
Fellow, elated with his wonted arrogance, has again usurped his Episcopal See;
wherefore upon the receipt of these Letters, we command to depart the City, or
else to let him know, that more severe punishments shall be inflicted upon him.
He seemed to gratify the Christians but to ruin them, (...). What I have said
before, renders it superfluous to make any further reflections upon his Letter:
it is granted, that he accuses the Clergy of Sedition, that he criminates
Christianity; But is it excusable for a Christian to use the scandalous and
jeering Defamations which an Apostate uses against Christians and their
Clergy, to render them odious? Must an Enemy be believed? Must the Arms of
Philistines be employed to destroy the Temple of God? had this Gentleman no
better Testimonies, than what came from the Scurrilous pen of Julian? what Law,
but invalids, or at least lessons the witness of a sworn enemy? and must the
Invectives of Julian be embraced as sure Arguments, to sully the Honor of the
Church of God? which is a clear refutation of that Tract, and is the Glory of
Christianity, That the Testimony of Enemies are produced against it; which
Enemies themselves have given a real Commendation of it; when that Julian
himself, in his Epistle to Orebasius, proposes to the Arch Priest of Galatia,
the Examples and Carriage of Christians to be imitated by the Heathens, by that
means to render Paganism its self more amiable.

Reflections upon part of the Book, called, A Short Account of the Life of
Julian.
IT seems indubitable, that a Lawful Heir, by a Lawful Authority, upon a Lawful
Reason, may be secluded from his Inheritance. The Lawful Authority in England,
is, His Sacred Majesty and the Two Houses of Parliament: To them the Lawful
Reason must be referred: But there is a vast difference 'twixt the Laws of
England and the Imperial Laws; the Succession to the Imperial Crown of England,
and the Eagles. It is known in our Land, that nothing has the force of a Law,
but what is ratified by the King and Two Houses of Parliament. His Sacred
Majesty, to give ease to his People, and to appease the angry humors of the
Dissenters, issued out a Declaration for an Indulgence. The Parliament upon the
next Convention questioned this Act; His Majesty in his Speech to them averred,
that He would stand to his Action. They addressed themselves to the King: the
King returned, that they invaded his Prerogative: They replied, That there was
never put an Instance of the like Prerogative. It Is otherwise in the Imperial
Laws: Quod Principi placui* Legis habet vigorem: What pleased the Emperor was a
Law. The Reason is thus given; for by the Kingly Law, which was Enacted
concerning the Empire, the people did grant unto the Emperor, and transfer upon
him all their Dominion and Power; that, whatsoever therefore the Emperor did by
his Letters command, or in his own Person Decree, or by any Prescript enjoin,
it was manifest, was a Law: and Just. Titulo 2do Sect. sed and quod, the same
is found, C. lib. 1. Tit. 17. Sect. 7. Cum enim Lege antiqua, que Regia
nuncupabatur, etc. When by the Ancient Law, which was called the Royal, all the
Right, and all the Power, with which the Roman people were invested, was
transferred upon the Emperor; we will not therefore divide the Laws, according
to the names of those that Enacted them, we will have the whole Code to be our
own: For how can Antiquity abrogate our Laws, which fully evinceth, that all
right was seated in every Emperor? And therefore Justinian intending to reform,
correct, and reduce the former Laws into one Code, he would have that called
his own. It was once in the power of the Roman people to choose their
Magistrates, the created Consuls and Dictators; but they transferring all their
Power upon one single Person; it was in the breast of that person to enact all
Laws, and to constitute what Officers he pleased, and his Successors: And
therefore nothing more frequent in the Roman History, than the Examples of
Emperors, by their own Decree, making Laws, creating Coesars, and designing the
successive Emperor, which is otherwise in England. The manner of Succession is
determined by the Laws made by the Authority of the King and the Two Houses.
And it is observable in the Roman Story, that all the power being thus devolved
upon the Emperor, whosoever gained the Empire, enjoyed the same power: And it is
observed the Emperors were created frequently by the Military suffrage. It
seems a great error therefore in the Author, from the Example of Julian, to
meddle with the English Succession: it is to be acknowledged, that Julian, by
reason of the Barrenness of Eusebia, Constantius's Empress, and that his two
Brothers dyed leaving no Heir, Gallus being likewise cut off, was the next Heir
to Constantius; but that title had been invalid, if Constantius had not created
him Coesar. Eusebius, and Eumenius the Pagan Orator did say, that Constantine
came to the Empire by the Law of Nature, and a Paternal right: But that was
Oratory, and allusive to the general usage of Kingdoms, where the Son succeeds
the Father; but it is not so in the Roman Empire. Constantius Chlorus was but a
Coesar under Maximianus Herculeus the Emperor; How could Constantine be by a
Paternal right Augustus, when his Father was but Coesar? But his Father having
influenced the Army, they, upon the Death of his Father, unanimously saluted
him Emperor: And Julian being made Coesar by Constantius, he gained the
affection of his Army; who after several Victories got over the Germans and
Almans, the Army saluted him Augustus, to which he had no other title; but what
the Sword gave him; and by his Rebellion against Constantius, did by the Roman
Laws forfeit all his right and title. It appears an extravagancy to accommodate
Julian's Succession, to the Succession of the English Crown.

The actions and behavior of the Christians toward Julian, do not at all
interfere with a passive obedience. The Question is thus stated, Whether a
Prince invested with Dominion may, in matters of Religion, be resisted by Arms?
No Christian did, during the Persecution, ever take up Arms against the
Emperor, or make the least resistance: their Passive Obedience was their glory,
and their Blood watered the Church of Christ. But he rejoyns, that the
Christians professed a Doctrine contrary to the Laws of the Empire, and
thereupon a Passive Obedience was necessary: But where Religion is the Law of
the Country, there it may be defended by the Sword. Hence the Army under Julian
would, if they had power, have resisted by Arms, because they professed that
Religion which became the Religion of the Empire, and was ratified by the Laws
for Fifty years: But here certainly is a grand mistake, Quod Regi placuit,
legis habet vigorem, and though Constantine and Constantius, by their Edicts
favoring Christianity, that Religion was the Religion of the Empire while
their Authorities remained: But Julian, a Pagan, succeeding, he by his Edicts
reviving Idolatry, it was made the Religion of the Empire: And therefore 'twas
as unlawful for the Christians under Julian to resist him by the Sword, as it
was for the Christians under the Heathen Emperors to resist them. Thus it
appears in our English Constitutions: King Edward the Sixth, in his Parliament,
established the Protestant Religion, whereby that became the Religion of the
Country. Queen Mary a Papist succeeding, gains a Parliament that rejects the
Protestant, and establishes the Popish Doctrine: then Popery became the
Religion of the Country; and no Protestant during her Reign did oppose her
Person or Authority. The Protestants in Norfolk and Suffolk were great
instruments to set the Crown upon her Head, some of whom afterward patiently
endured the Flames, and none drew a Sword; nor after her Coronation was any
violent means used against her: by which the Authors 2d Chapter is referred to the
judgment of a considerate Reader. The Christians could not possibly think that
Julian, though created Coesar, had a right to the Imperial Crown, especially when
they saw he had forfeited any Paternal right by his Rebellion. The Pathetick,
and almost inimitable eloquence of Gregory, only Provest, that Constantius did
impolitickly in creating Julian, Coesar, which I have proved in the resolution
of the 1st Quest: but does not at all evince this Proposition. But when he
says, The fault and mischief of Constantius his action, was not because Julian
usurped upon him, nor upon any other consideration whatsoever, but purely
because the Christian Religion suffered by it. This cannot be allowed; for
Gallus his Brother being created Coesar, though he was a great friend to the
Christians, and a Professor of Christianity, yet Constantius having a suspicion
that he aspired to the Empire, cut him off; and Constantius at the first
notice, that he was saluted Augustus, nay, lest his Victories should gain so
much upon the Army, that they would make him Emperor, sent a Colonel to
withdraw some of his best Soldiers from him; yet all this while Julian
professed Christianity, and did not publicly declare himself a Pagan, till
Constantius was dead. Constantius therefore is to be excused, because he was
ignorant, both as to his aspiring to the Empire, and his Apostasy from
Christianity. Julian, after he accepted the Empire, and Constantius greatly
enraged, to appease him, he begged that he might bear a share in the Empire.
Indeed Constantius, and none but Constantius could lawfully exclude Julian from
the Empire: Though it is true, that the Christians had such an aversion to a Pagan
Successor, that they could not endure him, when he was become their lawful
Emperor; yet it was equally true, that they never could endure the thoughts of
taking up Arms against him. It must be acknowledged that they gave him evil
words; yet it cannot be hence inferred that they would fight him. Hilarious,
Bishop of Poictiers, wrote a sharp Invective against Constantius himself, though
Constantius was a great lover of the Christian Religion; yet seduced, by his
Courtiers, he moved a violent Persecution against the Catholics: No Christians
used more bitter expressions against Julian, than he did against Constantius;
yet cannot any body see the least word in his Invective, whereby he would
animate the Catholic Christians to take up Arms against him.

It remains to examine, whether any actions of the Christians did conclude,
that if they could, they would have opposed Julian by Arms? Constantius it is
certain did repent him that he did create Julian, Coesar; none could devolve
that power upon him, nor divest him of it, but Constantius. There Is not one
word in the famous Invective of Nazianzen. to excite the Christians to Arms; I
will grant, that they reproached Julian and his Religion to his Beard; I
confess they did beat his Pagan Priests before his Face; but I deny that they
would have done the same to him: That they prayed for his confusion, and loaded
his memory with the greatest disgrace, must be granted; but that from these
their actions and words, must follow, that they would, if they could, have
taken up Arms against the Emperor, In my Book called (The Clergies Honor)
under the Head, The Loyalty of those Fathers, I gave a full instance of their
Passive Obedience: Withal, the Christian Principle is, We must not do evil,
that good may come on it: No Christian for a temporal gain, by committing a
crime, must hazard his eternal happiness. The first Christians suffered
according to the Laws of their Country, whereas these under Julian were
persecuted contrary to Law; so that the same men, who would have quietly
submitted to the Laws under a Nero, or Dioclesian, do nevertheless pursue
Julian, as if he were a Midnight-Thief, or a Highway-Robber. This is refuted
before, where Julian's Laws had as great force as those of Nero or Dioclesian;
and that the Laws that Julian made, render the Christians unable legally to
take up Arms against him, if they could: His own practice gives an intimation,
that he had that confidence in them. He retained in his service
(notwithstanding those Edicts which he published, to cast out all Christians
out of his Army) several great Commanders which were Christians; such was
Valentinian, until he beat the Priest; and Jovian until his death; both which
were afterward Emperors: For he that has the power to make a Law, has the
power of dispensation. And common Soldiers, of which an account we have in the
former part of the History, amongst which were Juventius and Maximianus; he was
extremely politic, and it may be said of him, as it was of Julius, Tammarte,
quam mercurio, ex utroque Caesar. He fighting with the Barbarous Nations, had
Six hundred Soldiers new raised, milites gravis armaturoe, in these he put
great confidence; though the Victory inclined to him, yet these ran away, whom
neither promises, threats, nor his own personal assurance that the Enemies were
flying, could recall: These he did not, according to the usual method of War,
deliver Captives into the hands of the Enemy; but caused them to be put in
Women's Aparrel, and so dressed, led them through the Army, which filled them with
such a confusion, that they esteemed the disgrace worse than death, and so
enraged them, that at the next Battle they flew amongst the Barbarians like
Lions, did wonders, and was a great occasion of obtaining the Victory. Scipio,
when he saw his Army dissolute, and inclined to Essemenacy, he put on Funeral
weeds, and so walked about the Army, thus provoking the Soldiers to Valor, by
casting this reproach upon them, that such an effeminate Army will be the cause
of his and their Death. Stratagems are as necessary for a General, as Valor. A
Prince that is fortunate, must have part of the Fox joined to the Lions heart.
Theodoret. Lib. 3. Cap. 15. Thus prefaceth of those two Martyrs, Juventius and
Maximianus: Julian with the greatest boldness, or rather with impudence, having
put on the vizard of meekness, prepares nets and snares to destroy Piety: There
were two persons famous in the Army, who were of the Emperors Foot-life-guard,
and in a Feast with their fellow Soldiers, did bitterly bewail the fiery
abominations of those times, and used the admirable words of the three Children
in Babylon; and further added, Thou have delivered us, O Lord, into the hands
of an Apostate, a King more wicked than any that reigns in the world. These
words were related by some that sat at Table with them; they were brought
before Julian, who asked them, whether they said those words? This Question of
the King heightened their Courage, who thus replied, We, O King, being bred up
in a true Religion, and obeying most holy Laws, we do bewail, when we see all
places filled with impiety, and most impious Sacrifices; our meat and drink
defiled: These things are the cause of our bitter complaints, not only at home,
but before your Majesty. He hearing these words, puts off his Vizard, and makes
his impiety to appear with an open face, and commanded them, after various and
cruel torments, to be put to death: but did not pretend their Religion to be a
cause of this sentence, but their frenzy, that they should abuse the King; when
Religion was the just cause: As in a Battle that he had with the Germans, he
hid his Soldiers by Night in a Wood; so he veiled his Persecution with the
shams of Sacrilege and Treason. The Instance that the Author gives of the
Governor of Berea, is an evidence of this Truth. Theodoret, Lib. 3. Cap. 22. He
seeing his Son hastening to embrace the prevailing impiety, he drove him out of
his House, and publicly disinherited him: The Young man hastens to an
adjoining City, where the Emperor was, and declares to him his Fathers
Proscription of him, and his own opinions: The Emperor promises to reconcile
him to his Father: When he came to Berea, he invites the chief men of the City,
and with them his Father, to a Feast, and commands him to sit at Table with
him, the Emperor sitting in the midst, To me, says he, it seems very unjust to
force the mind of a person otherways inclined; you ought not to tempt your Son
to embrace your Opinions, neither, says he, will I force you to believe what I
believe, though I might easily compel you. The Governor sharpning his discourse
about Divine things, thus returned, O King, you have discoursed to me about
this Villain, who is a hater of God, and a preferrer of a Lie to Truth. The
Emperor rejoyns, and that with a seeming mildness, O Man, cease railing.
Julian, though he saw the resolute confidence of this Governor, yet did not
divest him of his place, having a confidence, that the Christians would not
take up Arms against him. It must be again weighed, that God generally prospers
good means. It may be every where observed, that evil courses have had a bad
success. Count Julian in his Embassy to Affric, had his Daughter ravished by
Roderik King of Castile: To revenge himself, he brought up the Moors, who after
a Seven days Fight, vanquished the Spaniards, and took possession of the
Kingdom. A fatal calamity attended this Julian, his Wife and Children were hewn
in pieces before his face, and himself was cast into a Dungeon, where he
miserably perished. If God send Plagues, or Famines, we must not fight, but
send up our Prayers and Tears to Heaven. The Lady Jane Gray was a Lady of so
great accomplishments, that she was esteemed a Miracle of the World; yet her
Title not being good, the Protestants deserted her, and advanced Queen Mary:
She contrary to her Faith given to them, proves a Persecutor: The Protestants
draw not a Sword, but apply themselves to Heaven by their Prayers. The
Mountebank Receipt of Prayers and Tears, is an evil Droll. What Athanasius said
of Julians Persecution, Est nubecula cito transitura, was applied by our Jewel
to the Marian, and it proved true: There was but a Quinquennium of that
cruelty. Queen Elizabeth was Crowned, the Protestant Religion restored, and
with a great deal of glory since flourished: The Smithfield Fires have so
enlightened the English Nation, that it is morally probable, there will be no
Martyrs, but in the Field: though the Weapons of Christians are not carnal, but
spiritual, against a Lawful Prince enabled by Law to persecute them. Yet Hobbs
says very well, that Princes ought to consider, that Subjects have not only
eyes, but hands. This Proverb was in the School of Pythagoras, There were many
Pythagorists, but few Pythagoreans: which suits our Christian, Many called, but
few chosen. There are very few that prefer an eternal to a temporal Life, and
therefore will use all means to preserve this. I yield to the truth of each of
the Five Propositions, mentioned Page 92. Proposition the 3d. This is the only
case wherein the Gospel requires Passive obedience, namely, when the Laws are
against a man: and this was the case of the first Christians. All this I grant;
but then I must say, that the same was of the Christians under Julian.

To sum up all, the state of his Question concerning Passive obedience is
accepted. The Life of Julian, and the carriage of Christians under him, are
totally cross to his designs. Passive obedience was ever esteemed the glory of
Christianity, which I hope we shall never experiment in England: May our Church
flourish by the pious Lives, and devout Prayers, but never by the Blood of the
Members of it. It looks ill for to use an Example of Julian, whose power was
absolute and arbitrary, to justify any thing in England, where the Power is
limited and divided. Our famous Cowley, though he had served his Sacred Majesty,
and the glorious Martyr, with great faithfulness and industry Fourteen years;
yet for one Paragraph in his Preface to the First Edition of his Works, was
deprived of the reward of the Mastership of the Savoy, when he only designed an
insinuation into the minds of the Kings Friends, that their petty risings would
but be the ruin of their persons and families: he knowing that an happy hour
would come, when God would bend the hearts of the people of this Land as one
Man, to bring back the King in Peace. My design is to dissuade my Countrymen
from avoiding all Military attempts; and that the fears of Popery may not urge
them to those courses, which will be the ruin of their Religion and Liberties:
In Peace and Rest will be our safety. Religion, of which Prayers is a principal
part, is the Life of a Christian, and the best support of a Nation. The
Fulminatrix Legio in Panonia was an evident testimony of it. Marcus Aurelius
Antonius carries his Army into Germany, Fights the Quadi and Sarmatoe; his Army
was almost consumed by Heat and want of Water: He addresses himself to the
Country-gods, from whom no relief is found: In this great exigency he applies
himself to the Christian Soldiers that were in his Army, who prostrating
themselves on the ground, and praying to the Holy Jesus, there presently fell
Showers upon the Roman Army; and Thunder and Hail from Heaven dissipated the
Barbarians. This famous History is without question true: It Is acknowledged,
not only by Christians, but also by Pagan Authors. Those Christian Soldiers
being imbodyed, was called by the Emperors command, Legio Fulminatrix, the
Thundering Legion: This was performed Anno 176. The noble carriage of the
Thoebean Legion, Anno 297. gives an admirable instance of the Christians
Constancy and Patience: This Legion, if the Christian Laws had not prohibited,
might have defended themselves against Dioclesian, as well as the Christians
against Julian. Constantius, when he sent Julian against the Germans, gave him
360 Soldiers, of whom thus Lozymus from Julian himself, That they knew nothing
else, but to fight by their Prayers. This is invidiously said by the Heathens;
but it being the testimony of Adversaries, shows what was the behavior of
Christians. Incense burning upon an Altar, dissipates Thunder, and Prayer
averts the anger of Heaven.

Qu. V.
If Christianity has such an innate purity and glory, how comes it to pass
that Christians should so violently persecute Christians?

IF such an Intrinsic worth be in Religion, how comes it to pass, that
Christians are so cruel to Christians? that no sort of men prosecute one
another with greater violence and hatred than Christians do? It Is a sad
Character that Ammianus Marcellinus gives of Christians, No Tigers nor Wolves
so cruel, as Christians to Christians. Those most dreadful Persecutions raised
by Christians against Christians, those instruments of cruelty, wherewith
Christians have Tortured Christians, are sad Evictions of this truth. To which
I Answer, that though the matter of Fact be confessed, yet Religion cannot be
judged culpable: It prompts not to anger, but meekness; not to Revenge, but
forgive; not to Fierceness and Cruelty, but to Humanity and Sweetness: It urges
not War and Blood, but Health and Peace: the Master that Christians serve, is
the Prince of Peace; the Gospel, which is the Rule of their Lives, is the
Gospel of Peace; and the future happiness to which they are invited, is a
peaceable Habitation. Justin Martyr had a great contest with Crescens a Cynick
Philosopher, who acted a Philosopher in his garb and demeanor, when otherwise
he was one that hunted after Praise, indulged his Pleasures, and immoderately
heaped up Riches: he practiced those Vices which were different from the
Virtues which are the ornaments of a true Philosopher. This Crescens slanders
Christ: him Justin confutes, and proves him to be vicious and ignorant: this
charge in his Apology he profers to make good. Crescens perceiving how he was
bafled, endeavored to procure the death of Justin; for which he thus
reprehends him, That He who persuaded others to despise Death, should himself
fear it; and he who exhorted to a Patient and joyful enduring of Death, by
reason it puts the Soul into harbor, opens the Prison-door, whereby the Soul
is at Liberty, and enjoys a Blessed Immortality; yet endeavors to inflict
death upon me as the greatest evil. I may say the same of Christians; how
absurd is it for them who believe a life Eternal, a future retribution, future
torments, for which the quality and nature far surmount the Spanish
Inquisition, Ravilliac's Tortures, or the dreadful miseries which Moses, one of
Scanderbeg's Lieutenants, endured in Fifteen days flaying, should persecute
Christians with the most feral cruelties which Policy and Malice can invent, or
execute? This cannot be imputed to our Religion, which for Meekness, Peace,
Amiableness, and Love, is preferable to all the Religions in the World. It Is
this Religion, which calls to endure, to suffer for Righteousness-sake, to fry
Ten thousand Faggots with our Flesh; to Purple as many Axes with our Blood,
rather than sin. That same Religion cannot prompt its Professors to such bloody
actions. We will confess, these things have given a great reason to complain of
many Professors of so excellent a Religion. These actions are no reproach to
Christianity.

1st. It must be granted, the Vices of most men are not a just reproach of
humane nature. What Murders, what Fires, what Blood, what devastations have
been by men caused against men, upon no account of Religion? Those Wars managed
with so great success by the Romans, that no Empire of the World ever did, or
is ever in any probability to attain; those they never commenced on the account
of Religion: they revered the Tutelar gods of every Country, and therefore at
the besieging of a City, that they might the more easily conquer it, they did
avocare Deos: yet, what murders, and the sad effects of War they themselves
were the causes of, it is notoriously known. Pompey did glory that he was the
occasion that Eleven hundred Thousand men were destroyed: Tamerlane, that in
the Torrent of his Victories, he should be the cause of the death of Eight
hundred Thousand. What cruelties have been acted by men upon men, the Histories
of all Ages will attest. All these ascertain, that there is an Original Sin;
but yet does not reproach humane nature indeed. Mr. Hobs says, that the State
of nature is a state of War, and that all persons are equal. And Spinosa, who
is Hobs Unvailed, says expressly, that men are formed to destroy one another, as
greater Fishes to devour the smaller. Theol. Polit. Cap. 13. A fulsome
similitude he uses, to explain a notorious untruth. There is no such estate of
nature, nor is it possible to conceive such an equality amongst persons; for if
the Original of man be by Creation, then by the Successive generation the
question is determined: if we suppose men to be born by the prolifick power of
Egyptian slime, and the benign influence of the Heavenly bodies, yet experience
acquaints us there is no such equality naturally. Think we the understanding of
every Grecian was equal to the vast Wit of Aristotle? the valor and conduct of
every Scythian to that of Tamerlain? the eloquence and parts of every Roman
could parallel those of Cicero, whose Wit equalled the Roman Empire? No
Fictions may be admitted which serve to explain the Phornomena's of the
Heavenly Bodies; but to admit such Fictions which destroy Justice, under the
pretense of giving the true nature of Justice, explaining it, is a most
notorious absurdity, and not to be endured. Virtue and Goodness are not
fictitious; though such feral and Bloody actions have been perpetrated by Men,
yet it does not conclude, that mortals are divested of all humanity, or that
there are no Laws wrote on the Breasts of men, which may be fairly read in the
just lives of many excellent persons: As Cruelties acted by men upon men
reproach not humanity, so the persecuting Spirit of some Christians, do not
justly cast an imputation on Christianity its self.

2. It will not be amiss to enquire, when this persecuting and bloody spirit
invaded the Breast of Christians? It must be acknowledged, that during the
first Ten Persecutions no such spirit appeared. There was great divisions, many
Heresies, yet the true Church maintained its self by holiness of Life, patient
suffering of Tortures, and an excellent discipline: The only allurements to
Christians, were a future glory, and terror, Eternal punishments: but when the
Emperors became Christians, that restless Enemy of Mankind, and the great
opposer of Christ Jesus, employed all his Arts to make Christians act upon
Christians those cruelties Pagan Emperors did. In the Empire of Constantinus
the great, Arrius was raised up by Satan to disturb Christianity; he coloring
what some former Heretics had not so clearly broached, declared in the Church
of Alexandria* that Christ was not true God, coessential with the Father.
Whence sprung those first Persecutions of Christians against Christians, but on
the Arrian account? Under Constantius the Great no Persecutions were moved. His
Son Constantius, to whom he gave his Empire of the East, was prompted, though
not by his own nature, but his Court-Parasites, who perverted Eudoxia his
Empress, a person of great Learning and Spirit, to persecute the Orthodox and
Catholic Christians. Constantinus Junior, and Constans. Brother of
Constantius, governed in the West and South; these did not at all disturb any
sort of Christians. Julian succeeding Constantius, his Persecutions we have
recited. Jovian by the Acclamations of the Army was immediately created
Emperor, who being a Religious and Orthodox prince, moved no persecutions, but
gave even to Heretics Liberty. On his death Valentinian was invested with the
Eastern and Western Purple: the Soldiers, after his Election, in a tumult,
declared that another should be his associate; he in a resolute, yet complying
Speech, acquainted the Army, that it was in their Power not to have elected
him; but having elected him, it was in his power to appoint a time when a
Colleague should be chosen: taking his opportunity, he by the consent of the
Army caused his Brother Valens to be chosen his associate: To him the Eastern
Purple was assigned. To see the Power of God! Jovianus enjoyed the Empire but
Eight Months: the Army proceeding to another election, constituted a great
Soldier, a wise person, and most religious Christian, Emperor, who made then,
with the consent of the Army, Valens his Partner; at that time an Orthodox and
Catholic Emperor, who under Julian professed the true Doctrine; but marrying a
Princess, who was an Arrian, instilling those pernicious Doctrines into the
head of him a Soldier, and being Baptized by Eudoxius Bishop of Constantinople,
an Arrian, and by him at his Baptism sworn to maintain the Arrian impieties, he
proved a most dreadful Persecutor: God was so angry with him, as to substract
his Grace, that falling from the true Faith, he scarce appeared to be a
Christian; and being vanquished by the Goths; he was forced to take Shelter in
a Cottage, where he was reduced to Ashes. At Antioch, the famous Miletius being
Banished, when he kept his Court in that City, he gave to persons of all
persuasions full Liberty publicly to perform their religious Offices; he
opened the Jewish Synagogues, and the Pagan Temples, and gave a general
indulgence to all that owned the name of Christians, to Heretics, and those
who divulged opinions contrary to the Apostolical Faith. By his connivance and
approbation, the Mysteries and Festivals of the Heathens were celebrated. Those
cheats were suppressed by Jovian; Then began to flourish Ceremonies,
Sacrifices, and Religious Rites of Jupiter; Ceres and Bacchus were celebrated;
and this was done, not in Corners, as in the Reign of Religious Emperors: but
now in the midst of the City. In the Forum they wildly ran up and down, madly
performing their Orgias. He is only an enemy to those who profess and preach
the Apostolical Faith. These he first drove out of their holy Churches: they
then convened upon the tops of Mountains, there they heard the Words of God,
there they glorified God with Hymns and Praises. To perform Divine Exercises,
they endured the violence of all sort of Weather; Storms, Snow, Frost, and
Scorching heats. These recesses he permitted not to them, but by his Troops
dispersed them, Theod. Lib. 4. The cruelties of these persecutions Basil does
lively describe in his Letters to the Western Bishops: the Persecutions of the
Arrians were dreadful: the Donatists had liberty, till they grew violent; then
their Churches were taken from them, and some of the Bishops punished; but they
becoming Bloody, and a Sect amongst them especially called the Circumcelliones,
a feral and rabid company, acting Barbarities upon the Catholics, they were
restrained by more severe Laws. That the Arrians prosecuted the Catholics with
the greater Rage and Cruelty, the Vandalick Persecutions, not to be read
without Tears, are too sad a Testimony. The Catholiok Emperors were not Bloody,
nor did they prosecute the Arrians with Fire and Sword. The first sanguinary
Law was against the Manichees, 5. Arcadius, it was a most frantic and
abominable Sect.

3dly, An erroneous and wicked Principle imbibed, may be the Reason of
Persecution. Religion is not the cause of it, but men's ignorance, passion,
prejudice, and evil apprehensions of things. Because the Samaritans did not
receive Christ, James and John said unto him, Will thou command fire down from
Heaven to consume them? Luke 9. When Zeal, like raging Fire, does not warm, but
destroy, lays Towns and Cities in Ashes, no wonder they condemn to the Flames
those whom they account Heretics. What blood will not those persons shed? What
Murders will not they commit? what cruelties not exercise, when instigated by
an erroneous Conscience, and believe, that when they kill their Brethren they
do God good service? But this is absolutely contrary to the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus. It Is true, by the Law of Moses, the Blasphemer was to be put to death.
In the new Law, He that will not hear the Church, let him be as an Heathen, or
Publican, Matt. 18. I wish they were cut off that trouble you, says St. Paul,
Gal. 5. But from these words, to prove, that it is meritorious to put an
Heathen on a Rack, broyl a Publican on a Gridiron, and to cut off the thread of
a Schismatics Life by Instruments of cruelty, is as ridiculous as that of a
Sciolus. Hoereticum devita; an Heretic reject. To turn it, de vita toll, take
away the life of an Heretic; it is unquestionably true. The Gospel commands no
corporal punishment: The Church pronounces the person an Heretic; but the
sentencing of that Heretic to the Fire, and the executing of that sentence,
was performed by the Civil Judge and his Officers. I must not be
misinterpreted, as though I judged, that a corporal punishment may not be
inflicted upon those who are real Heretics, granting that Conscience cannot be
forced; yet it must be concluded, that an erroneous person may be forced to
those actions which may alter his judgment. No Boy can be forced to believe,
that (amo) signifies (I Love); yet a Boy may be justly forced to go to School,
and to attend to his Masters Lectures, and by that means he may be convinced,
that (amo) does signify to (Love) And this was the case of the Donatists: For
St. Augustine, a Man of a meek and Divine temper, who very well knew the
sweetness of the Gospel, and the greatness of man's infirmity, was against any
Penal Laws, in causes Ecclesiastical: But when the Donatists were compelled to
restore the Churches, which under Julian were taken from the Catholics, and to
come to Divine Prayers, and to the hearing of Orthodox Sermons, many of them
were converted: Upon this St. Augustine approves of that severity: But that
persons being subject to their Prince, demeaning themselves soberly, merely for
an opinions sake, should be killed as Dogs, and that by all feral means, to
extirpate that which they call Heresy, is meritorious, is not the product of
Religion, but of Prejudice and Passion. What a scandal did this give to the
Name and Faith of the Lord Jesus? The Indian King would not be in Heaven,
because the Spaniards were there. What bloody Tragedies have been acted over
all Enrope on this account? This savours not of the meekness and sweetness of
Christianity. The Religion of the Holy Jesus must not be reproached by the
passions and evil opinions of men.

4thly, All are not Christians that call themselves so; all are not
Pythagoreans, that are in the School of Pythagoras. A feral spirit amongst many
who call themselves Christians, arises not only from an ill guided Zeal, but
from Principles contrary to the design of Christianity. The Faith of the Lord
Jesus is pretended, when ambition and temporal prosperity are designed. And
this has been undoubtedly the original of infinite slaughters amongst
Christians, which have been veiled with the glorious pretense of Piety.
Certainly for Christians to Arm for the recovery of the Holy Land, and the
redemption of so many Thousand Christians from the slavery that they were then
involved in, was for excellent purpose. After the Lateran Council, when a great
Army was raised for that end, by the instigation of the Pope, the Swords of
Christians in the West were turned against the Christians in the East: Under
that sacred vail was hid the design of reducing the Eastern to the obedience of
the Western Church. The Ambition of Rome was to set up a Latin Empire
Ecclesiastical and Civil, in the Greek Church and State. The Gunpowder Treason
in England, whence proceeded it but from ambition? The late feral Plot;
acknowledged to be Devilish by His Sacred Majesty and Three Parliaments, Let
Religion be pretended, what was under the Varnish? Coleman, a name execrable,
not only to Protestants but to Romanists; a Mushrom gaining favor, durst be so
arrogant as to attempt the introducing of Popery, make the English Scepter
truckle to France. What was his aim? To be a great Minister of State. The same
was proposed by those who assisted him in these detestable actions. Religion
was in the Front; but in the Rear, Great Ministers of State, Ecclesiastical
Dignities, and Military Offices, these must be their encouragers. Though that
Coleman durst to his last breath deny that there was any intention to introduce
Popery by the Sword, which denial of his was a most notorious falsity; yet that
Fame, Dignities, and accumulated Riches were the Port to which he Sailed,
nothing more clear. They who fall from one Religion to another, must disguise
their Apostasy with the fairest vails of Conscience, Salvation, and a future
Glory: Yet they give a reproach to themselves, and to Religion; when they
design their Apostasy to open a Gate for preferment, no wonder that these
persons prove Persecutors. Religion is not to be charged with these bloody
actions: No, they are to be imputed to a damnable hypocrisy, and worldly
interest. Coleman, a Ministers Son, a pragmatick Sophister in Cambridge, went
into Flanders, changed his Religion, turned Romanist, then went up and down
City and Country to make Proselites; a person of a daring impudence; though
clearly bafled in disputes, would never discover that he was conscious of a
foil by one blush: Durst (proh bone Deus!) attempt those things which has given
the greatest disquiet that ever could have been given to his sacred Majesty, to
the two Houses, to the whole Kingdom, to the Three Nations, to the Protestant
Interest; Nay, it may justly be averred, that no English Romanist ought to
pronounce his name without abhorrence and reluctation. He can palliate his
Villainies with no other pretense than Religion, which he designed to promote,
not by blood or any feral means, but by those holy methods which the holy Ghost
approves, as he attested at his Trial: Non verba, sed facta loquuntur. His
words and actions give an eternal evidence against him. Could we imagine, that
his Life gave an indication of the Heavenly composure of his mind? Chrysostom
in his so justly famed Books, (...), styles him (...), that is, the Apostate.
Why calls he him the Apostate? Did he dissert his Religion? fall from the Faith
of the Lord Jesus? No. But being born of rich and illustrious Parents, his
retiring into the Wilderness, or to the top of a Mountain for the privacy of
mortification, and the more assiduous practice of holiness, he at the Twentieth
year of his age relinquished his divine Life, returned into the City, and there
lived splendidly; his retinue and Table were sumptuous and magnificent: for
this, declining from the severer practice of Holiness, Chrysostom condemns him,
and with all imaginable eloquence and piety endeavors to recall him. But we
have here an Apostate from the excellent Religion of the Church of England, who
not only imitates, but outvies this Theodorus. Theodorus reassumes his estate,
lives gallantly at the expenses of his Patrimonial inheritance. Coleman vies
with the primest of the Nobility: he that sprung up in a Night, made his
Apostasy the Ladder to climb to the highest preferments, and the Favorite to
bring him into the Councils of the greatest Princes of Europe, and the great
encourager to attempt the most notorious villainy in the World. Is this Faith
and Godliness? Can Christianity be reproached? Must the Faith and Loyalty of
the French Nation be condemned for the Treason of a Ravilliack? That
unchristian designs and secular aims are many times the cause of Christians
shedding the Blood of Christians, amongst many more Examples I will annex two:
Upon the death of Liberius, Damasus and Vrsibinus were competitors for the
Roman Pontificate; The people are divided, the parties are hot and passionate,
their heats are so vehement that both Parties fight: Damasus his party was
superior in this Bloody contest; a Hundred Thirty Seven Bodies were found slain
in one Church, a Church which was once the House of one Sicininus: the
dissension was so great and fierce, that Viventius the Prefect of the City
could not appeal it. This rage gave a disturbance to the City some time after;
perhaps the parties were not pacified, till Vrsinius was gratifyed with the
Archbishopric of Naples. Upon this Marcellinus, an Heathen, gives us this
remark, I cannot deny, considering with what gallantry the affairs of that City
are managed, that they who are competitors to gain, what they so much desire,
should strive with the greatest ardour and force; for when they have obtained
their longed-for Dignity, they are secure seeing that they shall be enriched
with the oblation of Ladies; they being gorgeously clothed, they shall be
carried up and down in Coaches, their Feasts shall be profuse, and they shall
maintain Tables superior to those of Kings. These persons might indubitably be
more Blessed, if they, contemning the splendour of the City, would compose their
demeanors after the mode of some Provincial Bishops, whose spare Diet, mean
Garments, and their Eyes constantly cast upon the Earth, commend themselves to
the True God, and his Genuine Servants.

Macedonius was certainly an ambitious man. Paulus being canonically elected
Bishop of Constantinople, was commanded by the Emperor Constantius to be
removed from that See. Phillip the Prefect performs the Emperors command: by a
fine trick, without the knowledge of the Citizens, sends him into Banishment,
and then takes Macedonius into his own Coach, and carries him into the Church:
the people were disconted; the multitude was so great, that what by the throng,
and the Sword of the Soldiers, a passage was made for him to the Throne by the
Corpse of One thousand Three hundred and Fifty. When possessed of that See, what
cruelties did he not exercise? banishments, confiscation of estates were but
lighter punishments: those that would not communicate with him; he Imprisoned;
some he Tortured, Women and Children he caused to be severely Scourged; he
forced the mouths of those, that would not communicate with him, to be opened,
and his Mysteries to be put into them: he caused Eggs to be heated, and cast
upon the Breasts of Women: he made the Breasts of other Women to be put between
burning Plates, and seared off: he acted such Cruelties upon the Christians,
that were unheard of to the Heathens, with an excessive pride; without the
consent of the Emperor he removed the Corpse of Constantine the Great, out of
the Church in which he was interred, into the Church of Acasius the Martyr: This
fact was endeavored to be hindered by the Orthodox Christians, of whom he
killed many: the Floor of the Church, and Street adjoining, flowed with the
Blood of them. Were these sanguinary Acts the product of Religion? No, but of
pride, and his temporal Interest.

Qu. VI.
Wherein the Christian Graces have a real preferency to the Pagan and
Philosophical Virtues?

IT will not be unworthy to discuss this Great Question, Wherein the Graces and
Lives of Christians are superior to the Actions and Virtues of the Heathens?

Julian (against whom these Papers are chiefly designed) was a Prince
conspicuous by many excellent endowments: Amongst the Heathens there were many
Philosophers and Statesmen, Orators, Generals and Princes eminent in their
singular qualifications. Is Valor a Virtue? Many were patient in bearing
Calamities, and none more daring in undertaking great actions. Is Justice a
Virtue? they were diligent hearers of Causes, and unbiassed in their final
determinations. Is Temperance a Virtue? They were to a Miracle Abstemious. Is
Charity a Virtue? they were Bountiful, and haters of the base sin of
Covetousness. If a composure of mind, by which persons are fitted for admirable
Actions; If industry and vigorous prosecution of Employments be excellent
Ornaments, in them they might glory. To all which may be added, in the Exercise
of Religion, which is the foundation of Virtue, they were very devout. To all
these they made a great pretense: Some of those Eminences must be granted; yet
to the Question, it will with clear Reason, and certain Truth be replied, That
the excellency of Christian Graces and Virtues, are superlatively to be
preferred to Pagan Eminences. To evince which, these Axioms must be premised.

1. Bonum ex integra causa, Malum ex quocunque defectu; An Universal
concurrence of Causes is required to make a thing good, when any deficiency
suffices to render it evil: One obliquity makes a Line crooked, when a
continued recital is necessary to constitute a strait Line.

2. When Virtues are intense, then they are concatenated; there is a
Conspiration of all Virtues, where the degrees are Heroical.

3. That the famed Philosophers agree in this, That there is a true God, whose
Will is the rule of Virtue.

4. That then it must evidently follow, That they who worship not the true God,
are not Virtuous.

5. It Is evidently perspicuous, that Virtues must have a respect to their
adequate objects: He that is Temperate, must both eat and drink moderately; he
that is Just, must be so to all persons.

6. That to the Constitution, Prudence is required: If this were not the Guide
of the Pagan Virtuosi then it must of necessity follow, they were not truly
virtuous.

My Pen shall not be too crabbed, nor my sentiments too bold in censuring the
state of dead Philosophers. What sentence the Divine Power has passed upon
them, is known to him only, to whom belongs righteousness and forgiveness. I am
not daring to peep into the dark; but confident, that the highest pitch of
Virtue the severest Pagan arrived at, is much beneath Christian perfection, and
the sublime life of Christian Philosophers.

1. Let the actions of any person be never so exact and congruous to those Laws
which goodness prescribe; yet if the end be vainglory, they are not true
Virtues. Ambition is that deformity which sullies the splendour of the best
Conversation, in that life, which seems to be a mirror to give the liveliest
image of Goodness: As the purest Crystal is by breath; so that, by popular
applause, is stained; which vice is infinitely opposed by Christian Religion:
Humility being adopted as a part of it; it is one of its prime constitutions,
enforced by the example of the Holy Jesus. How guilty the Ethnic Philosophers
were of this crime, is notoriously known: They were termed Vanoe glorioe
mancipia. How trifling was that temper of Demosthenes, who was hugely pleased,
that the murmurs of a Rivulet from him gliding, brought to his Ears the noise
of a Woman speaking to her Companion, This is the very Demosthenes. Cic. Tusc.
Quest. lib. 5. And Tully himself, that great Orator, and Virtuoso, and famous
Moralist, Trahimur omnes glorioe studio, and optimus quisque maxim gloria
ducitur. The chiefest aim of the best men he makes to be Glory; by Plutarch
accused of Ambition, and so judged by his Friends. Crecens, by Justin called,
(...). And of himself, Cicero says, Orat. ad pop. before his Banishment, Quam
virtutis gloria summa cum laud ad coelum extulit. He was infinitely affected
with those expressions of kindness, which he received from the Romans after his
return from Banishment, that he cries out, I am come to Rome upon the Shoulders
of all Italy. As for Julian, how vainglorious he was, take it from the Pen of
Marcellinus, he rejoiced very much in vulgar applause; he was an immoderate
hunter after praise, even from the least things that were. His affecting
popularity, made him to converse with mean and abject persons. Christianity
commands not to seek the praise of men, but of God: That he who glories may
glory in the Lord. The glory which we receive from men is but small, imperfect,
inconstant, and makes not the person the better: the glorying in God is raised,
perfect, perpetual, and makes the person really happy.

2. We shall rarely find, that there was a Concatenation of all Virtues in
Heathen Philosophers; and in them, their Virtues had not a respect to their
adequate objects: which is otherwise in Christians. In many thousands of them
gloriously appeared a concurrence of all Graces. It Is a Christian Axiom: He
that offends in one, is guilty of all. Christian Graces are like a Crown, or
Circle, in which if there be any part taken away, that cease to be a Circle.
From the Principles of Christianity, this manifestly is proved; for the form of
a Christian Grace, is the Love of God in Christ. That Love causes a true
Christian to abstain from all Vice, and practice every Command. Multitudes in
whom neither impurities, injustice, uncharitableness, irreligion, weakness and
timerousness of spirit, or any other vice did appear; and when any vice was
committed, they washed away the stain by Tears, and removed the guilt by
Repentance, and were never quiet, until they recovered their former purity.
They lived embelish'd with all Virtues. Where was there any Heathen, in whom
one great Vice or other was not seen? The consideration of their Idolatry must
be rejected, until the third and fourth Particulars be considered. This present
discourse is directed to the proof of the second and fifth Particulars: To
perform which, we will take a view of the Christian Laws and Lives, and the
Dogma's and Conversations of the Heathen Virtuosi If we cast our eyes on the
Sacred Code of the New Testament, we can see no Command, but that which is
holy, just and good; any impurity is so far from being countenanced, that an
impure thought, nay, a wanton look is prohibited by the purity of the Laws of
the Holy Jesus. A lustful casting of the eyes, is accounted Adultery. Such an
exact Justice, that rather than any injuries should be done, injuries and
torments are to be endured. Christianity is so far from admitting Injustice,
that it commands the remission of Injuries, and to return good for evil. It Is
true, that in late ages, in which there has been a decay of Piety, the
Generality have the name, not the life and essence of Christians: yet in the
purer ages of the Church, how eminent the Lives of Christians have been, how
glorious in the most complete composure of their conversations, the enemies of
Christians had confessed and admired: and still there are those, who for purity
are Virgins, and clothed in white; that lead Angelical Lives, and live as out
of the Body: They are so far from acting, or patronizing any filthiness, or
injustice, or affecting Vainglory, that impure motions they abhor: they
consume their Estates in Charity: by mortification they raise their Bodies,
that they become the Temples of the Holy Ghost: and their whole life is
consecrated to their Maker. The contrary will be found in the Lives and
Writings of the most famed Philosophers of both the celebrated Sects; the
Ionick, the successers of Anaximander; or the Italick, the followers of
Pythagoras. Theodorus, in the Life of Arristippus, affirms, that, (...), etc.
to Steal, to commit Adultery, to act Sacrilegiously, was the duty of a wise man
at some times, Laert. Lib. 2. Periander one of the Wisemen, had carnal
knowledge of his own Mother, Cratoea: which horrible fact being known, struck
her into an extraordinary sorrow; and if Causa bo^s conjecture he true, caused
her to be her own Executioner. Sodomy, that it is an unnatural Vice, cannot be
denied, but concluded. That Socrates, he that first reduced moral Virtues into
a Method, and compiled the first moral Philosophy, was an abuser of Alcibiades.
Laert. Lib. 1. in vita. His followers imitating their Master, esteemed this
Vice a Virtue; hence thus derided by Juvenal. Inter Socraticos notissima foss^^
Cyncoedos. Phoedon, who was taught by Socrates, of a great and noble Family,
being taken young, was made a Prize by his Master, to gain Moneys by
prostituting himself, Laert. in vita Lib. 2. and Aul. Goll. This same Phoedon
was the person, who occasioned Plato's inscribing his Book, De immortalitate
animoe Phoedus. Asclepiades had his Ganimede, who was too familiar with
Manedemus, Asclepiades his Friend. When Asclepiades his Amor came to Menedemus
his Feast, the Servants at the door would not admit him. Bion Borystthenes
adopted young men to abuse them: and one Burio cries out to Menedemus, Bion
enjoys me at Night, and I am not injured, Laert. in vita Bionis: lib. 4. Plato
himself was not exempted from this crime; that he abused Sodomitically one Eter
a Youth, and an Astrologer; for the same service he obtained Alexis and
Phoedrus, which Dion discovers in his verses on Plato's Lovers, related by
Laert. Lib. 3. Demetrius Phalerius (who was honored by the Athenians with
three Hundred and Sixty Statues) was Cleo's Ganimede, and had one Lamia for his
Mistress: his Epistles to his beloved Women, and to Pythocles a beautiful
Youth, give a sure evidence of his Purity. To Pythocles, amongst other amorous
passages, he has this, I languish, I am ruined, not enjoying your lovely and
divine conversation. More instances of such impurities might be recited, but my
Paper begins to Blush. It will not be unworthy to mention the Dogma's of
Antisthenes, who so much commended Virtue in excellent Apothegms, yet gave to
Wise men liberty to use what handsome Women they could; Laert. Lib 6. Diogenes
affirms, Women and Sons should be common. Zeno, that Wives in a well
constituted Commonwealth should be common. Chrysippus, Lib. 7. taught, that in
a Commonwealth, Mothers, Daughters and Sons should be Common. Amongst the most
Virtuous Grecians and Romans, the Marrying of Women for the use of other Men,
and exchange of Wives, were esteemed consonant to moral goodness, approved by
Philosophers, and ratified by Laws. The saying of Pittacus, that the gods must
yield to Necessity, is derogatory of the Divine Excellency. Archelous and
Epicurus cast off all goodness, by affirming, that nothing was just or unjust
in its own nature. It must therefore be averred, that the Virtues of Pagans
since they were accompanied with vices which wore the Garb of Virtues, they
being ratified by Laws, are far inferior to the Virtues and Graces of
Christians, who abhor all Vice, and are guided by infallible Rules: for the Law
of the Lord-is perfect, converting the Soul; the Testimony of the Lord is sure,
making Wise the Simple: The Statutes of the Lord are right, etc. Psalm. 19. 7, 8.

The consent of all Ages is a strong invincible Argument, that there is a
Deity. Though many gods were adored by Heathens, yet that did not argue that
they believed many supreme Deities: there was a belief amongst them of
Polytheism: they could not but imagine, that there was one Infinite Being, who
was supreme to all things; yet they entertained an opinion, that there was
Inferior Deities, some Spirits more excellent than Men, who were the Dii
Patrii, and Dii medioxumi. Patrons of Countries, and Nations, Towns and
Families; nay persons: They believed that God the supreme Deity, conveyed his
Will and Pleasure to Men and Nations by their Tutelar Deities whom they adored.
The notion of a Deity included in it, his Will to be the measure of all men's
actions. It Is evinced by the nature of Conscience, that an outward action is
not Virtuous, except conducted by the mind. The Courage of a Lion, or an
English Mastiff is not fortitude. It Is Reason that conducts the Act, and makes
it Virtuous or Vicious: and the consent of all Nations, is, that the Rule of
their Lives, ought to be the Will of God. To make Laws to be readily
entertained, they feigned they were given by their gods. Plato begins his
Dialogue concerning Laws with this question, Was God or Man the maker of Laws?
And the answer is, (...), God, God was the Cause. Numa Pompilius persuaded the
Romans to entertain his Laws, by pretending he received them from the Goddess
Ageria. It appears, that as the Unanimous consent of all Nations strongly prove
their is a Deity; so the same consent proves that the Will of God is the Rule
of all Virtuous actions. Hence it will necessarily follow, that they who have
not the knowledge of the True God, cannot guide their actions by those true
Measures, as they may, who receive infallible Oracles from the true God. That
the greatest of their Virtuoso's, as Pythagoras, were Idolaters, is evident.
Zenophons sayings, and facts of Socrates, says of him, (...), so religious,
that he did nothing, the gods being not first consulted: (...), so temperate
and continent, that in his choice he never preferred pleasure, to honest and
virtuous things: yet that Poederastia cannot be imagined to be a lawful
pleasure: and the gods he consulted must be the gods worshipped by the
Athenians, which is Idolatry. He sacrificed to the Grecian gods, and offered a
Cock to Esculapius. Plutarch approves the adoration of the Sun, Moon and Stars:
for, says he, it is impossible to think, that the World would conspire in
Worshipping of them, if they were not animated; de Placitis Philosophorum.
Seneca is reproved justly and severly by St. Austin, in that when he condemns
the Superstition of the Romans in their Sacrifices and adoration of their gods,
yet he permits them to conform to the Laws, Austin de Civitate Dei. Lib. 6.
Cap. 10. In this the great Moralist must be extraordinarily peccant, who would
act those things which were conformable to the Laws, yet these he judged
ungrateful to their gods. Thus those Philosophers, who made a great pretense to
Virtue, yet in common reason, cannot be excused from Idolatry. St. Austin
affirms, that Plotinus, Jamblicus, Porphyrius, Appuleius, and Plato himself
Sacrificed to diverse gods. De Civit. Dei Lib. 8. Cap. 12. When it is evinced in
Plato, easily it will be granted in others; nor can this be denied. The
Narrative which Eunapius gives of the Lives of Philosophers, is a certain
evidence, that they worshipped many gods, and were skilful in Magic. Maximus
(by the command of that Religious Emperor Theodosius) was put to death, for
being a Magician. To prove the verity of St. Austins censure of Plato, no other
Testimony need be used, than his own words expressly in his (...): He asks
Clineas, and Nigrellus, who may be esteemed the Cause of all good: especially
of that good, which is the best, which we term Wisdom; by it we are taught whom
to call a God, and adore? to which he answers, The Heavens, and all Terrestrial
Doemons, and Gods we must Honor, and chiefly Pray unto. Ficinus in his Preface
says, that, by Heaven, Plato there meant the Incorporeal, and invisible
Heaven: the Idea of which he commands to be adored through the visible, it is
representation. Ficinus, to vindicate Plato, uses some Artifices esteemed
amongst the Papists; but this clears him not from Idolatry. It Is frequent with
Plato to command Honor to be given, and Sacrifices to be offered to a
multitude of gods: Quarto de Legib. Page 8 32. Let us be convinced, that it is a
clear and certain truth, that we are obliged to Sacrifice to the gods; that we
be conversant in holy actions, Prayers, Oblations, and all manner of Divine
Service: this is the most Lovely and most Excellent; It Is that which conduces
to a most happy Life. The Honors being performed to the Heavenly Gods, and
those Gods who are Protectors and Patrons of Commonwealths; that person
obtains the end of Piety, who to Terrestrial gods offers congruous, though
inferior Service. After these, a Wise man will Sacrifice to Hero's, to Demons,
in consequence to the proper Images of the Country gods, as the Law prescribes.
Thus far Plato. No Subject, let him be extolled for extraordinary Wisdom,
singular Temperance, unusual Charity, undaunted Courage, exact Justice in
Commerce; yet is most unjust, and makes his Virtues Vices, if he heads his
Rebellion against his Natural Prince, and abuses all his endowments to promote
it. Idolatry is a Treason against Heaven. It was this which soiled the
Embellishments of the greatest Plilosophers, and eclipsed the Luster of their
greatest Excellencies. The Idolatry and Magic of Julian is in the former
discourse: how weak and erroneous is a natural understanding! The Wisdom of Man
is foolishness with God. O weak Mortals! happy were the Jews in their
Revelations: happier the Christians, who see the Glory of God Shining in the
Face of Jesus Christ.

Lastly, As it is granted; that Prudence is the chiefest of all Cardinal
Virtues; so it must be acknowledged, that those Virtues which are guided by a
Divine, are superior to those which are conducted by a natural Wisdom: The
Original of all Prudence, is, that Eternal Intellectual Sun, from which all the
Rays of Wisdom, whether Natural or Divine are emitted: So true is that of Job,
There is a Spirit in a Man; and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding, Job 32. 8. The Rays that are in the Soul by nature, or that
Candle of the Lord which is placed in the Soul, at its production gives a faint
and weak light; but vigorous and clear Beams (that fair and brighter Candle)
which shines with the sweetest and clearest Splendor, placed in the Golden
Candlestck, the Church, the Pillar and ground of Truth: and herein is the clear
proelation of the Christians in their actions and graces, to those of the
Heathen; for Christians are conducted by the best means; to the best end. That
there is an enmity by nature between God and Man, the Sins that men are guilty
of, are a deplorable, though certain Argument. That man endeavors to reconcile
himself to God, and to appease the Divine Wrath, and that by Sacrifices, is
manifest by the common usage of the World. All Nations unanimously agree in
this; all people in all ages tendered their propitiatory Sacrifices to God. The
Heathens did believe that the Sacrifices they offered to their gods, did really
appease the anger of those Deities: Hence some Nations sacrificed men and
women; and Julian ripped up the Bellies of Women. In Gaul they fed men on
purpose a whole year, that there might be offered a most excellent Sacrifice to
their gods. Amongst the Romans, they who did devote themselves to the gods were
accounted Hero's. The Jews had their Sacrifices appointed by a Sanction: they
were propitiatory; but as Types, their Virtue proceeding from him, who was the
Lamb slain from the beginning of the World: The Wrath of God being solely to be
satisfied by that Sacrifice which was equivalent. This was the sweet acceptable
Sacrifice of him, who was God and man; man to be a Sacrifice, God to render
that Sacrifice of a due Value: the Piety was the Altar to Sanctify the
Sacrifice. This is that mystery hid from Ages, that God should become man; that
by offering his own Body he might make atonement for Man; by his own Blood he
might enter into the Holy place, making eternal Redemption for us: by one
sacrifice once offered, he might, ever perfect those who are sanctified. He
gave the most excellent Commands and Rules of Living, which he enforced by his
own evample: He was separate from Sin; his Life was the pattern of all
goodness, and invited men by the Promises of an Eternal Glory. How blind the
eyes of Reason and natural Philosophy are, the sentiments of Philosophers,
which concern the ultimate end of Man, easily manifest. Did Pythagoras, Plato,
Aristotle, or Zeno discover in what, complete Beatitude consisted? were it to
be found in any of the Academies ancient, middle, or new? In the Stoa, or the
Roman Forum? No. The Metempsuchosts of Pythagoras is an absurd fiction, and
destroys the greatest part of the Divine Providence, by making a retribution in
the next life, which cannot be granted, if that be conceded. Plato seems to
have the clearest apprehension of the Souls immortality and a future Life, as
the state of the Soul is when living, and in that condition with those
qualities, when separated from the Body, sentenced to bliss or torture: As,
says he, the Body is full of Scars, or the Members dislocated, it will be so
when dead. The same with the Soul: the Filth, Wounds, and Deformitys, which it
contracted when in the Body, will remain, and be seen, when separated. The Soul
which by Virtue is made pure, and beautiful, when in the Body, retains that
same purity and beauty being separated. And further, that Virtuous Souls have
their various Seats in Heaven, and are happy, by possessing a perfect good,
which is God, and this to continue for ever: and is obtained more by Loving,
than by knowing. These speculations are curious and ingenious; these approach
near to Christianity: and certainly the Philosophy of Plato was a preparation
for the Gospel. We evinced before, that the best Principles of Socrates and
Plato's moral Philosophy, came short of the Code of Jesus Christ: So when we
consider the Doctrine of our Lord, we shall find, that these Speculations are
inferiot to it; for as to the judgment of the last day, it is clearly revealed,
that the Son of Man shall descend from Heaven, and shall place his Pavillion in
the Clouds, and Judge the World. Plato in his Gorgias, tells, that to the three
Sons of Jupiter, the last Judicature is committed. Minos, Rhadamanthus, and
Aeacus being in a certain Meadow in Bivio, where are two ways, one leading to
the Isles of the Blessed, the other to Hell: the naked Souls of these Judges
viewing the naked Souls of men, to send the Virtuous to Heaven, the vicious to
Hell. Minos and Rhadamanthus are the Judges of the Asians, and Aeacus of the
Europeans. Let what Ficinus says of Plato' s Opinion, be Plato' s sense, that
by Saturn is intended the Supreme Intelligence, in whom is the Universal Law
and Providence over all things: Subordinate to him are three principal Deitys;
Who gives the essence and form of Beings, is called Jupiter; who gives life is
termed Neptune; who disposes the orders and degrees of Forms is called Plato;
and the three Sons of Jupiter, Judges of Asia and Europe, are three Deities,
Servants of Jupiter and Plato, designed for that Office. Christianity acquaints
us, that there is but one only God; that God did assume our nature; that he
will judge the World. Plato introduces other gods, these three Judges to take
a view of the naked Souls, by inspection to pass the Sentence. Christianity
says, the Books shall be opened, that is, the Divine Omniscience, which
clearly discovers the actions, and knows the estate of every one, shall discern
the deeds of every individual person: And the Consciences of all persons are
another Book, in which are written the Sins and Graces of every person: all
shall then be so awakened and disposed, as they shall give a faithful account.
This is a rational account of the supreme and exclusive Tribunal. How can those
three Judges pass a just sentence, except they know of the Crime and Virtues of
every Soul, which they cannot do except they be Omniscient? And when they have
passed the sentence, how are the Souls sent their several ways? Certainly that
power which brought every Soul into such a Meadow, and conveyed the Souls to
the places to which they are sentenced, must be Infinite: whereby it must be
one, not three subordinate Deities: Omniscience and Omnipotence are properties
belonging to the true and only God. The account of the Christian felicity is
clear: An immortal Soul, which through the aid of Heaven, the assistance of the
Spirit, subjecting the Body to its self, and gaining a spiritual conquest over
it, making it subservient to Reason and Religion, when separated from the body,
ascends into Heaven, where it has an immediate and full enjoyment of God in
the understanding and will, by a clear and full prospect and view of God, by
that which we usually call Beatifical Vision: And this immediate Vision; which
is Divine, filis the Will with the most ardent Love of God; whence springs all
imaginable joy and delight, and this to continue for ever. Plato speaks very
delicately of this happiness, when he pronounces, that Happiness does consist
in the possession of God: That Souls come from, and return to God again; that
the possession of God chiefly consists in the Loving him above all things. Yet
it must be acknowledged, that great Person commended to the World for his
Eloquence, Holiness of his Life, and Pen, received the knowledge of these
things from the Jews; which is observed by Ludovicus Vives, and Leonard
Coquoeus the Jesuits, in their Commentaries upon St. Austin de Civitate Dei,
Lib. 22. Cap. 28. And our Learned Gale, Court of the Gentiles, Part. 1. Lib. 2.
Cap. 7. and affirmed, he has so mixed the Narrative, that it very much sinks
below the Evangelical Discovery, according to the Apostle, Life and Immortality
is brought to light by the Gospel, 2. Tim. 1. 10. The fullest discovery of an
Eternal Life and Glory was made by the Holy Jesus; Which will farther appear to
those persons, who were the preservers of their Country, advancers of its
Glory, enlargers of its Territories and Dominions; and was assigned the
greatest share of Glory in the World to come. This the intent of Scipio
evinceth, Sed quanquam sapientibus, etc. Though Religion, upon the performance of
excellent acts, is a most ample reward of Virtue; yet those divine perfections
are not satisfied with those honors, which Images standing upon Lead, or
Triumphs adorned with fading Laurels give it; but requires that Remuneration
which is more flourishing and permanent: Therefore, O African, that thou may
be more ready to defend thy Country; be certain that to those who preserve
Commonwealths, are the supporters of it, and extenders of its Empire, a
peculiar Mansion is assigned, in which they shall enjoy perpetual felicity:
That place is in the Milky-way, from whence the souls slide into the body, and
to which they return: In which Circle Scipio thought himself to be, when he so
dreamed. Macrobius knew very well the mind of Plato, with whom Cicero agreed in
his Book de Repub. Julian, says Marcellinus, thus comforted his Courtiers that
bewailed his Death; It was abject, and mean, to bewail that Prince who should
be placed amongst the Stars. From which it is evidently deduced, that there was
amongst them an apprehension of a future and eternal Felicity: but whether
there was not a mistake amongst them concerning the means to attain it, and the
felicity it self, there may be an occasion to judge? Political Virtues are made
the most suitable conditions to attain it. Let us suppose Virtuous Generals
Fight against Virtuous Generals, who conduct virtuous Soldiers against virtuous
Soldiers: Let this instance be given amongst a Thousand others: Sparta and
Thebes take Arms one against another; the Commanders in chief are Agesilaus for
Sparta, and Epaminondas for Thebes: both which intensively loved their native
Countries; to preserve their Cities they were equally inclined: both were
endued with Political Virtues. Epaminondas had that glory to make the Spartans
know, that an Enemy could pass the River Eurotas, which no Hostile Army had
done for Six hundred years: yet this Epaminondas dyed by a Lacedemonian Spear.
Agesilaus revived the drooping spirits of his Countrymen, who being incensed
against him, forced him into Egypt; returning to preserve his Country, dyed.
Are both these happy? Believe Cicero and Plato, as Macrobius affirms of Scipio,
who saw from the Galaxy, Carthage: They must be likewise amongst the Stars. Yet
they were enemies, and the preservation of one Country is the ruin of another.
What account can be given that they were both happy? None but this, that both
of them went to the Dii Patrii: whence it follows, they did not believe that
the happiness of separated Souls did consist in the possession of a supreme
Being, but of subordinate Deities: Therefore that felicity of separated Souls
cannot be perfect, those Deities themselves being but finite. And Plato's
conceit is not suited to that of a Divine Philosopher, when he affirms, That
future Beatitude, being gained by the Cardinal Virtues, Prudence, Fortitude,
Justice, Temperance, as the separated Soul, when united, exercised more
heroically a more peculiar Virtue. So its happiness in the possessing of God,
consists in the persection of that same Virtue. As he that excelled in Valor,
his fortitude then shall be accomplished: so the rest: When that true
Beatitude, which is in a beatifical Vision, brings all Graces then to be
exercised in that estate; as Faith and Hope cease in Heaven, so those Virtues.
Prudence, which directs by the best means, to the best ends: What need of that
Virtue, when there is a possession of perfect bliss? No object of Fortitude:
Heaven admits of no Enemy, no sorrow, or any evil. No object of Justice: no
commutative, because no contracts; nor distributive, for God only rewards and
punishes. Nor any of Temperance, for there is no Nectar or Ambrosia. But what
Macrobius asserts in Somnio Scip. Lib. 1. Cap. 11. That there are Two Gates in
Heaven, one in Cancer, the other in Capricornus; per has duas portas animos de
coelo in terram meare, etc. And by these it is believed they return from Earth
into Heaven; the one the Gate of the immortal Gods, the other of Men: For by
that the Souls of Men return to that seat in which they are eternally blessed:
And the Souls returning from the Galaxy, they then enter into the Dominions
belonging to Pluto. For Infants newly born, are fed with Milk, to immind them
that they came from the Milky-way. The Soul of Man by its innate power of
moving its self, sliding from the Zodiac, and Milky circle, into the lower
Orbs, is clothed with a body of light, and exercises it self with those
actions which are proper for each Sphere. In that of Saturn, those of Wisdom
and Intelligence; of Jupiter, in the practice of exterior things; of Mars, heat
and courage; of the Sun, fancy and imagination: of Venus, desire and appetite;
of Mercury, Eloquence; of the Moon, the power of Generation; and the Soul in
its fall between the Snake, descends into the Cup, and there being Drunk, has
a forgetfulness of all the actions it did in the Heavens. This is the Fluvius
Lethoeus: These are such great absurdities, that they need no refutation: But
they are a great attestation of the natural ignorance of Man; and how weak the
understanding of the greatest contemplative men are, when not guided by
revelation; but conducted by their own thoughts.

The Stoics placed their Felicity in Virtue, which they esteemed their God.
Aristotle the same; but Virtue cannot be the ultimate end of Man, when it is
the condition and means of attaining it. Aristotle places happiness in the
Body and Mind both, but not according to his Master, in the enjoyment of the
gods. Indeed both Aristotle and Plato, the one by asserting an eternal matter,
the other an eternal motion, have delivered those opinions which are very much
derogatory to the Power and Majesty of God. Moses, that gave the true account
of the worlds being created out of nothing, satisfies our reason, that nothing
can be infinite, no, not Eternal but only God; and that Infinite can produce a
Being out of nothing; that motion is caused by that Mover, who himself is
Immovable. And the Sacred Oracle, a Divine Revelation gives the fairest and
most satisfying account of true Beatitude: the knowledge of which, the wisest
Philosophers not attaining, it is past scruple, that their Virtues were not of
that eminency and luster as those of Christians. That Queen of Virtues,
Prudence, which governs the actions of men, was reigning in the Hearts of
Christians with more absolute perfections, than in the minds of the most
Virtuous Heathens. This most amiable and beauteous Princess, by Christian
Philosophy, directs her Subjects to place their happiness, not on the Earth,
but Heaven; not in the Creature, but the Creator; the God blessed for ever: And
clearly manifests, that pious persons are made fully happy in the Possession of
God, by Vision and Love. Divines thus instructed, more truly, with greater
Sublimity, profess God to be the Rewarder of Virtuous Actions. The Royal
Psalmist says, With thee, O Lord, is the fountain of Life, and in thy Light
shall I see Light, Psalm. 35. 10. And St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. God shall be all in
all. St. John, 1 Epist. 3. 2. Beloved, we know, that when he shall appear we
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. St. John giving us the
description of the Heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 21, 22. Says, And I saw no Temple
therein, for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it.

FINIS.

