THE Writ of Restitution: By the Lady ELEANOR.

PSALM. etc. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; Be learned ye that are Judges of
the earth.

ACTS 3. 21. Whom the Heaven must receive, till the times of Restitution of all
things which God has spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets since the world
began.

Printed in the Year 1648.

THE Writ of Restitution:
BY The Lady ELEANOR.
ANd now in this his cause, the Judge of all the earth, Prince of the Kings of
the earth, a case wherein all concerned; these are to pray three, who here sit
in his place Judges: Give me leave to speak, and show you a mystery, from this
writ Amoveas manus, defended by the happy Mr. Maynard, notwithstanding opposed
by Mr. Solicitor, with S. John, not knowing what Spirit he is of.

Before whow this day, the day of Judgments figure, showing by reason of a
writ of Error, not executable, three stand charged with contempt of the Court,
pleading Ignorance, notwithstanding the aforesaid Amoveas manus writ being
executed (as it were) the forbidden fruit tasted untimely; these men yet each
discharged and acquitted: as let it neither be reputed impossible, how much
opposed soever by others, for All to be saved at last, when the utmost mite or
minute satisfied or expired, the worst of reprobates not excepted, in his time
whose immense mercy inscrutable: this is the argument, Against whom no writ of
Error feisible either or possible.

Who saw every thing very good at first made by him, reduced to be no doubt to
the same estate, as holds good from that of dust return to dust, every thing to
the place from whence it came; fallen Angels and men restored every one, not left
a hoof, etc. or lost of that kind bearing his Image.

Of which general deliverance well understood to be an Article of the Christian
Faith, famous Origin, from whose judgment other fathers erring, forced were to
erect a Purgatory for Saints, that Babel edifice of theirs; of whom the
aforesaid ancient father, the worst they could say of him was, As he did worst
of any when he wrote ill, so exceeded all men when he did well.

And so proceeding with this reported Case of this days Hearing, where the
fiery adversary upon their surmisings, pressing for a present sentence, before
the accused heard or answering, charged, that although moved in open Court such
a writ, the Amoveas manus to be respited: and accordingly a Supersedis issued
out, delivered to the Sheriff then in being; the Tenants nevertheless outed of
possession by the now Undersheriff of that county about three months ago:
whereupon he called and appearing, demanded of whom, how those doors came to be
opened, denied not what he had done by virtue of such a sealed writ, by such a
Solicitor brought to him; as for other writs concerning them, pleads Ignorance:
One Pomfred by name, (alias Pomum) surprised in state of inocency, like her
first in the transgression; (for pursuing which Allegory thus) showing one
Massingal called, pleading ignorance too as the man laying the fault on Eve; he
(some three years since in that Office) only had a Supersedis, of what
validity now he knows not; for other writ, none came to his hand.

Also Jo: Rand Solicitor called, he appears, no young Fox, not to be foold with
pocket Errors, refers to the Judges, whether year after year that writ like to
be of much force, brought beforce such and such Officers; namely the Treasurer,
etc. when as in being none such, or like to be: And so this the Epilogue or end
of it, their stale Errors being quasht; the writ stands good for taking off or
removing his Majesty's unhealing hands, his Tenants cashiered; moreover for
strengthening which, another writ, a Writ of Restitution produced, brought in
COURT, stops the Lions mouths, forced to put up their pipes, as let it happen
to the enemy of General Restitution, sent to that parable of the unnatural
elder Brother toward his own flesh and blood, Luke; and murmuring laborers,
because their fellows mads partakers with them; endless unmercifulnes thereof
to bid others beware.

And here to make an end with what penance imposed on those three for a
presumption of that nature; these a touch of it: The under Sheriff Pomfred,
somewhat of a low pitch, he never to aspire or take upon him the state or style
of a high Sheriff; the other sometime in the same employment or Office,
Massingal to return to his domestic function or calling deserting former
dainties. The honest poor Solicit' J: Rand as for him unto other Solicitors an
example his lot, besides to pinch himself with hard and thin fare, never to
attempt the Kings Solicitors place, or St. John to be called like the wandering
Jew.

And so farther, no jesting matter neither of mean consequence, where like
Twins, this finished tedious Law Suit in Trinity term; and Gods word both
sympathizing or joined in wedlock, like the blessed Virgin and just Joseph
Cousins, though abruptly in brevities behalf handled or penned, presaging
without doubt, maugre the old Serpents plotting with his smooth outside,
through the holy Ghosts power, the third person in Trinity, long silent (...)
for unexpected Ghests such. His Father meeting him, by whom healed forthwith:
forerunner of the stumbling Age significant dicttates; on the future of a
supernatural blessing: when swallowed up in dispare, at their wits end.

According to whose express charge observed, not to take a strange woman to
wife. But of his people one of a holy descent: withal above others, namely of
PRIDE to beware: his seed that they might inherit the Land. Arrogance (not
unknown) the Mother of want, inseparably joined with a servile condition.
Concluding with the beatifical Vision the true healing Angel, discovering
himself unto them: one of the seven Angels or Spirits in presence of the
Throne: presents the Prayers of the Saints (to wit) in reference to the
Sabbath, alludes to the Sabbatical Century. Raphael signifying The Medicine of
God.

As his vigilent parents for his return, also to watch all: So from whose
stumbling mentioned in what obscurity the last days. Dreaming of such
anointings as much or supernatural participations.

His Grave when as prepared abroad and at home both: their son by whom she
conceived (as it were) returned into a New World: such a change closed with
Father Tobias Trumpets Alarm or Prayer: by the Angel preferred, withal pointing
to his close Imprisonment in the Whales womb, three days in Travel of him:
heard whose cry out of the Deep, who acknowledges brings up from Hell, etc.

And Hell and the Grave, one and the same word Gehenna expressing both as in
that similitude from unlikeness.

And in Adam as all died, so in Christ all made alive, Cor. 15. O the depth of
the wisdom and knowledge of God. By the Ancients Origin, Tertullian and others:
no question made thereof with whom all things possible, but to be implacable
absolutely.

And so much for these, the childrens teeth not set an edge for the Fathers
default. Captive Angels put into the List. The word Everlasting, That cansell'd
also being determinable signifying Ages: and farther, passing for ad infinitum.
When as spared in tender consideration of one Heathen City, wherein so many
thousands discerning not the right Hand from the left. And Eve hers as a
thousand for one how much more spotless in that nature. Then why thus incensed
our JONASES against them Abraham styles Sons worse then annihilated a million
of times, whose love a thousand times surmounts his hate: By that Jewish
envious elder Brother as figured, expostulating with his Father, etc. where in
truth a prefixed space of time signified, more proper then of place fixed, etc.

Prayed O ye sinners, therefore repent, turn and do Justice, show mercy, who
knows whether he may extend commiseration to this sinful City: as in behalf of
those Innocents, whose sittuation not far from Paradise.

As by the Fish taken in Tygris River of such virtue, etc. O make ye friends of
the unrighteous Mammon, That they may receive you into everlasting Habitations:
^pointing to the transitory whereon set up their rest, all dote. So finished
his magnificat Tobias, that Brides incomparable Luster or preparation: New
Jerusalems precious Edifice so ravished with it.

From the Lady Eleanor.
Tobias signifying good, for Good Friday.



FINIS.

