Zach. 12. And they shall look upon him, whom they have pierced: And they shall
mourn for him, as one mourns for an only, etc. and shall be in bitterness
for him, as one is in bitterness for his first born.
THese as by way of comparison set forth: This prophecy appointed for a sign
also requisite, since Faith in high things always slow.

Jonas as allotted then for the resurrections sign, of which took essay: Such a
three days rest and nights three; And the suns retiring so many degrees that
high favor to Hezekiah, Likewise of the leavings in the cup, happy Hastings
this first born, an only Son, partakes one of no inferior Family: Taking his
leave of this life, whose first days rest taken, on the Lords day; Saying my
lovers and friends have thou put away far from me (Psalm.) whose death and
obsequies (bewaild of no few) assigned for a warning piece of those very
perilous days stolen upon us: When say peace and safety, then sudden
destruction, These. x. And they shall not escape even the general day of
Judgments forerunner: whereof Apocalips thus, Behold he comes in the clouds,
and every eye shall see him; and they also that have pierced him; and all the
Kindreds of the Earth shall wail, etc. And thus of one so hopeful committed to
no simple Doctors, through too much suddenness or ignorance, as that way who
can plead not guilty, by letting blood was cast away; upon whom because of this
cast suit of cloths bestowed on him of his Masters, They shall look upon him
whom they have pierced, etc.

Let none with an evil eye look thereon: And so passing on with several coats
of houses born inclusive, adorning the Hearse, as dedicated to our Jerusalem of
the Gentiles, And in that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as
the mourning in Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddon, the house of Huntingdon
of which participates: Also in London, every family apart mourning and their
wives, etc. Of the royal Branches, like the House of David, all of them be
wayling apart, etc. likewise from that ominous name, called Megiddon impart, it
is done, Behold he comes making the sable clouds his chariot: solemnized Heaven
and Earths Funerals, these great lights extinguished, The Sun become as
sackcloth of hair, The Moon as blood, The Stars falling, etc. answerable to
that loud voice, Revel. 16.

Done it is, gathered in that place called in Heb. Armagedon, when every isle
fled away, etc. from whose Name importing diligence, Hastings who lost no time
himself, declares much more what hastening required, and looking unto that day,
at whose appearing Heavens and Elements dissolves and melts, etc. Wherefore,
for instruction sake adds, when ye see these come to pass, And I will pour upon
the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace.
So be sure then time to look up, etc. And this for another, and in that day I
will make Jerusalem a heavy stone for all people, etc. As extraordinary
blessings rejected, no ordinary corrections incurring inseparable evermore,
besides such distraction so giddy, that plague increasing daily too, or curse
of tax leavied, as witness whether fullfilled: and in that day (says the Lord)
I will smite every horse with astonishment, and the rider with madness: and in
that day will I seek to destroy all nations, that come against Jerusalem, etc.
and in that day (says the Lord) I will cut off the names of the Idols out of
the land. And such like demonstrations showing out of request, the name Saint
drowned in oblivion, such an eye sore at this time unto many.

And passing forward also, whether that waiter on the latter days, Esdras
testimony, termd Apocrypha, or miscalled, speaks not the present condition
presaging, the sons of the Church, Sion her sons cut off that fraternity;
whilst deeply musing upon their departure from the Law, grown to such a low
ebb or degree, the law though still in force, like the Spirit of prophecy
supposed transmitted not beyond the primitive times, as gross as Romish
miracles, without trial Esdras informs, saw such a mournful mother, changed his
cogitations, she replying, Sir let me alone; yet afterward thus after so long
time, that had a son then nourished by her with so much travel, grown up, came
to take him a wife, when fell down and died, the house turned upside (as though)
overthrew the lights fleeing the city, etc. into which Park or Field fled,
purposed to take up her rest; whereupon her passion to divert, spreads that
catalogue of confusion the present case greatest of all Sion, the mother of
all, delivered into hands of hateful Iaylors a captive: Spoken to Sion her
self, at whose fearful voice cast out the earth shook, which besides her Sons
farewell, some future thing reveals, a prophetical voycc, etc. And new Jerusalem
in her place, etc.

VVhereupon Vriel the Angel signifying Light, shows unto him. He in need of
comfort himself the solution, thrice over, who repeats these and thirty years,
ver. But after thirty years, etc. Lucy Lady of Huntingdon, the sackcloth and
ashes Hers. Ashbeys mourning for him, he born anno 1630. about nineteen years
of age, whose Epithalamiums to lamentations exchanged for Epitaphs: The saffron
robe for sable mourning, whose mother coming to his bedside, a little before
his death, Thus quomodo vales?
quomodo non possum been valere
cum proximus sim deliciis meis?
aluding partly to her Name of Lucia, etc. And for the vissage mard or
disfigured, wiped off so soon by the resurrection hope, as matters not, though
obvious to beholders at such time; When beauty turned into ashes, which Light
about ten extinguished at night, enjoyed no small happiness, in this the time
of sickness, in scarce complained of pain, Heretofore inclining to the Royal
Party: Hastings prophesied of by Esdras the Prophet, as Josias his Birth, so
long before concerning that reformation, when those priests cut off, foreshewed
their judgment, etc.

And for Esdras that new song of his, so much suffice: And new Jerusalem at
hand, no material city, whose face all Light and Luster: And for these useful
materials, Giving all warning not unprovided to be of the wedding garment;
Threatening the downfall of the rough garment from head to foot, soars and blains
their candlestick reward: And so make haste Lord God, Amen.

FINIS.

