A DISCOURSE Written by Sir George Downing, The King of Great Britain's Envoy
Extraordinary to the States of the United Provinces.

Vindicating his Royal Master from the Insolences of a Scandalous Libel,
Printed under the Title of [ An Extract out of the Regicter of the States
General of the United Provinces, upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing,
Envoy, etc.] And delivered by the Agent De Heyde for such, to several Public
Ministers.

Whereas no such Resolution was ever Communicated to the said Envoy, nor any
Answer returned at all by Their Lordships to the said Memorial.

Whereunto is added a Relation of some Former and later Proceedings of the
HOLLANDERS: By a Meaner Hand.

LONDON, Printed for John Luttone, and are to be sold at the Blew Anchor in the
Poultrey, 1672.

A Discourse written by Sir George Downing, the King of Great Britain's Envoy
Extraordinary to the States of the United Provinces, etc*
THE Envoy Extraordinary of His Most Sacred Majesty of Great Britain, etc.
having lately seen a certain Paper entitled, [ An Extract out of the Register
of the Resolutions of the High and Mighty Lords Estates General of the United
Provinces, upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing Envoy Extraordinary from the
King of Great Britain] did not at all think it fit for him to take any notice
thereof, but to pass it by as a Pamphlet (of which sort there come out too many
here every day); in regard that no such Resolution had been communicated to Him
by their Lordships, not any one word given him in Answer to his said Memorial:
And he had accordingly past it by, without taking any notice thereof, had he
not since by accident been informed by several Public Ministers residing here,
That the said pretended Resolution had been brought to them by the Agent de
Heyde: Whereupon he now holds himself obliged to Complain in most serious terms
to their Lordships the Estates General of the United Provinces, of this strange
and irregular way of proceeding; That while he is Residing here on the behalf
of the King his Master, Papers, in form of Answers to his Memorials, should be
given to other Public Ministers, here and elsewhere, and sent all over the
world, and yet concealed from Him; and thereby neither opportunity of being
convinced, if any thing of reason should have been said therein, nor on the
contrary of vindicating the Honor and Justice of the King his Master in what
he is therein unjustly charged and defamed withal.

Suppose that he the said Envoy Extraordinary should have proceeded in that
manner, and have given the Memorial (to which the said Paper is a Reply) to all
Pubblick Ministers residing here; and sent it to all Courts abroad, and should
have Printed and exposed it to the view of the world, without giving it to
their Lordships, what would they have thought thereof? and what might have been
expected that they would have said to it? Can their Lordships imagine that this
way of acting does tend any way to the justifying of their Cause, as to the
working of better impressions concerning the same in the minds of those Public
Ministers, or their Masters? Or rather, that they must be exeeedingly
scandalized thereat, as looking more like a Surprise of them and their
Judgments, than otherwise; and considering that they may to morrow be dealt
with in like manner, in relation to any Paper they may give in; and see the
Affairs of their Masters traduced and defamed, without any opportunity or
possibility of clearing the same.

And as to the Matter of the said Paper. Is it enough to say in general terms,
That the said Memorial was ill, graunded, or abusively informed, without
particularizing at all how, or wherein; or so much as excepting against any one
word thereof, much less disproving the same?

And again; If the things wherewith they are charged therein, be true (as they
both are, and must now be taken by all men to be, since nothing is made out by
their Lordships to the contrary) To what purpose is the whole sequel of the
said Paper? If it be true (as it is) That the Royal Master of the said Envoy
was no sooner returned to His Kingdoms, but that He was immediately, and from
day to day, troubled and importuned with a Crowd of Complaints of His Subjects
against those of this Country; all which notwithstanding, His Majesty did not
grant any one Letter of Marque, nor betake himself to any way of force for the
obtaining of their reparation and satisfaction; But instead thereof, for an
everlasting memorial of his great kindness and good will toward this Country,
and for the facilitating of the bringing to a Conclusion the late Treaty with
them (finding the Complaints and Pretensions of His Subjects to be so numerous
and great) was pleased after all to suffer very many of them, and those to a
vast value, to be utterly mortified and extinguished; and the rest (except the
business of the Ships Bonadventure, and Bon-Esperanza) after so much money and
time had been already expended in the pursuit thereof, and many of them ready
for a determination, to be pu^ in a LIST, and proceeded upon anew according to
the fifteenth Article thereof; no ways doubting, but that all possible speed
would have thereupon been used in bringing the matter to an issue and that for
the future better order would have been observed to*wards His Subjects. But
having waited now above 27 Months sinc^ the Conclusion of the said Treaty and
in that time their Lordship being continually called upon b^ His said Majesty's
Envoy Extraordinary, yea by His Majesty Himself in several Audiences to their
Ambassador: Yet so it is, that thos^ matters are still so far from being ended,
that in truth they seem to be now rather further from it, than at the day of
the signing of the said Treaty; and on the other side, new injuries daily
heaped, and the same Designs of the East and West-Indie-Companies carried on
for the utter overthrow of all the Trade of His Majesty's Subjects in those
parts of the world, as appeared by the business of the Ships Hopewell, Leopard,
and other Ships in the East Indies, and by the business of the Charles, James,
Mary, Sampson, Hopeful, Adventurer, Speedwel, etc. upon the Coast of Africa.
All which are matters happened since the Conclusion of the said Treaty. And after
all this, and notwithstanding His Parliaments application to Him upon the
account of His aggrieved Subjects, in so solemn and extraordinary a manner; His
Majesty was yet so far from being inclined to any other than ways of
accommodation, as that he did by a public Writing, or Declaration, declare,
That he would yet try what could be done by amicable endeavors at the Hague,
before he would make use of any other means; (the which was also very well
known to their Lordships) and did thereupon accordingly give orders to his
Envoy Extraordinary, to press them afresh: And further to make out his
peaceable and moderate intentions, and to take off all umbrage from their
Lordships, to let them know (as accordingly he did in public Conferences with
their Deputies) That His Majesty would not in any kind trouble their Fleets
which they then expected from the Streights and East Indies, nor their
Fisheries upon his Coasts; yea, further to put them out of all doubt, ordered a
far less equipage of Shipping for the Summer-guard than had been known these
many years: But all this was so far from working the desired and intended
effect, as that on the contrary their Lordships betook themselves to Arms in an
extraordinary manner, ordering the fitting out with all speed a great Fleet,
and hundreds of Carpenters forthwith dispatched to work upon it night and day
(holy days as well as working-days); whereby His Majesty seeing Himself wholly
defeated of His good intentions; and instead of satisfaction for His Subjects,
braved and threatened with those equipages, which could have no other regard but
upon Himself, was at last enforced for His own defense, (though very much
contrary to His inclinations and intentions) to arm also.

And whereas it may be pretended, as if their Lordships having fitted Their
Fleet, did desire that His Majesty would be pleased (for avoiding of all
inconveniences) to keep His Fleet within His Harbors, and that then they would
keep in Theirs also; It is to be considered, that This Proposition was not made
until that they had actually put to Sea a Fleet near as numerous as the whole
that His Majesty was equipping, and which was actually gone toward His Coasts:
so that this could not but be construed to be rather a mocquery, than
otherwise, for that thereby they had a Fleet at Sea to do what they pleased,
and in the mean while His Majesty had tied His own hands, and obliged Himself
to keep within doors; but he was yet pleased to assure them, that His (if it
did go out) should not do them the least injury; still, in the mean while,
pressing here at the Hague by His Minister, and Himself urging their Ambassador
at London, to hasten the dispatch of the matters in difference: And as a
further testimony of His desires of living in good Correspondence with This
Country, He did declare His willingness to enter into a Treaty for the better
regulating of the Trade and Navigation of both, and the prevention of such
disorders for the future; and for the quicker dispatch and ripening of so good
a work, a project thereof was in His Name tendered to them long ago, and yet to
this day not one word of answer thereupon.

And if it be also true (as it is) that their Lordships began the seizing of
Ships in these Parts, stopping the Ship from Gottenburg bound for London; and
though pressed again and again to set her at liberty, yet still retained her,
and to this day not so much as a word of answer why, or upon what account.

These things being so, can there be any doubt who is the Attacquer or
Aggressor? unless it must be held for a Maxim, That let their Lordships and
Their Subjects deal with His asoresaid Majesty and His Subjects from time to
time, and from year to year, as they please, yet they are not Attacquers or
Aggressors; but if His Majesty or His Subjects, after never so many years
sufferings, and all amicable endeavors first tried, to have obtained their
satisfaction, without to this very day having been able to obtain it in any of
those numerous cases of piracy and violence committed by the people of This
Country against them, whereof complaint has been made from time to time unto
their Lordships by His Majesty's Minister: If after all, any thing be done by
them toward the righting of themselves, His Majesty must be called and reputed
the Attacquer and the Aggressor. Let their Lordships make out, That the
Complaints in the said Memorial are ungrounded, and His Majesty will yield unto
them: but if otherwise, Who will think it strange if at last something be done
toward the righting of them.

And as to the Particulars mentioned in the said Paper to have been suffered by
them from the English* though those matters have not been treated of between
their Lordships and the said Envoy Extraordinary, but between the King his
Master and their Ambassador at London; so that it is not properly his business
to reply thereunto, but to refer them to that Answer which His Majesty has
promised to give concerning the same; yet seeing their Lordships have been
pleased not only to mention and insist thereupon in the aforesaid Paper, but
indeed to say nothing else by way of answer to the Complaints in his Memorial;
he cannot but say thus much thereunto.

That the Places and Ships said to be taken from them, were all belonging to
the West-Indie-Company of this Country, and nothing complained of in the paper
to have been taken from them belonging to any else of These Countries: And when
it shall be considered, that in the LIST of Damages alone, there appears to
have been near twenty English Ships successively, within a very few years
before the conclusion of the late Treaty, taken in a Hostile manner upon the
Coast of Africa, only by the Shipping of the said West-Indie-Company, with
their whole Lading, to a very great value; and not only so, but the men that
belonged to them, very many of them most barbarously and inhumanly treated, put
into most stinking dungeons and holes at Casteldelmina, there to lie in the
midst of their own excrements, nothing but bread and water given them, and
thereof not enough to sustain Nature; their bodies tortured with exquisite and
horrid tortures; and when any of them dyed, the living and the dead left
together; and such as escaped, turned out to perish by hunger or wild beasts in
those miserable Countries, or to be carried away Captives by the Natives; by
which means, several hundreds of His Majesty's good Subjects have perished and
been destroyed. And to this hour, notwithstanding all solicitations and
endeavors, not one penny of satisfaction given to the persons concerned in any
of the said Ships; And ever since the Conclusion of the said Treaty, Ships of
War have been kept by the said Company upon the said Coasts; which though they
have not proceeded so far as to take more of the Shipping of His Majesty's
Subjects, yet they have done that which is equivalent, and as ruinous to that
Trade; stopping and hindering every one that they met withal from all Commerce;
and to that effect pursuing them in an hostile manner from place to place: And
wherever any English anchored by them, hindering and shooting at, and taking
by force, with their Ladings, all Boats of the Navies that endeavored to come
aboard them, and their Boats that would go on shore; yea, depriving them of so
much as any provision or refreshment of fresh water (as appears by the
Complaints made by the said Envoy Extraordinary from time to time to their
Lordships concerning the same): And publishing a Declaration in the Name as
well of the States General, as of the said Company, wherein they deduce their
right to that whole Coast, to the exclusion of all other Nations: And
notwithstanding all Complaints to their Lordships, neither the said Declaration
disavowed, nor any thing of Satisfaction given, but still new Complaints
coming; and among others, that of their having stirred up the King of Fantine
by rewards and sums of money given him to that end; and supplying him with all
sorts of Arms and Ammunition for the surprise of His Majesty's Castle at
Cormantine in those parts; concerning which also proofs have been since given
to their Lordships by the said Envoy Extraordinary; so that there was an
absolute necessity imposed upon His Majesty and His Subjects, either of losing
all that had been actually taken from them, and withal abandoning for ever that
Trade it self; or otherwise of betaking themselves to some other ways for their
relief. And it will rather be thought strange that their patience did hold out
so long, than that now at last something should be done toward the righting of
themselves.

Besides, as to the business of Capo Corco, Did not the same Envoy
Extraordinary long ago complain in the Name, and by Order of the King his
Master, in public Conferences both with the Deputies of their Lordships the
Estates General, and also with those of Holland in particular, of the injurious
possessing and keeping of that place by those of the said West-Indie-Company,
deducing and remonstrating at large his Master's Right thereunto, the ground
having been bought by His Subjects of the King of That Country, for a valuable
consideration, and a Lodge or Factory built thereupon; and those of the West
Indie Company of this Country being got into the possession of the place merely
by fraud and treachery; but no reflection made thereupon by their Lordships,
much less any hopes given of ever obtaining any restitution from them. And
indeed, if His Majesty had not been able to rescue out of their hands the least
Boat or penyworth of Goods since His Return to His Kingdoms (concerning which
complaint had been made by His Envoy Extraordinary, of its being forceably
taken by them from His Subjects) what hopes of their quitting to Him any such
place? especially remembering that business of the Island of Poleroon in the
East Indies, which has been a restoring by them ever since the year 1622, at
which time it was by solemn and particular Treaty promised to be done; and
again, by another Treaty, in the year 1654: and by Orders of the Estates
General and East-Indie-Company of this Country, in the year 1661: and again,
by Treaty in the year 1662: and yet to this day we know nothing of its being
delivered: And can it be thought strange, if invited thereunto by the King of
the said Country, that His Majesty should after so fair warning condescend to
suffer His Subjects to endeavor to re-possess themselves thereof?

And as to the business of New Netherland (so called) this is very far from
being a surprise, or any thing of that nature; it being notoriously known, that
That spo^ of Land lies within the limits, and is part of the possession of His
Subjects of New England, (as appears most evidently by their Charter) and that
those few Dutch that have lived there, have lived there merely upon connivence
and sufferance, and not as having any right thereunto; and that this has from
time to time, and from year to year, been declared unto them, but yet so as
that the English were contented to suffer them to remain there, provided they
would demean themselves peaceably and quietly: but that the said Dutch, not
contenting themselves therewith, did still endeavor to encroach further and
further upon the English, imposing their Laws and Customs, and endeavoring to
raise Contributions and Excises upon them, and in places where no Dutch were or
had ever been: Whereupon they have formerly been necessitated several times to
send Soldiers for the repelling of them.

And as to what is said in the said Paper, as if though the English should
formerly have had any pretense to the said place, that yet the said pretense is
cut off by the fifteenth Article of the late Treaty. To this he does Reply,
That That Article does only cut off matters of Piracies, Robberies, and
Violence; but as to the Rights and Inheritances of Lands and Jurisdictions,
that it does not at all concern or intermeddle with the same. And that this is
so, there needs no other Argument but the producing of several Examples out of
their own Courts of Justice, whereby it will appear, that indeed as to the
Plundering and taking of Ships, or the like, that all such causes (if happened
before the time limited in the said Treaty) did cease upon the Conclusion
thereof; but as to such as were then depending concerning the Inheritances of
Lands, that they have still continued to be pursued: As for Example, The Case
of Sir Thomas Lower, an English Man, for certain Lands claimed by him in
Zealand. Besides, those of New Neather-Lands, had since the Conclusion of the
Late Treaty, made new Incursions upon the English, and given them many new
provocations; and by their Charters they have Jura Belli within Themselves,
without Appealing first into Europe: And if after all this, His Majesty has
suffered them according thereunto to rescue themselves from such continued
Vexations and Mischiefs; Can Any Prince think it strange, or be surprised
thereat, much less the most Christian King? (For whose Satisfaction this Paper
seems to be more particularly Calculated): Whereas He has been pleased this
very same year, to Order or Suffer (with his Privity) His Subjects to
Re-possess themselves in like manner by Force and Arms, of a certain Place
called Cayenne, which they pretend to have been wrongfully possessed and kept
from them by the same West-Indie-Company.

And as to the business of Cabo Verde, and the taking of their Ships, and what
else is alleged to have been done in those parts (except that of Cabo Corco):
'Twas but in the Month of June last, that the first Complaint was made thereof
to His Majesty; and did he not immediately return for Answer, That He had given
no Order or Direction to Captain Holmes (the Person complained of) for the
doing thereof: That he did expect him Home very speedily; and that, upon his
Return, he would cause those matters to be Examined, and Right to be done them,
and the Offenders punished? And did not the said Envoy Extraordinary upon the
Twenty seventh day of July last, deliver a Memorial to them to the like Effect?
And could more be said or done for their Satisfaction? Yea, could their
Lordships Themselves within their own Countries demand more of any of their
Schepens, or most Inferior Court of Justice? And does not the Fourteenth
Article of the Late Treaty say in express Terms, that In case any thing should
happen upon the Coast of Africa, either by Sea or Land, that Twelve Months time
shall be given after Complaint, for the doing of Justice: Yet did they not
within about Six or Seven weeks after; Resolve to send a Considerable Fleet of
Theirs into those Parts, to the number of Ten Men of War (besides the Ships of
the said West-Indie-Company) under the Command of one Van Campen, and
strengthened with a Considerable Body of their Milice, under the Command of one
Hertsberg? And did they not within about Six or Seven Weeks after that, put a
Resolution into the hands of the said Envoy Extraordinary, by their Agent de
Heyde, and about the same time give it to the King his Master, by their
Ambassador at London, Denoting and containing the Instruction given to the said
Van Campen?

And whereas they are pleased to Complement His Most Christian Majesty in the
said Paper, as if upon his score in hopes of the good effects of his good
Offices for the Accommodating of Matters, and for the making their Cause the
more clear, they had hitherto forborne the Proceeding against His Majesty's
Subjects as they might have done: Is it not therein expressly Declared and set
Down, that That force was not sent thither barely to Defend what they had, and
to take Care that nothing more should be Attempted upon them; but in downright
Terms, to Attacque and Fall upon His Majesty's Subjects, and to Carve out their
own Satisfaction and Reparation; And to pass by His doors for the doing
thereof? And that, Seconded and Backed with another Great Fleet under their
Chief Sea-Officers; An Affront and Indignation too great for the Name of King
to Suffer and Digest without Just Resentment.

And moreover, whereas their Lordships had lately invited His Majesty of Great
Britain, and other Christian Princes, to send Fleets into the Mid-land-Sea to
Act jointly against those Barbarians; And that he did accordingly Declare unto
them (in Writing, and by his Envoy Extraordinary) his Intentions of Sending,
and that his Fleet should Act Junctis Consiliis with theirs: Yet so it is, that
while it was Acting there, Pursuant thereunto, and in Expectation of being
Seconded and Appuyed by theirs, according to their Promise, De Ruyther was on a
sudden Commanded thence.

And whereas their Lordships would make the World believe that they had
proceeded with such Singular and Extraordinary Franchise and Clearness toward
his said Majesty, in Communicating their Intentions and Designs (as abovesaid);
Yet, Is it not evident, that the said Orders must have been given to De Ruyther
much about the same time?

And though Sir John Lawson and his Majesty's Fleet happened to be in the same
Port with De Ruyther when he quitted those Parts yet neither did he in the
least impart unto him his intentions of quitting the same, or whither he was
going; and though the King of Great Britain has since, several times pressed
their Ambassador at London to be Informed whither he was gone, and upon what
account; yet to this day his Majesty has not been able to obtain any
Satisfaction or Assurance concerning that matter: Whereupon, and all other
Circumstances being laid together, He has just reason to suppose and believe,
that he is sent and employed against Him; And that while His Majesty was
continuing (according to common Consent and Agreement between them) His Fleet
against the Common Enemies of the very Name of CHRISTIAN; and at a season, when
it more than ordinarily becomed every one to show something of their zeal
against them; Theirs is called off, and turned against Him. Nor is it to be
imagined that De Ruyther's Instructions, which are Concealed, should be more
Favorable than those which were Avowed to be given to Van Campen.

And is it then to be wondered, that His Majesty shows Himself a little
Concerned? Or is it now to be doubted, who is the Attacquer or Aggressor? And
if De Ruyther is in one part of the World making War against Him; What is to
be said against it, if His Majesty not having at this time in those Parts a
suitable Force to Resist him, does make use of what he has nearer home to
endeavor to secure himself, or to get something of theirs into his hands Does
either Common Right, or H^^ Majesty's Treaty with This Country oblige to seek
Satisfaction only i^ that part of the World where the Injury is done? and so
does tha^ at all alter the Case, because the their Forces acting against Hi^
out of Europe, His do something against Them, in Europe?

His Majesty has been very fa^ from beginning with them in an^ Part of the
World; but if at the time they are Actually with a Considerable Fleet of the
Estates falling upon Him, and His Subjects and He has thereupon given Order to
the stopping of some o^ their Ships in These Parts; Will not all the World
Justify His Majesty herein? And when withal, Themselves also began the
stopping of Ships in These Parts, and that He has all those reasons of
Complaint against them abovementioned.

Given at the Hague this 16 of September, 1664. G. DOWNING.

Of the cruel Ingratitude, Infidelity, and Insufferable Wrongs of the Dutch.
THere are so many pressing Arguments, for the justness of this War, against
the Dutch, and so generally known, that this Treatise will seem needless, and
impertinent; however it will not be amiss in this juncture, to revive the
memory of such execrable Cruelties, horrid Ungratitude, and insufferable
Wrongs, and Abuses, the Dutch have exercised from time to time against us, to
the intent I may irritate, and provoke further the already enraged Spirits of
such English, wh^ are willing to sacrifice their lives in the preservation of
the Honor, an^ Safety of their King and Country.

It is not so long since, but it easily remembered, who were the Rise, who under
God was the Maker, and yet durst the Ingratitud^ of these Hogens, prompt them
to draw a sword against Him, that gav^ them being, and to whom they ow^ their
being now in a condition of making this dispute about the Dominion of these
Seas. And contend for the right of the Flagg, whereas it is b^^ as yesterday
they had Licenses, an^ for a Tribute, to fish therein, grante^ them by his
Majesty's Royal Predecessors. O insufferable impudence for Mushroom States to
struggle with their Maker! Caesar endured with out exclamation the Senators
Pon^ yards, as whetted by a seeming jus^ revenge; but when that of his own Imp
Brutus was presented against him, he covered his face, leaving the World with
no less shame, then indignation, against so much unnatural Ingratitude: should
Millions of such Barbarismes now crowd together, they would be all outdone by
these peoples Inhumanities.

It would make your heart bleed, were you at Palaroon, to read there the
inexpressible Cruelties of the Dutch written in bloody Capitals, what
unconceivable Conspiracies did they contrive against the English in America, to
their utter ruin and extirpation. But above all, who can forget those
unspeakable Tortures the Dutch inflicted on the bodies of the English in
Amboyna, and afterward cruelly butchered them: the Memory whereof, whilst Sun
and Moon shall run their Heavenly course, or an English Spirit breath, can
never be forgot, nay scarce forgiven.

If we consider how loud and pressing the cry of blood is, or with what high
severity God ever proceeds against it, though his wrath for some small time may
seem to be a sleep, we have just cause to believe that there is a heavy account
must be given by the Dutch, for that execrable Tyranny of theirs, executed upon
the English in that place; and am almost fully persuaded, that the time is now
come, wherein his most Gracious Majesty, by the effusion of the blood of
Hollanders, shall endeavor to appease our incensed God, for the innocent blood
of ours, which was plentifully spilt by them, as well in other parts, as both
the Indies.

To take away a man's life without the course of Justice, though it be with the
greatest civility, and easiness of death imaginable, is a crimson crime, and
which God has denounced Murder, and will punish accordingly; but to heighten,
and multiply a death, withal the previous Tortures that a passionate
Diabolical Malice can invent, Cruelty inflict, or the frame of Man's body
undergo, is so far from being Manly or Christian, that it is beyond Savageness
and Bestiality, and Approaches that accursed frame of spirit, that He has
plunged himself into, who sits in the horrid seats of darkness.

I shall only, briefly touch upon some particulars of this bloody History, as
not delighting in such speculations, which acquaint the mind with Extremities,
and Criticisms of sin, a relation which has brutishly outdone all former
Records, and Examples of Cruelty.

There happening some differences in the Indies, between the Supposts of the
English and Dutch Companies, a Treaty was agreed on in London in the Year 1613.
Another at the Hague 1615. But neither effected any thing to purpose; however
1619. There was a solemn composition of all those differences, and a Method
laid down for their future proceeding, as well in Trade as otherwise; but in
consideration of the blood and cost (as was pretended) the Hollander was at, in
the expulsion of Spaniards and Portugalls out of the Isles of the Moluccoes,
etc. And for the building Forts for the suture security of the same, it was
agreed on, that they should enjoy two Thirds of the Trade, the English the
Third, and that the said Forts should be maintained by Taxes leavied on the
Merchandise: their chief Fort was at Amboyna, where the English had planted
five Factories, the head of all the rest; a place of considerable strength, for
it had four Bulwarks, with their Curtains; and upon each of these Points, six
great Pieces of Ordnance mounted, most Brass, the one side thereof is washed
with the Sea, and the other divided from the Land, with a Ditch of five Fathom
broad, very deep, and always filled with the Sea; in this Fort there were two
hundred Dutch Soldiers, and a Company of free Burghers, besides four hundred
Mardikers, (as they call them) in the Town ready to serve this Fort or Castle
at an hours warning; they having withal, several tall Ships in the Harbor,
for Traffic, and defense.

The English had here in this Town, an house of their own, in which they lived
under the Protection of the Castle, for two Years after the Treaty, and in
respect thereof in amity on their sides with the Dutch. But after this time
several debates arose, and by reason of the treacherous and unjust proceedings
of the Dutch, the just and miserable complaints of the English were dispacht
away to Jaccatra, now called Nova Battavia, where their grievances being not
heard, they were sent into England, and discussed with Holland, but no
favorable result hence accrewed. Hereupon the differences increasing, a sword
was found by the Hollander to cut asunder what their tedious disputes could not
untie. On the eleventh of February 1622. In the Fort, the Sentinel secured upon
suspicion an inquisitive Japoner, who was put to the Torture, and thereupon he
confessed, that He, and several of his Countrymen, had plotted the surprising
of the Castle: upon this, other Japoners were tortured and examined, who
confessed the like; during the time of this Torture, which was four days,
several of the English went to the Castle, partly to do business, and partly to
see these supposed Malefactors, not dreaming they were in the least concerned,
having never had any converse with any of these Prisoners.

There was at the same time in the Castle, a debauched Englishman, who for
offering to set a Dutchmans house a fire, was confined, and him they showed the
grievously* tortured Japoners, telling him withal, that they had consessed
that the English were joined with them, in this confederacy; assuring him, if
he would not confess the like, he should be worse served; upon the Torture he
confessed, as the rest had done: hereupon they instantly sent for what English
there was in Amboyna to come immediately to the Governor, who obeyed the
Summons; but they were no sooner entered the Castle, but secured, and sharply
charged by the Governor, with this conspiracy, having so done, they seized
the Merchandise of the English-company, into their own custody, with all their
Books and Writings; nor did they omit securing the English in the rest of the
Factories, whom they all threatened with the Torture, if they would not confess,
what ever the Governor and the Fiscal would have them, the Major part being
fully resolved to stand to the truth, received their Hellish Torture, but the
punishment was to great for man to bear, and so by their confessions helped the
Dutch to murder themselves, as well as their poor innocent Countrymen. Judge
you by the manner following of their insufferable Torture, whether these poor
Souls would not say any thing, nay dye willingly to be freed from it; thus they
used them, first they hoised the Prisoner up by the hands with a cord, on a
large door, where they made him fast with two staples of Iron fixed on both
sides, on the top of the door posts, extending his hands one from the other, as
wide as they could stretch them; being thus made fast, his feet hung about two
foot from the ground, which having extended as wide as they could, they fastened
them to the Door Trees on each side; then they bound a cloth about his neck
and face, so close no water should pass by; that done, they poured the water
sostly on his head, until the cloth was full up to the mouth, and nostrils,
and somewhat higher; so that he could not draw breath, but must withal suck in
the water, which being still continued to be poured in softly, forced all his
internal parts, so that the water came out of his Nose, Ears, and Eyes; and
often, as it were stifling and choking him, at length taking away his breath,
he falls into a swound; then taking him down quickly, they make him vomit up
his water: being a little recovered, they triced him up again, and poured in
the water, taking him down thus five or six times, as often as they saw him
faint: by this means his Body would swell twice or thrice as big as before, his
Cheeks like great Bladders, and his Eyes staring and strutting out beyond his
Forehead; after this, as they found him obstinate in the maintenance of the
truth, they would trice him up again, and with lighted Candles burn him in the
bottoms of the Feet, until the Fat thereof dropped out the Candles, yet for all
that apply fresh Candles; burning him under the Elbows, and in the palms of the
Hands, as also under the Armpits, until his inwards might be plainly seen.

Having by their extorted and forced confessions, accused one the other, they
were all thrown into a loathsome Dungeon, where having lain a while, they were
brought to the Castle-yard, where they received Sentence of Death; before their
suffering, they desired to take the Sacrament in Testimony of their innocence,
but it was denied them; however, they all Unanimously called Men and Angels to
witness, they dyed innocent of that Conspiracy was laid to their charge.

As I wish the occasion of publishing this at first had never been, so I wish
Justice once had, the remembrance hereof may be for ever buried. But this
breach being National, and to this day but in part satisfied (by some signal
Victories obtained over them, before and since his Majesty's happy
Restoration) and the blood there and elsewhere by them spilt, no doubt still
crying loud, it had been injust in the first publisher to have buried it in
silence; and a great sin of forgetfulness in not reviving the remembrance; for
as the beginning of these torments were from a causeless and slight suspicion
of an improbable and ineffective plot, so by that means were we forced from our
possessions in those parts, and the injury became complicated both against
Justice and Interest.

I cannot but add unto their cruelty, the extreme malice they bore to the
English in those parts; Polaroon, one of the Islands of Banda, was taken by the
Dutch, notwithstanding according to the Treaty 1619. they knew it was to remain
in the possession of the English; but knowing withal, that it must be restored
again, they exercise all the Malice in that Island, Hells consistory could
assist them with: they first take all courses to make the Island little or
nothing worth: they demolish and deface the Buildings, transplant the
Nutmegtrees, plucking them up by the roots, and carrying them into their own
Islands, of Nera and Poloway, burning what Trees they thought unfit for
Transplantations; nay, at last they found away to dispeople the Island, and to
leave it so, that the English might make no use of it, worth their charge of
keeping it. To effect which, they entertain a Runaway, the Son of an Orankey
or Gentleman of Polaroon, who having committed some notorious fact, which
deserved death, fled to the Dutch at Nera, acquainting the Governor, that the
Polaroons had a design with the help of the People of Serran in their
Curricurries, to massacree all the Dutch in Polaroon, and Polaway. Immediately
upon the indicium of this Malefactor, the Governor sent for the Orankes to
him, of whom seventy came, which he secured, they knowing nothing of his
design; and presently sent two hundred Men to Polaroon to secure the rest;
having taken them Prisoners and brought to the Castle at Nera, they were
secured with water and fire, as afterward those of Amboyna were; two dyed on
the Torture, and the rest, which were one Hundred and sixty, upon their own
forced confessions, were condemned and executed; the Women were forthwith
removed from Palaroon, and distributed into other Islands, subject to the
Dutch, leaving that place destitute of the help of the Country people, without
whom, neither the Dutch nor English, can maintain their Trade in the Indies.

Neither did their Treacheries, Wrongs, and Abuses, center here only, but
strecht themselves out from East to the West Indies, practicing and
perpetrating such inhumanities and injuries, as are not fit for Christians to
nominate. For instance, be pleased to observe, that the Colonies of
New England, consisting of several Governments, have the Dutch settled on the
South-west of them, at the Manatha's or the New-Netherlands; and the French to
the North-east, along the great River of Canada, who till of late have held a
Friendly correspondence, and have afforded each other a mutual assistance
against the common Enemy, the barbarous Indians.

About the Year 1646. the Dutch being reduced to a great exigence, and strait,
by the Indians: implored the English aid and assistance, which immediately was
sent them, under the command of one Captain Underhil, a Gentleman of excellent
Courage, Prudence, and Conduct, who prizing Christian blood, beyond Indian
Wealth and Treasure, (being proffered an Hog shead of their Wampam Pege, Indian
Money, to withdraw the English Forces,) slighted their offer, and fell on those
Infidels, in vindication of the Dutch, cutting off in one night, fourteen
hundred of them, not without the loss of English blood considerably, and all to
resettle (with the Assistance of the Almighty,) the Hollander in Peace and
Safety.

But Ingratitude over-clouding these Heroic Actions, and their accustomed
Treacherous, and barbarous Cruelty, extending it self from East to West,
running in its proper Channel of Dutch infidelity, quickly sought out their
Neighbors, their noble Friends and Defenders, the English: and nothing would
serve the turn, but that they must return Destruction, for being the happy
instruments of their then and former preservation; this their unworthy
inequality of retribution (without putting into the balance their former and
latter inexpressible ingratitudes) is enough to Chronicle the Hollander,
Perfidious, Ungrateful, Bloody, and Cruel.

It is no difficult matter to make it appear, how they about six years after
endeavored to repay the English kindness by their ruin: for in March 1653.
with presents and large promises, they instigated and hired four of the grand
Princes of those Territories, a fierce barbarous and bloody People, fit
Instruments for so horrid a design, on a Sabbath day, when all Families were at
Divine Worship unexpectedly to fall on the English and to burn and slay what
possibly they could; and for the better perfecting this Diabolical Plot, they
supplied the Indians with Arms and Ammunition, which were dispersed in all
their habitations, they having a Ship sent them on purpose from Holland, with
all necessary tools, for the acting a second Amboyna Tragedy.

But the Omnipotent God (who has ever been a most merciful Protector of the
English in those parts, as in the Pequet War, etc.) did through his infinite
goodness, most timely, before the bloody day of acting, cause an Indian that
should have been an Executioner, to be a revealing Deliverer, who informed the
Magistrates of Boston, of the Dutch and Indians bloody intentions; whereupon
they requested several Merchants of that Town, with all expedition, to march
forth toward the Indian habitations, to see what they could discover. The first
Wigwambs or Indian Houses they searched, they found them full of Arms and
Ammunition, (which have ever been prohibited the Indians by the English) all
their Muskets were charged with Powder and Ball, which, with some of the
principal Indians, were carried to Boston; who upon examination confessed the
Dutch had set them a work: all that we could then do, was but to put our
selves in our best Posture of Defense.

Having thus given you a summary account of some of their cruelties, I cannot
omit one particular passage, Chronicled by themselves, wherein you may see in
the cruel disposition of one, the bloody inclination of the whole Flemish
Nation.

At the Siedg of Leyden, a Fort being held by the Spanish Party, was after
taken by the Dutch by assault or storm. The Defendants according to the Law of
Arms, were put to the sword, where one of the Dutch, in the fury of the
slaughter, ripped up the Captains body, and with a barbarous hand tore out the
yet living heart, panting among the reeking bowels; then with his teeth rent
it, still warm with blood, into gobbets, which he did spit over the
Battlements, in defiance to the rest of the Army.

Now as we have with brevity displayed the cruelty and treachery of the Nature
and Actions of the Hollander, both at home and abroad, so we must not forget
what has been by them committed, since the year 1660. At which time it was his
Majesty's particular care, to conclude a strict League with the States General
of the United Provinces, upon such equal Terms as would certainly not have been
broken, if any Obligations could have kept them within the bounds of Justice,
or Friendship: this League was inviolably kept and maintained on his. But in
the year 1664. such and so many were the Kings Decl.
complaints of his Majesty's Subjects, abused and wronged by the ungrateful
Hollander, that the King, with the Unanimous vote of both Houses of Parliament,
was provoked to war, finding it a vain attempt to endeavor the prosperity of
the three Kingdoms, by peaceable ways at home, whilst the People thereof were
still exposed to the injuries and oppressions of the States abroad. His Majesty
spent a whole Summer in negotiations and endeavors, to bring them to
reasonable terms* which, notwithstanding all He could do proved at length
ineffectual, for the more his Majesty pursued them with friendly Propositions,
the more obstinately and unworthily they kept off from agreeing thereunto: upon
this ensued the War, in the year 1665. and continued to the year 1667. in all
which time our Victories and their Losses were memorable enough, to put them in
mind of being more faithful to their Leagues for the future.

Which Victories they endeavored to stifle by misreporting them conquests to
their People, over the their gallantly equipt English Navy; and particularly
that of the third of June, 1665. under the conduct of his Royal Highness the
Duke of York, Narrative whereof was Printed for general satisfaction, and to
preven^ misreports, which are commonly through ignorance, or malice, begotten
upon occasions of that Nature: and lest that signal Victory should be
forgotten, in short, it was this; the Dutch Fleet was brought on our Coasts (in
all probability) rather in expectation of finding Ours in disorder, upon the
proceeding foul weather, or by the Reports of our unreadiness; then from their
own innate Valor, but they were much mistaken, for it cost his Royal Highness
but little time to make ready, his foregoing care, and the cheerfulness of our
men, having prevented all hazard of disorder, and the happy arrival of the
Colliers, having supplied us with, what we only wanted, Men, but not Courage:
the Dutch, perceiving this, stood off to Sea, the number of their Ships being
one Hundred and ten Sail, besides ten Fire Ships; we followed them till that
Evening, and the next day forced them to fight: upon the whole matter, it
pleased God to give his Majesty a great and signal Victory, the Enemy being
driven into the Texe^ as far as the draught of water, and the condition of our
Ships would permit, the day being also very far spent the sum of all is, the
Enemie^ whole Fleet was defeated, Thirty of them burnt or taken, Opdam with his
Ship, blown up, as is supposed by a lucky shot in the Powder-room; most of
their Admirals killed, with many more of their Principal Officers; and
according to their general computation, eight Thousand Seamen and Soldiers; on
our side only one Ship lost, with some other slight damage. The God of Heaven
be praised for preserving his Royal Highness, to be the great instrument of so
signal a success, and continuing him to the perfecting this great work in hand,
to the honor of his Majesty, and the welfare of his People.

And that you may trace them farther, in their unworthiness and ingratitude,
this Victory, with the fear of being made no People, had no sooner brought them
on their knees, and his Majesty out of his accustomed Clemency, and
Commiseration, had received them into favor, by making Peace with them, but
they returned to their usual custom, of breaking Articles, and supplanting our
Trade. For instance, the States were particularly engaged, in an Article of the
Treaty at Breda, to send Commissioners to his Majesty at London, about the
Regulation of our Trade, in the East Indies, but they were so far from doing it
on that obligation, that when an Ambassador was sent over, to put them in mind
of it, He could not in three years time, get from them any satisfaction, in the
material points, nor a forbearance of the wrongs his Majesty's Subjects
received in those parts.

To give you an account of every particular wrong, and injury, the English
suffered by the Dutch, in their East India factory, would be a Task as
difficult to do, as to tell the spokes of a running Coachwheele; let it
suffice, his Majesty is thoroughly sensible of them, from the just and
miserable complaints of the Sufferers, and will now with Gods Assistance, now
call them to a severe account, for all their insufferable wrongs and abuses,
which the East could not contain; and therefore they went a little farther in
the West Indies.

For by an Article in the same Treaty, his Majesty was to restore Surinam into
their hands, and by Articles upon the Place confirmed by that Treaty, they were
to give liberty to all the King of Englands subjects, in that Colony, to
transport themselves, and their Estates, into any other of his Majesty's
Plantations. In pursuance of this agreement, the place was delivered up, and
yet they detained all our men in it, only one emiminent Person they sent away
prisoner, for but desiring to remove according to the Articles.

To what a height will this insolence and perfidiousness of theirs arrive to,
if not timely checked and prevented? How arrogant and presumptious will they
be, if the bladder of their pride, blown up with violence, and oppression, be
not suddenly pricked, and so let out the airy opinion of their supposed
strength, and greatness; I know not what their arrogance and ambition, may
prompt their precipitate endeavors, but if they think that our God above is
deaf, and does not hear the loud cries of the injured, and oppressed, and that
his Vicegerent, here on Earth, the King of England, will not endeavor the
redress of his abused Person and People, they are worse then that impudent
Impostor, who in despite of his Savior, threw his dagger into the air, as if
he would have stabbed Heaven therewith, but was at last forced to confess,
Vincisti me Galilaee.

They will now find, I hope, a good God to direct a great and gracious Prince,
how to punish such a vild and ungrateful People: not so supinous or careless,
as the Dutch abusively have pictured him, with his hand in his Pockets, as an
idle-spectator, looking on his Ships as they burned at Chatham. I confess it
was a sudden hot Feverish fit, and unexpected but let them have a care they
have not many thousand shaking cold ones for it.

-- Nec Surdum, nec Tiresiam quenquam esse Deorum. -- They Will find None of the
Gods are either deaf or blind. But to return where I left off, my passion
carrying me a little from my present subject, though not from the present
purpose. Our Ambassador complaining of this behavior, after two years
solicitation, obtained an Order for the performance of these Articles, but
Commissioners being sent, and two Ships to bring our Men away, the Hollanders
according to their former practices, sent private Orders contradictory to these
they had owned in public, whereby our Commissioners journey thither, was to no
other effect, then to bring away the poorer sort of people, and the prayers and
cries of the wealthier for releif out of that captivity. Whither this practice
participate not of the Nature of Hell, I will give any rational Man leave to
judge; since the mouth of that infernal place stands always gaping to receive,
but will let none out. Thus notwithstanding his Majesty made complaints by
Letters, to the States of Holland, of this unjust detention, yet never received
one word of satisfaction.

It is not to be wondered that they venture on these outrages upon the English
in remote parts, when they dare be so bold, with his Majesty's Royal Person, in
their abusive pictures, so grossly, that as it is not fit to be named; so none
but a beastly boarish Flemming would do it. But let De Wit look to it, he that
would have the States of Hollands Arms over his head, and that of England
pictured under his feet, I question not but he will find that the Belgic Lion
with his cracked Sheafe of Arrows, cannot defend his sides from being gored by
the Enlish Unicorn. Yet still see is in bearing these Majesty was, and still is
in bearing these matchless contumelies and abuses, represented in Pictures,
false Historical Medals, and Pillars, this one would think sufficient to
exasperate his Majesty into an high displeasure, since it is so evilly
rescented by all his Majesty's loving Subjects, and will undoubtedly be
revenged: but his Majesty graciously declares, it is not what relates to his
particular Self, but the safety of our Trade, upon which the wealth and
prosperity of England depends, the preservation of his people abroad from
violence and oppression: and the Hollanders daring to affront us, almost within
our very Ports, which move his just indignation against them; and what
Englishman will not be assisting with his life and estate, in so just a cause,
wherein the honor of his King, and the welfare and safety of all his temporal
concerns consist: surely if we have left any thing of an English spirit, we
cannot but be herein active, and as England never wanted men of courage, so I
hope she will not want power (if confidence may be put in the Arm of flesh) to
chastise the Insolences of our Enemies.

Who would have thought they durst have disputed the right of the Flag, a
Prerogative so Ancient; it was one of the first of his Majesty's Predecessors,
and ought to be the last from which this Kingdom should ever depart; it was
heretofore by them never questioned, and I know not how it should, it was
expressly acknowledged in the Treaty at Breda, and yet it was not only violated
last Summer, but afterward justified and represented by them abroad as
ridiculous for us to demand. His Majestic may well call this an ungrateful
insolence, since in the time of King James, and King Charles, they never left
cringing, till they got a permission to fish in our Narrow Seas, and thought it
an high obligation, although they paid a large Tribute for so doing; large did
I call it! no, but small, considering the vast benefit that did accrue unto
them thereby. And now I think it will not be amiss, here in this place, to give
you some account of this fishingtrade, according to my best information.

The Coasts of Great Britain, do yield such a continual Seaharvest, to all
those who with diligence labor in the same, that no time or season elapseth in
the year, in which industrious men may not employ themselves in fishing, which
continues from the beginning of the year, to the latter end, in some Port or
other upon Coasts; and therein such infinite shoales of Fishes are offered to
the Takers, as may justly move admiration: the Hollander I am sure is not
ignorant hereof.

The Summer fishing for Herrings, begins about Midsummer, and lasts to the
latter end of August: the Winter fishing for Herring, lasts from September to
the midst of November; both which extend from Bughoness in Scotland, to the
Thames mouth.

The fishing for Cod, at Almby, Wirkinton, and White-haven, from Easter to
Whitsontide.

The Fishing of Hake at Haberdeny, Abarswith, and other places between Wales
and Ireland, from Whitsontide to Saint James-tide.

The Fishing of Cod and Ling, about Padstow, within the Lands, and Severn from
Christ-tide, to Midlent.

The Fishing for Cod, on the West part of Ireland, from the beginning of April,
to the latter end of June.

The Fishing of Pilchars, on the West of England from St. Jamestide to
September.

The Fishing for great Scalping, and many other sorts of Fish, about the
Islands of Scotland, and in several parts of the British Seas all the year
long.

And that you may know what plenty of fish we have in our Seas, not many years
since, upon the Coasts of Devonshire, in one day were taken five hundred Tun of
fish, and about the same time three thousand pounds worth of fish in one day,
were taken at St. Ives by Cornwall in small Boats, others of the same Party
adventuring in a Calm, among the Holland Busses, not far from Robinhoods-bay,
returned presently to Whitby, full fraught with Herrings; and reported, that
they saw some of those Busses take ten, twenty, and four and twenty Lasts of
Herrings at a draught, most of them returning with an hundred Lasts of Herrings
in one Buss, into Holland.

At another time it was observed, that a Fleet of Colliers returning from
New Castle to London, about the Well near Flamborough-head, met with such
multitude of Cod, Ling, and Herrings, that one among the rest, drew up in a
small time, as many as were sold for near upon as much as her whole lading of
Coals amounted to, and some hundreds of Ships might have been there laden in
two days and two nights.

Out of which wonderful affluence and abundance of Fish swarming upon our Seas,
that we the better perceive the infinite gain which the Dutch make thereof, and
by that means, how infinitely beholding they unto us, I shall insist upon the
number of fishing Vessels, they have formerly and lately employed upon our
coasts, and by their vast income, how they have increased, in Shipping, in
Mariners, in Trade, in Towns and Fortifications, in Power abroad, in public
Revenue, in private Wealth; and lastly, in all manner of Provisions, and store
of things necessary.

How poor and low these Hoghen Moghens were, in Q. Elizabeth's time, is unknown
to few; at which time France tired with labor, the striving of her own
Children, had caused in the bowels of her state, and child by the cold distrust
conceived of the revolted Hollanders success, (rebelling against their lawful
Sovereign) deserted them into despair, as well as other Neighboring Princes:
then may they remember, how England opened her tender arms, to receive their
Fugitives, and her purse to pay their Soldiers: so that a foot of ground cannot
be called theirs, that owes not a third part to the expense, Valor, or Counsel
of the English, of whom such glorious spirits have expired in their defense, as
have been thought at too too mean a rate, to double the value of what they
thought for.

Did not the English dispute their Title at Ostend, till they had no Earth to
plead on, the very ground failing them before their Valor; yet whilst
fighting there, not only against the Flower of the Spanish Army, but the
Plague, Hunger, and cold despair; so that it may be said without Hyperbole, the
Nobility and Gentry, Queen Elizabeth lost, doubled the number, the cruelty of
Spains great Philip had left you.

The Assistance that wise Queen gave them, was good self-policy; she made them
able to defend themselves against Spain, and was so at the Pole; but they who
enable them to offend others, as her successors have done, have gone beyond it
questionless had this Thorn been removed out of the Spaniards side, he might
have been feared too soon, to grasp his long intended Monarchy, were the
Spaniard possessed Lord of the Low Countries, or had the States General the
wealth and power of Spain, the rest of Europe, might be like a People at Sea,
in a Ship on Fire, that could only choose whither they would drown or burn.

We have cherished this starveling Viper too long in our warm bosoms, and now
does not only hiss at, but endeavor to sting those who brought them to life,
from almost an irremediless condition.

Since we succored them abroad, and gave them leave to fish in our Seas, pray
consider their vast increase of Shipping.

They had many years since, seven hundred Strand-boats, four hundred Evars, and
four hundred Galleys, Drivers and Jod-boats, wherewith the Hollanders fisht on
their Coasts, every one of these employing another Ship, to fetch Salt, and
carry the Fish into their own Country; being in all three thousand sail,
maintaining and setting at work at least forty thousand Persons, Fishers,
Tradesmen, Women, and Children.

Besides they have an hundred Dager-boats, one hundred and fifty tuns a piece,
or thereabouts; seven hundred Pinds and Well-boats, from sixty to an hundred
tuns a piece, which altogether fish upon the Sea of England, and Scotland, for
Cod and Ling only, and these too for the most employ other Ships, to bring them
Salt, and carry the Fish home, making in all sixteen hundred Ships, which
maintain and employ at least four thousand Persons of all sorts. For the
Herring season, they have at least sixteen hundred Busses, all of them only
fishing on our Coasts, and every one of these makes work for three other Ships
which attend her; the one to bring in Salt from foreign parts, the other to
carry that Salt and Cask to the Busses, and to bring back the Herrings, and the
third to transport the said Fish into foreign Countries: so that the total
number plying the Herring-fishing, is six thousand four hundred.

Moreover, they have four hundred Vessels at least, that take Herring at
Yarmouth, and there sell them for ready-money: so that the Hollander (besides
their three hundred Ships fishing on their Coasts) have at least eight thousand
and four hundred Ships only maintained by the Seas of Great Britain, by the
which means principally, Holland being not so big, as one of our Shires in
England, containing not above twenty eight miles in length, and twenty three in
breadth, have increased the number of their Shipping, to at least ten thousand
sail, and to that number they add in a manner daily, although the Country it
self affords them neither Materials, nor Victuals, nor Merchandise to be
accounted of, toward their setting forth.

Secondly, let us consider the increase of their Mariners, from the number of
their Ships, fishing on our Coasts, which as we said before, were eight
thousand four hundred, we must allow more hands to the fishing concern, then
for bare sailing; if suppose ten men to every ship, one with another, the total
of Mariners and Fishers, will amount to fourscore and four thousand; out of
which number, they continually furnish their longer Voyages, to all parts of
the World; for by this they are not only enabled to brook the Sea, and to know
the use of the Tackle and Compass, but are likewise instructed in Trade, and in
the Principles of Navigation and Pilotage; insomuch as their chiefest
Navigators, have had from home their education and breeding: and hence they are
become, as skilful and knowing in all the Sands, Sholes, Creeks and Channels
belonging to our Coasts, as the best of our Pilots.

Thirdly by reason of those multitudes of Ships and Mariners, they have
extended their Trade to all parts of the world, and therein (to speak the
truth,) have out-thrown all ever yet have used the Sea, many Bars length,
exporting in most of their Voyages, Herring and other Fish, returning in
exchange, the several commodities of other Countries.

From the Southern parts, as France, Spain, and Portugal for our Herrings, they
return Oil, Wine, Prunes, Honey, Wool, Grain, with store of foreign coin; from
the Streights, Velvets, Sattins, and all sorts of Silk, Allom, Currants, all
Grocery ware, with much Money.

From the East Country, for our Herrings, they bring home Corn, Wax, Flax,
Hemph, Pitch, Tar, Soap-ashes, Iron, Copper, Steel, Clap-board, Wainscoate,
Masts, Timber, Deal-boards, Polish-dollars, and Hungary-gilders. From Germany,
for Herrings, and other Salt-fish; Iron, Steel, Glass, Millstones,
Rhenish-wines, Battery-plate, for Armor, with other munitions; also Silk,
Velvets, Rashes, Fustians, Poratoes, and such like Frankfort Commodities, with
store of Rixdollars.

From Brabant, they return for the most part ready-Money, with some Tapestries,
Says and Hullshops: yea, some of our Herrings are carried as far as Brasile;
and that which is more strange, and much to our shame, above four hundred of
their Ships, fish with ours at Yarmouth within Ken of land, uncontrould, making
us pay ready-money for our fish, caught by them on our shores.

Fourthly, by this their large extent of Trade, (originally derived from the
benefits they have received from the Kingdom of England,) they are become as it
were Devisions of the whole World, whereby they have within a Century or more
of years, so enlarged their Towns, that the major part of them, are as big
again as they were before; for instance, Amsterdam, Leyden, and Middle-borough,
having been lately above twice enlarged, and their Streets and Buildings so
orderly set forth, that for Beauty and Strength, they may compare with most,
upon which they bestow infinite sums of Money, all originally flowing from the
bounty of our Seas; from whence, by their labor and industry, they derive the
beginnings of all their Wealth and Greatness, and particularly for the Havens
of the aforesaid Towns, whereof some of them cost Forty, Fifty, or an Hundred
Thousand pounds.

Fifthly, by reason of the number of their Shipping, and Mariners, and so great
a Trade occasioned by fishing principally, they have not only strengthened and
fortyfied themselves at home, to repel any further Polemick attempts of the
King of Spain, but have likewise stretched their power to the East and
West Indies; in many places whereof they are Lords of the Seacoasts, and have
likewise fortified on the Main, where the King and People are subject to their
devotion, and our Countrymen the English, lying open to all the outrages, a
cruel and imulting Tyrant can inflict upon them. So formidable they are both by
Sea, and Land, that none but a Carolus a Carolo, knows how to lore their
topsaile of their insufferable Pride, and bring by the Lee, their matchless
insolence.

Sixthly, how mightily the public Revenue and Customs of the State are
increased, by their fishing, may appear in that about forty or fifty years
since, over and above the Customs of the Merchandise, Excises, Licenses,
Waftage and Lastage, there was paid to the State for Custom of Herrings, and
other Saltfish, and Cask paid for Waftage, which comes at least to as much
more: besides a great part of their Fish sold in foreign parts for ready
money, for which they commonly export for the finest Gold and Silver; and
coming home recoyn it of a baser allay, under their own stamp, (witness the
scarcity of our old Gold) which is no small means to augment their Treasure.

Seventhly, as touching their private wealth, it will appear by the abundance
of Herring, and other fish by them taken. For instance, during the War between
the King of Spain, and the Hollander, the Dunkirkkers, by taking, spoiling, and
burning the Busses of Holland, and setting great ransom on the Fishermen,
enforced them to compound for great Sumns of Money, that they might fish
quietly one year, whereunto the next year after the Fishermen among themselves
were to pay a dollar upon every last of Herrings, toward the maintenance of
certain Ships of War, to convoy and secure them in their fishing; by reason
whereof, there was a Record kept of the several last of Herrings taken that
year, and it appeared thereby, that in one half year, there was taken three
hundred thousand last of Herings, which being at twelve pound per last,
amounts to three Millions and six hundred thousand pounds; whereas at
sixteen, twenty and thirty pounds they are sold in other Countries.

This great Trade of fishing, employing so many ships at Sea, must consequently
maintain a very great number of Tradesmen, and Artizens at land; as Spinsters,
and Hempwinders for Cables, Cordage, Yarn, Twine for Nets, and Lines, Weavers
to make Sailcloaths, Receivers, Packers, Dressers, Tacklers, Coopers, Blocks,
and Bowl-makers for ships, Keelmen and Laborers, for removing and carrying
fish, Sawyers for planks, Carpenters, Shipwrights, Boat-men, Brewers, Bakers,
and a number of others, whereof a great part may be maimed Persons, and unfit
to be otherwise employed, besides the maintenance of all their several Wives,
Chidren and Families; and further, every man or maidservant, or Orphan, having
any poor stock, may venture the same in their fishing voyages, which affords
them ordinarily great increase, and is duly paid according to the proportion of
their gain; this makes them have so few Beggars amongst them, and we so many,
in not finding out such like means, to employ the poorer sort of people; the
appurtenances hereunto belonging, will cost us no more than theirs did; and
since we have the propriety of the seas, we want only industry to effect this
purpose.

Lastly, Holland is so poor of it self, that it yields little, saving some
few Hops, Madder, Butter and Cheese; yet notwithstanding, by reason of this Art
of fishing, abounds plentifully in all manner of Provisions, as well for Life
as Luxury, nay for defense too; all which they not only have in competent
proportion for their own use, but are likewise able from their several
Magazines, to supply other Countries.

The premises considered, it makes much to the ignomy and shame of this
Kingdom, that God and Nature offering us so rich a Treasure, even to our own
doors, we notwithstanding neglect the benefit thereof, and by paying money to
the ungrateful Hollander, for the fish of our own Seas, impoverish our selves
to enrich them.

But thanks to Almighty God, that has put it into his Majesty's heart to put a
stop to their further proceedings herein, and do not doubt but he will once
more make them acknowledge, that the Sovereignty of the Narrow Seas belong to
him alone, his Majesty's Prerogative by immemorable prescription, continual
usage and possession, the acknowledgment of all Neighbors, States, and the
Municipal Laws of this Kingdom, and that unto him (by reason of the said
Sovereignty,) the Supreme command and jurisdiction over the passage and fishing
in the same rightfully appertains.

Why may not the English then make the same advantages of these Seas, as the
Dutch, whom we are now chastiseing, not for their industry therein, but for
their ingratitude, incivility, and rag-manners? The task will not be very
difficult, if this method may be observed as follows.

By erecting two hundred and fifty Busses, of reasonable strength and bigness,
there will be employment found for a thousand Ships, and for at least twenty
thousand Fishermen and Mariners at Sea, and consequently for as many Laborers,
and Tradesmen at Land. The Herrings taken by those Busses, will afford the King
twenty thousand pound Custom outward, and for Customs returned inward, three
hundred thousand pound and more.

We have Timber sufficient, and at reasonable rates, growing in this Kingdom,
for the building these Busses, and every Shire affords men of able and hardy
bodies, fit for such employment, who now live poorly and idly at home;
Provision we have cheap enough, and great plenty thereof, and our Shores and
Harbors are near those places, where the Fish do haunt; for drying our Nets,
Salting and Packing our Fish, and for succor in stress of weather, we may
bring our fish to Land, Salt and Pack it, and from some parts of this Kingdom,
be at our Markets in France, Spain, or Italy, before the Hollander can get home.

But this we shall the better and sooner do, if we consider and endeavor to
reform certain wants, and abuses, which heretofore has hindered us, from
effecting this good and great work, whereof these that follow, are none of the
least.

The non-observance, (or but slightly) of the old Custom, and the Statute Laws,
for observing fishdaies, from whence scarcity of flesh proceeds: Thus fish
being not bought so frequently as it ought to be, the want of sale decays the
Trade thereof.

Want of order and direction in our fishing, every man being left to himself,
and every man fishing as likes him best. Whereas amongst the Hollander, two of
the best experienced Fishermen are appointed to guide the rest of the Fleet,
and the rest are bound to follow them, and so cast their lines according to
their discretion. Again, the Hollanders set forth in June, to find the shoal of
fish; and having found it, dwell amongst it till November; whereas We stay till
the Herrings come home to us, and sometimes suffer them to pass by us, ere we
look out, our Herring fishing continuing only seven weeks at most, and theirs
twenty.

The Hollanders Busses are great and strong, and able to brook foul weather,
whereas our Cobbles, Crayes, and Boats, being small and thin-sided, are easily
swallowed by a rough Sea, not daring to adventure far in fair weather.

The Hollanders are industrious, and no sooner are discharged of their lading,
but presently put forth for more; whereas our English, after they have been
once at Sea, do commonly never return again, till their money taken for their
fish be spent, and they in debt.

The Hollanders do retain the Merchants, who during the Herring season, do
duly come to the places where the Busses arrive, and by joining together in
several Companies, do presently agree for the lading of forty Busses at once;
and so being discharged, they may return speedily to their former fishing;
whereas our Fishermen, uncertain of their Chapmen, are forced to spend much
time in putting off their fish by parcels.

What else may be considered in this particular, I will leave to the serious
thoughts of better Headpeices than my own.

Thus as I have given you a summary account of the vast advantages, which will
accrue unto us, by the regular, orderly, and industrious fishing on our own
Coasts, so I have briefly related how highly indebted the Hollander is to the
King of England, for his wealthy fishing* Trade; yet they are so far from
acknowledging any debt, that instead thereof, they have most unworthily thrown
dirt* in his Majesty's face, a Gracious Prince, who has endeavored by
kindnesses, to charm these swarming Frogs, who are now ready to become an
Egyptian Plague, by croaking against him, in his own Waters. They say Hollands
opulent and wealthy City Amsterdam was founded on Herring-bones. For all my
just animosity against the Dutch, as an Englishman I cannot but be somewhat
afflicted, to see the Dutch

Here now let me crave leave to address my speech to this ungrateful Neighbor,
and thus a little expostulate with him.
1. Has not his Sacred Majesty been always so tender of his Royal word, that
he made with you before he left the Hague, and the preservation whilst you
needed it, and friendship, since God has enabled you to subsist, as he scarce,
had set foot on his Royal Throne here, before the sense of your safety, no less
then of his inspired him, with an earnestness, to renew, or strengthen his
Royal Alliance with your, not so observable in respect of any Neighbor
beside, doubling I am sure in retalliation, the poor and few marks of gratitude
have dropped from you; rather expunging his kindnesses, with your more frequent
injuries, and imputing your failing, to the less courtly nature of your soil
and people; then the want of gratitude and civility, to so potent a Neighbor
as Britain, who next to God, may be styled your Maker, who has dispensed with
thousands of dangers and inconveniences for your sake?

2. Have you not had liberty to trade, and to become Denisons; nay so
graciously you have been used by his Sacred Majesty, and his Royal Father, even
to admiration, that you had power to buy and purchase Land in fee-simple, tale
or otherwise in any of his Cities and Countries; no mark of distinction being
imposed, in relation either to Honor, Profit, or Justice; Witness the Acts of
Naturalizing so many of your Spawn, in the Twelsth, Thirteenth and Fourteenth
years of his present Majesty's Reign?

3. Do not the Maritan Towns of Kent, Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, etc.
aboundwith the issue of those swarms, the very sound and noise of their
fellows Calamities, had driven out of their Hives?

And notwithstanding the present just War his Majesty has proclaimed against
the States General of the United Provinces, he has mercifully provided for the
aforesaid Dutch-Inmates, and all such who are necessitated to withdraw their
Persons and Estates out of those Countries: nay, observe his Majesty's special
care of your people inhabiting this his Kingdom, in his own words: And because
there are remaining in our Kingdoms, many Subjects of the States General of the
United Provinces, We do declare, and give our Royal Word, that all such of the
Dutch Nation, as shall demean themselves dutiful toward Us, and not correspond
with Our Enemies, shall be safe in their Persons and Estates, and free from all
molestation and trouble of any kind; how illy you have deserved this
continuance of so many kindnesses, I dare appeal to your own Consciences, or
any impartial Person to judge.

4. Can you think so wise a Council as this Kingdom was steered by, did not
apprehend; That though the making you free might fortify the Queens outworks;
yet it could not but as much dismantle the Royal Fort of Monarchy? I know not
whither you were a President to the late Usurper, who for many years, steeped
the three Kingdoms in their own blood: but sure I am, your Principles may teach
Subjects to depose their Princes, and be no losers by the bargain; which (by
the way) has rendered you unpleasant or unacceptable to all Neighbor Monarchs,
fearing by your practices you will furnish their subjects with pretenses upon
all occasions of advantage to do the like.

5. Was not the assisting you an occasion of our invasion in eighty eight, by a
Navy held invincible in the Creed of Rome, till the more glorious Valors of
the English (assisted by the Lord of Hosts) had clearly confuted the Popes
Title, even to the amazement of the Clists, and wonder of the World? The only
reason then that kept King Philip from heading a Royal Army in his own Person,
was the fear he did apprehend of his being cast in his passage out of Spain,
(as his Father Charles the Fifth was) upon the British shore, knowing the
English were cordial in your preservation, then ever to suffer him to come and
go in Peace, when he came on so bloody an errand.

6. And though he, as a Magnanimous Prince, and so great a Monarch as he was,
yet he did often desire his Sister of England to hear his just defense, for his
so rigorous proceedings; She refusing to dispute the truth of your complaints,
presuming it more probable for a stranger to be a Tyrant, then that the Natural
Inhabitants upon a slighter cause, cast themselves into the no less bloody,
then scorching flames of a Civil and uncertain War, She seeming rather to
forget the Obligations She owed him, either as a private Person or Brother,
when he was King of England, then her Neighbors oppressions. I shall not need
here draw blood in your faces by application, your Consciences (if you have any
such thing left) will do it for me.

7. Were not your messengers received into England in the quality of
Ambassadors, they being then too modest to own higher Titles, then of Poor
Petitioners, casting themselves prostrate at the feet of no less Potent
Tribunal, then what you were admitted to in the quality of Ambassadors the
other day, and the which you now fight against; at which time, (I blush to
think thereof) your Ambassadors was pleased to say, that in this conjuncture
they would condescend to strike to Us, if we would assist them against the
French; but upon condition, that it should never be taken for a President here
after, to their prejudice: this was such a condition which would soon have
reduced us to a miserable and contemptible condition. Did not your Ambassador
forget himself, what and where he was, to be admitted into the quality of an
Ambassador, was an honor you could never have attained to, but through the
Clemency of a gracious Prince? your Messengers in the same quality but narrowly
escaped the Gallows, when they went with their Petition to his Catholic
Majesty? And did not his late Sacred Majesty, out of his Princely goodness
imbroider your Messengers with Titles, unworthy such ingratitudes, as you
afterward showed him and his, against your Alliance then made and professed?

8. Have you not opened your Arms, to receive those into your Councils and pay,
that even the whole World does blush at the reflection of so horrid an Act;
such is it that tears fall on my Pen at its Relation, as if it should say, thou
art not able to express blackness? Wherein Holland, can thou glory? not with
coloring it with a charitable Protection? O no! Then what satisfaction can you
give the World; or fancy to your selves, when you show a President how to
protect the most horrid Regicide that ever drew breath, such as are culpable of
no less crime then the blood of the best of Kings, and one who espoused you as
it were into his Royal Family?

9. Nay, see farther your ingratitude, that no sooner Providence had measured
out the Kingdom into Peace, by restoring our dread Sovereign unto his undoubted
Right, and the words of a firm Alliance and Amity, (concluded betwixt him and
you,) scarce cold in his mouth, but what wonderful outrages you committed on
our Ships and Merchants, in almost all places and Ports, where you could
either find or meet them, but especially there, where you were able to treble
the English power and strength, who if equally but Manned, or Shipped, would have
reduced your Brandy-courages into that combustion which they say that Wine
bears, and that only by its flames to behold your own ruins: nay, such was
your ingratitude, as if nothing were more indifferent to you, then who were
happy, so England were miserable?

10. If you were not willing for those many years, to come stealing and
bribeing the Usurpers so long for your fishing, why should you be so tutchy
now, with such as inquire whether it was worth your cost, or their honor, to
defend the propriety thereof, to the utmost hazard of their lives and fortunes?
I understand that the late Usurpers did not only give you the fish, but baits
to catch them, ( Lampries I mean) laden by boatfulls out of the Thames, which
they would never have done, had they been as full of circumspection as that
Creature is reported to be of eyes, this kindness to you (as all other
kindnesses shown to you use to do) made you so insolent as to fly in their
face, sor which they were forced to bring you into better manners, witness the
several Victories they obtained over you in the year, 1652. But more
especially, that near Portland, wherein you were totally overthrown, imputing
your want of success, to want of powder; but I think those few of yours which
were left, they sent home with a powder.

Lastly, all this considered, why may not his Majesty assume to himself, the
rights of disposure and regulation of that which is undoubtedly his own? and
why may he not take, till by you, that never - questioned style of Lord of the
British Ocean? as well as you at Guiny, and the East Indies, that strive with
your Maker, who shall be most High and Mighty.

With these Expostulations, pray take some of these following Queries.

Some pertinent and necessary Queries to the present Subject.

1. What other Alliance can afford you so safe Harbourage in case of foul
weather at Sea, as England, Scotland and Ireland? if none, whether
contingencies driven in by storm under our shelter, your West, and East -
India, and Straits - men, may not exceed all the Coals and Tobbacco Prizes, De
Ruyter, or any under him, shall scrape up in his Naval expedition?

If the raising a Flying Army in the Netherlands, may not one time or other be
reduced to such a faction, especially when headed by one that cannot keep the
same Consort with you, as to cause the resolving you into the first Principles
of both Poor, Distressed, and Oppressed? Nay, it may be, further reduce you to
be Vassals to some of your right or left - hand Neighbors, whose aim is wholly
to root up that Vine, which they perceive is likely to eclipse; but more
willing to destory the glories of their rights, and benefits of their Traffic
and Trade.

3. If Venice may not unproperly be called the Signet on Neptunes right hand;
whether England and the Netherlands being in a strait confederacy, may not be
styled his two Arms? By which, in relation to their shipping, he embraces the
Universe.

4. Whether your Maiden Towns (as you call them) may not longer enjoy that
Title under the Alliance of England, who has many more rich and beautiful
Havens and Harbors, then any other Neighboring Nation.

5. Whether the making an honorable Peace with England, by complying with her
just commands, may not be accounted putting of Money to more than common
Interest?

6. In case it so happens, whether their Wisdoms do not cease too dangerous
and chargable Wars; the which if not done, may not be the sole cause of having
it said, their blood was upon their own heads?

7. Whether in case Zealand, or any other of your Provinces irritated by the
inconveniences that must inevitably follow, may not be tempted to divide, and
adhere to the stronger and honester side? And which that is your Wisdoms, may
easily resolve from the dispute, his Royal Highness, and the incomparable
Rupert gave your Meenhere, Opdam?

8. Whether the World may not afford Us and You, a sufficient trade without
intruding, or encroaching on each others Interests?

9. Whether Monarchs do, or can look upon you under a milder aspect, then
Traitors, without a tacit consent of the like power resident in their People:
whereas England does, and ever did esteem you in a more honorable relation and
interest; for though you, like Dial of Ahaz, recoiled so many degrees back in
the Sphere of policy, it is Naturally more proper for that hand, and that power
which first made you a free State, to be touched with an inclination ever to
maintain that Honor and Interest, which the blood of so many of their brave
Countrymen has expired in the setting it up?

10. Whether, as you are compared to the Ant for industry, so in this, as one
says, the Ant is a wise Creature, but a shrewd thing in a Garden or Orchard,
and truly so are you; where ever you light in a pleasant or rich soil, like
Succors and lower Plants, you rob from the root of that Tree, which gave you
shade and protection. Thus let me tell you, your Wisdom is not indeed Heroic;
as courting an Universal good, but rather narrow and restrictive, as being a
Wisdom, but for your selves; which to speak plainly, is descending into craft;
and is but the sinister part of that which is really Noble and Celestial. Nay,
in all, they hold so true a proportion with the Emmet, as you shall not find
that they want so much as the sting?

11. Whether Holland affords not the People one commodity beyond all other
Regions, if they die in perdition, they are so low, that they have a shorter
cut to Hell, then the rest of their Neighbors: And for this cause, perhaps all
strange Religions throng thither, as naturally inclineing toward their Center:
Besides, their riches shows them to be Pluto's Region; and you all know, what
part that was which the Poets did of old assign him?

12. Whether the Duke d'Alva's taxing of the tenth penny on the Netherlands,
did not fright it into a Paulsie, which all the Mountebanks they have bred
since, could never tell how to cure: for at the approach of a Wagon, the Earth
shall shake as if it were Ague-strucken?

13. Whether if Mount Aetna, be Hells mouth or fore-Gate, Holland be not the
Postern; for some call it the Port Esquiline of the World, where the whole
Earth does vent her crude black gore, which the Inhabitants scrape away for
fuel, as men with spoons do excrements from Civit-Cats.

14. Whether Escutcheons are not as plentiful in Holland, as Gentry is scarce;
for every man there is his own Herald, and he that has but wit enough to
invent a Coat, may challenge it as his own: A Coat they must have, though their
Ancestors were never known, which in ^ight of Heraldry, shall bear their
Atchievment, with an Helmet for a Baron at least, Marry the Field perhaps shall
be charged with three Baskets to show what trade his Father was?

15. Whether the Dutch People, are so generally Boorish, but that most of them
may be bred a Statesman, they having all this gift, not to be so nice
conscioned, but that they can turn out Religion to let in Policy?

16. Whether their Country is not the God they worship, War their Heaven, Peace
their Hell, and the Spaniard, the Devil, they hate, Custom their Law, and
their Will their Reason?

17. Whether the Hollander was not bred before Manners were in Fashion, and
that makes his conditions as Boorishly-churlish as his breeder Neptune?

18. Whether complement be not an idleness they were never trained up in, and
that is the Reason of their happiness, that Court Vanities have not stole away
their minds from business?

19. Whether the Hollander, had he not been a Subject to Spain, would not have
loved the Nation better; and that which confirms their eternal hate, is, that
they know the World remembers they were once the Subjects of that most
Catholic Crown?

20. Whether their Shiping is not the Babel which they boast on, for the glory
of their Nation; It is indeed a wonder; and they will have it so, but we may
well hope they will never be so Potent at Land, lest they show us how doggedly
they can insult where they get the Mastery?

21. Whether equality of number, when they meet our Ships at Sea, be not as
dreadful to them, as a Falcon, to a Mallard, from whom their best remedy is to
steal away: But if they come to blows, they want the valiant stoutness of the
English, who will rather expire bravely in a bold resistance, than to stain
their Honor by an ignoble flight.

22. Whether Democracy be not the best Government for the Low Countries, since
there had need be many to rule such a Rabble of rude ones? Tell them of a King
in jest, and they will cut your throat in earnest.

23. Whether there is under Heaven such a Den of several Serpents as Amsterdam
is? You may be what Devil you will, so you push not the States with your Horns.

24. Whether the Dutch place their Republic in a higher esteem than Heaven it
self, by their boundless Toleration; and had rather cross upon God than it? For
whosoever disturbs the Civil Government, is liable to punishment; but the
Decrees of Heaven, and Sanctions of the Deity, any one may break uncheck't, by
professing what false Religion he please.

Lastly, Whether they had not rather keep an old fault in which they discover
manifold and manifest errors, than in an easy change to meet a certain Remedy?

His Majesty's Propriety and Dominion over the British Seas clearly asserted;
And some other of the Dutch Insolences detected.
IT is easy to be proved by the Ancient Interpreters of the Mosaical Law, That
the Sea is no whit less capable of private Dominion, than the Land. In Numbers
you shall find it expressly written, And let your borders be the Great Sea; that
is (as the Rabbis comment on the place) the Main Ocean and its Islands.

You may read, that Pompey the Great, being Admiral of a great Navy, had a
Commission given him by the Senate, as absolute Lord of the Sea; nay, many of
the Roman Historians have called the Sea their Sea, because it was in
subjection to, being wholly subdued by, the Roman Power. Thy borders are in the
midst or heart of the Sea, says the Prophet Ezekiel of the Tyrians: and it is
affirmed in ancient History, That the City of Tire built by Agenor, made not
only the Neighbouring-Sea, but what Seas soever her Ships sailed in, to be of
her Dominion.

There was an ancient Custom used in the East, That when Great Kings had a
design to bring any Nation under their power, they commanded Water and Earth,
the pledges of Empire and Dominion, to be delivered unto them; conceiving that
the Command of the Sea, as well as of the Land, was signified by such a Token.

And if we take a view of these late times, as to the Rights and Customs of
Foreign Nations, we shall find, that the Commonwealth of Venice has enjoyed
the Dominion of the Adriatique-Sea for many Ages. The Tuscans to this day have
an Absolute Dominion in the Tyrhene-Sea; and those of Genoa, in the Lygustick.

To conclude: That the Dominion of the Sea is admitted amongst those things
that are lawful, and received into the Customs of Nations, is so far from
contradiction, that nothing at all can be found to control it in the Customs
of our later times, unless it be by the Encroaching- Hollander, who bordering
so near our shores, has done, and does endeavor to violate the Right of His
Most Sacred Majesty, under the pretense of Civil Community. Besides, it is most
evident from the Custom of all Times, That Commerce and free Passage has ever
been so limited by Princes in their Territories; that is, either granted or
denied, according to the various concernments of the Public Good. Princes are
concerned to be wary and careful, that they admit no such Strangers, or
Foreign Commerce, where the Commonwealth may receive any damage thereby.

Some Oppugners to the Mare Clausum introduce this Argument, That the Water is
open to All, and therefore by Law it must be open at all times to all men. What
a trifle is this? Before the distribution of things, there was no Land which
did not lie open to All, before it came under particular possession. If the
Hollanders should object this Argument against our Dominion over the Narrow
Seas; I would ask them the reason of their Custom in Delphland, called Jus
Grutae, which has ever been under the care of those Officers called in Dutch,
Pluymgraven, whereby the Beer-Brewers are obliged to pay the hundredth part for
the use of those Waters.

Having thus in general given you an account, That almost amongst all Nations
there has been allowed a private Dominion of the Sea: We shall now come nearer
home, and inform you, That the ancient Britains did Enjoy and Possess the Sea
as Lords thereof, before they were subjected to the Roman Power. We find no
History of Britain to which any credit ought to be given, elder than the time
of Julius Caesar; at whose coming we find the Britains used the Sea as their
own for Navigation and Fishing; and withal permitted none besides Merchants to
sail into the Island without their leave; nor any man at all to sound or view
their Seacoasts or Harbors.

Amongst several Kings of old, that not only ruled this Land, but had also
Dominion over the Sea, I find none more potent than King Edgar; who possessing
an absolute Dominion of the Seas, sailed round it once a year, and secured it
with a constant Guard of Ships, of which, as is reported, he had Four thousand
eight hundred stout ones; and what Dominion this was King Edgar had as Absolute
Lord of the Sea, appears in these words, I Edgar King of England, and of all
the Kings of the Islands, and of all the Ocean lying about Britain, and of all
the Nations that are included within the circuit, etc.

After him, King Canutus left a testimony, whereby he most expressly asserteth
the Sea to be a part of his Dominion: for placing himself by the Seaside on
Southampton shore, he is reported to have made trial of the Seas obedience in
this manner: Thou, O Sea, art under my Dominion, as the Land also which I sit
upon is mine: therefore I command thee not to wet the feet or garments of thy
Sovereign. Although the event did not answer his expectation, yet by this he
professed himself to be Sovereign of the Seas as well as of the Land.

There is nothing more clear, than that the Kings of England have been
accustomed to constitute Governors, who had a charge to guard the English Sea,
and these were called Custodes Maritimi. In this number you shall find in
Parliamentary Rolls of the 48 of Hen. 3. Thomas de Moleton, who is called
Captain and Guardian of the Sea; this Title was afterward changed into
Admiral, in the days of Edward the third: The principal end of calling that
Parliament, was concerning the preservation of Peace both by Land and Sea;
giving us to understand, that the Land and Sea together, made one entire Body
of the Kingdom of England.

And that the Dominion of the Seas is properly in the Power and Jurisdiction of
the King, may appear by those Tributes and Customs that were imposed and paid
for the guard and protection of those Seas; and this was paid to the Reign of
King Stephen. Since, Subsidies have been demanded of the people in Parliament
upon the same account.

Neither was this imposed only on the English, but also upon the ships of
Foreigners, every Vessel paying after the rate of six pence a Tun that passed
by, such ships only excepted that brought Merchandise out of Flanders. If a
Vessel were employed to fish for Herrings, it paid six pence a week for every
Tun; if for other fish, so much was to be paid every three weeks; as they who
brought Coals from Newcastle to London, every three months. Mr. Seldom that
learned Antiquary affirms, That before a Court of Delegates in France, in
express terms it has been acknowledged, That the King of England has ever
been Lord not only of the Sea, but of the Islands therein contained, upon the
account of being King of England.

But to give greater light to this truth, we may from several Records produce
many testimonies, That the Kings of England have given leave to Foreigners,
upon request, to pass through their seas. There are innumerable Letters of safe
conducts in the Records, especially of Henry the fifth and sixth; and it is
worthy of observation, that those Letters were directed by those Kings to their
Governors, or Sea Admirals, Vice-Admirals, and Sea-Captains.

And to clear all at once: The Kings of England have such an absolute Dominion
in the English seas, that they have called the Sea it self their Admiralty: and
this we find in a Commission of Edward the Third, the Title whereof is de
Navibus Arestandis and Capiendis.

And as a freedom of Passage, so a liberty of Fishing, has been obtained by
Petition from the Kings of England. We read that Henry the sixth gave leave to
the French, and other Foreigners, sometimes for a year, sometimes but for six
months, to go and fish throughout his seas, provided that the Fishing-boats and
Busses, exceeded not the burden of thirty Tuns; and if any Foreigners
whatever should molest or disturb any of the King's subjects as they were
fishing, they were forthwith to lose their License, and the benefit thereof.

In the Eastern Sea, which washes the Coasts of York shire, it has been an
ancient custom for the Hollanders and Zealanders to obtain leave by petitioning
the Governor of Scarborough-Castle. It is worth the while (says the Reverend
Mr. Cambden) to observe what an extraordinary gain the Hollanders do make of
fishing on the English Seas, having first obtained leave from the Castle of
Scarborough; for the English have ever granted them leave to fish, reserving
always the Honor and Privilege to themselves, but through Negligence resigning
the Profit to Strangers. King James took special care that no Forreigner should
fish on the English or Irish seas, without leave first obtained; and every year
at the least this leave was renewed by the Commissioners for that purpose at
London.

A remarkable Example of Fishing in this nature we find in the days of Henry
the Fourth. An Agreement was made between the Kings of England and France, That
the subjects of both Kingdoms might freely fish throughout part of that Sea
which is bounded on this side by the Ports of Scarborough and Southampton, and
on the other side by the Coast of Flanders, and the mouth of the River Seine;
the time was also limited betwixt Autumn and the beginning of January. And that
the French might securely enjoy the benefit of this Agreement, the King of
England sent Letters to all his Sea-Captainsand Commanders.

By this we may plainly see, that these Limits wholly excluded the French from
that part of the Sea which lies toward the West and South-west; as also, that
which lies North-east of them, as being so limited by our Henry at his own
pleasure, as sole Lord and Sovereign of the Whole.

There is amongst the Records of Edward the first, an Inscription pro Hominibus
Hollandiae, etc. for the men of Holland, Zealand, and Friesland, to have leave
to fish near Yarmouth; the King's Letter for their protection runs in these
words:

The King to his beloved and trusty John de Butelarte, Warden of his Port of
Iernemuth (now called Yarmouth) Greeting: For as much as we have been
certified, that many men out of the parts of Holland, Zealand, and Friesland,
who are in amity with us, intend now to come and fish in our Seas near unto
Iernemuth; We command you, That public Proclamation be made once or twice
every week, that no person whatsoever employed abroad in our service, presume
to cause any injury, trouble, damage, hindrance, or grievance, to be done unto
them; but rather, when they stand in need, that you give them advice and
assistance in such manner, that they may fish and pursue their own advantage
without any let or impediment. In testimony whereof, we have caused these
Letters to be made Patents, and to continue in force till after the Feast of
St. Martins next ensuing.

Here you see that the King grants a Protection to fish; and he limits it
within the space of two months. He alone also protected the Fishermen on the
German Coast; nor might the Fishermen use any other Vessels than what were
prescribed by our Kings. Upon which accounts all kinds of fishing was sometimes
prohibited, and sometimes admitted; this restriction being added, That they
should fish only in such Vessels as were under the burden of thirty Tuns. And
this appears by the Letters of King Edward the third concerning the Laws of
fishing which were directed unto the Governors of several Ports and Towns on
the Eastern shore: the words are these:

For as much as we have given leave and license to the Fishermen of the
Neighbouring-Ports, and to others who shall be willing to come unto them for
the benefit of fishing, that they may fish and make their own advantage with
Ships and Boats under the burden of Thirty Tuns, any Prohibition or Command of
ours to the contrary notwithstanding. We command you to permit the Fishermen of
the said Towns and others who shall be willing to come to the said places for
the benefit of fishing, to fish and make their own advantage with Ships and
Boats under the burden of thirty Tun, without any let or impediment; any
Prohibitions or Commands of ours made to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

This is evident also in the Records of King Edward the fourth; for he invested
three persons with Naval Power, whose Office it was to guard and protect the
Fishermen upon the Coasts of Norfolk and Suffolk; and the charges of the Guard
were defrayed by the Fishermen of the said Seas at the pleasure of the King of
England. Neither were any persons admitted to a Partnership in this kind of
Guard, except those who were appointed by the King of England; lest by this
means perhaps it might derogate from the English Right; which is a manifest
sign and evidence of their Dominion and Possession of the place.

And this may yet more clearly appear by the Limits and Laws usually set by our
King to such Foreigners as were at enmity with each other, but with amity with
the English: and to this effect is the Proclamation of King James; who having
made peace with all Nations, did give equal Protection to the Spaniards and the
United Netherlands, at that time exercising acts of great hostility one against
another: Our pleasure (says he) and commandment is to all our Officres and
Subjects by Sea and Land, That they shall prohibit as much as in them lies,
all hovering of Men of War of either Spaniard or Hollander near to the entry
of any of our Coasts or Havens: and that they shall rescue and succor all
Merchants and others that shall fall within the danger of any such as shall
await our Coasts.

And it is further to be observed, that as our Kings have very often commanded,
that all manner of persons should cease from hostility throughout all the
places extended into their Territories by sea: so they indulged the like
privilege for ever throughout the more Neighbouring-coasts of the French shore,
That all manner of persons, though enemies one to another, should securely sail
to and fro, as it were under the wings of an Arbitrator or Moderator of the
Sea; and also should freely use the Sea, according to such spaces and limits as
they were pleased at first to appoint; which, without doubt, is a clear
evidence of Dominion.

In the next place I shall cite some of the Public Records kept in the Tower
of London, in which the Dominion of the Seas is expressly asserted, as belonging
to the Kings of England.

We read that Edward the third, in his Commissions given to Geofry de Say,
Governor or Commander of the Southern and Western Seas, and to John de Norwich
of the Northern; expresses himself in these following words:

We calling to mind that our Progenitors the Kings of England having before
these times been Lords of the English Sea on every side, yea, and Defenders
thereof against the Invasions of Enemies; do strictly require and charge you by
the Duty and Allegiance wherein you stand bound, That you set forth to Sea with
the ships of the Ports, and the other ships that are ready; and that you arrest
the other ships under our Command; and that with all diligence you make search
after the Galleys and Ships of War that are abroad against Us, and that
stoutly and manfully you set upon them, if they shall presume to bend their
course to any part of our Dominions, or the Coasts of Scotland, etc.

We read also in the Reign of the said King, in the preferring a certain Bill
in Parliament (which is the voice of the State of the Realm) that he was
usually accounted King or Sovereign of the Seas by all Nations; written in
French, and thus translated into English:

The Nation of the English were ever in the Ages past, renowned for Sea-Affairs
in all Countries near the Seas: and they had also so numerous a Navy, that the
people of all Countries esteemed and called the King of Edgland, the King or
Sovereign of the Sea.

Another Testimony to the same effect we read in the Parliamentary Records of
Henry the fifth, where the tenor of the Bill runs after this manner:

The Commons do pray, That seeing our Sovereign Lord the King, and his
illustrious Progenitors, have ever been Lords of the Sea; and now seeing
through God's grace it is now come to pass, that our Lord the King is Lord of
the shores on both sides the Sea, such a Tribute may be imposed on all
Strangers passing through the said Sea, for the benefit and advantage of our
said Lord the King, as may seem agreeable to Reason for the safeguard of the
said Sea. The Answer subscribed to the Bill was, Soit avise par le Roy: for the
King at that time resided in France, being Lord of that Country as well by
Conquest as Inheritance.

Many other Testimonies in this nature may be produced, which to avoid
prolixity I must omit.

Neither has the High Court of Parliament only given this attestation to our
Kings as Supreme and Sovereign of the Seas; but to confirm it, all the Judges
of the Land were consulted herein, and all jointly averred, That the King's
Sea-Dominion, which they called the Ancient Superiority of the Sea, was a
matter out of question his Right.

Neither is this Truth confirmed only by our Laws, but by our Medals. There
has been a piece of Gold often coined by our Kings, called a Rose-Noble, upon
the one side whereof was stamped a Ship floating in the Sea, and a King armed
with a Sword and Shield, sitting in the Ship it self as in a Throne.

But what need we labor to produce so many Testimonies at home, from our
Records in the Tower, and other places, from our High Courts of Parliament,
from our Laws, from our Coin, and from our Histories, to prove this Truth,
since it is acknowledged even by Foreigners themselves, whom it most
concerns, by striking sail according to the ancient custom, by every ship of
any foreign Nation whatsoever, to any King's Man of War, which is done not
only in Honor to the King of England, but also in acknowledgment of his
Sovereignty and Dominion at sea. The Antiquity of this Custom, and that it has
been in use above these four hundred years, may appear by this following
Testimony:

At Hastings, a Town situate on the shore of Sussex, it was decreed by King
John, and the assent of his Peers, in the second year of his reign, That if the
Governor or Commander of the King's Navy, in his Naval-Expeditions, shall meet
with any ships whatsoever at sea laden or empty, that shall refuse to strike
their sails at the command of the King's Governor or Admiral, they are to be
looked on as Enemies, etc. Mr. Seldom in his excellent Treatise called Mare
Clausum, says, If any ship whatsoever had not acknowledged the Dominion of the
King of England in his own sea, by striking sail, they were not to be protected
on any account of Amity, and Penalties were appointed by the Kings of England
in the same manner, as if mention were made concerning a crime committed in
some Territory of his Land.

But above all that yet has been said, There cannot be produced a more
convincing Argument than the acknowledgment of the Sea-Dominion of the King of
England by very many of our Neighbor-nations.

At what time the Agreement was made between Edward the first of England, and
Philip the Fair of France, Reyner Grimbald Governor of the French Navy,
intercepted and spoiled on the English Seas the Goods of many Merchants that
were going to Flanders; and not contented with the depredation of their
Commodities, he imprisoned their Persons: Hereupon a Bill was exhibited against
the said Reyner Grimbald, and managed by Procurators on the behalf of the Peers
and People of the English Nation; with these were joined the Procurators of
most Nations bordering upon the Sea throughout Europe; all these instituted a
Complaint; and all these Complainants in their Bill do jointly affirm, That the
King of England and his Predecessors have time out of mind, and without
controversy, enjoyed the Sovereignty and Dominion of the English Seas, and the
Isles belonging to the same, by right of their Realm of England: also, that
they have had, and have the Sovereign Guard thereof, with all manner of
Cognizance and Jurisdiction, in doing Right and Justice according to the said
Laws, Ordinances, and Prohibitions, with all other matters which may concern
the exercise of Sovereign Dominion in the said places.

But more particularly, We do find an acknowledgment of the Sea-Dominion of the
Kings of England, made by the Flemmings themselves in the Parliament of
England, in the Reign of Edward the second; the Records of the Parliament speak
it thus:

In the fourteenth year of the Reign of Edward the second, there appeared
certain Ambassadors of the Earl of Flanders to treat about the reformation of
some injuries they received: and as soon as the said Ambassadors had been
admitted by our Lord the King to treat of the said Injuries, amongst other
particulars they required, That the said Lord the King would at his own suit by
virtue of his Royal Authority, cause enquiry to be made, and do justice about a
depredation by the subjects of England upon the English seas, taking Wines and
other Commodities from certain Merchants of Flanders; alleging, that the said
Merchandises taken from the Flemmings, were brought within the Realm and
Jurisdiction of the King; and that it belonged to the King to see Justice done,
in regard that He is Lord of the Sea.

In the seventh year of King James, this Right was very strenuously asserted by
Proclamation, and all persons excluded from the use of the seas upon our
Coasts, without particular License; but the Hollander continuing his
encroachments till after the death of that wise and learned King; CHARLES the
First of ever blessed memory, issued a Proclamation for restraint of fishing
upon his Seas and Coasts without License, in these terms:

Whereas our Father of blessed memory, King James, did in the seventh year of
his Reign of Great Britain, set forth a Proclamation touching Fishing, whereby
for the many important Reasons expressed therein, all persons of what Nation or
quality soever (being not his natural born subjects) were restrained from
fishing upon any the Coasts and Seas of Great Britain, Ireland, and the rest of
the Isles adjacent, where most usually heretofore fishing had been, until they
had orderly demanded and obtained Licenses from our said Father, or his
Commissioners in that behalf, upon pain of such chastisement as should be fit
to be inflicted on such wilful offenders: Since which time, albeit neither Our
Father, nor Our Self, have made any considerable execution of the said
Proclamation, but have with much patience expected a voluntary conformity of
our Neighbors and Allies to so just and reasonable Prohibitions and Directions
as are contained in the same.

And now finding by experience, that all the Inconveniences which occasioned
that Proclamation, are rather increased than abated: We, being very sensible of
the Premises, and well knowing how far We are obliged to maintain in Honor the
Rights of our Crown, especially of so great consequence, have thought it
necessary by the Advice of our Privy Council, to renew the aforesaid Restraint
of Fishing upon Our aforesaid Coasts and Seas without License first obtained
from Us: And by these Presents do make public Declaration, That Our Resolution
is (at times convenient) to keep such a competent strength of Shipping upon Our
seas, as may (by God's blessing) be sufficient both to hinder such farther
Encroachments upon Our Regalities, and Assist and Protect those Our good
Friends and Allies who shall henceforth by virtue of Our Licenses (to be first
obtained) endeavor to take the benefit of Fishing upon Our Coasts and Seas in
the places accustomed.

Given at our Palace of Westminster, etc.
This Proclamation being set forth in the year 1636, served to speak the intent
of those Naval-Preparations made before in the year 1635, which were so
numerous and well provided, that our Neatherland-Neighbours being touched with
the apprehension of some great design in hand for the Interest of England by
Sea, and of the guilt that lay upon their own Consciences for their bold
Encroachments, soon betrayed their jealousies and fears, and in them a sense of
their offenses, before ever the Proclamation was made public; as I might show
at large if it were requisite. Instead whereof, I shall only insert Secretary
Cook's Letter, written to Sir William Boswel the King's Resident then at the
Hague; in which Letter you will understand the grounds and reasons of that
great Naval Preparation, and the King's resolution to maintain the Right
derived from his Ancestors in the Dominion of the seas; and therefore I have
here rendered a true Copy of it so far as concerns this business, as most
pertinent to our purpose.

SIR,
BY your Letters, and otherwise, I perceive many jealousies and discourses are
raised upon the preparation of His Majesty's Fleet; which is now in such
forwardness, we doubt not but within a month it will appear at sea. It is
therefore expedient both for your satisfaction and direction, to inform you
particularly what was the occasion, and what is His Majesty's intention in this
work.

First, We hold it a Principle not to be denied, That the King of Great Britain
is a Monarch at Land and Sea, to the full extent of His Dominions; and that it
concerns Him as much to maintain His Sovereignty in all the British Seas, as
within His Three Kingdoms; because without that, these cannot be kept safe, nor
He preserve His Honor and due respects with other Nations. But commanding the
Seas, He may cause His Neighbors, and all other Countries, to stand upon their
guard whenever He thinks fit. And this cannot be doubted, that whosoever will
encroach on Him by Sea, will do it by Land also, when they see their time. To
such presumption Mare Liberum gave the Warning-piece, which must be answered
with a defense of Mare Clausum; not so much by Discourses, as by the louder
language of a powerful Navy, to be better understood, when overstrained
Patience sees no hope of preserving her Right by any other means.

The degrees by which His Majesty's Dominion at Sea has of later years been
first impeached, and then questioned, are as considerable as notorious.

First, To cherish, and as it were to nourish our unthankful Neighbors. We
gave them leave to gather Wealth and Strength upon our Coasts, in our Ports, by
our Trade, and by our People. Then they were glad to invite our Merchants
residence with what Privileges they desired. Then they offered us even the
Sovereignty of their Estates; and then they sued for License to fish on our
Coasts, and obtained it under the Great Seal of Scotland which now they
suppress; and when thus by leave or by connivence they had possessed themselves
of our Fishings not only in Scotland, but in Ireland and England; and by our
Staple had raised a great stock of Trade; by these means they so increased
their Shipping and Power at Sea, that now they endure not to be kept at any
distance: nay, they are grown to that confidence, to keep Guards on our Seas;
then to project an Office and Company of Assurance for the advancement of
Trade; and withal prohibit us free commerce even within our own Seas; and take
our ships and goods, if they conform not to their Placarts.

What Insolences and Cruelties they have committed against us heretofore, in
Ireland, in Greenland, and in the Indies, is too well known to all the world.
In all which, though our Sufferings and their Wrongs may seem forgotten; yet
the great Interest of His Majesty's Honor is still the same, and will refresh
their memories as there shall be cause. For, though Charity must remit Wrongs
done to private persons, yet the reflection on the Public may make it a
greater Charity to do Justice on crying Crimes. All this notwithstanding, you
are not to conceive that the work of this Fleet is either Revenge or Execution
of Justice for these great offenses past; but chiefly for the future to stop
the violent Current of that Presumption, whereby the Men of War and
Free-booters of all Nations (abusing the favor of His Majesty's peaceable and
gracious Government, whereby he has permitted all His Friends and Allies to
make use of His Seas and Ports in a reasonable and free manner, and according
to his Treaties) have taken upon them the boldness not only to come confidently
at all times into all his Ports and Rivers, but to convey their Merchants ships
as high as his chief City, and then to cast Anchor close upon his Magazines,
and to contemn the Commands of His Officers when they required a farther
distance.

But, which is more intolerable, have assaulted and taken one another within
His Majesty's Chamber, and within his River, to the scorn and contempt of His
Dominion and Power. And this being of late years an ordinary practice which we
have endeavored in vain to reform by the ways of Justice, and Treaties; the
World I think will now be satisfied, that we have reason to look about us. And
no wise man will doubt, that it is high time to put our selves in this Equipage
on the Seas, and not to suffer the Stage of Action to be taken from Us for want
of Our appearance.

So you see the general ground upon which our Counsels stand. In particular you
may take notice, and publish as cause requires. That His Majesty by this Fleet
intends not a rupture with any Prince or State, nor to infringe any point of
His Treaties; but resolves to continue and maintain that happy Peace wherewith
God has blessed His Kingdom and to which all His Actions and Negotiations have
hitherto tended, as by your own Instructions you may fully understand. But
withal, considering that Peace must be maintained by the Arm of Power, which
only keeps down War by keeping up Dominion; His Majesty thus provoked, finds
it necessary, even for His own defense and safety, to reassume and keep his
ancient and undoubted Right in the Dominion of these Seas, and to suffer no
other Prince or State to encroach upon Him, thereby assuming to themselves or
their Admirals any Sovereign Command; but to force them to perform due homage
to His Admirals and Ships, and to pay them acknowledgments, as in former times
they did.

He will also set open and protect the free Trade of his Subjects and Allies,
and give them such safe Conduct and Convoy as they shall reasonably require. He
will suffer no other Fleets or Men of War to keep any Guard upon these Seas,
or there to offer violence, or take Prizes or Booties, or to give interruption
to any lawful intercourse. In a word, His Majesty is resolved, as to do no
wrong, so to do Justice both to His Subjects and Friends within the limits of
His Seas. And this is the Real and Royal Design of this Fleet.

Whitehall, April 16. 1635. Your assured Friend and Servant, JOHN COOK.


Nay farthermore, you may see the Dominion of His Majesty in His British Seas,
clearly represented, asserted, and fully proved, by that Propriety of Title and
Sovereignty of Power which the Duke of Venice exercises on the Adriatic Sea,
if you will consult Mr. Howel in his Commonwealth of Venice, which by the
manner of Prescription, the Consent of Histories, and even by the Confession of
their Adversaries themselves, is almost the same with his Majesty's of Great
Britain. But his Majesty has one Title more above all theirs, which is the
Title of Successive Inheritance; confirmed as well by the Law of Nature, as of
Nations; and is so much the more considerable, in regard of the infinite
advantages of the Profits of it, as the British Ocean in its latitude and
circumference exceeds the small boundaries of the Gulf of Venice.

Yet so it is, that the Indulgence of the Kings of England to their
Neighbor-nations, especially to the Hollanders, by giving them too much
liberty, has encouraged them to assume a liberty to themselves; and what at
the first was but a License, they improve into a Custom, and make that Custom
their Authority; insomuch, that some of the most busy of them have openly
declared against the King's Propriety on the British Seas: Amongst these is
one Hugo Grotius, a Gentleman of great Ingenuity, but in this particular so
inclined to obey the importunities and serve the interests of his Contrymen,
that he disobliged himself of the Dutch, and moreover (to speak the truth) of
his Conscience it self: for if you look into his Sylvae, upon the first
Inauguration of King James, he is pleased to express himself in these words,
Tria Sceptra Profundi in Magnum cojere Ducem; which is, that the Rights of the
English, Scottish, and Irish Seas, are united under one Scepter: neither is he
satisfied with this bare profession; Sum animos a Rege tuo, quis det jura
Mari, Take courage from the King, who gives Laws unto the Seas. In the same
Book in the contemplation of so great a Power, he concludes, Finis hic est,
qui fine caret, etc. This is an End beyond an End, a bound that knows no
bound, which even the Winds and the Waves must submit unto.

But with what Ingratitude have the Dutch answered the many Royal Favors which
the Kings of England have almost perpetually conferred on them! If there be no
Monster greater than Ingratitude, what Monsters are these men, who of late are
so far from acknowledging their thankfulness, that (like Vipers) they would
feed upon and consume those bowels which did afford them life and spirit.

We may observe, that in their lowest condition (which is most suitable to the
name of their abode, called the Low Countries) they petitioned to the Majesty
of the Queen of England; whose Royal Heart and Hand being always open to those
that were Distressed (especially those that were her Neighbors) upon the
account of Religion; she sent them Threescore thousand pound in the year 1572;
and presently after, there followed Four Regiments of Foot, and after them the
War increasing, there were sent over Col. North, Col. Cotton, Col. Candish,
and Col. Norris, with other Persons of Quality; who for the Honor of the
English Nation, made in that War excellent Demonstrations of their Valor, and
redeemed the Dutch from the Power of those who otherwise would have brought
them to a better understanding of their duties.

At the last the Prince of Orange being slain, presently after the death of the
Duke of Alanson (Brother to Henry the Third of France) the Queen of England
sent over to them Robert Duke of Leicester, with great provision both of Men
and Money, accompanied with diverse of the Nobility and Gentry of good account;
and although the said Earl not long afterward returned into England, and the
affairs of the Hollander were doubtful till the fatal battle at Newport; yet
Queen Elizabeth of ever blessed memory, out of her unspeakable goodness to the
Distressed, and to those that suffered for Religion, did (as long as she lived)
assist the Hollanders both with Men and Moneys; she gave them hope in despair,
gave them strength when weak; and with the charity of Her Princely Hand did
support them when fallen. And although the Hollanders do ungratefully alledg,
That it was a benefit great enough for the English to assist them in Reason of
State, because by so doing they kept out a War from their own Country.

It is most certain, that at that time the English had no cause to fear a War
at all, but only for their Cause, and for the taking their parts: for it was
for their Cause that the English in the year 1571, had seized upon the sum of
Six hundred thousand Ducats on the West of England, being the Money designed
from Spain to the Duke d'Alva, for the advancement of the Spanish Interests in
the Netherlands.

And although the Hollanders do further alledg in their own excuse, That they
were so grateful, as that they offered unto the Queen of England the
Sovereignty of the Netherlands, which she would not accept; and therefore none
of their fault that She obtained it not.

It is in reason truly answered, That the Queen of England well knowing that
she was in danger to draw a perpetual War on her Self and her Successors by the
accepting such a Gift to which She had no right, did wisely refuse their
Liberality; and yet for all that, She continued to aid them without that
chargeable obligation.

The Hollanders do further alledg, That the Queen of England had the Cautionary
Towns of the Brill and Flushing, with other places, delivered into her hands.

It is true, She had so, and thereby only enjoyed the benefit of being at the
greater expense of Men and Money. But pray take notice, that most certain it
is, That the Hollander had no sooner made a Truce with the King of Spain, and
the Archduke Albertus, but he began presently to set the English at naught,
and take the Bridle out of their hands; whereupon immediately ensued the
bringing of English Clothes died and dressed, into Holland, and the adjoining
Provinces, without ever making the King of England, or his Ambassador Leiger at
the Hague, acquainted therewith.

And to make amends for this their saucy and insolent affront, in a more high
and peremptory way they demeaned themselves to King James himself. For whereas
the Duke of Lennox, as Admiral of Scotland, had by order from the Majesty of
King James, in the year 1616, sent one Mr. Brown to demand of the Hollanders
(then fishing on the Coasts of Scotland) a certain ancient Duty called Size
Herring: they began to contest with him about it; and after a long disputation,
they paid it as in former times it had been accustomed; but not without some
affronting terms, That it was the last time it should be paid.

And it is most certain, that the same Gentleman coming the year following with
the same Authority and Commandment with one only Ship of His Majesty's to
demand the Duty aforesaid, but by them he was denied it, who as plainly as
peremptorily told him, That they were commanded by the States of Holland to pay
it no more to the King of England. Of which he took witness, according to his
Order from His Majesty. This taking of witness did so startle them, that
without any more ado they pretended an Order to arrest him; and so they carried
him into Holland, where a while he was detained.

Nay, a little while after, such was their insufferable abuse, that when Mr.
Archibald Ranthim, a Scotch Gentleman, and residing at Stockholm in Sweden,
where he solicited for some sums of money due to the English Merchants; at the
same time in the same City was one Vandyke lying there as an Agent for the
States of Holland, who said unto some principal persons of the Swedes, That
they need not be so hasty in paying any moneys to the subjects of the King of
England, or to give them any high respect, because the said Kings Promises were
not to be believed, nor his threatenings to be feared. For which vile and
insolent speeches being afterward challenged by Mr. Ranthim, he had no better
excuse than to say, He was drunk when he spoke those words: And by this means
his excuse of playing the Beast, did excuse him from playing the Man.

Now from these insolent Affronts by words, let us proceed, and come to what
they have done by deeds, more than what I have already declared in my preceding
Discourse; where, in the first place, we may observe their rude demeanor to
out English Nation in the Northern Seas, on the Coasts of Greenland, and those
parts about the fishing for Whales, and the Commodity of Trayn-oyl; where
violently they have offered unpardonable abuses in an hostile manner, driving
the English away to their great loss and prejudice. Their pride of heart was so
high, that it would not give their Reason leave to apprehend, That Fishing at
Sea is free for every man, where it is not upon the Coast of any Country unto
which the Dominion of the Sea belongs by ancient Prerogative.

And yet all this is but inconsiderable in regard of their usage of our English
in the East Indies, where in open Hostility they have as fiercely set upon
them, as if they had been most mortal Enemies, having in several Encounters
slain many of our Men, and sunk sundry of our Ships; and when they had taken
our men Prisoners, they would use them in the sight of the Indians in such a
contemptible and disdainful manner, as if it at their own home, and all places
else, the English in respect of them were but a sordid and slavish Nation, and
the Hollanders were either their Superiors, and might use them at their own
pleasure; or the English were so spiritless, or so unpowerful that they durst
not be revenged, but quietly must put up all the Affronts and Injuries which
they received at their hands.

And as for the commodious and profitable Trade which the English have had in
Muscovy for above these fourscore years, and some other Countries that lie upon
the East and North, which the Hollanders have now gotten quite out of their
hands, to the great grief and prejudice of several Merchants in London; What
shall we say, seeing not long since they have been acting the same again with
our English Merchants in Turkey? And it is a practice so usual with them to
spoil the Trade of other Nations, that when they cannot find any occasion to do
it, they will show a nature so wretchedly barbarous, that they will not stick
to spoil one another. And yet all this proceeds out of an ignoble and sordid
spirit; for let them arrive to what wealth they will, they can never be the
Masters of a Noble and Generous Disposition.

Had it not been for their Neighboring Nation of the English, they had never
arrived to the liberty of a free State; yet so ungrateful have they been, that
they have endeavored to forget all the Obligations of Humanity, and have
dug into the very bowels of those who did preserve them. So many Examples of
this nature may be instanced, that I am forced to omit them for want of room.
The Perfidiousness and Ingratitude of the Hollanders to the English, may be
traced all along ever since they shook off their obedience to the King of
Spain, even unto this present time. But we will pass from their Hypocrisy and
Cruelty practiced abroad, and look on their actions at home.

How, almost but the other day, did they labor to impose upon His Majesty, and
Sir George Downing his Envoy Extraordinary, by delivering Papers to many
public Ministers of State at the Hague; as if his Majesty and his Envoy had
been pre-possessed with them, when they had not the least notice of any such
thing?

How have they seemed to be most desirous of Peace, when at the same time they
have omitted no days, even those appropriated for holy duties, to drive on
their Preparations for War? How have they stood in defense of their violent
and unjust proceedings; and instead of redressing their Injuries, they have
increased them?

About the year 1662, they concluded a Treaty with the English; and having
engaged, That better order should for the future be observed; they have since
heaped new Injuries, endeavoring the utter overthrow of all the Trade of his
Majesty's subjects in the East and West Indies; witness our ships the Hopewell,
Leopard, and some others in the East Indies; and the Charles, the James, the
Mary, the Sampson, the Hopeful Adventurer, and the Speedwell, on the Coast of
Africa.

And after all these Acts of the highest Injustice, and their utmost endeavors
for driving on a War, they have done and would still make the world believe,
That His Majesty is the first Undertaker of it: who from his own mouth to their
Ambassador in England, and by his Injunctions to Sir George Downing his
Minister in Holland, has given so many and such remarkable Demonstrations to
the contrary.

What can they say to the Memorial of the Complaints which Sir George Downing
exhibited to the States General, importing, That in the space of a very few
years, almost twenty English, with their whole Lading, to a very great value,
have been seized upon in a very horrible manner, and the men in them most
barbarously and most inhumanly treated, being put into stinking and most nasty
Dungeons and Holes at Casteldelmina, where they did lie bedded and bathed in
their own excrements, having nothing but bread and water given them, and not
enough of that neither to sustain Nature (their bodies being under the fury of
exquisite and horrid torments); and when any of them dyed, the living and the
dead were left together; and such as outlived that Cruelty, were exposed in the
Woods to Famine, or to the mercy of wild beasts in those desolate Countries, or
to be carried into captivity by the Natives, by which means several hundreds of
his Majesty's good Subjects have perished and been destroyed.

And to this hour, notwithstanding all solicitations and endeavors of his
Majesty's Envoy, not one penny of satisfaction can be had either for the loss
of the ships, or the persons concerned in any of them; but to the contrary,
they have ever since hindered, and shot at the English ships that have anchored
by them.

How inhumanly and treacherously was one Captain Jordan butchered by them, who
sailing from Bantam with two ships, the one called the Sampson, and the other
the Hound, to the great Islands of Burnew, he discovered three or four Dutch
ships standing in for the same Port; and being confident that they intended no
good to him, he gave order to prepare for the Encounter; fully resolving to
fight it out to the last man, rather than to yield himself to the unmerciful
hands of his insulting and approaching Enemies. The Dutch summoned to deliver
the ships upon fair Quarter; but Captain Jordan (who had a great heart in a
little body) absolutely refused to yield upon any condition whatever. The Dutch
pretending to be unwilling to shed blood, called out to the English, and told
them, That they knew well enough that little Captain Jordan was there; and
desired them to persuade him to parley with them: The Captain being informed of
it, refused to have any conference with them: whereupon they desired that he
would but show himself on the Quarter Deck, that by a fair compliance they
might stop the effusion of blood, which otherwise must follow. Whereupon Capt.
Jordan (thinking that to speak with them could not much prejudice him) did show
himself on the Quarter Deck; and after the exchange of some few words, told
them, That he knew the Justice of his Cause, and the Injustice of theirs; and
was resolved to fight it out: The Hollander alleging, That their strength was
far greater than his; and it was rather Desperateness than true Valor to fight
upon such a disadvantage. This prevailed nothing with Capt. Jordan, who told
them, He was resolved to fight it out, and leave the success to God. The Dutch
finding him untractable to their demands, held him still in discourse, until a
Musquet-bullet from one of their ships laid him dead on the Quarter Deck as he
was in parley with them. At that very instant of time, whether by Treachery, or
by Accident, it is uncertain; a part of the other English Ship, called the
Hound, was blown up, and many of her men mortally hurt: The amazement was so
great, that the English were enforced to yield; who having taken them, did
instantly lade them with bolts, and did not allow them so much favor as they
showed to the Heathen.

Thus may we observe what Injury and Wrong we have all along sustained by the
Dutch, who have got many of those Islands where now they have seated
themselves, by Cruelty and Bloodshed, and by murdering the English and their
Friends. These indeed are sad Relations; and though dismal in themselves, they
are but the Prologues to their more bloody Tragedies.

But to give further proof of their Confidence and Ambition, they have
published a Declaration, wherein they assume and challenge to themselves a
Right to that whole Coast, to the exclusion of all other Nations; although by
Order from his Majesty, Sir George Downing both in public conferences with the
Deputies of the Lords General, as also with those of Holland in particular,
has at large remonstrated his Majesty's Right and Interest in some part
therein, having by his Subjects bought the ground of the King of that Country
for a valuable Consideration, and built a Factory thereon; and yet for all
this, some of the Dutch West India Company by fraud and treachery have got into
the place, and no hopes of the restitution of it; for they are resolved to keep
that by Violence which they have obtained by Deceit.

Moreover, What can they say for themselves concerning their stirring up the
King of Fantin by rewards and sums of money, and supplying him with all manner
of Arms and Ammunition, for the surprising of his Majesty's Castle at Cormantin
in the West Indies; so that an absolute necessity is imposed upon his Majesty
and his Subjects, either of losing all that have been actually taken from them,
and abandoning for ever that Trade it self, or of betaking themselves to some
other way for relief.

The Island of Polleroon has been surrendering back to the English ever since
the year 1622; at which time by a solemn and particular Treaty it was promised
to be done; and again, by another Treaty in the year 1654; and by an Order of
the States General, and the East-Indie-Company of that Nation, in the year
1661; and again by another Treaty in the year following: and yet to this day
there is not the least mention of any thing Restored.

And should any man then think it strange, that his Majesty after so long an
experience of the Perverseness and Deceitfulness of that Nation, that he now
endeavors to re-possess his subjects of those places which by the hand of
Violence and Oppression the Dutch have forced from them?

Now as for the business of the New-Netherlands (as they call it by I know not
what Authority) it has been abundantly elsewhere proved, That the said Land is
part of the Possession of his Majesty's subjects in New England, which their
Charter plainly and precisely shows and expresses; and those few Dutch who
lived there heretofore, have lived there merely upon the connivence and
sufferance of the English; which has been permitted them so to do, so long as
they demeaned themselves peaceably and quietly. But the Dutch not contenting
themselves therewith, have encroached more and more upon the English, imposing
their Laws and Customs, and endeavoring to raise Contributions and Excises on
them, and in those places where the Dutch had never been; whereupon they have
been several times necessitated to send Soldiers for the repulsing them.

Since the Conclusion of the late Treaty, the Dutch have made new Incursions
upon the English, and given them many new provocations, and have ordained a
Trial of Causes among themselves, and a Proceeding by force of arms, without
any appealing into Europe at all.

And can any Prince then think it strange, if his Majesty of England suffer his
subjects to rescue themselves from such continual Vexations? His most Christian
Majesty in the year 1665, was pleased to order his subjects to re-possess
themselves by force of arms of a certain place called Cayen, which the French
alleged had been wrongfully kept from them, and detained by the West India
Company of the Netherlanders.

We might in the next place alledg De Ruyter's leaving the English Fleet, when
with united Counsels and Forces they were to act against their common Enemies
the Pirates and Barbarians in the Midland-Seas, according to the Treaty soon
after his Majesty's happy Restoration.

We may alledg their Instructions given to Van Campen in the year 1664, at what
time his Majesty entertained not any open War against them; which Instructions
was in downright terms, To attack and fall upon his Majesty's Subjects in the
West Indies, and to carve out their own Satisfaction and Reparation.

Lastly, Their refusing to strike, and denying his Majesty the Right of the
Flag, even in his own Seas: Witness Sir Robert Holmes late meeting with Eight
Dutch Men of War convoying their Smyrna-Fleet homewards, which had no doubt
come short of home, had not that brave Commander been overpowered with Numbers:
In which short, but sharp Conflict, as there was not an Englishman which gave
not large proof and demonstration of his Courage; so particularly, the Right
Honorable the Earl of Ossery, acted wonders that day, almost baffling the
belief of their eyes who were Spectators of his incredible Valor.

Thus I have in part drawn to the knowledge of all, the Cruelties, Ingratitudes,
Injuries, and Wrongs, done unto the English by the Treacherous Dutch; yet not
one hundred part of what they are; and for their hainousness, deserve only a
Pen of Steel to record them in the wrinkled brow of Time, there to remain to
posterity. And if all the Premises aforesaid be not cause enough to provoke his
Majesty to maintain the Justice of his Cause by the Force of Arms, we will
leave to the World, and to his Enemies themselves to judge: And surely that
Sword is to be feared, that strikes with the Hand of Justice.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
THey that will needs bear all the World before them by their Mare Liberum, may
soon come to have Nec Terram, nec Solum, nec Rempublicam Liberum.

Neptune's welcome to his Royal Highness JAMES Duke of York, upon his first
appearance at Sea, to Fight the Hollander.
AM I awake? Or have some Dreams conspired,
To mock my Sense, with what I most desired?
View I the undaunted Face, See I those looks,
Which with Delight were wont to amaze my Brooks?
Do I behold that Mars, that Man Divine,
The Worlds great Glory, by these Waves of mine?
No, I find true, what long I wished in vain:
My much endeared Prince is come again.
So unto them, whose Zenith is the Pole,
When six black Months, bright Sol begins to role;
So comes Arabia's Wonder from the Woods,
And far, far off is seen by Memphis Floods,
The feathered Sylveans Cloud, like by her fly,
And with triumphing Plaudits beat the sky.
To Virgins, Flowers; to Sun-burn'd Earth, the Rain;
To Mariners Fair Winds amidst the Main;
Cold shades to such, who by hot glances burn,
Are not so pleasing, as thy blessed Return.
Swell my proud Billows, fail not to declare,
Your Joys as ample, as his Conquests are.
And you my Nymphs, rise from your moist repair,
And with your Lillies Crown this Princes Hair.
Kiss each his floating Castles which do run
Upon our Waves, swift as the Rising-Sun.
Eye of our Western-World, Mars-daunting Prince,
Whose Valiant Deeds the World cannot recompense.
For to thy Virtues and thy Deeds is due,
All that the Planet of the year does view.
O Days to be desired! Age happy thrice,
If you your Heaven-sent good could daily prize!
But we (half Palsie-sick) think never right
Of what we hold, till it be from our sight.
I see an Age, when after some few years,
And Revolutions of the slow paced Spears,
These days shall be 'bove others far esteemed,
And like the World's great Conquerers be deemed,
The Names of Caesar, and feigned Paladine,
Grav'n in Times surly brows, in Wrinkled-Time,
Shall by this Princes Name be past as far,
As Meteors are by the Idalian Star:
For to Great Britains Isle thou shall restore
Her Mare Clausum; Guard her Pearly shore,
The Lions Passant of Dutch bands shall free,
To the true Owner of the Lillies three.
The Seas shall shrink, shake shall the spacious Earth,
And tremble in her Chamber, like pale Death.
Thy thundering Cannons shall proclaim to all
Great Britain's Glory, and proud Holland's Fall.
Run on brave Prince thy course in Glory's way,
The End the Life, the Evening crowns the Day.
Reap Worth on Worth, and strongly sore above
Those Heights which made the World thee first to love.
Surmount thy Self, and make thy Actions past
Be but as gleams or lightnings of thy Last.
Let them exceed those of thy younger time,
As far as Autumu does the Flowry-prime:
So ever Gold and Bays thy Brow adorn:
So never Time may see thy Race outworn.
So of thine own still may thou be desired:
Of Holland feared, and by the World admired:
Til thy great Deeds all former deeds surmount:
Thou'st quel'd the Nimrods of our Hellespont.
So may his high Exploits at last make even
With Earth his Honor, Glory with the Heaven.
FINIS.

