THE SPEECH OF Henry Dowdall, Esquire Recorder of DROGHEDA To His MAJESTY, at His
Entry into the Town of DROGHEDA, On the seventh of April, 1689.
Imprimatur.

PATRICK CLOGHER.

Most Sacred SIR,
AMong the many Miracles which adorn almost every step and passage of Your Most
Sacred Majesty's Life, we think none more Conspicuous, taken in all its
Circumstances, and Providential Accidents, than Your Majesty's late, more than
Miraculous. Landing in this Your Ancient, Loyal, and long-suffering Kingdom: A
Blessing, by so much the more surprising, by how much the less expected! A
Blessing, of which our Ancestors never could dream, when their thoughts were
proudest! A Blessing, for which we our selves never could hope, when our
Misfortunes allowed no other Consolation but what we were forced to seek in
dubious Prophesies, or in our almost worn and tired Devotion! A Blessing, in
fine, which late Posterity will scarcely believe, be it never so credulous.

For our shares, (Great Sir) we are f^^ced to confess, that the novelty of our
present Happiness is still so surprising, that Joy of the one side, and Wonder
of the other, have so divided our Souls, that we scarcely find leisure for a
single thought. And yet, we cannot but perceive, as the descending of a God was
formerly requisite to the re-instating of lapsed Man, that e'neso the coming of
a God-like KING was absolutely requisite to the redeeming of a Loyal Distressed
People from a Captivity, in its Cause, Duration and Severity, not to be
paralleled in Story.

In Effect (Great Sir) a faint Beam shot from a distant Sun through so many
thick intervening Clouds, was scarce able to dissipate the envenomed Foggs, for
almost forty years so predominant in this Isle; and nothing less could do it,
than the more powerful warmth of that Sunshine, which on Your Majesty's first
Landing, overspread our Hemisphere.

And though we ca^t utterly abhor and detest the first moving Cause of this Your
Most Grac^^^^ Visit, yet cannot we but Praise and Bless Providence, for having
raised to (...) the Perjury, Treachery, and Perfidiousness of others, a fair
opportunity (...) exerting those truly loyal Principles which our slaughtered
Ancestors signed ^ith their Blood, and avowed with their dying Groans.

Yes (Sacred Sir) it must make for the Credit of long wronged Ireland, that She
still suffered for, and with her Royal Master: And if now there be found in Her
any Distemper or peccant Humor, it proceeds from the too great fullness of
pampered Traitors, who Gorged with the Fat of Loyal Sufferers, must at length
have broke out in the old Sores and Ulcers of Rebellion.

But since it pleased God, and You (Great Sir) to have preserved the Head and
Heart still sound, the malignancy of the Distemper being now cast into the
Extremity of one Limb, and the Sore being brought to maturity, Your Majesty may
with safety apply a Discretionary Medicine.

What remains to me, (Great Sir) is humbly to Implore Your Majesty's Acceptance
of a Sacrifice, which this day I am Commissioned to offer. It is (Great Sir)
the Hearts and Hands of this Adoring Crowd, the Lives and Fortunes of all these
the Ancient Inhabitants of Your Majesty's most Ancient, and most Loyal Town of
Drogheda. That their Blood is sincere, and proof against the Scurvy of
Rebellion; Witness those Walls; Witness these Pavements Consecrated by the Gore
of their Ever-faithful Progenitors.

We will conclude (Great Sir) with a short Prayer, and it is not that Your
Majesty either Protect us in, or Restore us to our lost Property, our Churches,
or our Benefices: No. Our Loyalty is so Seraphick, that it rejects all those
drossy Allays of Self-Interest; but it is (Sacred Sir) that Heaven, whose
Darling we are sure you are, may grant to Your Most Sacred Majesty, after
having dashed to pieces all Treasonable and Traitorous Associations and
Conspiracies, after having sored like a Sun in its full Meridian over the Heads
of all Your Enemies, and unnaturally Rebellious Subjects, after having
dismembered Rebellion it self, that Infernal Hydra, and driven it into its
Hellish Mansions, where we are sure it took its first Breath, a Happy, a
Speedy, a Safe, and a Glorious Return to Your Ancient Imperial Throne; in
Success, a Caesar; in Conquest, an Alexander; and a Constantine in Religion.

FINIS.

