THE REVELATION INTERPRETED:

By the La. ELEANOR.

2 THESSAL. 2. 3. Let no man deceive you, by any means for that day shall not
come, except there come a falling away first, etc.

Printed in the year, 1646.

THE REVELATION INTERPRETED:
By the LADY ELEANOR.
Chap. XIII.
PAssing by Caesar's adored Image: with the Time amounting to about 1700. years
past, since their uprising, as hereby appears giving the seven Heads and ten
Horns: until its setting, that Monarchies period, RATHER proceeding with
these, to show the Truth, who the Founder of great BRJTTAINS unhappie faction,
as the Holy Ghost here gives to understand so plainly, That none needs to ask,
whose description This, of this Sea Monster no other then the Admyrals-Office:
where the waters having the priority, Thus shows:

Verse, I.
And J stood upon the Sand of the SEA, and saw a Beast rise up out of the Sea,
having seven heads, and ten horns, and upon his horns ten Crowns, and upon his
heads the Names of BLASPHEMY: The Dragon giving him his power and great
authority: namely, George Viliers, created Duke of Buckingham.

Where follows the Names given to Ships, one called the Leopard, another the
Bear, and the Lion, and the like, as not unknown. verse.

And so of his deadly wound given at Porchmouth, that addored Minnion, for two
seven years who was so followed of every one, and admired: Of whose Large
gifts Thus farther:

Verse. III.
And J saw one of his heads (as it were) wounded to death, and all the World
admired the BEAST: And his deadly Wound was healed. And there was given him a
Mouth speaking great Things, and Blasphemy: And power was given him to
continue 42. months; and he opened his mouth in Blasphemy, etc.

Where shows here, besides the healing of that foul Soar the Kings- Evil,
Porchmouths BLOVV, by a Butchers knife given, how Cured. also what an
insaciable Mouth by him opened; daily fed with such Gifes, Offices, and Titles
of Honor not a few; wanting NO kindred to be supplied. This aspiering man
Buckingham, from the Beast deriving his Name, so much bound to the Dragon his
Patron, rather then to Saint George. This supporter of the Spanish FACTION,
colored or clok'd under Arminisme: That beyond expectation ter ten years, his
Fathers VNLVKYE Favorite who continned his too, from 1625. March, until 1628.
August, two and forty Months, or three Years and half before his Pay
received, not behind with it Then Being as not unknown fore-warnd OF that very
Month, Caesar, as he foretold of the Jdes of March.

Where serving for both Meridians shows. The french K: for his Blasphemous
Tongue also how Rewarded, who gives the ten HORNS Crowned. That in the Year,
1610. Likewise was slain, whose Faction revived again or continued too. As by
the Power of the KEYS, Conjured up such SPIRITS or Factions set a foot,
begeting in KINGDOMS such desperate VVARRES and doings; where The one NOT more
suddenly in that Manner taken away, Then the Other remaining in Prison so long:
waiting His appointed Time, as extant upon RECORD, sometime made known to him:
But no more of that NOW. But of his Sorceries and Witchcrafts as revealed here,
or miracles.

Where farthermore, for the Treasurers-Office thus, usurped by the Clergy,
(verse 11.) And J beheld another beast coming out of the Earth, with two Horns
like a Lamb, spoke like the Dragon, and exercises all the Power of the first
Beast, etc.

And so no farther, of This Canonized expert DOCTOR or Saint, inspired by the
Red Dragon, (with such a gift in healing,) by whom this deadly Wound healed,
worse then when Buckingham was liveing. The Number of whose Name, even
(VJS-COVNT VVJLERS) as count the Number of the BRJTTJSH-Beast, Namely 666.
These numerall Letters HJS: VIC LVVVI, viscount vvilers: Together with the
weight of Solomon's gold Yearly 666. Talents, (Chron. 9. Chap.) Included in
those Characters. Of a truth directly pointed at great Britains Revenue and
Customs rather; amounting to about six Hundred Thousand pounds per annum: Put
on this Account, etc.

And so much for this piece finished in such have: The last days story.
Dedicated to HIM that has Understanding and Ears, to weigh it too: The vanity
setting forth, and instabillity of WORLDLY Things, or perferment in this
Admirable BEAST: his rising, and falling, Whose power To the wonder of all
Continuing from the Year, 1625. March (first of this present Reign:) until
August, 1628. As afore-shewed, even the Dukes due 42. MONTHS: And concerning
the TREASVRERS-Office engrossed by the CLERGY, our High Priest, horned like the
Lamb, (to wit) The two Arch-bishop-pricks, voyced like the old Red Dragon. That
wonder in Heaven whose place found no more there: Stileing Themselves like the
Arch-angell, no less.

And thus passing on: from That SEA-Wonder, to this VVonder coming out of the
Earth; faining (as it were) Himself to be Elias: When Bals Priests slain, and
to say the Truth in this comes not short; He the occasion of their Ruin, the
Bishops their Downfall: And for such, Fire descending from Heaven, witness the
Wrath of GOD; as fire and sword, who can gainsay it, but HE the Author
thereof doubtless, And the day of Judgment too: hastend it, not far off.

SO farther, as here Noted or Signified for the Time of Easter Thus, or the
RESVRRECTION-Feast: When such a Bloody reign began, Namely; Wherein that
abomination (the cause of these Judgments) Idolatry again set up, directly in
these expressed: And all whose Names are Not written in the Book of Life, of
the Lamb slain from the beginning of the WORLD; shall worship or obey HIM: As
again, this for another witness of the aforesaid Feast; Peter's cutting Off
that Man's Ears, again healed. Even pointed at, as cried here. JF ANY MAN HAVE
AN EAR, Let him hear: Verse, He that Leads into Captivity, shall go into
Captivity; and he that kills, shall be killed. (as much to say) As some want
their Ears, So others their Understanding more, That discern Not These.

Where shows, unto such Cruelty, and Blood-thirstynesse, how this man added
Blasphemies-madnesse: As these giving to understand, saying; That he has
Power to give LIFE, BREATH, and SPEECH, etc. verse. (as it were) Because the
Keys of the Bottumlesse pit His, where gold so current: Therefore in Him all
Live and Move, etc. fearful to be Named or Spoken.

And these are The JMAGES those Angels adored also: And as for the Beast that
had the deadly VVound with the Sword and did Live, (or was healed) besides the
Faction continued, points withal at the great Plague, When the Angels Sword so
suddenly sheathed, 1625. with worse Plagues accompanied; The advancers of
Jdolatry and Tyrranny:

As here farther more aludes to great BABYLONS Proclamations of The golden
JMAGE; He that would not fall down before it, to be killed: (as much to say)
ALTARS served, and bowed unto, etc. And at last, what Measure tbey meted to
Others, served with the same Themselves: Sometime that were so Observed, Feared
and Flattered; This Sea-god: And god of the Winds like, Dragon-like by Sea and
Land roaring, setting KINGDOMS together by the Ears: Breathing and Thundering
out LYING and BLASPHEMY, as They please, without Control: And so He, Who
has Understanding; needs NO farther to wonder or be informed, what These
revealed LAST Monsters are:

The Signs infalible of the Last day at hand: Where besides Caesar's golden
Image, adored; gold made their god: (verse) aluding to the That: Used too for
the KINGS-EVILL so dangerous to be LOST or VVanting. And as here, Jdolatry and
Covetousness both expressed: So deified Caesar, his translating of the Year,
points thereat: Those 365 days of the Year: Like Enoch days also 365, he
translated, or That was NOT: whose Successor Eternity, like Methuselah, as
Augustus outreigned all the rest, and That succeeded Him untimely Cut off.

And again, as Eternity preceding Time, so K: James his 60 years reign,
before his NOW aged 46; bearing Times mark or Seal 1646. Time to be Longer:
HIS power put down too: And so NO farther of the Dragons old quarrel to Saint
George, in advancing One of That Name, or Seating in the Saddle such a
graceless ONE: breaking his own Neck: And ruin of the KINGDOM. This New
adored Saint, (as no doubt Canonized) Saint George the second, saluted with
sevenfold Blasphemous superscriptions daily such, and the Like made upon His
NAME (His grace): Whereas thrice SIX 666. The restless Number thereof. Here
unto the VVLgare not referred or directed: But he which Understands Misteryes
of State to Him:

Proverbs XVI. How much better it is to get wisdom Then gold: And to get
understanding rather to chosen then Silver. And thus wild as the Dragon: He
with Satan's Mark in the head, of the old Serpents cut, (Geneses. 3.) By some
MERMAYDE, as this BlaspheMER: spewd up doubtless; so from Them his enchanting
Noats had, of Menacing such, reaching from Earth to Heaven.

FINIS. FJNJS.

