OF ERRORS JOINED WITH GODS WORD.

By the Lady ELEANOR:

Make straight the Path of our God.

Isaiah 41. Printed in the year, 1645.

For the most Honorable the high Court of PARLIAMENT assembled.
From the Lady Eleanor.
AS the Blind then foretold of their leading the Blind: So verily never more
palpable darkness: (of that kind) then now: Even such as the very Legend and
Alchoran for a bold fable hardly guilty of the like: As this witness for one
published according to order entitled: A divine prophecy of King James a
Relation of the two witnesses their coming down from Heaven, and then fighting
with Antichrist, etc.

A thing so contradictory and Repugnant to the truth: As light and darkness
not more opposite or differing: they being so far from any such declination:
That they ascended up to Heaven in the sight of their enemies, as witness come
up hither, the resurrections voice, being persecuted by that Beast, viz. such
an authority put down afterward Rev. 12. as even the very beast himself
asscended out of the bottomless pit.

Which witnesses signifying in truth Dan. and John, two Books of the Prophets
to be interpreted, the Resurrection time revealing it, and though accompanied
with such signs and tokens at that time: Yet as in former Prophets days
likewise persecuted and opposed.

And every title of this being so precious that Heaven and Earth cannot pass
away till all come to pass, showed and manifested to the world, shall show of
some other places as barbarously corrupted also: Kings 2. For whereas the Holy
Ghost says, there shall be none left to bury of Jezabels body. They have made
it, there shall be no body left to bury her, and Daniel the 11. Cap. thus:
Where showed at the end of years, The Kings daughter of the South pointing at
Austria, shall be delivered namely of a child, is by our Doctors thus
translated: (But she shall be delivered up to death) whereof even the true
meaning is. To show at the time of the end such a remarkable thing of one so
long time childlesse, Nevertheless to be delivered or brought a bed of a
child: to wit the marriage of France with Spain, etc.

And so for another mistake a word of no small difference namely the word
Sacrifice added in so many places; whereas the Holy Ghost renders it thus.

And an Host was given against the daily: (Dan:) our daily bread given in the
Lords Supper, as much to say, by them translated as it were the host offered
up, or Transubstantiation, and such like linsie wolsie woven together by them,
because they receive not the truth, is just with God to leave them to the
spirit of Error. And though there is a certain place faulty: 2 Chronicles. 22.
showing Ahaziab to be two years elder then his father Jehoram yet being
reconciled else where in holy writ, as in 2 Kings Cap. 8. verse 26. is not to
be placed amongst the aforesaid errors: As in truth Ahaziah 22. years old when
he began to reign. And not 42 though so accounted there. 2 Chronicles. 22. Cap. 2.
verse.

And so much for a scourg of small cords made, or some Correction as here
requisite: where Gods word which passes not away, is changed into stuff,
passing for current.

FJNIS.

