THE Crying Charge.

Ezekiel 22. Now thou Son of man, will thou judge, Will thou judge the bloody
City? yea, thou shall show her all her Abominations, etc. Printed in the year
1649.

To the High Court of Justice, appointed for the Trial of CHARLES STVART King
of ENGLAND. By the Lady Eleanor Douglas.
SHOWS,
THe Kings consent therewith, how Mervin E. of Castlehaven, Lord Audeley,
unmercifully was sentenced to death Easter term 1631. and in May cruelly
executed a^^ Tower Hill, accused falsely of two Crimes, what lewdnes could and
malice produce; one, Of his being accessory to a Rape committed on Ann his
wife, done by a Page, one Broadway; and, Of Sodomy (made death H: 8.) committed
with an Irish Footman, Fitzpatrick O Donel; which aforesaid Lord Audeley
indicted of Felony, brought to his trial at westminster, the K. Attorney where
showed, The King like God, would extend to the prisoner all mercy: Likewise the
Lo: Keeper that day Lo: High Steward, because the cry was great of Sodom, would
see whether those things were so; the Witnesses whereupon called to appear, she
a common Whore her husbands accuser, without ever appearing in Court, or taking
any Oath, had there contrary to the Law, one of her consorts that said, My Lady
upon her Honor says thus, etc. or, It was true.

The other Witness, the Irishman, he a vagrant, had served under the Emperor,
although a Papist, had contrary to Law, his Oath taken at the Bar, refusing the
Oath of Allegiance; where asked by one of the Judges the manner, confessed, Not the
act, but somewhat of a foul nature, etc. what such malice and the like might
invent, promised to be the Queens Footman. The Attorney, one not to seek of his
Errand, saying, Howsoever, it was an act of Uncleanness; prayed the Court to
proceed upon it: My Lords, said he, you have heard this odious Crime, how dark
and mysterious it is grown; you must be curious therefore how you admit of any
mitigation: who accordingly his counsel took, etc.

Upon which pronounced, Lord have mercy upon thee the prisoner, to lose his
life forthwith, of such promised mercy enjoyed the first fruits.

All which undue sinister proceedings by way of humble Petition signified to
the K. when perceived to what a low ebb the cry was fallen and his Chaplains,
Deans and others appointed to attend the prisoner, partly by their relation, he
thrice in their presence had taken the Sacrament upon it, He was not guilty of
those criminals; was pleased by them to let the prisoner know his gracious
Answer, He should dye like a Peer of the Realm, be Beheaded, and not Hanged
like a common person: whose Servants, his Page the principal, who ought to have
suffered, before the accessory; he and his fellow servants the Footman were
brought to their trial the next Term.

In behalf of whom the aforesaid Broadway, came up diverse Gentlemen of the
County to inform the King, able to testify of the Youths coming home to his
Fathers house, more then six months before the time put down by her of the
Ravishment, this Broadway come away from his Lords service.

Who at last cast; when upon the Ladder so far protested both his Masters
innocence that way and his own; taking God to witness, A virgin he came into
his service, and a virgin went forth of it.

O Donel praying to St. Dennis, cried out upon some of the Privy Council that
told him, He must speak for the King, and thought not to be served so.

And this man's house utterly ruined, chiefly, because had declined Popery,
before his untimely death ever suspected; endeavoring to reform his Family, by
which means cast himself upon the merciless times. Mervin Earl of Castlehaven,
that faithful Martyr, suffering (as it were) between those twain, one on the
right hand, the other on the lest, the honor having to be the first entered into
the joy of his Lord; of whom notwithstanding the worst any in the world could
world could say, was, He had the best things in him of any, and the worst: Upon
the Scaffold making this his Confession;

In the Name of God Amen.
I Mervin Earl of Castlehaven, being in my full strength and memory, thanks be
given unto my Maker, having been branded and openly accused for change,
alteration and doubtfulness of my Faith and Religion; I thought fit, like a
Christian man to give satisfaction upon what ground I stand for my belief, and
to express it under my hand, for the satisfaction of all charitable people and
Christians.

First, I do believe in the blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons; one
eternal and everlasting God, God the Father, God my Redeemer, and God my
Sanctifier.

I do rely upon the merit, death and passion of our blessed Savior Christ
Jesus, and upon his mediation for the remission of my sins.

I do believe and use with most humble reverence our Lords Prayer, the Creed of
the Apostles, and the ten Commandments, as they are set down and allowed in the
Church of England.

I do believe the Canonical Scriptures, and that they are written by the
inspiration of the holy Spirit.

And for the rest of my belief, I do refer it to tbe true Orthodox Faith of our
Church of England. And from the Articles received at this present in the Church
of England, and confirmed by authority of Parliament, I do not differ in any
point, renouncing all the Superstitions and Errors taught or believed in the
Church of Rome or any other Church; in which Faith I will, God willing,
continue to my lives end:

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto subscribed my Hand this first of May,
1631. CASTLEHAVEN.

Psalm. 116. Right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.
FINIS.

