(...) Nov. 1680.
ORde^ (...) of this House be retur^ (...), for his Sermon yesterday (...)
House at St. Margarets, and that (...) the same: And Mr. Speaker is (...) use
to give him Thanks, and to (...) of the House to Print his Sermon.

(...). Goldesborough, Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE House of COMMONS, At St. Margarets
Westminster, November 5. 1680. BY HENRY DOVE, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. C. for H. Brom at the Gun, and Benj. Took at the Ship
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS, At St. Margarets
Westminster, Nov. 5. 1680.
Psalm 64. 9, 10. And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God:
for they shall wisely consider of his doing.

The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him: and all the
upright in heart shall glory.


THAT this Psalm is a Prayer of David's for preservation of his Life from fear
of the enemy, we are assured from the title and the first verse: And if that
rule of Interpreters hold good, That where nothing is new in the Title, there
the Argument is the same with the foregoing Psalm, we may probably infer, that
it was indicted by the Royal Prophet, when Saul and his associates sought his
life.

However it be (for Expositors are not agreed about it) without any force to
the Text, or any part of the Context, we may fitly apply it to the Public
Solemnity of this day, wherein we are assembled to magnify the providence of
God for his memorable deliverance of the King and Kingdom from the bloody
designs of Popish Traitors, and to implore his goodness for the continuance of
his favor to our present Sovereign and the whole Nation; to give him thanks
for the great things he has done for us already, and to pray for the final
defeat of the like hellish Plots against us. This is a day which the Lord has
made, let us rejoice, and be glad in it: nay, this is a season which he has
once more signalized, let us pray and sing praises to the God of our lives. And
what great reason we have to rejoice in his Providence, and glory in his Power,
and trust in his Goodness, will be evident from the words when applied to the
day: for it is most remarkably of his own making; he has made it his, by a
miracle of mercy; And all men shall fear and shall declare the work of God, for
they shall wisely consider of his doing: and he has made it ours by a return
of duty; The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him; and
all the upright in heart shall glory.

In the words we have these three general parts.

I. An Act of God; something of his doing.

II. Its Effect upon men in general: All men shall fear, and shall declare, etc.

III. A special Duty resulting from it, incumbent on good men: The righteous,
etc.

I. I begin with the first, as the ground of all the rest: An Act of God, which
is twice mentioned, called The work of God, and His doing: The expression is
doubled, to make it at once more certain, and to bespeak our observance of it:
But what that work was, and by what means accomplished, we must learn from the
precedent verses. The Psalm (as I said) is a prayer of David's for deliverance
from his enemies, with a description of their intended cruelty, and a
prediction of Gods judgments on them. His enemies were strong and powerful, but
God was omnipotent, and in Him was his help and trust; they designed his utter
ruin, but God turned the mischief upon their own heads. And that we may see
how great a deliverance God wrought for him, let us first consider what they
plotted against him. In the description we have several characters of their
rage and cruelty, and as many intimations of his danger.

1. Their secret counsels and midnight contrivances, [ver. 2.] Hide me from the
secret counsel of the wicked; for so usually all Treasons and Conspiracies
begin, in private Combinations and clandestine Plots: And though it be true of
all sins, that they are works of darkness, yet Treasons most of all hate and
avoid the light, being hatched in the dark recesses of wicked hearts, and
promoted by secret Meetings and Consultations. But their malice was too great
to be long concealed by darkness it self, and therefore it soon broke out,

2. Into open Rebellion; for so it follows, [ver. 2.] Hide me from the
insurrection of the workers of iniquity: that is the next degree of their
mischief and his danger: They that harbor Treason in their hearts want only an
opportunity to act it with their hands; and when men are engaged in wicked
Conspiracies, they are soon drawn on to open Insurrections: They that dare
imagine evil against the King in their Bedchamber, will not stick to
countenance Rebellion against him in the Camp: For the malice of Treason, like
fire concealed, will either find or force its passage. So their secret counsels
here, were soon formed into an Insurrection, and the heat of their rage kindled
the flames of Rebellion.

3. In their slanderous reproaches and unjust insinuations, ver. 3. They whet
their tongue like a sword, and shoot out their arrows, even bitter words: This
is the usual Prologue to all Traytorous designs, to calumniate the Government,
and speak evil of Dignities, to reproach the one and make it odious, by
traducing the other, and rendering them contemptible: They shoot out their
arrows, intimating the number of their slanders; for such will be sure to say
enough, that something at least may be believed: Or if their reproaches be too
gross to find credit, then they rail and discharge bitter words, sharpened with
spite and envenomed with malice, and these they dart in private suggestions
and crafty insinuations, ver. 4. That they may shoot in secret at the perfect,
suddenly do they hit him, and fear not. And when they have infected others with
this poison of asps that is under their lips, we soon find 'em in the next place

4. Met at their private Cabals, to animate the Traitors, and carry on the
Treason, ver. 5. They encourage themselves in an evil matter, and commune of
laying snares privily: For Treason is usually an underground work, and as far
as possible is brooded in the dark; mischief is the design, and secrecy is the
midwife to bring it to the birth, and no means unattempted lest it should prove
abortive; which is a further description of their designs, and his danger.

5. Their great industry and diligence, ver. 6. They search out iniquity, they
accomplish a diligent design: There is not a more active Principle in the world
than malice, nor any malice more devilish and busy than that of Rebels: It Is
the Devils malice that makes him restless, and Rebels have so much at least of
his temper, that they leave no stone unturned which may carry on, or accomplish
their mischievous designs: and hence they are fitly styled in Scripture, Sons
of Belial, i. e. of the Arch-rebel.

These are the characters which David gives us of his enemies within the
compass of this short Psalm; and a true description of all their successors,
such as are enemies to Kings, and Traitors to Governments: and when we have put
'em all together, their secret counsels and their barefaced Rebellion, their
malicious slanders, and their deep-laid Plots; and all these acted with
unwearied diligence, and restless industry, we need no further proof of his
enemies designs, and his danger.

But in the midst of all these dangers, and in the height of their expectations
the good man looked up to God, and foresaw his own safety, and their ruin,
ver. 7. But God shall shoot at 'em with a swift arrow, suddenly shall they be
wounded. God who has set up Kings, will defend 'em; He that called David his
Anointed, did preserve him; He that has said, By me Kings reign, has thereby
entitled 'em to his protection: And that it might appear that his rescue was
from Heaven, that both his deliverance and his enemies destruction was Gods own
Act, he has mentioned two circumstances, which I shall briefly consider as most
applicable to the case before us.

1. The suddenness of their destruction. And 2. The manner of the discovery,
and prevention of his danger.

1. The suddenness of the destruction; suddenly shall they be wounded. When
they were in the height of their hopes, priding themselves in their well-formed
Plots, and secure of the success, he that searched the secrets of their hearts
and knew their treachery, blasted the design, and rendered all their
contrivances vain and fruitless. The suddenness of events does usually enhance
the wonder, and when things most improbable and unlikely are brought to pass in
the twinkling of an eye, when men least think of 'em, and have no reason to
expect 'em, it is a plain intimation that some more than ordinary cause
concurred to their production, and the finger of God is clearly visible in such
surprising and unaccountable events. When the Israelites were delivered from
Babylon after a tedious restraint, and all of a sudden sent back to their own
Country in peace, as the joy of such an unexpected return almost amazed 'em.
When the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, then were we like unto them
that dream, [Ps. 126. 1.] they could scarce believe it to be real; so they
rightly concluded [ver. 3.] The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we
rejoice. Such sudden events are beyond the power of ordinary means, and must
needs be concluded to be Gods own work. And so the sudden destruction of the
wicked in the midst of their prosperity, and when they think themselves most
secure, is a manifest proof that it is the Lords own doing. To see fearless
sinners baffled in an instant, and sunk into confusion when they think of
nothing less, is an undeniable argument that it was an omnipotent arm which
smote 'em. And it quieted David's doubts of the equity of Gods providence, when
he saw the wicked brought into desolation in a moment [Psal. 73. 19.] To behold
them flourishing to day like a green Bay Tree, and to morrow dried up like the
Fig Tree cursed by our Savior, makes it notorious and plain, that they were
blasted with a breath from Heaven. So perished David's enemies, whereby it is
evident it was Gods own work: And so was it

2. From the manner of the discovery, and the prevention of his danger, ver. 8.
They shall make their own tongue fall upon the head of themselves. Intimating,
either that the mischiefs which they had devised for others, should return upon
themselves; or that their own tongues should be made their own betrayers. The
first is the Psalmists common observation of the wicked, and of the equity of
Divine Justice in their punishment, that they are taken in the snares which
themselves had laid, and are fallen into the pit they had dug for others.
And the other is as certain (though not so common) that the wicked are often made
the revealers of their own secrets, and the contrivers of mischief are the
betrayers of themselves. And both are arguments of an overruling power in such
mysterious events, and manifest that it is Gods own doing.

And thus have we seen what work it was that David here ascribes to God,
namely, the destruction of his enemies, evident to be his doing, more
especially by the suddenness of their ruin, and the manner of the discovery,
and prevention of his danger. And the case suits well with the occasion and the
day, wherein we escaped as great a danger, by as strange a deliverance, and
that from God too, and of the Lords own doing; which will plainly appear when I
have paralleled the forenamed circumstances with the subject of this days
solemnity.

I shall not need to describe the greatness of our danger, when I have but
mentioned the horror of this days Treason; how the King and Prince, with the
whole High-Court of Parliament were all marked out for slaughter, to be blown
up alive, and involved in one common death without a minutes warning: And it is
not hard to imagine, what tyranny and usurpation, what oppression and
bloodshedding had ensued, what unspeakable misery had been entailed upon us
and our posterity, to the loss of our liberty and fortunes, to the change of
our Government and Religion, to the continual hazard of our lives, and of all
that at present we peaceably enjoy: which was all certainly intended, though by
the infinite mercy of God, it was never executed. A design so cruel, that they
who cannot but abhor it, if true, would willingly persuade themselves and
others, it is false; and we are forbidden to trust our ears, because we did not
see it with our eyes. It Is hard, that they who lay the greatest stress on
Tradition, should not allow us to believe one, especially of a matter of fact,
of less than fourscore years, and within the memory of some now living: But
what will not they deny, who cry down the Bible it self, and vilify the
testimony of Gods holy Spirit, when it makes against them? For unless the
several public Records of the Kingdom, and the joint consent of our deceased
Fathers, unless the confessions of the Traitors themselves, and some of their
own most creditable Wtiters; nay, unless our own senses at this very day, and
our fresh experience of the like damnable designs, can be all supposed to
deceive us, a Conspiracy no less certain than barbarous, as firmly to be
believed as heartily detested by all that wish well to our English Israel, and
renounce those ungodly Principles, which countenance or defend such unchristian
and bloody practices. I know rhere are few (if any) that hear me, unacquainted
with the story of this days Plot; and therefore I shall leave it to your
memories to run the parallel between David's Conspirators and these Traitors,
in the secrecy of their Counsels, designs laid deep as Hell, and black as
utter darkness, in the maliciousness of their calumnies and embittered
slanders, in the insolence of their insurrection and bold-fac'd Rebellion; and
in their industrious sedulity to carry on their Treason, and an unquenchable
thirst after blood and ruin; to all which they wanted only success to make 'em
the most matchless villains that perhaps ever trod on the earths surface.

But he that sits in Heaven laughed 'em to scorn; the Lord had them in
derision: What David foresaw, God himself revealed, by discovering the Treason
and confounding the Traitors: which happy discovery gave birth to this days
joyful gratulations, to praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for us the children of men. To which as the proper matter
of this days duty I hasten, when I have first briefly evinced, that this was
also Gods own doing: which will be more evident from the same arguments,
wherewith David manifested the destruction of his enemies to be Gods own work.

1. From the suddenness of their destruction. When there was but one night
between us and ruin; and e're the next Sun had set, the whole body of this
flourishing Kingdom had either bled its last, or fainted with the loss of its
best blood; when the Treason was ripe for action, and nothing wanting to the
execution but only stretching out an hand to fire the fatal train; when the
Traitors grew big with hopes, and altogether fearless of disappointment, God
shoots at 'em with a swift arrow, and suddenly they are wounded. They had
posted themselves in several quarters of the Kingdom, looking for destruction;
and it came so effectually on themselves, that as they did not suspect it, so
they could not possibly avoid it. Their designs were so near the issue, that
their Confederates at a distance believed 'em done; and so nigh was our danger,
that we might truly say with David, [1 Samuel 20. 3.] As the Lord lives, there
was but a step between us and death. But God who rescued Isaac from the knife
and the fiery pile, withheld That terrible Blow, and made them the sacrifice to
their own merciless cruelty, delivered us from the fire, and made them the
offering, consuming 'em in a moment by their own wickedness: For it is no new
observation that several of those rebellious accomplices, who had prepared the
fatal Pile, were first scorched and afterward slain by the direful effects of
that very element, which they had chosen as an instrument of our ruin: And
when we see such notorious offenders corrected by their own sins, when they are
punished by the same thing wherein they have offended, and made to drink (as it
were) out of their own cup, we may easily discern who administers the potion,
and how just the retaliation is. And it is often the case of the wicked, that Gods
hand may be manifest, and his providence glorified by the resemblance of the
punishment to the sin: The Psalmist has noted it [Ps. 109. 27.] Hereby shall
they know that it is thy hand, and that thou Lord have done it: and how is that?
[ver. 29.] in that they are clothed with their own shame, and covered with
their own confusion, as with a mantle: That they fall as fast as they rise; are
still confounded by their own devices, and still thy servants rejoice.

2. In the manner of the discovery, and prevention of the danger: That the
Traitors should be made their own Betrayers; and one of them by endeavoring to
save a Friend, should destroy all the rest of his accomplices: That darkness
should bring their deeds to light, and one night discover what ten months had
concealed: That the obscurity of a Letter should prove the best comment to find
out its meaning, and the darkness of the Text give light to its interpretation:
That the Actors should be apprehended on the Stage, when they were just ready
to begin the Tragedy, and all the danger blown over in a moment: That the
intended Massacre should be the means to our greater safety; and the ruin
threatened to our Church should prove its establishment. These are all
undeniably such effects, as carry on 'em the Signacula Dei, the print of Gods
finger, the legible characters of infinite Wisdom, and Omnipotence. So that we
may boldly appeal with David to all that see it; O come hither and behold the
work of God, how wonderful he is in his doing! Psalm. 66. 5. And what is that?
that such as are rebellious are not able to exalt themselves [ver. 7.] but are
snared in the work of their own hands: for it was this day done, the ungodly
were caught in their own snare, and trapped in the pit they had dug for
others, even without a figure. They said among themselves, Come, and let us
make havoc of 'em all together, by undermining 'em in that very place where
they have made such Laws against us. They sought deep to hide their counsel,
and their works were in the dark; and they said, Who sees it? and who knows
it? They took an Oath of Secrecy, nay they received the Sacrament upon it:
Blessed Lord! that thy most Holy Ordinance should be thus profaned; that men
should call upon thy Name, while they deliberately blaspheme thine Honor! The
Seal of Confession must not be violated to save the King and Kingdom; but the
Seal of our Eternal Redemption is made the Bond of Iniquity without any
scruple: Such is the Piety of those who make Religion a cloak for Treason, and
turn Rebels out of Conscience! They stuck (you see) at nothing to lodge the
Secret safe; but God avenged their profaneness by infatuating their Counsels:
He darts a scruple into one of their minds [Lest the righteous should perish
with the wicked] and makes his own Conscience tell him more than seven
Confessors: He reveals the Treachery by the hand of a Confident, and makes the
mischief betray it self, that he might protect the Innocent, and make himself
known by the execution of his Judgments upon the wicked, especially on such as
delight in Treason and Blood, and so horribly dishonor Christ as to call it
His Religion. So the Plot was discovered, and the crafty confounded, whereby it
is evident, it was Gods own doing. That Is the first general, the work of God.

II. But when God makes bare his arm, and stretches out his hand to work
wonders, sure the world must be awakned into an observance of them; and that is
next to be considered:

Its Effect upon men in general: and here is a threefold Effect mentioned. 1.
All men shall fear. 2. Shall declare the work of God. 3. Shall wisely consider
of his doing.

1. The first effect is Fear, which naturally arises in men's minds upon the
apprehensions of Gods irresistible power and greatness; For who has an arm like
God? or who can thunder with a voice like him? yea, who can hear his voice and
not tremble? or see his hand stretched out and not be afraid? Thou did cause
thy judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth trembled and was still; Psalm.
76. 8. Thou, even thou art to be feared; and who may stand in thy sight when
once thou art angry? [ver. 7.] And as the apprehensions of his Power and
Majesty strike dread and terror into men, so the wonders of his Providence,
especially the eminent deliverances of his people, and the confusion of their
enemies, must needs beget an awful reverence of that Omnipotence, which alone
does wonders, and brings mighty things to pass. And all men that see such
things shall fear, i. e. shall tremble before his Power and Providence, who by
such events makes it manifest, that he interposes his Wisdom in the most secret
counsels of men, and overrules all their malicious contrivances, to the ends
of his own Counsel, and the designs of his Goodness. As Joseph said to his
Brethren, Genesis 50. 20. As for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it
unto good; to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive. And
all men shall fear, i. e. shall be afraid to conspire against them, whose cause
God himself so miraculously owns and abets; and shall be convinced, that the
care of the righteous is with the most high; that with his right hand he covers
them, and with his arm he protects 'em. And all men shall fear, i. e. shall be
afraid to do any more so wickedly, and shall depart from the tents of such
ungodly murmurers, left they be consumed in their sins. And all men shall fear,
i. e. shall fear God and the King too, whose Minister he is, in whose name and
behalf he acts; and into whose heart God was pleased to put the first discovery
of this days happy deliverance, and to make him the instrument of his Peoples
Preservation, that they might know him to be Gods visible Deputy upon earth,
and might fear before him; according to the wise-mans advice, My son, fear God
and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change.

All men shall fear, but fear alone will not profit us; for the Devils tremble
before the power they hate, and wicked men may dread Gods vengeance, where they
are unwilling to see his hand: and therefore here follows another effect, which
such signal actions have upon men:

2. They shall declare the work of the Lord. And this is an effect as general
and large as the other, though upon different accounts; for even they who are
unwilling to own it, shall be forced to acknowledge it, and they for whose sake
it is done shall rejoice to publish it. When God rescued his people from
Babylon, the Psalmist observes, that even the Heathen took notice of their
wonderful deliverance, Psalm. 126. 2. Then said they among the heathen, the Lord
has done great things for them: And if Strangers that have only heard of ours,
shall talk of Gods providence over us, surely we that reap the benefits of his
goodness, should sing forth the honor of his name, and make his praise to be
glorious: If it was wonderful in their eyes, we were the unworthiest persons in
the world, if it should not be so in ours too. And truly they deserve not to
share in so great a blessing, who neglect to declare this work of the Lord, who
refuse to pay him the honor due unto his name for the frequent deliverances
vouchsafed to our Land and Nation. It Is no less than brutish stupidity that
makes men regardless of these wonders of Providence, which he that rightly
considers, will find reason enough most solemnly to admire and adore; which is
the third effect.

3. They shall wisely consider of his doings. That is, they shall better
understand the method of Gods proceedings, and the reasons of his dealings in
the world: for these things make it plain, that God takes care of the affairs
of his people, and that the enemies of his Church, (enemies I say in their
minds, though the Church be still in their mouths, while they continue their
wicked works) with all their crafty devices, with all their spite and malice,
and the gates of Hell to help them, shall not be able to prevail against her.
And these sudden defeats, and remarkable disappointments of such treasonable
designs, are evidence sufficient that they are hateful to God, who is the
governor of the world, and is concerned for his own Vicegerents; That
vengeance belongs to him, and he will surely repay it for such sins. Whosoever is
wise, says David [Psal. 107. 43.] will observe these things, and they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord: And it is the wise-mans observation
in the like case [Prov. 24. 22.] having told us of those that are given to
change, that their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of
them both? He immediately subjoyns, These things also belong unto the wise,
[ver. 27.] that is, these things are matter of weighty consideration, and
thereby we may learn by experience, that God for the better government of the
world thinks it fit, to make Rebels and Traitors the most memorable examples of
Vengeance and Judgment: Search the Scriptures, and turn over the Annals of all
Ages, you shall scarce meet in story with a seditious Innovator or a Rebel, who
has not ruined himself: Destruction treads close upon their heels, and
punishment will assuredly come from God; for they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation, says St. Paul, [Rom. 13. 2.] They shall utterly perish in
their own corruption, says St. Peter, [2 Pet. 2. 12.] Their judgment lingereth
not, and their damnation slumbereth not, [ver. 3.] Not one of the mutinous
generation among the Israelites came into the Land of Promise, because they
rebelled against Moses and Aaron, and in them against God. And that all the
earth may stand in awe of him, and the Governors he has appointed, God opened
the bowels of the earth, and she swallowed up Corah, and covered the
congregation of Abiram; They went down alive into the gulf, with their wives,
and their sons, and their little children, Numb. 16. 27. And that we might
perceive it to be Gods own immediate work, we find Moses putting it upon this
issue, [ver. 29.] If these men die the common death of all men, then the Lord
has not sent me; then let me have no authority among you: But if the Lord make
a new thing, or create a new creature (as the phrase imports) such a thing as
ye never saw, nor was ever heard of before; If the earth open her mouth, and
they go down quick into the pit; what then? why, Then shall ye understand that
these men have provoked the Lord, ver. 30. then shall ye know that it is his
doing. Beware of the way of Corah, lest ye perish in the gainsaying of Corah:
God hates the dispositions, which are the cause of Rebellion, and will never
let the practices go unpunished. If therefore we tremble at the vengeance, let
us dread the crimes, and so wisely consider of Gods doings, as to detest the
sins for which others have been so notably punished. But there is something
more yet to be done, as the proper work of the day; and that is,

III. A duty resulting from all these considerations, and chiefly incumbent on
good men: and that (as the other) is threefold. 1. Rejoicing in the Lord. 2.
Trusting in him. 3. Glory and triumph. The righteous shall, etc.

1. The righteous shall be glad in the Lord. A duty no less easy than
pleasant, and that which we all seem to covet and desire most; that which we
eagerly pursue as the best of this worlds satisfactions, joy and rejoicing:
There is no such gladness of heart, as that which a good man enjoys in the
contemplation of Gods goodness: And sure we need no invitations to what we are
all so naturally inclined: God himself requires it, the deliverance of the Day,
and the discoveries of a later date call for it: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye
righteous, and again I say, rejoice; for the voice of praise is comely, and it
becomes well the just to be thankful. And seeing God requires a sign, and some
outward testimony of your joy and thanks, let me bespeak your Charity to the
Poor, in those emphatical words of Nehemiah, [8. 10.] Go your way, eat the fat,
and drink the sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared:
for this day is holy unto our Lord; neither be you sorry, for the joy of the
Lord is your strength. God who frankly bestows his blessings, loves a cheerful
return of what he gives; and since our goodness extends not unto him, but to
the Saints that are in the earth, he has left the Poor among us as his standing
Receivers by his own Patent, The poor ye shall have always with you, (says our
Savior) and whenever ye will ye may do them good, [Mark 14. 7.] Do it
therefore at this time above all, and make them partakers of your fullness and
joyfulness: for then we glorify his name, when we joy in his salvation, and
are glad to do good to others, as God has done unto us; when the voice of
rejoicing is heard in the Tabernacles of the righteous, and the tokens of our
joy are sent to the poor and needy. And that our joy may be perfect, let us
temper it with Faith, and add the next degree of our Duty:

2. The righteous shall trust in him. And good reason indeed to trust in him,
of whose favor and loving kindness we have had so large experience; well may
we rely on that power which is so able to protect us; well may we depend on
that providence, which so remarkably takes care of us. And herein lies the
difference of the effects, that such works of God have upon the righteous and
the wicked; that the one are struck with horror from the apprehensions of his
power and providence, and confounded with the sense of their own guilt; whilst
good men glory in the demonstrations of Gods power, and make all his
Dispensations an argument of a more cheerful dependence on him. It Is this that
supports the spirits of good men, under all the troubles and distractions of
the world, and keeps 'em from despondence with fear of future evils, and
apprehensions of mischief and disturbances, when they call to mind the
deliverances of past times, and Gods manifold appearances in the cause of his
Church and People.

And what if a cloud appear, or the storms arise? if we build our confidence on
the rock of ages, we have a shelter against the Tempests, a strong consolation
and a good hope, as an anchor of our souls, both sure and steadfast: And what if
the same danger threaten us, and the storms arise from the same quarter? we
have still the same God to flee unto, who has manifested his care of our
Church by a continued series of Miracles and Mercies. Though the unquiet
spirits of the world, and the powers of darkness combine against us, yet if we
hold us fast by God, he will never leave us nor forsake us; if we adhere
constantly unto him, his Faithfulness and Truth will be our Shield and Buckler;
and while we are under the defense of the Almighty, we shall not be greatly
moved. This was David's confidence, whose deliverances always equaled his
dangers, and from his own experience he encourages others to depend upon God,
[Psalm 62. 6, 7.] He only is my rock and my salvation; he is my defense, I
shall not be moved: In God is my salvation and my glory; the rock of my
strength, and my refuge is in God: And then immediately it follows, ver. 8.
Trust in him at all times, O ye people; pour out your heart before him: God is
a refuge for us. Selah. The times and seasons to come are in the hand of God
alone, and we know not what a day, much less what a year may bring forth,
though we cannot but know what our sins have deserved if God should enter into
judgment with us; yet even this is matter of great rejoicing, that we are still
assembled to give him thanks in the great Congregation, and to praise him among
the Heads of the people, And this too is an encouragement to rely on the same
infinite Power and Goodness for the continuance of our safety, That the next
year shall be as this, and much more abundant; That God will settle and root us
faster by shaking us a little; That he will perfect his own work by a full
detection and final defeat of all our implacable enemies. And in this humble
confidence and assurance of his favor we triumph and glory: Which is the last
branch of our Duty.

3. All the upright in heart shall glory: They shall glory in his strength, and
triumph in his favor. But that is not all; they shall glory in the confusion of
the wicked, and rejoice in the continual disappointment of such treacherous
designs: And they that do not rejoice and glory in such Discoveries and
Deliverances are none of the upright in heart; for they defraud God of his due,
and deny him the honor of his own work; and they give us reason to suspect,
that they wish the Treason had been acted. They that refuse to give thanks for
the Deliverance, want only an opportunity to contrive the like mischief, and
put the Design in execution. But let us (I beseech you) as men upright in
heart, with all our Souls, yea with heart and voice, offer up our Thanksgivings
to the God of our mercies, and confess his Name, and glory in his Strength, and
triumph in his Goodness: As we are sensible to whom we owe our safety, let us
keep the Feast with joyful and thankful hearts, making it (like the Feast of
the Passover) a day to be much observed throughout all our Generations; let us
all, as friends to Sion, the Church we wish well to, give thanks to the
preserver of our Sion; as Subjects of a Kingdom, whose peace and prosperity we
pray for, let us bless the God of our Israel, the mighty defender of our Nation.

We have heard with our ears, and our Fathers have declared unto us, the noble
works which God did in their days, and in the time before them. How he did
deliver our Nation from the Tyranny of the Pope, the Usurpations of his Sea,
the Treasons of his Emissaries, and from the Idolatry, Superstition and Cruelty
of his Religion (I call it His, for Popery is no more like Christ's Religion,
than a Wolf is like a Lamb.) How soon he extinguished the fire of the Marian
Persecution; and in the years next ensuing, gave us Beauty for Ashes, even ten
for one: How he put to flight the Forces of the Aliens, and displayed his
wonders in the deep in 88: and how he delivered both our Church and State as on
this Day.

And as we have heard, so have we seen, how miraculously he dispelled that
dismal Cloud which covered us, by bowing the hearts of all-the People, as the
heart of one man, to bring back the King to his own Throne: How he made Him
among the Princes of the earth, the Firstborn (as it were) from the dead; How
his Hand has held him fast in the midst of manifold dangers; and by Gods
protection of Him, we also are protected in the quiet enjoyment of our Lives,
Liberties, Fortunes, and Laws, and in the free and open Profession of Christ's
true Religion. Oh! let us walk worthy of these reiterated Deliverances, and
live as becomes a Reformed and a Redeemed People. Let not our Heats and
Divisions on one hand, nor our Looseness and Profaneness on the other, give
occasion to the Enemy to triumph over us, lest they say in their hearts, There,
there, so would we have it; lest we ruin our selves in a more effectual
manner, than all the Papal Conspirators in Europe can devise. But let us
manifest our thankfulness to God, by living piously and peaceably in the
steadfast Profession of his holy Gospel, and in hearty Loyalty and Fidelity to
our King; whose strength and security, next under Providence, does principally
depend on the Hearts and Affections of his Subjects, on the Counsels and
Assistance of his Parliament: So shall we best secure our selves, consulting at
once our Duty and our Interest; so with St. Paul, may we hope in God, who has
delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver, in whom we trust that he
will evermore deliver us, [2 Cor. 1. 10.]

From all Sedition, privy Conspiracy, and Rebellion; from all false Doctrine,
Heresy and Schism; from all Popish Principles and Practices; good Lord deliver
us, through Jesus Christ our Savior and mighty Deliverer.

To whom, with thee, and thy Holy Spirit, three Persons and one Eternal God, be
ascribed of us, and thy whole Church, all Power and Glory, Thanksgiving and
Praise now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

