THE EVERLASTING GOSPEL.

Apocalypse ^^ And they sung a new Song before the Throne, and before the four
Beasts and the Elders; ver. 24. And no MAN could learn that Song, but the 144,
etc. Printed in the Year of our Redemption, December. 1649.

The Holy Gospel, According to the Evangelist, By the Lady ELEANOR.
EVen the same, that which was from the Beginning, then believed in, magnified
unto the end of the world, as until the consummation of the Age (saying) Lo, I
am with you, without end whose Kingdom.

How it came to pass showing, in the first year of his Reign, first of his
Name, Charles of Great Britain, in Berks the first of Shires, she then at her
House Englefield Manor, of Englands Realm, Daughter of the first Peer, Anno 25.
the Month of July in, so called after the first Roman Emperor, he slain, etc.

Where the word of the Lord of Hosts, when came to her, the Heavenly voice
descending, speaking as through a Trumpet of a most clear sound these words:
Nineteen years and a half to the Judgment, and you as the meek Virgin.

Awakened by which alarm early in the morning, whereof thus, signed with
Divisions character, the years being divided, this magnified morning Star,
story of Jerusalem of the Gentiles, Great Britains blow foreshewing, Anno 44.
accomplished: The same though come to pass, who nevertheles in stead of their
acknowledged error, like those Priests and Elders, first who setting a Watch,
then underhand by such large Doctrine endeavor to stop the peoples mouths, that
do as they are taught, promised to be saved harmless, the old Serpents policy,
etc. And with this Revolution thus going on, in the first of his Reign, the
beginning in of the year, when a Star within the Horns of the New Moon
enclosed, of some judgment at hand, the ominous Forerunner: First, of the
Wise Men coming from the East, as follows; whose flight taken westward,
through that heavy hand occasioned; the Cities unparalleld Plague, Bills to be
Canceld never, or drowned in forgetfulness, increased to no less then weekly
Five thousand five hundred and odd, the Age of the world; decreased as
suddenly about the midst of Summer: all one as their being fed, that blessing
thought upon, when the five thousand men with those loaves five, etc. no more
then the fingers of their hand, any matter made of it, so thankful: VVhereupon
(the aforesaid Visitation) the Term kept at Reding, County of Berks, other
Courts at Maidenhead Town, the Parliament posting to Oxford, doing all homage
to this New born BABE, ruling with the iron Scepter, them forewarning all in
vain, Be wise, O ye Kings, Be learned, ye Judges; that in such security held
themselves then, and so much first for that, and his powerful word displayed,
the priority thereof, thou Britain not the least, etc. And of his wrath then
kindled, showed great Blessings and Corrections inseparable companions:
Wherewith proceeding, namely, without it done nothing that was done, its mouth
the Oracle, Beginning and Ending of Monarchies, inheritance whose from East to
West extends; concerning the aforesaid golden number, Nineteen years and a
half, being in a Manuscript inserted, containing Germanies woeful Occurrences,
and Great Britains both, with what sign confirmed; showing further thus, who
immediately after with her own hand within two days delivered it to the
Archbishop Abots, he then at Oxford, of University the first, in presence of no
few; with this for a Token given, the plague presently to cease; of whom took
her leave, the Bishops Amen whereto went round.

The Bills obeying the same before the Month expired of August, witness when
scarce deceased One thousand of all Diseases, whereas before so infectious, five
children dying for one aged, next Term supplied with others fled returned; so
that of its late desolation appearance, no more then of Change or Amendment
amongst them, none at all.

And so pursuing the Prophetical History in the next place, That it might be
fulfilled out of the Low Countries, etc. as the Virgin when undertook her
voyage, she fleeing for the Babes preservation thither; also constrained for
printing the same, to go into Holland, those plain swathingbands for wrapping
it in, pretending in her husbands behalf the Spaw obtained a License, since
none for printing to be had here, inquisition and hold such, among them
imprisoned about it formerly, till afterward all as free, Cum Privilegio out of
date become.

Where thus passing on the mean while ere her return thence, George Archbishop
deceased, Anno 33. unhappily whose hands imbrued in innocent blood, Archbishop
Laud, 19 of September. translated, etc. reigning in his stead, successor of him,
in stead of the Stag who shot the Keeper, presaging what Murders him coming
after, when as for another her soul pierced in no mean degree, what honor to be
a Prophet amongst their own nation and rank; for example as specified on
Record: no sooner arrived then apprehended, of her child ravished, a greater
then the Parliament, the Word of God: And how recompensed for their service,
referred, etc. where after a Candle being sent for, about the third hour in the
Afternoon, that with his own hand had burnt it, saying, She has taken good
long time, till 44. for Doomsday then; My Lords, I hope I have made you a
smother of it: in truth his own fatal hour, those years of Nineteen and a half,
reaching to his Execution Month and Year, Anno 44. January, when parted head
and body, like that aforesaid divided year, showed before sacrificed by his
ungracious hand, Author of this Division or Distraction, a cup filled to the
brim afterward, as that Judgment day, June Anno forty four complete: The
restrained four Winds, etc. Apoc. 7. signified by them, extending to forty
eight, that Blow January also, all standing at the stroke of FOUR; the
foursquare City New Jerusalem wherewith agrees: Micah the Prophet ( cap. 5.)
his alarm to awaken the Age, speaking no parable, ^^ her goods seized on,
wherewith given the Oath, such and such ARTICLES for answering to: In which
case not much to seek, of Scandalum Magnatum in that kind, against those
little ones, the penalty of it, touched by whomsoever, a millstone a fitter
ornament, etc. she not slow in appearing to receive their wild Sentence; the
Dragon of Lambeth, Laud, his venom discharging last of all, even Anno Etatis
33. measured out by our Lords age, when as brought to his Arraignment by wicked
hands, how sacrificed this Testimony of his; a word also as ensues.

And (...) like measure October 23. she committed close Prisoner,
Excommunicated, Fined to his Majesty's use Three thousand pounds, and to make
public Recantation at Paul's Cross, as extant on Record, Twelve Hands Signed
by; also Edge Hill fight, and the Irish Massacre 23 of October, and Twelve of
them at once Voted to Prison, for that Order of theirs nothing to stand of
force there done without them: His Majesty lastly Fined his three Kingdoms to
the use, etc. As for Paul's, a habitation for Owls, those Noats set up, to set
forth the residue, where the time would fail how the first Blow at Edgehill in
Oxfordshire, the second Newbery, fought within a stones cast of her house at
Englefield. And thou Bedlam-House, too little the Thousandth part to contain of
them distracted since thence her coming, well knowing if the Master of the
house called Devil, etc. what the Servant to expect; where so much for this
time, accompanied with the Universal Tax, no Inferior Rack set upon in these
days C. Stu. his Reign, as sometimes in Caes. August. second of that Monarchy,
no small oppression, as the lineage of David a witness of it: closing it with
these from her Name, Rachels, signifying a Sheep, rendering Charles his soil for
the Golden fleece bearing the Bell: so whom he has joined of her Lamentation,
(...) Jacobs saying, Some evil Beast has done it, needs not ask Whose Coat
party-colored? also in pieces rent, since our British Union, etc. not without
cause weeping, because they are not; and so all doing they know not what, even
forgive, etc. And again thus, since Thus it was written, and thus it behoved to
suffer, and to rise again.

The New-Years-Gift to all Nations and People, Iubile.

December. 1649.
FINIS.

