THE (...) C^ (...) LO^^ DEDICATE^ (...) BRITT^

By the LA: ELEANOR

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1645.

THE REVEALING OF OUR LORDS second Coming.
Revela. XI.
AND to measure or give the meaning of this place of Scripture, of age to
speak in these accomplished days for it self, a touch whereof suffices to be
given: So touching this Angel which stood and made that solemn Oath swearing
by the maker of all things: That TIME should no longer be; saying, Arise and
measure the TEMPLE, and Them that worship therein, etc.

Doubtless the self same; beheld by the Prophet DANIEL (12.) Which speaks to
this Evangelist, at first clothed in Linnon on the waters, and as in his
resurrection raiment then: so here in the Ascensions, clothed in a cloud, the
Angelical Robe, giving by this to understand, when the rising from the dead to
be reveald, or times reign finished, so commands him to w ite (as it were)
what shall come to pass, when the Church shall be refined before the end or a
reformation, leaving and casting out, the Court OF ROME in those days returned
to Heathenisme, that mother of ignorance tyrannizing and treading down the
Church standing out for the truth unto the end, where those sacred Witnesses
cast out for dead, guilty of the Prophets blood and our Saviors.

Thus showing, when that Eclips past those mists dispel'd, and afterward
preachd the Gospel when as far West as East, before the evening or setting of
time, for an infalible Forerunner of the end of the World come, for which all
bidden to watch. How then it shall come to pass, Informs this Disciple: This
blessing of Blessings how added to the former, even out of the Scriptures, the
Old and New two Books to be interpreted, for our Lords coming revealed, and
these like as in days of Old, with signs and tokens evident to all.

And as here appears, shows then how those new molded days rewarded;
opposing the Holy Ghost, made to wait, They plagued also, fares with them
(...) the (...) Heavens (...) where silenced the Spirit of Prophecy.

As came to pass before that deliverance of theirs, out of that Bondage, and
before Bals Priests put down, not one escaping; great blessings as sometime
accompanied with no light corrections: And these the sum of that Angelical
discourse.

So proceeding with the general Resurrection, and Ascensions (...) ^ose bo^
(...) one taken up, both waiting (40.) days in the Mount of God: And that dead
Soldier revived by a touch of the Prophets Corpse, all prophesying to these
last days of such division divided like those waters, some-time them.

As here the gift of the Holy Ghost like the Cloven tongues in the seventeenth
hundred Years under those Characters expressed, (ver. 2.) And the Holy-Citie
shall They tread under foot 42. Months: and so again, And I will give to my
two Witnesses; and They shall Prophecy a Thousand two Hundred and sixty days,
etc. (to wit) seven Times, signified by these Three years and half, doubled
by Months and Days: including also the Worlds mistical Week Cut Off:

Where farther, for making plain of These multiplied rough obscure places:
Concerning how long the Churches Warfarre, To receive double for all HER
Sins: referred unto TIMES farewell redoubled, as declared also to HIS Servant
the Prophets; Daniel 12.

And from the Time that the daily shall be taken away, and the abomination that
makes desolate set up; There shall be a Thousand two Hundred and Ninty days.

Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the Thousand three Hundred and
Thirty five Days, (to wit) as aforeshewd. Seven times even the Number of rest,
or so many years, under the reign of ANTICHRIST, till which accomplished
Daniel bidden to be gone, and rest satisfied, or take his long sleep.

A Thousand seven Hundred years (as much to say) from the time of the last
Supper given, before HIS blessed Resurrection day, (made the Churches day of
REST,) Until the general rising from the dead: Like the thrice fourteen
Generations: (Mat: 1.) (or three Periods,) each fulfilling 500. years. here in
like manner given under the Angels hand lifted up, testifying or protesting; A
time, and Times and half, (or part) And thus as five Hundred years going to a
Period of TIME, fulfills 1700. years, so by taking away a Thousand, from those
Prophetical, two Thousand six Hundred twenty five days: Even comes to the
Year, 1625. That unparaleld troublesome Time, where he styled the great Prince
MJCHAEL, that shall stand up: going before the general Resurrection, the dead
There standing upon their feet (Daniel 12.) by that Arch: Angels dreadful
Alarm awakned. And so Blessed is he that comes (and waits to 1645. the end:)
And where every word has its weight, as points at the last Centurie to be
divided, and the very half year: So here shows when the End of time come;
^as no great miss or loss of it Where nothing from head to foot, but Plagues
and Ulcers, the Bottomlesse-pit opend. Hell LET LOOSE, How it shall come to
pass in those days preferring darkness before light: These things when as
again Prophesied, to Nations, People, and Kings, being come to its full Time,
even overcome and Killed by that spirit ascended out of the Bottomless pit,
Monster of Mankind; The ascensions Enemy, and the Resurrections, not a little
insenced and wyld: whose sentence on Record of old: In this manner. He must be
killed verse etc. which offers violence to them from above endued with such
power and inspired. To be plain, He in the year 1633. translated to be
Arch-BB. And that suffered that Antichrist; on a Friday which made his last
Sermon, (witness Revel. verse. 5.) (where our Lord crucified) Was the very
text (as it were) ( Heb. 12.) For the joy set before him who endured the
Cross, etc.

But proceeding on with these examined witnesses as for fire proceeding out of
their mouths, verse etc. as aluding to the Feast time, of the fiery tongues so
signifies again, fulfilled that of the Prophet Joel. That on all flesh he will
power out his spirit (the Gentiles also) and his sons and Handmaids shall
prophecy.

And so again for interpreting Scripture, by Scriptures for manifestation of
the aforesaid measured times, accomplishing the number of seven, here turned to
the Prophet Zechar. 4. Who when by the Angel awakend, as a man out of his
sleep, Saw a Candlestick, all of Gold with seven lamps, and seven pipes to
the seven lamps, two Olive thereby; empting the Golden Oil. Signifying also
before the Rising from the dead, times mystery how by the Spirit of prophecy
extracted out divine vision to wit the Prophets aforesaid or two witnesses
whose Books that Light so hateful to men: manifested with a witness thus.

Verse 8. And they shall see their dead bodies three days and a half lie in
the street of the Great City spritually called Sodom and Egypt, like News out
of date: Cast about, because Prophecy for a time ceased: And by the spiritual
calling, made their Pastime, as not rare in the last days such wits or
Scoffers, so with those tidings of the great day made their sport And how
festival times Easter, Witsontyde, and the rest solemnized in City and
Country with what doings, in stead of works of charity and Alms deeds, how
sends presents one to another, Play Houses visited and drinking houses, half
the Sabbath day, very Sodom, no other possessed with the same spirit of blindness.

And thus here a line and there a line, concerning the Spirit of prophecy to
be powered out, from years discending to days, (verse) And after three days
and a half the Spirit of life from God enterd into them these two Prophets,
and they stood upon their feet, aluding to that, when they falling dead at the
feet of the Angel, the Lord of Sabbaths, which were again raised, Daniel and
John, those so greatly Beloved, as he by a touch of the Scepter the seven
stars, etc.

And these Things like that doubled Dream because the things Established: (
Geneses 41.) visible in our Horizon of the sevententh Century, wherein held
such an impossibility for Prophets again to arise before the day of
Judgment, yet shall go on with the meaning also, of that great voice Come up
hither. And they ascended in a cloud up, beheld by all Them, stricken in a
moment with no little astonishment. Which referred to your judgments, whether
or no, speaks not to all you the wonderful work of God, Great Britains
Parliament voice, as before Whitsontyde presented was, unto the house this very
place of Scripture, even joining with the Prophets loud voices as they Gods
kingdom proclaim, so serves for their thankesgiving, and the Cities as come
to pass since the last ascensions feast, after that sad breakefast blow,
bestowed on their enemies unto which Shall add this for another.

Verse 13. And the same hour (as much to say,) at ten in the morning,
signifying also the same time when gathered together those several Nations, (
Acts 2.) Stranger of Rome. Jews and Proselites: when such a noise, where shows
moreover within an hours space, how many slain, and so many thousands taken,
and a remnant that took the Covenant, or gave glory to God. Also the list of
Names returned as in the Original signifying, (names of men) Men's names all:
where also those wrathful Irish Et Jratae sunt gentes and advenit ira tua: as
at the day of Judgment for them, no Quarter; by Their dispairing of mercy,
setting their Names too for the rising of the dead to be revealed before the
END to these Kingdoms. And again, as serves for the hour of the day (verse.
13.) so bears date in the year, One thousand seven Hundred; beside Seven
hundred slain expressed: showing the second woe past is, behold the third WOE
comes quickly, Namely about Michaels feast: The seventh Angel or last Trumpet
gives warning of it; So farthermore for those great victorious Voices, where
such Tyranicall power resigned, for which the rejoicing Elders 24 for evermore
siting; Not more extoling GODS power herein, Then the NATIONS filled with Envy,
to see the Crown and Honor of the day Conferred on such derided heretofore so
much contemned: As not by might, (or Army) nor by power; But by my Spirit,
says the Lord of hosts: And for the Temple opened those heavenly gates, or two
Olive trees, to wit (verse.) with the mystery made known of Time measured by
his Reed, or sharp Rod given him to measure with: Thus much suffices. And for
such Storms and Outcries, where the tree of Life offered to every one: Not
unlike the tree of Knowledge, at first pleasant to Him, afterward all as
bitter: Nevertheless when the hour past, like her Travel the Mother of all
living, rememberd not at all. And so far for the Cause set forth of
Canterburys suffering: And their dead Bodies, not suffered to be BVRYD,
(exposed to the veiw) whose seven Years complete before going into prison: The
express EPYTOMIE of Antichrists Kingdom in the 1700. year, also destroyed to
be or Cut off, for Ever.

Postscript.
SO then what differnce, between them obedient to the Devil, that inquire of
evil spirits and others disobedient to the spirit of God, or to whom his
command peremtory: Yet like the deaf Adar, stop the Ear, much like the case
of those two Sons in the Gospel, or Brothers, the one where gives such an
undutifull answer, the other nothing but fair words: who as though Antiquity
were a plea for error, or custom any excuse for any thing, by his Apostles
prohibited.

As in that inacted by them, against eating blood (So well Observed,) Acts 15:
verse 20. Also, verse 30. Saying; for seemed good to the HOLY GHOST and to us
to lay no greater burden upon you then these necessary things, that ye
abstain from meats offered to Jdols, and from blood and from strangld meat,
and from fornication, from which things if ye keep your selves ye shall well,
fare ye well.

And again, cap. 21. verse 25. We have written and concluded, etc save only
that ye keep your selves from things offered to Jdols. And from blood and
strangld meat and from fornication, Where although disburthened of all the
rest, but blood the life of every thing. Which like the forbidden tree or the
tree of life in the midst of Paradise standing, as this between a branch of the
first and second table, afterward notwithstanding ready dressed at (...) ^ays The
Apostles Ordinances nothing made of ^t, and not only these freely digested but
libels published by authority against holy authority, too (...) some on ^sides
as that unsufferable fable ^^^led a re^^tion of the two Witnesses their coming
down from heaven And fighting with Antichrist, also for another a late preface
with that bold universal, that all spirits which do suffer themselves to be
inquired at are evil spirits, and therefore of the Divill, as much to say or
afirm the Holy Ghost cannot do what he pleases, or that any thing is impossible
or too hard for God to do.

And for their Philosophy as mean and weak as their Theology behold his
produced Book. De Magia Naturali, apparent whereby her spirit absent from the
body, that for so long might be awakend by no means. So to him who is, Alpha
and Omega both: Jn whom consists all and some, both the only affirmative and
negative voice; be all praise. Amen.

FJNJS.

