The Excellency of Public Charity.

A SERMON Preached before the UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, IN NEW-COLLEGE-CHAPPEL, ON
THE Feast of the Annuntiation, 1697.

By H. DOWNS, M. A. and Fellow of the said College.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-Luce over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. M DC XCVII.

PSALM cxii. Verse. 9, 10. He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor,
his Righteousness endures for ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor. The
Wicked shall see it and be grieved, he shall gnash with his teeth and melt
away, the desire of the ungodly shall perish.
TO Consider the Excellency of Charity in general, and that variety of strong
Motives which engage to the Practice of it; how powerful the Language of Nature
is on its behalf, and how much more so the Word of God; To consider, that to
refresh the Bowels of our Brethren is to give Ease and Comfort to our own, and
to show Compassion to others an happy Means of taking Pity on our selves; Nay
that our Bounty to the Poor is truly Lending unto the Lord, and relieving those
Wants which he is pleased to tender as his own; To consider what good
Dispositions this Excellent Grace argues, and what good Effects it every where
occasions; how great the present Reward of it is, and how much more so its
future shall be. This would be of too large a compass for a single Discourse of
this Nature, I shall therefore confine my self to the Consideration of the
peculiar Excellency of public Charity, and it may not be improper in this
Place, at this Time, and on this Occasion, to attempt to show the great Charity
of public Foundations, particularly of that kind, the Benefit of which most
that hear me this day enjoy.

He who has in these respects dispersed abroad and has given to the Poor, his
Righteousness endures for ever, his Horn shall be exalted with Honor, though
the Wicked shall see it and be grieved.

From whence I shall take occasion to discourse,

First, Of the great Charity of public Foundations, especially of those which
are Nurseries of Learning and Religion.

Secondly, Of the peculiar Honors they reflect upon the Founders of them.

Thirdly, I shall enquire into the Reasons why, notwithstanding all this, these
Places and the Persons who more immediately enjoy the Benefit of them, have
been in all Ages, and still are the Objects of many Peoples Hatred, Envy and
Ill Will; of these in their Order.

And First, Of the great Charity of public Foundations. As God has put strong
Principles in every Man to engage him in the great Work of his own
Preservation, so, (because in some Cases he may in no sense be able of himself
to help himself) he has both by Instinct and Precept subjoined the Care of
others to his own; making Men mutual Assistants to one another toward the
Support and Well being of the whole.

Now those Persons who to this purpose do most effectually labor for the
Public Good, not only seeking their own but others Welfare, and do the most to
repair the Ruins which Sin has made, these are the great Benefactors to
Mankind, the Supporters of Kingdoms and the Pillars of the World. Of this sort
are they who not content to extend their Beneficence to some few round about
them, move in a larger Sphere, and consult the Good of Multitudes not only of
the present but of future Generations; who desire and endeavor that the
Effects of their Charity may endure as long as the Wants of Men, and that their
Miseries may not outlive the Provision which these make against them; Who
provide lasting Encouragement to labor, or a sure Refuge to those that cannot
work; that contrive the most effectual ways that no Man may be useless, but
serviceable, at least not a Burden to the Commonwealth; Who are (as Holy Job
was) eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and a present help to those whom
the Providence of God has thrown upon the Mercy of others, and made it both a
Duty and Pleasure to administer to their Necessities.

I believe I need not say much to evince the great Charity of Erecting
Hospitals, and such public Edifices for their Relief whom God's Providence has
disabled from relieving themselves; their Miseries are apt to make deep
Impressions upon our Souls, and we easily see and feel the Excellency of that
Charity which removes such pitiable Objects out of common view, which binds up
their sores, pours oil into their wounds, and prevents their Infirmities from
being afflictive to others, and as much as may be from being grievous to those
that bear them. Now the yernings within our own bowels do not speak as much on
the behalf of other works of public Charity, as this; yet it is certain that
the Conveniences and good Effects that attend them do. Thus the Charity of
employing the Poor, and furnishing them with work, which may redound to their
Profit and the Benefit of others, is very advantageous to the Good of Mankind,
and this sort of Charity guided with Discretion has a large Influence upon the
Happiness of any People; for it much increases the Strength, Wealth and
Grandeur of a Nation, and upon this it is that the most Civilized Nations have
been the most flourishing, and the Effects of their Wisdom have been seen in
the Prosperity of the People.

How barbarous and sadly miserable are those Nations where the People are
ignorant of the ways and means to provide against their own Wants, and are left
open without fence to the Miseries of this World; who know not how to employ
their Strength to their Advantage or Security, nor for what purposes God made
them what they are; certainly in this regard they may be compared unto the
beasts that perish, and are in other respects more miserable than they.

Again, How remarkably weak and poor are those Kingdoms and even nigh unto
Desolation where Sloth and Idleness prevail and Industry has no place? Who
suffer their Faculties to gather Rust for want of Exercise, and take no care to
apply their Abilities to the Ends they were given. Sacred History mentions
abundance of Idleness as one great Sin, and occasion of the Ruin of Sodom, and
Profane History informs us that Idleness, neglect of Tillage, Mechanic Arts and
Merchandise, brought swift Destruction upon the great Persian Monarchy, and
indeed the same Cause will have the same Effects upon all States and Empires
whatsoever; Idle Persons being like dead Branches, which serve neither for Use
nor Ornament, but are an heavy burden to that Body that bears them.

Whereas in those Kingdoms, where every Man is put and kept in a way to be
serviceable in his Generation, and the Strength of every Member is applied as
near as may be to the Sustenance and Support of the whole Body, what can arise
from hence but Beauty and Strength, which is not easily to be shaken by
Disorders from within or by Violence from without, but is very much secured
from the Force of both: A Nation thus improved is like a stately Fabric well
laid together, wherein every Material is disposed in its proper Place and
Order, whence arises the Comeliness (I had almost said the Life) of the whole;
but a rude, unpolished, unimprov'd People are like the same Materials, rough*
hewn, unprepared for Use, out of which indeed fine things might be wrought,
were there but Artificers to put their hands upon them, and the Skill of the
Workman to form them into Usefulness and Beauty.

Now by nothing is this so great and good Design more effectually promoted than
by setting up Workhouses, Manufactures, and Schools preparatory thereunto;
this is the End which they aim at, and they cannot generally fail of Success;
herein many Persons have an ingenuous Education freely bestowed upon them,
which otherwise by reason of the Narrowness of their Circumstances they must
have wanted for ever, and are trained up to be truly useful to others, as well
as profitable to themselves; by these means a Spirit of Ingenuity spreads
itself throughout a whole Nation, and the Improvements Men from thence receive
are to the Advantage of many Generations.

It is very certain that Man even in this degenerate State is still capable of
a great deal of Perfection, but it must be wrought out, and almost any manner
of Wisdom must be dug for as for hid Treasure; for it is observable, that
things of greatest Value are not to be found near the Surface. His Faculties
are not utterly lost, but only unwieldy and benumbed for want of Use, he does
not so properly want Power, as Management, neither is he deficient in his
Talents but in his Improvement; and it is this Defect which those public Works
I have been mentioning, do always design to provide against, and do often
effect: Which makes such public Charities well ordered, public Blessings, and
the Authors of them are very deservedly called Benefactors; Benefactors not
only to those who immediately enjoy the Effects of their Charity, but to as
many as the wide Influence of it can reach.

But I am more particularly concerned to insist upon the great Charity of those
public Foundations which are Nurseries of Learning and Religion. This sort of
Charity has that in common with other public Charities, that it is very
extensive in its Design and Usefulness, reaching to Multitudes not only of this
but of future Ages, making a suitable Provision against those Evils which are
likely to last as long as the Sun and Moon endures; but in other Cases it far
exceeds them, they directly aim at the temporal good of Men, this chiefly
regards their spiritual and eternal Interest, the Improvement of the Mind into
the Likeness of God here, and an happy Enjoyment of him hereafter.

In the other Foundations Men are bred up to a regular Use of the Powers of
their ` Bodies, in these to a due Exercise of the Faculties of their Souls, and
that not for their own Benefit alone but for the Use of others, that the
unspeakable Advantage of their Improvement may redound unto all.

Herein those who excel others in the Goods of Fortune are shown the way to do
it as much in the Goods of Nature and of Grace, and to adorn their high
Stations with such worthy Actions as may make them the Glory of their Times:
Herein they are instructed how to manage and improve the Time they are so much
Masters of, and the other Talents they enjoy, to their own Advantage and the
Public Good, that their Leisure and Wealth may be to them Opportunities of
Virtue and Goodness, which are to many others strong Temptations to Sin, and
sad Occasions of Falling.

It is very fit that those Persons who either by the Privilege of their Birth,
or the Choice of the People, are often called to that important Business of
making Laws; at least have a mighty Influence on all that are round about them,
should learn betimes for what purposes they are by the Providence of God so
highly advanced, and be taught to fill up their several Orbs with a suitable
Glory, that they may dispense Warmth, Light, and Fruitfulness to the Earth. And
how much these Places conduce to these Ends, let those in Gratitude declare who
have partaken of the Advantages of them; sure I am, there never was any that
truly answered the ends of his coming hither, that had ever reason to repent of
so easy a Purchase of that Education which others graciously enjoy.

For herein also many have the Advantages of a Liberal Education, for want of
which, those who have been Men of Renown in the Learned World, might have been
forced to submit to more servile Employments, whilst the Necessities of this
corruptible Body had pressed down the Soul which museth upon many things; and
the finiteness of their Thoughts had gone off in the sweat of their Brows. But
to bring those of a lower Condition almost to a Level with those of a higher
with respect to the Improvement of their Natures, and for the Advancement of
Learning and Religion in the World, herein even these Persons have from the
Charity of others great Opportunities, great Encouragement, and great
Obligations to those Purposes.

First, in these Foundations they have great Opportunities of Learning and
Religion: Indeed, Time and Leisure are valuable Advantages, for to the purposes
I am speaking of, Time and Leisure are much required. It is well known how
laborious the search after Truth is, and for any one that would make any
considerable Progress in any Science, how necessary it is he should attend upon
it without Distraction, be free from the necessity of working with his hands,
while his head is thus employed, and exempt from the Labors of the Body,
whilst he would apply himself to those of the Mind. But besides, these men from
hence receive the best Direction how to improve their Time and Leisure to the
best purposes, without which, Time and Leisure would be of little value. For
Man is so little able of himself, to refuse the evil, and choose the good, that
without being brought up at the Feet of some Gamaliel, he might be ever
learning, and yet never come to the Knowledge of the Truth: but being well
informed by those whose Experience qualifies them for the instruction of
others, having Pilots to guide them in these dangerous Waters, they make their
Voyage with a great deal more Safety and Pleasure, and much sooner and easier
arrive at the Haven where they would be; which without such public Foundations
would necessarily be the Privilege but of a few. Moreover, by such public
Nurseries of Learning and Religion, there is a much more free, open, and manly
Spirit communicated from one to another, and what by Emulation and other nobler
Motives, they are brought to aspire to greater Heights than a private Education
would ordinarily excite them to. Besides, by means of a public Education, Men
become (as Quintilian observes) more meet for the Converse of the World with
which they must have to do.

And now whilst I behold the Rivulets from these Fountains, spreading
themselves throughout the Land to make glad the City of God; whilst I behold
Church and State refreshed with these Waters which from hence plentifully flow;
I cannot but bless the Providence of God, who by these means so liberally
provideth for the Earth, and admire that Charity which is so diffusive of its
Blessings from one end of the World unto the other.

Hence proceed Men who by their Wisdom and Learning, are meet for the People,
to turn them from Darkness to Light, from the Power of Satan unto the Lord, to
be Ambassadors for Christ, and to beseech Men in his stead to be reconciled
unto God, that they may grow in his Favor, by the Practice of those Virtues,
which though the Laws and Reason of Men have generally required, yet Christianity
alone could sufficiently enforce. Not but that even these Laws have their
singular Use, and will be necessary as long as there are others besides the
Meek that inherit the Earth, who must have their bounds set which they should
not pass. And this is another Advantage of these public Foundations, that
require and encourage the Study of the Laws of Nature, and Nations which ought
to be the Foundation of all other, directing a more especial Regard to those
Civil and Imperial Laws which have been generally supposed to come nearest to
the first Principles, and have long obtained in the World upon that Account:
Many of our Pious Benefactors had a particular Eye to the Advancement of this
sort of Learning, which enables Men to set an Enclosure round each others
Property, and is the true Basis of Righteousness and Peace.

Hence proceed others also, who searching into the Works of God for those
Antidotes which his Wisdom has provided in secret against the Miseries of the
World, do mightily support the Health and Welfare of the Body; by the strength
of other Beings, they sustain the Weakness of Man, and in great measure stifle
the seeds of Corruption which mingle themselves with, and often choke the seeds
of Life which they support, and as long as Man is subject to so many disorders
from within, and injuries from without, those that study their Cure, and employ
their many Talents to so good an end, will never be esteemed unprofitable
Servants, nor those Places that encourage them useless to the World.

I might mention others likewise, who applying their Studies to other purposes,
have proved exceeding useful in their Generations: Witness those Mathematical
Heads, who by a Morning Thought have saved the Labor of so many Ages; and have
shown Men by their profitable Inventions, the readiest ways to supply
themselves with the Necessaries and Conveniences of Life with abundantly
greater ease, thereby abating much of that part of the Curse on Man In the
Sweat of thy `Brows shall thou eat Bread; whilst these men by examining into
the Laws of Motion and Mechanism, do perfect those Arts which are so necessary
for the Well-being of Kingdoms, and the Employment of the People, they do more
good to any Nation, than if they had sprang a Mine of Gold, or pointed out the
Place of Silver where they find it. For as there is great Force in Nature,
almost to any purposes; so those that search into this great Depth, and
vigorously endeavor to apply it to the Uses of Life, may be, and often are
very instrumental to the Good of Mankind, and a more than common Blessing to
the Earth.

As for those that apply themselves to the speculative Parts of those Studies,
I believe these also meet with a suitable Reward to all their Labors in the
delightful Enlargement of their Minds, and more extended Capacity of Thought;
which qualifies them the better to launch out into the deep Abyss of Truth, and
to maintain a Commerce with the far distant Regions of the Intellectual World.
Besides these Studies, which are esteemed by many as Dry and Barren, may be
directly exceeding fruitful of good Thoughts in the Soul, whilst in the strange
Harmony of Numbers, and the wonderful, but pleasing Proportion of Lines and
Figures, it has a clear er View, and more affecting Prospect of his adorable
Perfections who made all things in Number, Weight, and Measure.

But I am insensibly sliding into a large Field of Matter, when I have not Time
to show the great Usefulness of all the particular Branches of Learning, though
this would most effectually evince the great Charity of these Foundations which
happily promote them; but this is less necessary in this place, where Men's
Experience speaks more feelingly upon this Matter than Words can.

Then as for Religion in such Charitable Foundations; How are Men brought up,
not only under a continual Sense, but Exercise of it; and they must be Proof
against very great Means of Grace that are not profited thereby. The public
Duties of a Christian so often and solemnly performed, must naturally have a
great, Force upon the Soul, and tend to make Religion Habitual by the constant
Practice of it: Herein Men have strict Precepts, and frequent Opportunities of
Practice, good Instructions, and good Examples set before them; the one
representing the Reasonableness, the other the Practicableness of true
Goodness; and it can be no easy matter to rebel against so much Light, and to
stifle all those good Motions which the happy Circumstances of their Life do
force upon them.

But Secondly, That Men may effectually Labor to these great Purposes, they
here find an agreeable Encouragement attending upon their Labors; the
Conveniences of Life which these Foundations afford, are a great Encouragement
to make themselves meet to receive them. It is indeed a Reproach to our
Natures, that we should stand in need of any additional Encouragement to be
Wise and Good; Wisdom and Goodness being themselves a sufficient Reward, and
strong Incentives to the Pursuit of them: but yet the general Backwardness of
Man to these things, makes it necessary to add the force of other Motives;
besides it is very fit for the Credit and Reputation of Learning and Virtue in
the World, that as happy Circumstances should attend them, as any other
Employment: Therefore it is provided, that they who set themselves to seek
after Wisdom, should have their Reward; the Possession of those Advantages,
(the hopes of which are a Spur to some) should be a greater Encouragement to
others, and strong Motives to Diligence and Industry, which first qualify them
for, and then render them worthy of these Enjoyments*

But further, the Countenance which is here given to Learning, by that
Fellowship in Study, which is the Privilege of these public Places of
Education, may be thought no inconsiderable Encouragement. Company makes any
kind of Labor go down with Cheerfulness, and abates much of the fatigue of any
Work; this renders that Business a Pleasure, which would be esteemed a Burden
and Toil were we alone. Companions in this, as in any other Travel, insensibly
cheat us of the tediousness of our Journey, and make us less mindful of our
Weariness, and more unwilling to complain of it; for there is some aversion in
our Natures to being outdone by our Equals, or distanced by those who have
only the same Advantages in common with our selves.

What need is there in the Third Place, particularly to mention the great
Obligations which these Places lay upon Men to excel in the Knowledge and
Practice of Virtue and Goodness: This has been in some measure hinted at
already, for their Opportunities are Obligations; their Encouragements,
Obligations, Time and Leisure, and the Privileges they enjoy, the Ends and
Designs of their Benefactors, and the Necessities of their Country, are all of
them Obligations, and loudly call for an Improvement of their Talents. Chorazin
and Bethsaida, Cities that had greater Opportunities, and Means of Instruction,
according to our Savior's Argument, have more to answer for, than Tire and
Sidon that wanted those Advantages which the others enjoyed

It is very natural (at least, it is very reasonable) for any one to consider
why he is placed in such or such a station, that remembering the end, he may not
do amiss, and whilst he does consider what the Design is for which those
Privileges were given, how much the matter of his Calling requires Diligence
and Application, and how great the Necessities which must be served by it: this
Person if he was under no Law, would be a Law unto himself, and endeavor to
improve that Time which is so precious, not only upon the account of himself,
but of others too.

Upon the Whole therefore, Since Learning and Religion are so highly
advantageous to the World, since the several Branches of them do aim at the
reparation of those Mischiefs which were occasioned by the Fall, with reference
either to our Bodies, or our Souls; and since the Advancement of Knowledge and
Piety is much furthered by these public Foundations, which afford great
Opportunities, great Encouragements, and great Obligations to these Purposes;
this shows the abundant Excellency of that public Charity, from which such
public Benefits do arise: and surely what is pregnant with such great and good
Designs, and produces such blessed Effects, will not ordinarily fail of the
Praise of Men, at least not of the Approbation and Praise of God. Which leads
me to the next general Head of my Discourse, under which, I am to show.

Secondly, The peculiar Honor, which such public Works of Charity reflect
upon him that does them, His righteousness endures for ever, his Horn shall be
exalted with Honor. Every Man is more or less truly Honorable, as he is more
or less like unto God, in whose Image he was made; true Worth claims Esteem,
and any real Excellency ^s a Patent for Honor. Now there is no Body that
expresses fairer Features of the Divinity, than the Charitable Person I am
speaking of, and consequently, no one can stand fairer for the good Opinion of
Men, or is more sure to meet with Honor from the Fountain of it. Whilst men
behold such stately Edifices as these, how naturally are they lead to consider
the largeness of his Mind from whence they sprang, and whilst they consider the
purposes for which they serve, admire the extensive Goodness of his Design, who
for those purposes ordained them; who like his Creator so happily labored to
rescue Man out of the Misery into which he was fallen, and had so great a
Desire for, and Pleasure in the Prosperity of his Servants: Certainly, the best
way to measure the Excellency of Charity, as well as of Faith, is by the Works
of it; most Men will inwardly esteem his Virtues, of which they see such
glorious Effects, and out of Justice to his Character, will endeavor to set
forth all his Praise.

Lo! this is the Man which trusted not in the multitude of his Riches, but
according to Solomon's Precept, honored the Lord with his Substance, and with
more than the First Fruits of his Increase. This is the Man who made to himself
Friends of the Mammon of Vrighteousness; who when Riches increased, set not his
heart upon them, but dispersed them abroad for the Service of Men, and the
Glory of God; this is the Man who was Proof against all the Temptations which
Riches bring along with them, was neither tempted by them to Luxury, nor
Covetousness; neither to the Lusts of the Flesh, nor to the Lusts of the Eyes,
nor the Pride of Life; but was a faithful Steward of these dangerous Gifts of
God. Such inward Veneration must good Men have of so much Worth, and by such
Approbations will they express what they inwardly admire. Even in this respect,
his Righteousness endures for ever upon the Hearts and Tongues of these Men,
and will be as lasting as the Effects of it, even from Generation to
Generation: To this purpose we read in holy Scripture, that the Memory of the
Just is blessed; he cannot well be remembered without a kind of Gayety of
Thought, and Blessing is upon the Head of him, through whom so many are truly
Blessed: Whilst the Memory of the Wicked shall rot, that of the Just shall live
for evermore; and as it is written Two or Three Verses above this of my Text,
the Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance. But then, if in this
respect, the Witness of Men is great, the Witness of Angels and of God himself
is much greater: If the Honor that comes from Men is so very valuable, much
more that which comes from God, and from those which are round about him. How
may we imagine, will that Heavenly Hierarchy who rejoice at the Conversion of
Sinners, pronounce an Euge upon him who has so much furthered their Conversion!
How will they welcome him into the Regions of Glory, who has labored with them
in the great Design of bringing many unto Righteousness, who has been their
Fellow-helper in ministering to the Necessities of the Saints, and in forwarding
their Progress toward the End of their Hopes who are Heirs of Salvation. How
will they embrace such an one in the Arms of Love, and be never better pleased,
than when they are summoned by their Maker to set a Crown of pure Gold upon his
Head.

For whereas God has expressly declared, that they that honor him, he will
honor; how must the Administration of this Service, which is abundant by many
Thanksgivings unto God, obtain from him a more than ordinary Recompense of
Reward. Such glorious Works are a great Credit to Religion, and a most sensible
Demonstration of its Power: Many are hence persuaded to adore and reverence
God, whilst they observe what others do for his Name; whilst their Light so
shines before Men, and they cannot but see their good Works, they are more
easily led to glorify their Father which is in Heaven; and consequently we may
be assured, that such Righteous Men, shall not fail of the Righteous Man's
Reward. They who are thus Instrumental in turning many unto Righteousness,
shall (according to that in the Prophet) shine as the Stars for ever and ever;
and those who by their Means are converted unto the Lord, shall add new Stars
to their Crown, and be a continual Accession to their Glory: So that whereas
most others can work out their Salvation only while they are here, and then the
Night comes on them when no Man can work: these great and glorious Benefactors
to Mankind, leave as it were an increasing Stock behind them, which is still
improving by Posterity to their Advantage. In this Sense more especially their
Righteousness endures for ever, their Works of Charity shall follow them into
the other World, to the mighty Increase of their Reward.

But this kind of Charity (as most other good Designs) has a dark as well as
bright side. This Virtue, and the Subjects and Effects of it, which are of so
high a Price in the sight of good Men, of the glorious Angels, and of God the
Judge of all, have yet some that cast sour Looks upon them, and can neither
afford them a good Thought, Word, or Deed.

But I am in the Third and Last Place to account for the Behavior of these
Men, and to enquire why, notwithstanding what has been said, these Places and
the Persons who more immediately enjoy the Benefit of them, have been in all
Ages, and still are the Objects of some Peoples Envy, Hatred, and Ill Will. Why
the Wicked, when they see them are grieved. Some there are of that unhappy
Temper, that they are never well at ease when others are so, and are truly
miserable, because those about them are truly happy; they catch Infection from
the Health of others, and from the sight of their Prosperity grow sick and pine
away: and then it is no wonder if such Places as these, where there is such
large Provision made for the Happiness of the World, be evil-spoken of, and
evil entreated by such Men. This unchristian Temper, must necessarily grudge
and fret it self at these things; whilst the eldest Son of Wickedness which
rules in the Children of Disobedience, observes how much these Foundations
contribute to the overthrow of his Kingdom, it cannot be strange, if he set
his Agents on work in all places, by all means to weaken their Force, and by
raising Prejudices, Calumnies, and Jealousies against them, lessen their Power.

Some there are, who either over-looking their own Faults, more easily espy
those of other Men, and discern a Mote in another, sooner than a beam in their
own Eye: Or being incapable of making just allowances for the Corruption of
Human Nature, and Heat of Youth, and the Strength which many Temptations
receive from it, do from the miscarriage of some few (most of which, perhaps
brought the Infection along with them, or caught it elsewhere) unreasonably
condemn these Places for their Defects, as the Unhealthiness of the Child, is
very often without Cause thrown upon the Nurse. But such Societies ought not in
reason to bear the blame, for the Vnfruitfulness of some of their Members, any
more than Religion it self, for the Barrenness of some of the Professors of it.
Do Men judge of the soundness of a Tree from the decay of Two or Three of its
Branches? ought not rather the flourishing Condition of the other Boughs to
shadow lesser Defects? and also be a sufficient Proof, that the Fault is not in
the Stock, but in the particular Indisposition of some Parts which are unapt to
receive Nourishment from it. Indeed considering the great unsteadiness of
Youth, and the Claim and Right to Liberty they at those Years pretend to, and
the Dangers which arise from the first Exercise of it; considering how the
Temptations they then meet with, are suited to the very briskness of their
Blood, and gaiety of their Complexion; it is an Honor to these Foundations,
that so many are herein preserved from the Pollutions of the World; and that by
instilling good Principles, and encouraging good Practices, they are able in so
great a measure to balance the Weight of Corruption and Sin. And if there
should be those who so ill requite the Charity and Care of others, as not
sensibly to be bettered thereby, it may be a strong Argument of the wonderful
Degeneracy of some Natures, but none at all of the Vselesness of those
Foundations, which endeavor, though ineffectually, to restrain them.

Again, others there are, who considering how much the Advancement of Trade and
Labor, and such like, is to the advantage of any Nation, having their Heads
full of variety of Projects of this Nature, fondly magnify one Way of Charity
to the depression of another; and whilst their Thoughts are warmed with these
Things, they forthwith decry all Persons as useless to the Public, which are
not serviceable to it in their way.

There is in most Men a great Partiality to their own Fancies, so great, that
they think they cannot do Justice to the things they admire, without doing
Injustice to every thing else; and the Reputation of their Designs must be
built upon the Ruin of all other. The Reason of this, I suppose may be that
having a strong Affection toward the Offspring of their Brain, as well as any
other, and turning those things that please them often over in their Thoughts,
they see the Length, and Breadth, and Depth, and Height of their Usefulness,
whilst other matters which have but a transitory Glance cast upon them, are not
so well esteemed, because not so well understood, and their Beauty for want of
a Closer View does not affect them. Yet one would imagine that amongst a
Civilized People, it might be a hard matter to find any, that should only value
Men as they do their Beasts, merely from the Strength of their Limbs.

Indeed it will easily be allowed, that where these Public Foundations which
are Nurseries of Learning and Religion, bear no Proportion or Regard to the
Necessities of the People; that is, when they are too many in Number, or are as
so many Privileged Places for men to shelter themselves in from the Service of
the World; then indeed, as our Neighboring Countries can sadly testify, they
may become a Burden to a Land, and a great Grievance instead of Advantage to
the People. For according to S. Paul's Argument, If the whole Body were an Eye,
where were the Hearing? In the Body Politic, as well as Natural, there are
different Members; and it is not fit, that every Member should have the same
Office, for then how is it possible that the different Necessities of it should
be served? But in this Nation, the Number of these Religious Houses can now be
no just ground of Offense, much less their Disservice to the Public, as was
shown above. As therefore the Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have no need of
thee, so much less can the Hand say to the Eye, I have no need of you; and
consequently, they that extol some Works of Charity, to the exclusion of
others, plead for a Schism in the Body, which naturally tends to its
Destruction.

But I fear, the chief Ground of Hatred lies still behind, I am verily
persuaded, that nothing makes these Places, or those that sow or reap the
Benefit of them, so much spoken against by different Parties, as the Opposition
their Errors and Superstitions from hence meet with on all Occasions: (It is
the Wicked, which when they see them, are grieved, the Enemies of the Doctrine,
Discipline, or Practice of Christianity.) As Truth will have its Opposers, so
those that defend its Cause, will have Adversaries enough, who will be sure to
spare nothing which may blacken their Characters, that their Wisdom and
Learning, may have less Efficacy upon the Minds of the People: Whilst from such
Places proceed Men who are ever ready to stand in the Gap against those who
would either undermine our Faith, or break our Communion; this will open the
Mouths of the Gainsayers, and make them in the Language of the Children of Edom
in the Day of Jerusalem, cry, down with them, down with them, even to the
Ground.

If the Thoughts of some Men were Visible, we should plainly see, that their
Opposition to Universities, generally proceeds from the Opposition of these to
their Errors, and they are only out of Humor with these Constitutions, because
they will not favor their Principles. I know something of a more odious Aspect
is often pretended, but this is but a Pretense, the other is generally at the
bottom. It Is really their Enmity to our Church, that makes them Enemies to the
Seminaries of it; and though they may urge other grounds to the People, yet they
go upon these themselves: But this is so far from being their Reproach, that it
is their Honor. For this puts the Usefulness of these Foundations at present,
upon the same Issue with the Usefulness of the Church of England, and I think a
fairer need not be desired.

And thus I shall leave them both united in their common Interests, to the
Protection of GOD, against all their Enemies round about, that they may both
become the Glory and Praise of the Earth, whilst the Wicked shall see it and be
grieved, he shall gnash with his Teeth, and melt away; the Desire of the
Ungodly shall perish.

FINIS.

