OF Times and Seasons THEIR MYSTERY.

By the Lady Eleanor.

DAN. 2. And Daniel answered and said, The Name of God be praised; for Ages of
Ages; for Wisdom and Strength are his; for he changes the Times and Seasons,
etc.

Printed in the Year. 1651.

A PREFACE or APPEAL.
THe Revelations Gospel; blessed Book of the Prophet David's Generation comes
not (as testifies) by flesh only, this Man-child of the Woman seed, but
diversely as in days of old God spoke then; so now of his Sons coming after one
and the same way, by things past, as though present, as follows of that Tyrant
Herod again and his followers; who with an Iron Scepter, the Revolted Nations
subdues, whose Rod instead of Kissing, to depose him, taking Counsel with one
consent.

Touching which Sacred Oracles, for as much as no few having taken upon them,
unacquainted with such Pedigrees Mystery, untimely to gather of this Paradise
Tree, this hidden Manna, consisting of Times Mystery and Seasons; breathed by
the Father the breath of life. Therewith Miracles and Gifts of Tongues not
Equivalent.

Have here conceived not amiss concerning this Conception by the Holy Ghost,
the Fathers proper Darling, by a touch to thee Reader: Which living Tree to
unfold what date it bears. Offspring of David arrived its Maturity or Period
attained. Those Olive Leaves prescribed for healing the Nations malady or evil,
to his servants the Prophets for whose cure aforehand being revealed, by him
styled his friends servants, not being of their Masters Privy Counsel, even
things shortly to be done, attends or waits no longer; as shows, for the time
is at hand ( Rev. 1. cap.)

Notwithstanding his then reply, it is not for you to know times and seasons,
precious reserves in the Fathers own hand, or dispose for after ages; which Key
of David pretended to be in their pocket, a Legacy left only to them and their
assigns, a strain or note too high for vulgar spirits. His eye salve anointed
with Balaams.

And thus of Jew and Gentile, born under one Planet or Sign, on this wise
signified, no obscure Characters, ( Rev. 12.) And there appeared a great sign
in Heaven, a woman clothed or arrayed with the Sun, inthroned above the Moon,
Crowned with twelve Stars, no other the Golden Zodiacks signs, assigned to
those parts, she pained to be delivered: the party otherwise called a prisoner.
At such a time appears, etc. not any thing more perspicuous and clear. Where
enlarged thus. And there appeared another sign in Heaven, Behold a great Red
Dragon, having seven Heads, etc. And he stood before the Woman, even points to
the sign Virgo, by the word Virga, Arod; where Scorpio follows. The Dragons
Tail imparts no less, the third part of Stars drawing after him, with Michaels
alarm, the Archangels. The Suns appointed progress displayes about the fall
September, etc. Day and Night, when going to halfs for the hours: with the
Serpents loosing his place then, by the flaming sword expelled, wherewith
proceeding sufferings of this her seed, no new Gospel but that from the
beginning, as he wrote to that Lady. So of this Deified persons description,
adorned with those Celestials innocence in its colors, she in travel, etc.
That Ostetrix where imbrew'd, stood before her in his proper colors also with
open mouth, drawn from head to tail, the Episcopal Antichristian Order
(attended with his Train) styled The old Serpent the Devil, that Father rather,
as much to say, Anno Dom. Octobris Michaelis, Coram Patri totius Angliae, etc.
Such a one she appeared, personally to receive their judgment, thence even to
be carried away by water close prisoner to the Gatehouse, witness. And the
Serpent cast out of his mouth water after the Woman, as a flood, that he might
cause her to be carried away of the flood; wherewith he in the seventeenth
Century shut up in the Ark Noah. Those days cast into the account. As Item,
Against them his waging War; those keeping the Commandments: Idolatry for
questioning it: Incensed that remnant that had not bowed the knee to Baals
Altar.

All with one voice. How mavelous are thy works: VVitness Babes, Sucklings,
Heavens, Moon and Stars, ordained to praise his Name, whilst others as fallen
into a Lithargy, snoring (...)


