Ezekiel, Cap. 2.
WHereas this Vision, styled The appearance of the likeness of the glory of the
Lord: whereby as appears then a warning-piece of great Babylons preparation,
reports some greater judgment of more moment or importance then their
Captivity: above all his fellow brethren the Prophets, though then others he no
more timorous; nevertheless by such several admonitions given him, doubtless
intends (no other, or no less) then captivity lead captive, attended with
innumerable chariots: The Lord of Hosts marching on the winged winds, much
rather then the King of Assyria his Army: The great days Alarm sufficiently
visible.

And so of these vigilant living creatures in this Vision, This watchmans
Looking-glass, the first visag'd like a Man looking upward, another a Lions
voice, the third the laborious Ox, the fourth for speed to an Eagles swiftness
likened; whose faces every way besides full of eyes before and behind, other
motion none but straight forward, requisite; in Prophets those watchmen or
seers especially, who bend their course that way, the future the mark they
shoot at: And having had such a full view of this glorious Vision, every one so
many faces, fell on his face, by a voice commanded, Stand upon thy feet (to
wit) I am the Resurrections voice, unlike that of the tempter, If thou be the
Son of God, cast thy self down: And where the Devil threw him down, when the
evil spirit cast out, thus stood up instantly, gives him withal to understand
(Verse) I ordain thee one of the order of Prophets, my Spirit I have appointed
to to enter into thee, and Jure Divino, no less, at all points armd with his
commission, he with a writ of Rebellion to serve them, says, I send thee to a
rebellious Nation, Cap. 2. that have rebelled against me: And they, whether
they will hear or forbear, who stop the ear like the deaf Adar, I send thee
unto them, say thou thus, Thus says the Lord, whether they hearken or refrain,
choose them, for they a rebellious house, yet shall they know there has been a
Prophet amongst them, verse 5. And thou, be not daunted or dismayed howsoever
they look, of their looks be not afraid, though they a rebellious house, leave
that to him, the Holy Ghost who will not be so answered, protesting though
Noah, Daniel and Job were present, they should but save themselves.

And line upon line, even the Lords own words again and again expressly, what
can be said more plain; then thou shall speak these my words unto them
notwithstanding as aforesaid, whether they will hear or forbear, for they are
most rebellious: But thou, hear what J say, Be not rebellious like that
rebellious house, weigh not their favor nor frowns, let them know they have
been visited, give them warning howsoever, Open thy mouth, eat what J give
thee; standing on thy feet receive it, the Resurrection tidings, and as
expressly commanded, so to a tittle observed; of which Angelical food, the
Evangelist John communicated even the little Book opened, etc. where heard such
a noise of Trumpets, an Angel the crier, stood roaring like a Lion, so many
Thunders uttering their voices, as Drums, a Cryers voice too, he in the Isle of
Patmos, in that Desert, crying, He that has an Ear, let him hear what the
Spirit says to the Churches, Rev. cap. 2. etc. besides, Fighting against the
Holy Spirit; forewarning all to beware, proclaims the Judge of quick and dead
his coming; and both of these agreeing thus in the sad condition of the time,
as it were, not to be awakened, bidden in another place, Son of man, sigh with
breaking of thy loins, smite thy hands, etc. an end, the end is come upon the
four corners of the earth (or land, as signifies both) now the end; an evil, an
only evil, behold is come: Thus says the Lord, Cap. 7. An end is come, it
watches for thee, behold it is come, as it were, all is accomplished, the day
of Judgments forerunner is come, smothered although by our Overseers, fast
asleep for all, as in this City of late, some sleepers (characters of the
carriage of the time) women, never the like, awakened not not by the pains of
their travel, but as fallen asleep many days before, so continued still sleeping,
whilst in the bed the Babe choked, etc. Another whose Arm lay broyling on the
fire (lately gone into the Hospital) she in the mean while asleep.

Furthermore for whose commission before this Prophets being dismissed, thus
much without aggravation or augmentation he, unto such an unexpected Banquet
invited, being not sent fasting away, of Lamentations, Mourning and VVoe spread
before him.

Cap. 3.
Moreover saying, having caused him to eat, bidden freely to fill himself, etc.
J send thee not to the Cotages unto Day-laborers, those of a rude speech, them
of thick or great lips; surely had J sent thee unto them they would have
hearkened unto thee, and have answered.

And with motives and admonitions such, this Messenger of his prepared; and
this no news, of a Prophet to be least honored where best known; for the most
part there dishonored most: Even these the Lords gracious warning, his words
expressly shall go on with them.

Saying, Go, get thee to the house, speak with my words unto them: who hardly
will hearken to thee, receive thy testimony, whom neither pestilence, the like
unheard of; the sword, Brother against Brother, Children against their Father;
Famine, evil Spirits grown familiar acquaintance, as though Satan now fallen from
Heaven: And thus mixed new and old like a Scribe in both instructed, etc.
proceeding with the Commission saying farther, for as steel they be of a stiff
forehead; But thy face I have made strong against their faces, and thy forehead
against their foreheads, as an Adamant.

Harder then flint, embrace or salute them not; shake off the dust of their
houses, go not amongst them, who say in their hearts, He delays his coming, or,
We will not have this man to reign over us; as though of some other nation, we
know not what he says, moreover Bring them forth, and slay them before me, as
appears by that Prophetical Parable, when as supposed the Kingdom of God
immediately to appear, as it were, even, Mine eye shall not pity them, though
they cry aloud, I will not hear them etc.

And therefore that will by no means incline or hearken to thee, with none of
them communicate, for all their looks, see thou be not weak or daunted, though
they a rebellious house, verse 9. receive and take it into thine heart, and
hear it with thine ears, For all my words shall thou speak unto them, etc.
Look, see thou forbear them not, having a watchmans care, speak unto them and
tell them, Thus says the Lord etc. ( ver. 11.)

Verse, who then taken up in the Spirit, shows how he heard behind him from its
motion, a voice of a great rushing, to remember him; again another warning, as
a clock its Alarm before it strikes (cap. 1.) likened to the voice or speech of
an Host, those Alarms, or unto the noise of great waters their rushing, and the
like; as compared to the Almighty voice, coming from Heaven: Their wings and
wheels one within another, etc. Thus what before he saw, now his ears witness
bears of it.

Much like as when all they were sitting or assembled, Penticost when fully
come, Acts 2. which filled the House where they were, suddenly such a sound, a
rushing of a mighty wind from Heaven.

When Elias like also this Prophet ascends, lifted up the King of Glory his
fiery chariots from above sent down, drawn by the aforesaid living creatures
four; swift as the wind, with their two joynd wings on this side, and on that
side sparkling, likened to burnished brass, and burning coals of a brightness
unspeakable, yet not flying, but went or ran: even the workmanship of clocks
and watches with their crystal covers, so dreadfully expressed; besides the
shadow on Dials (these the emblem of Prophets) not to go backward in the least
degree, all their motion strait forward, who when they went or ran, returned
not, although in another place shows they returned; a contradiction easily
reconciled: from their recoiling likened to the Heavens perpetual motion, in a
moment though as a flash of lightning, retire at the King of Glory his
appearance or presence, Verse 17. They returned not when they went, etc.

And of this sacred essence; each grain or dram requisite to weigh it, annexed
to a charge thus given upon life and death; whether they will, or will not: as
before declared; much more every fathom and quarter, to sound of this deep: a
calling to discharge of more consequence then his voyages: or any Belman or
Watchman, showing what hour of the night, and what past: But let that pass,
moreover whose charge, thus (verse 12.) where heard that voice Blessed be the
glory of the Lord; from this place, to wit, in the Church, sufficienty manifest
where the Suns Tabernacle, the clock stands, shadowed under the Tabernacle, as
from the head to the sole of the foot drawn, the Cherubins by witnesses
appearing more then one, shows they had round feet; according to the Hebrew;
and strait with faces and hands stretched upward, and what living creatures
these, not deemed difficult to discren, adding when those went these went, when
those stood these stood, plain enough to be understood: besides Ringers no
strange creatures: these having under their wings the form of a man's hand;
informing clocks their plumits and weights drawn up those feet too: together
with Ringers their posture stretching their loins, standing on their toes, as
by the soles of their feet, etc. the length of which easy to be taken, unto
calves feet likened, to wit, Neats leather their shoes, or Calves leather,
each expressed, as this Prophet portray could, we understand.

And so far for Aarons Bells, these their rushing heard into the utter court:
Bells a glory, wherein we surpass other Nations.

Besides this for another, ( cap. 9.) where those six men standing, beside the
brazen Altar: Amongst whom one with a writers inckhorn by his side: among the
wheels, the Sexton or Clerk that keeps it in order: He for one withal, and
showing, he reported had the matter as he was commanded or ordered to do, in
the next place as refers to the Rolls Office, its six Clerks, those reports of
theirs by the said Roll or Writ, that woeful lamentation, etc. likewise
certifies with the inckhorn, that slaughter weapon too wit) the penknife, to
beware of cutting men's throats therewith, such doings, etc.

Cap. 10. Thus running over the words of it, from the beginning of the Book to
the end, as the Alphabet the literal sense, he that runs may read it, hidden
although from Rabbis, Fathers and Modern both, taken with that admiration into
consideration, giving thanks to his Father, that had made of his great Counsel:
He that shuts and no man opens; opens and no man shuts: Behold the little book
sealed with the Seven-stars; which book holds in his right hand, no man worthy,
or so wise, for all their libraries, so much as to behold the out side of it;
they held at such distance, no looking within the shadow of those Hierglipical
Cherubin Curtains, The Spirit and the Brides bed, thereof to touch a loop, so
much edge or selvedg, like the scattered bones out of hope, cap. 37. Though
here brought bone to bone, as it were, Live O obstruse Oracle; containing the
living creatures, namely, The Holy Ghosts Heralds, betokening not only this
terrestrial Tabernacles clothing of rags, covered with vermin for vermillion,
celestial forthwith exchanged, with the whole Creations Restitution, figured
forth; the renewed estate of men and Angels, each in its order.

But even engines of War, the great dreadful days likeness, as in his hearing
( cap. 10.) O wheel, cried unto, where he between the wheels, the man in
linen, and match made of linen, pointing there to great Ordnance, even gives
fire to them; beware the brass Piece loud enough, cried whose motions strait
forward, whether the head looked, mounted on their beril colored wheels, all
put into a color, compared to the Almighty thundering voice, when he speaks,
plainly spoken, what a noise utters when their monstrous shot discharged,
compassed with no little smokes and fire, as the appearance of the glory of
God, etc. their terror represented by the cloud in the day time, and the fiery
pillar by night; these living creatures likewise in the Brazen serpents
likeness, when bitten in that manner, whose souls so much loathed the Manna,
could not digest such light meat ( Number. 21.)

And how lightly soever esteemd; nevertheless with the Prophets last
instructions, shall proceed to give a taste of it; where showed him the
forefront of the house eastward, all the form of the house charged to observe
it; to be brief, Church-Reformation demonstrates, cap. 40. with its Chambers,
inner Chambers, and outer Courts, namely, the several Courts of Justice
likewise to be reformed; as by such exact dimensions for a rule given, with the
Temple and inner Temple, every corner surveyed, as of late disordered Coledges,
called Temples in this City, repaired too, set forth in this Map of Isralites
days: The holy waters answering thereto, like one deep calling to another,
tokens of no inferior consequence, when at so low an Ebb, issuing from the
threshold that became an ocean for fishers, exceeding many from Eng. to Engl.
etc. not to be circumscribed within so narrow limits, reserved to a larger
table.

Have only sounded the trumpet, here given the word, O house hear, Thus says
the Lord, etc. for they a Rebellious, etc. for their standing in contempt,
served the subpena: Thus hard and slow of hearing, removed the pillow from
their elbows: of some passages and tokens, touching the woeful present given a
touch to call them from the foreruners of his coming, what an over-turning goes
before it, whose voice as the sound of many waters, even the floods voice.
Noah's days 1700. When as repented him he made man, as in this present century
appears, un paralleld for such surpassing sins and judgments.

But going on with the words of his commission to perfect the same. Cap. 3.
Verse. 2.6. Thou shall not go amongst them, etc. for they a Rebellious house; a
multiplied phrase after the manner of clerks, in drawing bills or books; the
aforesaid as it were, the word book authorized otherwise, called a bill of
divorce, as thus styled the book of Ezekiel the Prophet, signifying both book
and bill.

Cap. 12. verse 2. thus enlarged, Thou dwell in the midst of a Rebellious
house (Verse 3.) For they a Rebellious house: though they a Rebellious house,
etc. And has not the Rebellious house said unto thee, etc. concluding the
matter thus, For in your days, O Rebellious will I say the word, and perform it
says the Lord, Verse 25. Acts 13. Therefore beware, lest that fall upon you:
behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish ye, for I do a work in your days,
which ye shall not believe, though one declare it unto you.

Where last of all, because if the cause should depend beyond what was
expected, before ripe for a hearing (Thus) a cloud about breadth of a hand
appears, Verse 27. Thus says the Lord, He that hears, let him hear; and he
that forbeareth (to put in his answer) let him forbear: for they, etc. alters
both mood and number, hereby showing what though some be dumb or willful, yet
he at least, let him open his mouth, and not with one voice, Shut him out
whilst he made stand at the door knocking, making as they asleep were, bears
witness, Revelations 22. he that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he
that is filthy, etc. and come says the Spirit and the Bride (revealing before
the glorious Throne, our appearing immediate) and let him without delay answer
that hears, and say come, etc.

The Grace of our Lord, etc. Ezekiel. cap. 3.

Postscript.
Least that come to pass, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a
Wedding garment? and he was speechless etc. without his robe of Parliament,
without doubt (in adding thereto) many called, but few chosen, an Item to both
Houses. Mat. 22.

FINIS.

