THE New Jerusalem At Hand: By the Lady Eleanor Douglas, Daughter of Lo:
Audeley, Lo: Touchet E. of Castlehaven.

JE LE TIEN. MAT. 28. Behold, I am with you all days, until the cons^mm^tion of
the age.

Printed in the Year 1649.

The Prophetess of the most High, to all Nations and People, etc.
Showing in stead of a Charles the second, gives ye the character of a second
Saul, even He and his for ever cut off, unto that giving place, that
everlasting, even proclaimed, The first and the last (to wit) Prophets the
beginning and the ending, Jure Divino, before Kings of the Earth: Certain
inferences by, borrowed from days of old ( Sam. cap. 10.) whose Reign
confirmed by that ominous token, witness of Rachels Sepulcher (as much to say)
such another he mourning and weeping also for his children, because they were
not, or not him to succeed, read in letters of her Name, Rachels, otherwise
rendered Charles; and thus running over the sum of it.

To whom on this wise showed cap. he when little in his own eyes, above the
rest how chosen to be a King so great, from tending on Asses, Scotlands former
low Estate pointing thereto: and so farther of Kings given in his wrath, in
anger taken away: briefly thus, but referred to the first of his Reign, Anno
1625. that heavy hand upon the City, an unparalleld Pestilence, concluded with
our three Kingdoms Division; so that if ever all at their wits-end, now
accompanying his departure, 23 of his bloody Reign; in making him King of Great
Britain, evident the Lord repenting himself much more, well served for their
Repining, whom Nothing but a King would serve, who blessed were above all
Kingdoms; so in a virgin Queens renowned Reign: And for them so much, First and
last of their Name, both tasting of one sharp cup, their Heads cut off, and
fastened their bodies in that manner to the wall, or nailed, etc. as to the Story
referred (Sam. etc.) which had each three Sons: where this for another cast
upon her, Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman; whether in right
appertains not to our Scottish Jonathan, by his Mothers means stripped of his
Royal means and Estate.

Passing over what between him passed and his ghostly Father or Confessor,
supposed to have been Samuels very Spirit, who fell all along both of them upon
the earth sore afraid, how feigned or carried out, to make good the innocent
blood spilt of such multitudes of his people, who without question as
participated of Saul's fits, The evil Spirit from the Lord (to wit) the evil
Counsel infused by the Clergy; so wanting neither in his Fathers Faith or
Religion, spoke truer then he wist, whose wanton Minion bewitched with, neither
repented hereof; One charged with the life of his Father, nor of his
unmeasureable Swearing, which amongst them swear By their saul, so long till
verily conjured up his Spirit, that not a little boasted of his Kingcraft,
witness Familiar Spirits, witches of late, transferred from Scotland hither:
And as for that Agag, the delicate Buckinga^ how his mother made childless, she
author of his unhappiness, she ensnared by their Spanish junkets, cannot but
add this to the Reckoning of Phinehas spirit, how it has acted on these
twain, saying, Righteous art thou, O Lord, that have judged thus, Anno 1628. as
when Buckingham his deadly wound had given him, by such a one transported, etc.
so even Charles late King, 1648. at length paid home that heavy Stroke or Blow
of his, aged Eight and forty, like The flying Roll, in length twenty cubins,
etc. twenty years, which had given him to make his peace or repent him; and so
much only at this time commended to the Reader, with this contained in the
Prophet Daniels confession (neither have we hearkened, etc. ( Chapter 9. v. 6.)
doubtless pointing to the people of this land alike with dumb and deaf spirits,
etc. together with his lame confession on the Scaffold, like blind Devotions
Lesson, promised, That he should say but very short Prayers, who came not short
of it none at all said that we hear of.

Nevertheless, unwilling to insult over the worm or grave; as his hard lot, To
morrow be thou with me, said to Saul, so This day be thou with me in paradise;
peradventure his pardon had folded up herein, which had not received in his
lifetime altogether those good times others had, etc. might at the last gasp
or minute repent: And so much for The Ax laid to the Root of the old Tree, in a
Reign of 23 years, which produced no better fruit. And for the title set forth
of the Keys of David belonging to her, Rev. 1.7.

And as demonstrates a second Saul, so a second Adam, he first of the Kings of
the Earth, his immediate woeful fall shadowing it forth.

VVitness she subject (Heb.) called Chavah or Eve: By whom had three Sons,
where thus for her sake rewarded ( Genesis 3.) Even placed at the East a flaming
Sword, etc. turning every way, droven out as it seems VVestward, from his
Garden to the open Field, in their Leather liveries to encounter travel, justly
reaping the fruits of accursed mother Earth, war and strife, the Thistle and
Thorn, its emblem in stead of the Olive and Grape: All our days as stubble but
a blaze, vanished like a shadow: The sum or substance of which informing,
formerly as he forbiden expressly the Tree of good and evil, notwithstanding
took thereof; so again, when as offered the Tree of life, its Leaves for healing
the evil of the Nations, or Kings Evil; a like Trespass or capital Crime guilty
of, that rejects it, like Judgments draws upon their heads: And therefore
suppose not that those Galileans were sinners above the rest, because of late
suffered, etc. Nay, but except ye repent, ye all likewise shall perish.

And so from Saul and Doeg, deriving Douglase, here concluding as began, how
his bloody House cut off, also even dyed for his transgression against the word
of the Lord, etc. and also for asking counsel of one that had a familiar
Spirit, and enquired not of the Lord (to wit) his Bishops, etc. whose army how
swarmed with Witches, never the like heard in any Reign visited in that kind,
wherewith showing lastly of the evil Spirit, when fell upon him, how the good
Spirit (at the very same time) rested on another: The solitary Turtle-Dove as
it were shut up, one of his own name (owned by King James, before the other of
Stuart) and of his Age and Nation: Sir Archibald Douglase, the supposed Son of
King James, the Elder Brother about a month, etc. also wrote Anno Etatis, etc.
as by a Legacy of a thousand pound per annum, out of his Crown Lands appointed
for him; whereof though disappointed or prevented by the said K. unexpected
death, yet of the better part could not be disinherited, then any three Crowns
a greater blessing: The holy Spirits anointing apparent by his Letters hereto
annexed, that not only in those days were accounted to be distraction; but to
this very day, even with Learned Doctor Sybald, fulfilling what honor Prophets
receive at home: By whose hand no few of these Manuscripts were burnt: This
man's writing who wrote so long ago. From the Hysope Nicity, unto the Cedar
Authority or Supremacy, conversing with no Books, but one the Book: Sir
Archibald Douglas right Heir of the Earldoms, howsoever of Morton and Douglas
the doughty; likewise of person a choice young man, and a goodly, etc. That
Nations Captain by his Birthright himself a Soldier by profession, in Spain
and Germany no ordinary Commander, upon whom the first fruits of the Spirit
came.

Quaeres or Questions To Dr. James Sybald, Minister of Clerkenwel.
ANd (whether) the very perilous time now, fulfilling what is written in Paul's
second Epistle to Timothy, Men shall be lovers of their own selves, more then
of God, etc. from such turn away: And what is written in ( Mark. 13.) Of the
troublesome last days: (ver. 10, 11.) Of which I will say no more, only thus
much: Had you demanded of me in how many days, the change which I speak of
should be, or known of what consequence it is, ye would not so suddenly have
endangered me, as to have spoken a word of me to that purpose, or where I was;
when ye see what will be, and what ye have heard of me; even very shortly you
will be ashamed, and heartily sorrow for your precipitate Opinion of me.

Now considering that you are preparing to morrow in the Forenoon, on the
uncertain Easter Day; Also to receive your part of the Passover, even kneeling
at the Communion Table; consider these Texts, and prepare an answer to the
same: Deuteronomy. 16. There thou shall sacrifice the passover at the evening, at the
going down of the Sun, That thou may remember it all the days of thy life: 1
Cor. 11. When ye come together therefore into one place; this is not to eat the
Lord's Supper, for in eating every one takes before his own Supper, etc. John
13. and Supper being ended, etc. Concerning which, tell me therefore in your
Conscience; is not the Lord's Supper in the Forenoon a most Belly-god invention:
Also the kneeling at the Communion Table does not fulfill what is written in the
first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, ver 20.8, 21. But I say, the things
which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, not to God; and I would
not that you should have communion with devils, etc. Also is not the Title of
Doctors a most presumptuous thing (Mat.) Which love the uppermost rooms and
chief seats, and to be called Rabbi, Rabbi, and Matthew. 23 Neither be ye called
masters, etc. As also the names of Saints, (Psalm.) When who knows how often he
offends; much less knows the secret sins of another: Also according to your
Conscience let me know your opinion of the Ministerial Priests: Traditions has
not made the word of God of none effect, or to have no power, Mark 7. ver. 13.
and many such like things do ye.

Also let me know what is their reward that do crouch and make courtesies to
boards; when as it is written, Keep thy foot, or have a care thereof when thou
go into the House of God; and be more ready to hear; then offer the
sacrifice of fools (to wit) lest thou crouch and make a crooked courtesy to a
board, which was but a stock, even a block: whatsoever it was, and whatsoever
it is, and they worse then a block that make a cursed courtesy to it, a
besotted beast and a devil ( Sam. 28.) going even to the very Devil of Hell,
with him who stooped with his face to the ground, bowing himself; likewise they
try what reverence they can do unto him.

And lastly, what is the reward of addition and diminishing the word of God,
Rev. 22. showing, For I testify, If any man shall add, God shall add the
plagues written herein; and if any shall take away, God shall take away his
part out of the holy city. So taking in haste leave, think of me what ye please,

Rest your faithful Friend, ARCH: DOVE. Elijah.
Likewise know, I desire you not to speak a word of this till the appointed
time, only have a care in the mean time of your own soul; Acts 2. Save your
selves from this untoward generation.

From my Lodging at White-Fryers. Anno 1638. your Easter-Eve.



To my much esteemed worthy Friend, James Sybald, Minister at Clerkenwel, this.
Loving Friend,
IT seems your employment is very much, for if it were not so, or if ye had
remembered my desire, I should have seen you according to your Promise in two
days, after that time ye was with me last: Certainly, if ye knew how near the
Great Change is, which I spoke of, ye would have seen me before this: Which
unexpected Change, whatsoever it be, it being so exceeding near, I request you,
whatsoever ye have to do, let me see you this afternoon: But a few words. And
likewise through CHRIST I charge you, not to speak a word of this, until you
see what GOD will do shortly; whatsoever it be, unless a very Great Change be
shortly, then think of me what ye will: Exitus acta probat.

Ye may believe me, for I think ye know it had been better for the Lord Major
of this City, Anno Dom. 1638. to have heard me from the LORD, then to have had
the Plague of GOD amongst them, which came just then, how soon the seven
Elected Eldermen did charge me, not to come near them, nor write any more unto
them; which did so offend GOD, as his Plague has continued amongst them until
this day: Therefore do not vilify my Request. So till I see you, Rest,

January 19. Anno Do. M.DC.XXXVIII. Your faithful Friend, * Rev. 2.28. THE
MORNING STAR.
I pray you bring no servant with you, near the place where I am; for I am
exceeding loath for to be known, to be near the city, until I be seen at Court;
which now God willing will be shortly: I am sure there is none knows I am so
near you, no not one, except my servants: Therefore I request you let me not be
discovered by you, nor by your words, concerning the contents of my Letter.

Likewise do not think to lose much time with me, for one sentence shall be
sufficient.




To a Messenger of the LORDS, Dr. James Sybald, Minister at Clerkenwel at
London, this.
Loving Friend,
MY self, though your Well-wisher, has constantly been committed willingly
within the Chamber and Study where ye left me about two Year since: It was not
the Lords Will, know hitherto, that I should write unto you, since the 20 of
June, Anno Aetatis, 1638. Because the Great Change which he moved me to tell
you, was to be suddenly, know, it was not to be accounted according to the
computation of man, but according his own (to wit) it was not plainly to begin,
until some few days hence, according to our computation; his mercies being
above all his Works: He gives his very enemies a space of time, for to consider
their own doings, that they might repent. Though now adays most of all the men
of this world, cannot possibly be moved lawfully for to be obedient unto him,
nor to be just: So says ELIAS and verily ELIJAH, who desires you, if you love
your self, or your own good, for to come unto him about two a clock this
afternoon: otherwise, assuredly the LORD will not let me do you the good which
I intend, who lets you understand, none of the unjust within this Kingdom
before long will be able to stay therein: So think of this, and do which I
lawfully desire for the best, till I see you. Vale. And so rest,

Your faithful Friend, DOUGLASE.
December. 19. Anno Do. 1639. From the JACOBIN or Carmelistain Friars,to wit of
old, From the Carme, Freere, Frater; as Fray may be well applied truly unto any
one of all the many many sorts of Friars, whose Fray has continued too long;
and now, it must, it must be returned to them.




And here happy Readers, with this Manna communicated (to wit) the Divine
Prophesies of this Man; know herewith ordained and enacted as heretofore, a
Rebel against the Father proclaimed, he that Despised the Son; likewise (unable
to gainsay it) they a Reprobate Church, sitting in the seat of Scorners: which
acknowledge not the fulfilling of these now, ( John 16. All things which the
Father has are mine: Therefore I said, that he shall take of mine, and shall
show it unto you; and he shall show you things to come, as much to say, Even
manifested the truth of those sacred Mysteries, contained in the Revelation of
Jesus Christ which God gave unto him, etc. Cap. 1. Things for the future
treasured up, by no other Spirit to be unfolded, but by the same Spirit of
truth, wherewith were written at first, or penned; and for that purpose the
same poured forth again in the last days: And so these by that Spirit then
persecuted, witness (Rev. xi.) The Beast ascended ont of the bottomless Pit, or
Abyss, one in old Samuels likeness, Bishops, etc. Also which testifies,
whosoever despises the Spirit of Prophecy, guilty of all the Blood of the
Prophets shed: And therefore lest your sentence that, Ye stiff necked, etc. ye
do always resist the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye (Acts 7.)
provoke him not, who is a consuming fire, according to their works, Jew and
Gentile both high-minded, who rewards them, as referred to the prophet Malachi,
accompanied with what judgments (cap. 4.) when that blessed time, arising with
healing in his Wings, (ver. 2.) the meek dove Messenger of peace, displaying
her golden feathers, as the lightning out of the East shines even unto the
West (Mat. 24.) the Spirit of Prophecy vouchsasing a visit, absent from the
Church so long comfortless, saying, I have the Keys of Death and Hell, a
Scepter of seven Stars in whose right hand ( Re. cap. 1.) pointing to times
Mystery, the present Century, and at this time so much for admonishing all: He
that has an ear, let him hear, etc. and fare him well that will not; a story
by whom related of Alexander the Great, etc. on the Scaffold, as well might
have told a tale of his Horse.

These from Whitehall, sometime Wolseys the Cardinal. Febr. 1648.
FINIS.

