Hells Destruction. BY The Lady Eleanor Douglas.

Apocal. Behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that you may be
tried; and you shall have tribulation ten days, etc.

Printed in the year 1651.

Hells Destruction.
Behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be tried;
and ye shall have Tribulation Ten days, etc.

Apoc.

MOst Learned and Honored Judges, with whom so precious restles Time, of which
as who can be over frugal, shunning therefore Multiplicity; long process but
wearisom to the wise: Seeing then our Laws how balanced with Gods Law its
profound Precepts, said to be founded thereon, and Reason in its purity
consonant thereto, otherwise has with it no affinity.

Emboldens to present this Paradise Posey, durable presidents which too
circumspect wherein ye cannot be, hereof as ensues.

Adam that first Lord Chief Justice or Judge, before whom the Lord God brought
every Creature formed of the Earth, to see what he would call them; and
whatsoever he called every living Creature, that was the name thereof: of a
certain admits of no wrong or contrary Names whatsoever in any Courts of Record
to be legal or answered unto. As these inform, accords with the former, the
Judge of quick and dead; where demanded Consisting of about 6000 Foot and 700
Horse, the length of Times Foot, the distracted Time Aged ear ^000 years, he
Legton also, etc. The Dutch styled Gravs and Boors their late loss put into the
Reckoning, Mat. 8. Mark 5. Luk, etc.
first, What his Name was? before obtained a pass for that Baptized Herd the
Gentiles Prototype doubtless, the Devil his Godfather; who made answer, saying,
Legion, for they were many; he resident (as it were) in Hell, among the Graves
distracted, etc.

Thus as we see and know irrational Creatures, these of several kinds retain
their proper Names; and very Devils not debarred theirs. Nevertheless that
Dominion have over them, Man the Little World, to Angels not much inferior,
deemed no little VVonder, as though confined to a lower Region then they,
suffer our selves, worse then Bruits undergo Names enjoined utterly false,
instanced as here the dead child like in stead of the living laid in her
Bosom, disputed in Solomon's presence; whereby no less then bereft both of her
good Name and Liberty, witness this their erroneous VVarrant of Arrest, Ecce
vera copia.

Eleanor Lady Davers alias Douglas, committed to Woodstreet-Compter by Steedman
Officer to the Lord Major (July 17.) 1646. As true that might have styled her
Lord Major, etc. for any relation between Davers and Douglas: But by a
Nonsense Alias a seeming connection far from Holy Writs Example, Slime in
stead of Mortar, and Brick-bats for firm Stone, with it dispenses not;
Confusion of that consequence.

Whence follows next Simon Magus alias Peter, etc. Saints and Devils become
fellows; also Fool and Racha: what not? as out of the path of his Commandments:
of warrants that latitude allowed them, one Name because lighted on, matters
not how many false beside, so at all with Logicks definition or Reason, agrees
not, authorized by the proviso (Alias) the meaning of it; sometime or otherwise
etc. though she never before at any time called by the aforesaid Name belonging
to another Tribe or Family; He that calls the Stars by their Names (as it were)
Male and Female, those lights: where joins names, no such Bills of Divorce
tolerates neither what Antiquity or Custom either occasions, as referred to
those judicious, the Sequel of what concernment.

Lastly wherewith even whose additionals Abraham and Sarahs, consists but of a
letter both alike old and new consenting in one. Also Paul for Saul, one so
cautious that way, witness in mentioning the said Patriarks Blessing as well
observes, saying, Not Seeds, as of many, etc. but Seed, etc.

And so much for that, They would have said, etc. in stead of Alius: All they
can allege or say for themselves so contradictory to Sense and Verity, better
to be justified by some blind slow Belly Cretians such Vipers, then by those
interested in the Name of Christians, who would be unwilling to Subscribe to
any other.

And hereupon of her false Imprisonment undergone; so many years, If when the
cause of the Law ceases, then ceases the Law it self: wherefore when the
Adversary detains the work, for which the Bond was entered into, occasioned it,
why should he keep it, and her person in hold both? or by what Justice and
Equity stands such an Execution any longer afoot or in force, she having been
since put to the charge for Imprinting the same all over, for which was
acknowledged the said Obligation of Sixty pounds, no benefit whereby accrewing
to her, by a certain Printer, one Pain, upon whose importunity and protestation
'twas obtained.

Another Quaere, since Scandalous Names bear Action to be termed Bankrupt, etc.
why unjust Cutthroat Actions what the Adversary pleases, no Redress in that
case; as amounting to Hundreds no few by this Broken Printer and his Consorts,
the Burden of them, no short furrows plowed, etc. By City unmerciful
Adonizebeks, unmindeful of his Confession, as hehad done, God had requited him,
Threescore and ten had dismembered them, etc. And Abimelech how rewarded, doing
execution on his Seventy Brethren, a woman his Executioner (Judges 9.) laying
on himself (as it were) violent hands, caused one to slay him, not impertinent
here to unmerciful Executions.

With the Milstones lighting on his Head, a presaging to the Press, and
Majorship both, by those several Tables under which so many fed by him, of his
Thumbs to be pared and Great-Toes.

And what Figs and Grapes such Thistles and Thorns produces, proceeding
therewith the plot of this Cutthroat Fellow; which aforesaid Arrest in his own
House, who to draw her thither feigned had lost the Copy, etc. The ready way for
compassing their desperate Ends, supposed in having her life at mercy, being
sent to the Compter, locked into her Chamber by the Keeper: Not long after (she
all unready, etc.) between two of them carried down thence, instantly shut and
bolted was into the Dungeon-Hole, Hells Epitomy, in the dark out of call or
cry, searching first her Coats pockets: Frustrate that way, with the Key took
away the Candle, there left in their Pesthouse on the wet floor to take up her
lodging, beyond any draught, by so many poisonous Vermin harbored: Like
disquieted Spirits setting up fearful several Notes, coursing about, etc.

About an hour after, when* as no need of Sun, Moon or other (Anno 1646. July
17.) whereof notice Extraordinary taken about the City, they brought her again
to a Chamber, That Night till day break, the Heavens without intermission
flashing out Lightnings, as Noonday; The Element like a Casemate standing open,
without Thunder at all, or any Rain, those continued fireworks notwithstanding.

Which time Twelve-Moneth that Adonizebek Lord Major was committed to the
Tower, and his Brethren (Anno 47.) when the Armies unexpected arrival at the
Whitsontide, etc.

As for the perfideous Printer how happened with him, soon spued out of House and
Home, his Wife within few days dead, in whose Brothers unhappy Name the Bond
taken.

And so when the smoaky Bottomless Pit to be opened, the purifying days over,
oppressed Captives, seasonable for Elevating their weary Heads, Signs in Heaven
and Earth, Sea and Waters, contribute their Testimony, no mute obscure Tokens,
like the floods voice uttering theirs, unbound as it were, clapping their hands
for company; perplexed people at their VVits-end (Luke 21.) on all sides in
that unparalleld Thraldom, mutinying, then these Uncircumcised their
Commissions date expired: As he that reads that Magna Charta the Prophet
Isaiahs Good Tidings for them Cap. 61. Luke.
bound, etc. those doors to be unbar'd.

Of which groaning Days thus, alluding to their Month of Travel the Tenth, or
lying in, paralleld with the ten Persecutions, Ten days shall have Tribulation;
The Mysterious Beasts Revel. 2.
Reign, Crowned or Mitre'd with his Ten Horns, charged with open Blasphemy,
spewed out by so many Heads, against the Tabernacle, the presence, etc. opening
no narrow Throat, repaid Lex talionis, that leads into Captivity, etc. Rev. 13.

And so much for the year of Redemption, arrived that Haven, Tokens of it
likened to the Springs infallible Messengers of Summers approach, the Fig Tree
and the rest, proclaimed by Heavenly Heralds, which Powers above shaken, like
those Boughs, others bids beware the Tree or Ax.

VVitness our New Star in Cassiopei, the French taking essay of its influence,
that Herodian Massacre not long after it, seen 74 years before the year 1644.
the heavy day of Reckonings forerunner; of which Great-Seal day John heard the
number (Rev. 7.) even sealed the year of God Ao Dom. 44. observing the motion
of the former, that in the East 74 years before Jerusalems ludgement, the
numbered Time of our Captivity or coming out of Heathen Babylons Purgatory, of
whose Habeas Corpus sealed Writs a Discharge thence of the restless Abyss,
touching Obligations sealed and the like: These an express command (Rev. 9.)
commanded henceforth not Showing they have a King (...) them, etc. (of the
Roman Faction) where those called Cavaleers or Royalists, and coin Dollors and
Half Crown Pieces adored (Daemoniae) (he heard the Number of them) with Pieces
of Ordnance, the Fleet or Navies preparation by those hideous Hieroglyphics
signified, etc.
to harm or touch any such, but those branded or charged with Murder and
Theft, etc. (ver. 20.) breach of his Law, the Commandments.

And for this time so much, prefixed fixed or set times though said to be but a
certain time for an uncertain, and the like, questionless of highest
concernment those undervalued most, or least in request, because flatters not
or torments them, termed wild notions and brainsick, etc. Likewise for
uncertain Names on record, Darius as it were for David; like that Dispute about
her having five (Ioh.) Bidden Go call her Husband: whence follows, if Davers
one, then (otherwise) called Douglas, he none of hers either.

As sarthermore for tedious Apprentiships their farewell, together with that
granted, What is not true is false; Ergo, Libel bastard slips, and sinister
actions imposed on his people, unlawful to be fathered on Gods Word, his Law
thereon either erring not in a tittle.

FINIS.
From the Fleet. Easter 1651.

