Dreadful News FROM HACKNEY MARSH, GIVING A True Relation OF THE Blowing up two
Powder Mills:
WHEREIN Were Two Hundred and Sixty Barrels of Gunpowder: And the Occasion of
their taking Fire: With a Particular Account of the number of the Men and Women
Killed; Its Tearing up of the Earth, and Trees; The Shattering and Damnifying
an adjacent Mill, and several other Houses, even to the Town of Hackney: And
the great Consternation it put the whole City of London in; As also, a
Computation of the General Los^ sustained thereby.

THE General Remarks that are made of those two Elements Fire and Water, that
they are good Sevants, but bad Masters, may in a great measure be said of that
Grand Compound Powder; for though it be a good Servant, in all times of
necessity, for to serve as a Defense against the Assaults and Designs of our
Enemies; yet when it becomes an Instrument of Destruction to Humane kind, when
at its own Conduct, nothing is more Detrimental to its Proprie^ors. A most
Dreadful and Lamentable Example of which you have in this following Relation.

In Hackney-Marsh on the Brinks of the said River, distant three Miles and a
half from London, lately stood three Mills, two whereof were for the use of
making of Gunpowder, and the other for grinding of Bark for Dying, etc. On
Saturday the Nineteenth of this Instant April, 1690. about the Hour of Seven in
the Evening, one of the two abovementioned Gun-Powder-Mills took Fire, and in
an instant blew up it self, and tearing up the Trees and Earth, reached the
other, which likewise blew-up, with several little Weavering Rooms, all which
it laid level with the Ground in a moment; it gave but two Reports, but of so
extraordinary a nature, that it amazed not only Hackney and other adjacent
Towns, but even the whole City of London, and Liberties of the same; the^e
being scarcely a House, but more or less felt the effects of its shaking them
even to that d^gree, that it has occasioned matter of much Dispute and
Observation among the Curious; for though the Naturalist do give diverse Reasons
for Earthquakes, and their strange shaking the Earth for a great
circumference, the Chief of which, is its being ledged for a time in the grand
Caverns and Channels of the Earth, etc. Yet this last Example is a Matter of
more Novelty, and no less dreadful consequence to the poor Inhabitants.

The Reasons assigned for its taking Fire is variously said, some say, the
over-covetousness of the Workmen, in working a longer time than (by their
Rules) they ought, to get Money for their Extraordinary Expenses the Week
following; but the more considerate Neighbors adjacent do believe, That they
were mistaken in their Time about an hour, through their neglect in counting,
and forgetting to Turn up their Hour Glasses, by which their Punns, that their
Powders beat into over heated, and occasioned the Gunpowder to take Fire, as
them Skilled in those Affairs affirm it will.

There is Six poor Souls killed, Four Men kind, and Two Women, one of which is
the Master of the Powder Mills, who lies upon the Earth, another a Minister
that Lodged there, whose Head is beaten clear off, and his Intrails hangs out
of his Body, a Boys Face and Breast visible, his other parts being buried in
the Earth, an Ancient Woman lying with the upper part of her body above, and
her lower part under the Ground; another blown into the River, they all lying
there to be viewed by the Beholders, as miserable Spectacles of humane misery;
several others escaped by leaping into the River.

There was (in the Storehouse, which was adjoining to the Mills) Two hundred
and Sixty Barrels of Gunpowder, the loss of which, with the two Mills, a
Dwelling House, two small Houses for weaving of Cloth, being wholly Ruined;
also two other large Houses adjoining, with the Dying Mill; all which, though
they are still standing, yet miserably Shattered, with other Damage; in all
valued at Four Thousand Pounds Sterling.

FINIS.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed for Alex Milbourn at the (...) Arms of Little Old Bailey, 1690.


