The Ancient and Modern Stages surveyed. OR, Mr COLLIER's View OF THE
Immorality and Profaness OF THE English Stage Set in a TRUE LIGHT.

Wherein some of Mr Collier's Mistakes are rectified, and the comparative
Morality of the English Stage is asserted upon the Parallel.

Rode Caper Vitem, tamen hinc cum stabis ad Aram,
In tua quod fundi Cornua possit, erit.
Ov. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Black Boy over against St. Dunstans
Church in Fleetstreet. 1699.

TO THE Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of Dorset, and Middlesex, Baron
Buckhurst, one of the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council,
Lord Lieutenant of the County of Sussex, and Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, etc.
My Lord,
IN addressing to Your Lordship, tho I betray my Ambition, I shall strengthen
the opinion of my Integrity. For by appealing to so great, and so impartial a
Judge, I give the World sufficient demonstration, that I trust more to the
Merit of my Cause, than of my Performance, and depend rather upon the matter,
than the manner of what I deliver, for my Justification.

The Tide of Prejudice runs high for my Adversary, and the less discerning part
of the Town are so prepossessed with the Specious Title, and the Plausible
Pretense of Mr Collier's Book, that they think the whole Interest of Virtue and
Religion embarked on that Bottom. Immorality and Profaneness are things so
justly abhorrd, that whoever enters the Lists against 'em, has all Good Men for
his Seconds. And their zeal for the Cause so far blinds many of 'em, that they
neither see, nor suspect any Defect or Treachery in their Champion. For men are
very unwilling to hear Truth, against Prejudice, and suffer Reason to triumph
over Inclination.

The Town is divided in its Judgment of the Piece, and the whole Contest lies
betwixt those that are Judges, and those that are not, as Cardinal Richlieu
said upon another occasion. The latter are of the Opposite Faction, and are as
much more numerous than the former; as Vanity and Presumption are more
Universal, than Understanding.

This makes the Prefixing your Lordships name, by your own Permission, whose
Judgment is as little to be biased, as it is to be questioned, not only matter
of Honor to me, but of necessary Defense. Not that I expect any Protection for
those Errors which I may have committed. They must be left to the mercy of
Readers of far less Judgment and Candor, than Your Honor. To be tried by such
a Grand Jury, is a happiness I am so far from expecting, that I know it
impossible. But the Deference due to so great a Name may procure me a fair
hearing amongst some, upon whom a bare regard to Justice would hardly prevail
so far.

Did Mr Collier contend only for the better Establishment of Virtue, and
Reformation of Manners, I should be ashamed to appear against him. But there is
a Snake in the Grass. Mr Collier undertakes the Patronage of Virtue, as Cunning
Men do the Guardianship of rich Orphans, only to make his Markets of it. That
this is his case, the following Sheets will, I hope, sufficiently demonstrate.
His Vehemence gives us just ground to suspect his Integrity, and to believe
that he has some concealed Interest, or Pique at the bottom. The disinterested
enquiry after Truth is always accompanied with Candor; where that is wanting,
there is just reason to suspect some further design. In Mr Collier's
management, the Heat and Smoke are too great and apparent for the Fire to be
long concealed. His Design is manifestly not to argue the Poets out of their
Faults, but to bully his Readers out of their Understandings, and by violence
to alter the Impressions already received of those matters* which he treats of.
His Style is adapted to his purpose, fierce and bold, full of vehement
exaggerations, and haughty menaces, he racks Sentences, and tortures
Expressions, to extort a Confession from 'em of things to which they are
absolute Strangers. The consequence of this way of writing is, that Women, and
Weak Men, whose Fears are stronger than their Judgments, will be awed into a
Persuasion before they are convinced of the Truth of it. For such People in
most cases measure the certainty of Assertions by the Confidence of him that
pronounces 'em, and the Importance by the false weight that is laid upon 'em.

'Twas this consideration, not any extraordinary Affection for the Stage, that
engaged me in this Argument. I look upon it as an attempt toward usurping the
Sovereignty of Men's Understandings, and restoring the Tyranny of Bigottry,
whose Yoke we have scarce yet sufficiently shaken off. My Reason is the
dearest, and freest part of me, or at least it ought to be so, and he that puts
the Dice upon that, affronts me in the most sensible manner. I had rather be
bubbled of my Money than my Intellects, and should choose rather to be thought
his Cully, than his Fool. It Is true, these tricks are not to be put upon a man
that is aware of 'em, and consequently I might have secured my self without
making a public discovery. But I think it a Cowardly piece of Caution, a sort
of Criminal Misprision to connive at the cheating of others; and while I am
able to inform 'em, the Clamor of Knaves or Fools shall never awe me to
Silence.

That this is no extravagant Surmise, no Hypochondriacal Fancy, is evident from
the Tenor of the whole Book, especially the third Chapter. Every thing is
delivered with an air so haughty, so magisterial, so decisive, that he seems
rather to serve us with an Injunction to believe him, than an Argument. That
this Imposition may be the more tamely submitted to, he palms the Authority of
the Church upon us, and pretends her Commission to make Fools of the Laity.

The Church is by no means obliged to him, for endeavoring to cast the Odium
of his own Arrogance and Ambition upon her. How great soever his Zeal for her
service may be, his Indiscretion in it does not come a whit behind it. For to
extend the Power and Authority of the Priest, he curtails the Articles of the
Church, and denies the King's Supremacy, which she has already obliged him to
swear to the belief of.

I shall not trespass so far upon Your Honor's patience, as to recapitulate
the several Invidious things, which he fathers upon the Church. I will hope
well of his Design, tho I fear the effects of his Performance will not turn to
her Service. And I could wish his Motives were better, or not so apparent. If
Demetrius was a Stickler for the honor of Diana, 'twas because he made Shrines
for her, the interest of his trade engaged him in her Party. Mr Collier's Case
is not much different. The Poets had sometimes made bold to display a vicious,
or a foolish Priest, and those that were Knaves in the World, and Drolls in the
Pulpit, had been made Cheats and Buffoons upon the Stage. The Mask of Formality
and Sanctity was pulled off, and the Block-head and the Hypocrite shown
barefaced. Thus the Profane Vulgar were suffered to peep, and pry into
Mysteries. This Mr Collier resents as if he were personally concerned, and
would persuade the world, that to expose Hypocrisy is to affront the Church,
than which her Enemies could not have suggested any thing more malicious.
However, this mistaken Injury has raised a Flame, which will cost the effusion
of abundance of Ink before it is extinguished. Manet alta Mente repostum, and
is never to be forgiven while Mr Collier can wag a Goose-quill.

Our Clergy deservedly have both at home and abroad the reputation of the most
learned Clergy in the World, and I shall venture to affirm, that they are the
Best in the World. Their Candor toward those that differ from 'em in Opinion,
their Modesty in asserting their own, and their sober Conduct in the discharge
of their own Consciences, and not assuming the dominion of those of other men,
will prove what I say to to be no Paradox. And therefore Mr Collier, in making
so large a demand in their names, has obliquely traduced 'em, by giving
occasion to those that don't sufficiently know 'em, to suspect that he acts by
their Approbation and Authority.

But I forget, that while I talk to Your Lordship, I wrong the Public, which
claims so great a share in your thoughts and time. I shall not attempt the
Character of Your Lordship: For, to write of you, as I ought, to do you
Justice, I must write like you, which I hope I shall never have the vanity to
pretend to. But the Name of My Lord Dorset alone carries more Panegyric than
the fruitfullest Invention can furnish. Those Adventurous Gentlemen, that have
already tried their Strength at it, have by their foils taught me caution.
Their Performances fall so extremely short of the Merit of their Subject, that
when they have exhausted their Fancies, their whole stock of Rhetoric looks
like an Ostentation of Beggary. This consideration alone is sufficient to deter
me from presuming further upon Your Lordship's Goodness, except to ask Pardon
for my Ambition of taking this Public Occasion to declare with what profound
Respect I am

My Lord, Your Honor's Most humble and devoted Servant.

THE TABLE.
INtroduction. p. 1 The quarrel to the Modern Stage first formally commenced in
Spain. 5 Shows among the Heathens of Religious parentage. 6 The Drama of the
same extraction. 7 Tragedy and Comedy originally one thing 8 When first
distinguished. 9 The Stage under the patronage of Bacchus. ibid Paganism a
Religion contrived for popularity. 10 Heathen Religion all Ceremony. 12
Idolatry of the Stage, the principal argument of the Fathers against it. 13
Heathen Plays dangerous temptations to the new Christian Converts. 17 Zeal of
the Fathers against them not unnecessary. 18 Disingenuity of Mr Collier. 20
Idolatry the main Objection of the Fathers to the ancient Drama. 21 Mimi c
Shows among the Romans scandalously lewd, the Drama not at all. 23 Clemens
Alexandrinus falsely cited against the Drama. 24 The Fathers sometimes over
rigorous. 25 The authority of the Fathers short of the Case. 33 Caution of Mr C
-- II -- r. ibid. Plato's authority considered. 34 Xenophon' s. 35 Aristotle'
s. 36 Plays forbidden to young People upon the score of the temptations from
the company. 36 Licentiousness not defended. 39 Mr Collier's Character of
Terence and Plautus. 40 This Character insidious. 41 His Citations patched up
of incohe rent fragments. 42 The invention of the Roman Comic Poets barren. 43
Poetic Justice neglected by them. 44 Livie's authority abused. ibid. The Luxury
and expensiveness of these Shows, not their immorality condemned by Livy. 46
Valerius Maximus misquoted. 47 Falseness and absurdity of Mr Collier's
Paraphrase. 48 His Conclusion not to be found in Valerius 49 Stage allowed at
Marseilles. 50 Seneca's Authority nothing to the purpose ibid Yet perverted 52
Tacitus, etc. impertinently cited. 54 Ovid and Mr Wycherley say nothing against
the Stage, but the Audience. 55 Too great severity of no service to Morality.
56 Mr Collier's licentious method of misquoting unsufferable. 57 The Athenians
the greatest Friends in the World to the Stage. 58 The Law against Judges
making of Comedies a direct Argument against Mr Collier. 59 The old Comedy of
the Greeks exceeding licentious. 60 Comedy, why no proper Exercise for a Judge.
61 Opinion of the Spartans. 62 Theft tolerated at Lacedaemon. 63 Character of
the Spartans. 64 Plutarch's Authority falsified by Mr Collier. 65 Politeness
the Objection of the Spartans to the Drama. 66 All sorts of Plays not
prohibited at Lacedaemon. ibid. Morality not the reason of rejecting the Stage.
67 Adultery tolerated at Lacedaemon. ibid. Livy's Authority considered. 69
Ancient Romans an unrefined people. 70 Acting of Plays first left off by the
Roman youth, because of the difficulty. 71 Histriones, who so called ibid.
Conjectural Reasons why Players were noted with infamy. 73 Two first most
probable. 75 Drama at first necessitated to use the Actors of the Ludi Scenici.
76 The Actors of Tragedy and Comedy therefore only called Histriones. ibid. The
Praetorian Edict against them. 77 Labeos exposition shows the intent of that
Edict. 78 Mr Collier's Disingenuity in this point. ibid The Roman Censure
extended only to the Mercenary Actors as such. 79 Scipio and Laelius Writers to
the Stage, or assisting to it. 80 Julius and Augustus Caesar and Seneca did the
same. 81 Law of the Theodosian Code considered. 83 Meaning of the Theodosian
Law. 84 Parallel instance 85 Authority from the Councils already answered. 87
Quarrel to the Stage unjust. 88 Ancient Stage infinitely more scandalous and
lewd than the Modern. 89 Stage dancing, as now practiced, inoffensive to
Modesty. 90 Mr Collier's notion of the extravagant power of Music ridiculous.
91 Power of Music owing to contingent circumstances. 94 Influence of sounds
indeterminate. 95 Mr Collier a Platonist. 97 Not acqnainted with the subject he
treats of. 98 His charge rash. 99 Comparative Morality of the Vocal Music of
the ancient and modern Stages. 100 Ancient Vocal music. 101 Chorus, its Office
102 Their Mimi. 103 Mr* Collier's Objections from the Topic of Love a
Declamatory Rant. 105 Mere Frenzy. 106 Revenge not encouraged by the Stage. 108
Instance in the Mourning Bride. ibid. Passion not proper in Comedy. 109 Love,
Jealouly, etc. how to be used in Comedy. 111 Exposition of an Observation of
Horace. 112 Horace's instance from Terence examined. 113 Tragedy, what in the
Judgment of Aristotle. 114 Duelling and Rencounters against the nature and Laws
of Comedy. 115 Duel in Love in a Tub against the rules of Comedy. 116 Comic
Poet obliged to draw according to nature. 117 No breach of Morality without
offending against the Laws of the Stage. 118 Mr Collier right in his end of
Stage Poetry. 120 Mistaken in his method of prosecuting that end. ibid Morals
of a Play wherein shown. 121 Folly and Knavery the subjects of Comedy 122 Mr
Colller's Character of the Ancient Poets invidious. 124 Fable the principal
part of a Play. 125 Fable of the Oedipus of Sophocles. 126 Piety of Oedipus.
129 Oedipus' s Proclamation. 130 Moral of the Fable defective. 131 Moral of the
English Oedipus the same. 132 Merely Speculative. ibid. Not very natural. 133
Moral of Seneca. 137 Seneca the Philosopher supposed the Author. ibid. His
Moral neglected by the Author of the English Oedipus. ibid. Sum of Seneca's
Moral 140 Oedipus's justification of himself. 141 Harmony of the Greek, Roman,
and English Authors. 142 Levity of Fortune not the occasion of the fall of
Oedipus. 143 Opposition of Providence. ibid. Presumption of Laius. 144 Another
Moral. ibid. Presumption of Oedipus. 145 Oedipus in Sophocles and the rest of
the Tragedians, a Predestinarian. ibid. French Moral. 146 Necromancy and all
sorts of Divination allowed by the Heathens. ibid. Conjecture of the Reasons
that induced the Authors of the English Oedipus to prefer the Greek Moral to
the Latin. 147 Seneca's Moral not proper for the English Stage. 148 Greek and
Roman Moral unserviceable to virtue. 149 Oedipus, why so minutely examined. 150
Fable of Ajax Flagellifer. ibid. The Moral somewhat obscure; two may be guessed
at. 152 The First not arising naturally from the action. 153 The Second Moral
not very natural. 154 Fable of the Electra. 155 The Moral of it. 156 Fable of
Antigone. ibid. The Moral of it. 157 Oedipus Coloneus. ibid. The Fable of it.
159. No Moral. ibid. Trachiniae, its Fable. ibid Moral of Sophocles. 160
Philoctetes, the Fable 161 No Moral. 162 Speech of Hercules not pertinent to
the Action. ibid. Character of the Plays of Euripides in general. 164 Fable of
the Orestes. 165 The Characters all vicious. 167 Not of a piece all through.
ibid. The Moral of it. 168 The Medea, etc. of Euripides. 170 Fable of the
Hippolitus. ibid. Ion usurped by Mr Dacier, a Moral Tragedy. 172 Fable of Ion
precedent to the Action. 173 Fable commencing with the Action. ibid. Main
condition of Moral Tragedy neglected in this. 174 Creusa's a wicked Character.
175 Ion's Character indifferent. ibid. Of no service to Morality. 177 Hercules
Furens compared with the Trachiniae of Sophocles. ibid. Character of Aeschylus.
178 His Prometheus immoral. 180 Jupiter abused by the Poet under the Persons of
Power and Force. ibid. The abuse backed by* Vulcan. 181. Deficiency of the
Greek Tragedy. 182 Tragedy at Rome borrowed from the Greeks. ibid. Seneca the
Philosopher, supposed the Author of some of those Plays that go under his name.
184 Seneca unjustly aspersed by Mr Collier. ibid. Seneca careless of Poetic
Justice. 186 Ajax Oileus an improper instance of it. 187 Seneca limited by
Precedent. ibid. Hippolytus of Seneca examined. 188 More artificial than the
Hyppolytus of Euripides. 189 The rest close Copies from the Greek. 190 Octavia
ill-contrived and insipid. ibid. General Reflections on the ancient Tragedy.
191 Aristotle's division of Tragedy. 192 Moral Plays not much encouraged at
Athens. ibid. Alcestis of Euripides a Moral Tragedy. 193 Ancients careless of
the general Moral of the Plays. 164 Consequence of Mr Collier's loose way of
writing. ibid. Turned upon the Ancients. 196 Socrates by this means condemned.
198 Aeschylus arraigned by Mr Collier's Precedent. ibid. And Sophocles. 199
Extravagance of this way of declaiming. 200 Shakespeare prefixed to all the rest
of the English Dramatics. 201 Censure of Hamlet unjust. 202 Fable of Hamlet
before the commencement of the Action. ibid. Fable after the Action commences.
203 Poetic Justice exactly observed in this Play. 204 Moral of Hamlet. 205
Tragedies of this Author generally Moral. 206 The Orphan. 207 The Moral good.
ibid. Mr Collier's Zeal for the Pagan Priesthood in jurious to Christian
Ministry. 208 Don Sebastian a religious Play. 210 Reasons of Mr Collier's
quarrel to the Cleomenes. 211 Moral wanting to the Cleomenes. 212 Moral
inference. 213 The Poet too faithful to the History. ibid Mourning Bride. 214
Fable very just and regular. 215 Moral excellent. 216 Advantages of the Moderns
over the Ancients in the Morals of their Fables. 218 Providence not employed to
promote villainy. ibid. Nor to oppress Virtue. ibid Nor to protect Malefactors.
ibid Modern Poets more religious than the Ancients. 219 The Fable of the Poets
disposal, Characters and Expressions not so. The Fable, if any, the Evidence of
the Poets Opinion. 220 Mr Collier's a false and perverse measure. 221 The Fable
the Engine of the greatest and most secret Execution upon the Audience. 222 Not
abused to any ill end by our Poets. 223 Apology for the Ancients. 224 Moral
Plays not esteemed at Athens. 225 Moral and Pathetick reconciled, and united by
the Moderns. ibid. Poetic Justice neglected by the Ancients in general 226
Monsieur Dacier's exception to Monsieur Corneille answered. 228 Poetical
Justice a modern Invention. 229 The Modern Stage on this account preferable to
the Ancient. 230 Fable of Comedy considered. 231 In Comedy the action and
persons low 232 The correction of Folly the proper business of Comedy. Perfect
virtue excluded the Comic Stage. 233 Some infirmity required to qualify a
Character for Comedy. 234 No Gentlemen, but men of pleasure fit for Comedy.
ibid. Comic Poetry, and Droll Painting compared. 235 Such Characters real and
common. 236 Mr Collier's mistake concerning the nature of Comedy. 237 Heads of
Mr Collier's charge against English Comedy. 238 His first Article examined. 240
This Rule repugnant to the nature of Comedy* 241 Reason why. ibid. Indulgence
of Plautus and Terence to vicious young people misplaced by Mr. Collier. 242
Plautus and Terence faithful Copyers from nature 243 Opinion of Horace enquired
into 244 This not a bare character, but a rule. 245 Sense of Horace in this
place mistaken or prevented by Mr. Collier 246 Parity of reasoning betwixt Mr.
Prynn and Mr Collier 247 Another outrage to Horace ibid Use of a Chorus
according to Horace 248 Mr Collier's answer to an objection ibid. A reply to Mr
Collier's answer. ibid. Chorus in old Comedy 251 Double mistake of Mr Collier
about the Plutus of Aristophanes. 252 Tripartite Division of the Greek Comedy.
253 By this the Plutus old Comedy. ibid. Fable of Old Comedy of what kind. 254
Characters of Cratinus, Eupolis, and Aristophanes how differenced. 255 New
Comedy how differing from the Old. ibid. Plutus not new Comedy. 256 Satire of
the old Comedy particular of the general. 257 Aristophanes the beginner of the
middle Comedy. 258 No Chorus in the Plutus. 259 Office of the Chorus in Comedy.
ibid. The parts Essential to a Chorus omitted in the Plutus. 260 Inconclusive
inference from Aristotle. 263 Silence of Aristotle no argument in this case.
ibid Reason of Aristotle's silence in this point. 264 His account of the Rise
of the Drama. ibid. Progress of Comedy obscure. ibid. Brevity of Aristotle.
265. A particular Treatise of Comedy written by Aristotle, but lost. 266 Chorus
not used in the New Comedy. 267 Chorus altogether improper for the Comic Stage
in England. 268 Used at Puppet Shows. ibid. Function assigned the Chorus by Mr
Collier. 269 Original error of Mr Collier. 270 Loose Characters in Comedy no
encouragement to Debauchery. ibid. Ridiculous fear of Mr Collier. 271 Theaters
wrongfully accused by him. 272 Sense of Horace again perverted. 273 Horace's
advice Political, not Moral. 275 Manners here fignify'd Poetical not Moral. 277
Mr Collier' s description of Poetical Manners. ibid. Defective and Equivocal.
279 Aristotle' s description. 279 Propriety of Manners required. 289 Wherein it
consists. 281 Similitude of Manners what. ibid. Equality of Manners what. 283
Faults of Characters what. 284 Faults of Expression manifold. ibid. Some heads
of Mr Colliers charge. 285 Mistaken in his first point. 286 Faults of
particulars no reflection upon the Sex in general. 287 Universals and
Individuals improper Characters. 288 What Characters proper. 289 Two sorts of
resemblances in Poetry. 290 Quality no just reason for exemption. 291 Mr
Collier's Collection from the Ancients very loosely made. 292 Objection to
Ophelia. 293 Character of Ophelia. ibid. Objection groundless and frivolous.
295 Mad Song. 296 Foolish but inoffensive. ibid. Ancients more faulty than
this. 297 Instance in the Antigone os Sophocles. ibid, etc. Instance in Electra
of the same Author. 301 Antigone in Sophocles not so nice. 304 Cassandra not so
nice as Mr Collier pretends. 305 Extravagance of Cassandra. 306 Indecency
against Character. 307 Misbehaviour of Hecuba. 310 Love and tenderness used by
the Moderns. Lust and Violence by the Ancients. 311 Numerous instances of this
kind to be found (...) Euripides. 312 Some referred to. ibid. Seneca examined
upon this Article. 313 Miscarriage of Phaedra. 314 Modesty of Lycus considered.
318 Reference to other instances. 319 These faults less pardonable in Tragedy
then in Comedy. 320 Slaves the Top Characters of the Roman Comedy. 321 Very
little variety in their Plots. 322 Greater Liberty taken by Aristophanes. 323
Aristophanes whether an Atheist or not, nothing to the purpose. 324 Mr
Collier's Argument in defense of Socrates considered. 325 Rigor of the
Athenians to Socrates a sort of acquitment to Aristophanes. ibid. Mr Collier's
instances no proof of his assertion. 327 The Opinion of the Man not measured by
the Expressions of the Poet at Athens. ibid. Liberties of Plautus greater than
those of the English Stage. 328 Instances from the Amphitryo. 329 Remarkable
circumstances of a passage in Amphitryo. 330 The disguise under which Mercury
appears no excuse for his misbebaviour. ibid. Jupiter not more modest. 331
Instance from the Asinaria. ibid. Instance of singular Morality. 332 Plautus's
Lovers more active than talkative. ibid. Instanced from the Curculio. 333
Comparative modesty of the Virgins of the Ancient Stage hence to be observed.
334 Mr Collier's own exceptions taken notice of. ibid. His instances in Olympio
grossly mistaken or misrepresented. ibid. Another instance from the Asinaria.
338 Slaves not the only offenders of this kind in Plautus. 339 Plautus's
Prologues and Epilogues not always inoffensive. 340 This proved from the
Epilogue to the Casina. 341 Epilogue to the Asinaria an encouragement to
Lewdness. 342 The Epilogue to the Captivi somewhat smutty. 343 Complaint of the
Abuse of the Clergy not well grounded. 344 Their relation to the Deity
considered. 346 Personal representation of the Deity considered. 346 The power
of the Church not lodged with the Priest. 347 Mission of St Paul and the
Apostles what and how circumstantiated. 348 Difference betwixt their
Commission, and that of the present Ministry. 349 Importance of their Office no
exemption. 352 Some faults not cognizable by the Ordinary. 353 Priests not
misrepresented, unless faultless. 355 Mr Collier's plea from Prescription
examined. 357 Instance to the contrary from Sophocles. ibid Euripides not more
tender of Priests. 359 Seneca meddles little with them. 360 Euripides and
Seneca full of profane expressions. 361 Rude treatment of the Nobility a false
Charge. 365
ERRATA.
PAge 28. l. 7. r. 'em off: p. 52. l. ult. add in: p. 68. l. 22. r. Mulciber:
p. 73. l. 5. dele not: p. 74. l. 5. r. Infancy: p. 76. l. 11. r. of: p. 86. l.
8. r. for: p. 101. l. ult. r. possibly: p. 132. l. 5 for (...) ^. (...): p.
173. l. 25. r. proud: p. 190. l. 11. r. disengage: p. 235. l. 25. dele not: p.
255. l. 23. r. waving particular: p. 302. l. 2. r. shown. She was: p. 306. l.
17. r. push her: p. 306. l. 19. r. (...): ibid. l. 20. for (...) p. 308 l. 2. r
Indignation: 3p. 11. l. 7. r. (...): p. 313. l. 2. add made: p. 315. l. 18. for
guge r. jugi: p. 339. l. 1. r. conspexeris: p. 341. l. 19. r. dare.

Errata in the Margin.
P. 23. for se de r. sed and: p. 29. for Verundia r. Verecundia. p. 57. for
ictaeo r. dictoeo: p. 69. r. ac: for relicta r. relicto: for tribi r. tribu: p.
71. for victus r. victis: p. 113. for Dio r. Dii: p. 169. r. (...): p. 126.
dele and: p. 192. dele The Moral: p. 226. r. (...) p. 317. r. Mr Collier's
instances.

Mr. COLLIER's View OF THE English Stage, etc. Set in a TRUE LIGHT.
THe aim of all Writers is, Introduction.
or ought to be, to maintain or propagate Truth, to inform the Judgment,
improve the Understanding, and rectify the Mistakes of others. Where this is
the real end and design of a Writer, no Itch of Popularity, or Awe of Faction
ought to bear him from his Bias, or make him give an inch to his Hopes, or
Fears; and the more Universal and Important the Truths are, which he discovers,
or defends, the greater in proportion ought to be the Zeal and Application.

Were these rules constantly, and prudently pursued, we might hope for an
honester, as well as wiser world, than it has been my fortune yet to find any
Memoirs of, since the multiplication of Mankind. For tho the Declaimers of all
Ages have inveighed with great bitterness against their own times, and extolled
the antecedent; yet even hence we are furnished with an argument, that all have
been equally culpable, since those times, which we, to humble our own, affect
so zealously to commend, our Forefathers did as vehemently condemn; and if we
do not find the Topics of Satyr to be in every Age the same; we can only from
thence conclude, that the Mode, and not the Measure of Iniquity is altered.

But whether the rules be strictly observable, or not, may be matter of doubt.
For, besides that grand Seducer Interest, which few withstand, Passion,
Prejudice, and Inclination, have an almost irresistible Influence over us; and
even in the coolest, and severest of our deliberations, we are apt to give too
much to Prejudice, and to humor Appetite and Passion beyond Reason.

That this is no uncommon case, most of the present Paper-Combats demonstrate,
in which the War on both sides is carried on with an obstinacy and fury, very
disproportionate to the trifles generally contended for. The Combatants enter
the lists against Chimerical Giants of their own raising, and lay about 'em
like Ajax, or Cervantes's Hero, amongst the Sheep, Giants, or Windmills, it is
all one, if they stand in their way they must be encountered.

The most formidable of these, is the Author of the Short View of the
Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage. This Gentleman, some time or
other, between sleeping and waking, had happened to hear some of Mr Durfy's
Rattles, and perhaps some saucy Jack or other of the Stage discharge an Oath or
two, and presently mistaking 'em for a noise of Drums, and volley of Shot,
falls to dreaming of Invasions and Revolutions, that the Church Artillery was
seized, and turned upon it; of a terrible Stage Plot, and a huge Army in
Ambuscade behind the Playhouse Scenes; and therefore he cries out to have the
Beacons lighted, and the Bells rung backward in every Parish, to raise the
Posse of Fathers, Councils, Synods, Schoolmen, and the rest of the Church
Militia, and cast up Retrenchments, for the Vanguard of Parnassus are upon 'em.
Then he calls for his Durindana of a Goose-quill, and thunders out Anathema's
as thick as Hail shot.

Thus instructed and appointed, he draws out his forces, and charges with such
violence and fury upon the Forlorn-Hope of the Stage, that it had been
impossible for 'em to have sustained the shock, if Pegasus had not been trained
of old to the service, and very well acquainted with the temper of the Enemies
Fire.

This Anti-poetick War has been carried on with abundance of heat at diverse
times and in diverse Countries; The quarrel to the modern Stage first formally
commenced in Spain.
it broke out first in Spain, about the close of the last Century, under
Mariana a Jesuit, who published a Book Contra Spectacula; and after that
another, by the Special Approbation of the Visitor, and the Provincial of the
Jesuits of the Province of Toledo; from thence it traveled into Italy, where
it was fomented by Francisco Maria, a Sicilian Monk, and P. Ottonelli, a
Jesuit; and was thence translated into England, about sixty years ago, by Dr
Reynolds and Mr Prynne; to France, about thirty years ago, by the Prince of
Conti, the Sieur de Voisin, etc. and tho buried for some years in its embers,
broke out again there not many years ago into a flame; at which Mr Collier took
fire, and revived the quarrel in England.

All these disputes have been managed with great vehemence and fierceness on
the Agressor's parts, and had the success been answerable to their Resolution,
the scattered rout of Parnassus had been never able to have rallied, or made
head again; but their Onset was like that of the Turks and Tartars, the Noise
was much greater than the Execution. I could never find that the Muses were
famous for Martial Exploits, or that their Votaries e're signalized themselves
by any extraordinary achievements in the Polemicks. How comes it then, that
such impetuous Assailants have gained no more upon 'em? For as yet the very
Outworks of Parnassus seem to be in no danger. Is it the natural strength of
the Place, or Resolution of the Defendants that Protects 'em?

Before I give a direct answer to these questions, it will be necessary to
premise a short account of the occasion, state, and progress of the
Controversy, in, and from the time of the Primitive Fathers down to our own
Times; by which we may be enabled to make a right Judgment, how far the present
Stage is affected by the Authorities, and Arguments urged from 'em.

It is on all hands agreed, Shows among tbe Heathens of Religious Pare^tage.
that the Ludi and Spectacula of the Greeks and Romans, were a great part of
the Solemn and Public Worship of their Gods, instituted on purpose to
commemorate, or expiate some signal Benefit, (...) Calamity, of which those
Gods were the supposed Authors, or Instruments: These Plays or Shows were
usually preceeded by a Solemn Procession of the Gods to whom they were
dedicated, and the Priests and Sacrificers in their Formalities, with the
Victim in all its Religious Pomp, (much after the manner of the Solemn
Processions in use amongst the Roman Catholics to this day) this was succeeded
by Vows made, and Sacrifice performed upon the spot, whether it were Theater,
Circus, or any other place of public Shows, or Games. After all these were
performed, or finished, the Play or Show was ordered to begin, which was also a
principal part of the Religious Worship* and concluded the Solemnity of the day.

The Dramatick Representations spring both from one Original, and were
instituted for the same general end and purpose with the rest of the Heathen
Games, The Drama of the same extraction.
that is, for Religious Worship. These (if I may be allowed to use the plural
number, for that which in the Original, was but one thing) were invented in
honor to Bacchus, and consisted of Songs in his praise, Music, and Dancing
about a Sacrificed Goat, intermixed with rustic raillery, suitable to the
Genius and Temper of the Boors, and Villagers, that were the performers.
Tragedy and Comedy were not yet become Separate Provinces in Poetry, Tragedy
and Comedy originally one thing.
but either name indifferently signified the same thing, the first being taken
from the Sacrifice, which was a Goat, the other from the Performers, which were
the Peasants, or Villagers, or from the nature of the Entertainment itself,
which was composed of Rural Music, Songs, and Dances. By what steps and
gradations the improvements were made, how the decorations of the Stage were
introduced, and when the Drama first branched into Tragedy and Comedy, as
distinct members, are pretty speculations, and afford an occasion, which one,
that. like Mr. Collier, affected to show much reading to little purpose, would
not let slip; but not being to my purpose, I shall not prosecute 'em any
farther.

It Is probable the partition of Tragedy and Comedy was first made, When first
distinguished
when the Poets, quitting the Dithyrambi, or Hymns to Bacchus, betook
themselves to the representation of Stories or Fables of their own invention;
the nature of the subjects then becoming different, according to the Poets
choice, the names were divided betwixt 'em Or perhaps, that part which we now
in a restrained sense call Tragedy, being first refined and improved, and
becoming the study and diversion of more Polite Men, the other continuing
longer in the Possession of the Villagers, retained the name of Comedy for
distinction sake, even after its utmost improvements.

But when, The Stage under the Patronage of Bacchus.
or howsoever this was, tho the Sacrifice of the Goat at Plays was left off,
the Satyri in praise of Bacchus discontinued, and the Plays appointed
indifferently in honor of any of the Gods, as occasion directed, that they
were, as the Auditors rightly observed, Nihil ad Bacchum, yet the Stage
remained sacred to and under the Protection of its old Patron, who had amongst
the Romans his Altar on the Right hand of the Stage, and the particular God to
whom the Play was for that time directed, on the Left. This was the Posture and
Condition of the Stage in the time of the Fathers.

This being the case, a Christian could not be present, or assist at these
representations, without openly countenancing or conforming to the Idolatrous
Worship of the Heathens; which the Fathers, as became careful and pious
Pastors, were extremely solicitous to prevent. They were sensible of the
difficulties they had to encounter, and the obstacles they had to surmount. The
Christian Religion was yet but newly planted, and therefore till it had taken
sufficient Root was carefully to be covered and defended from the injuries of
rude Blasts, and the contagion of those rank superstitious Weeds that grew
about it, by which the Root might be killed, or the Soil infected, and the Sap
withdrawn.

Paganism was a Religion, invented at first to oblige and captivate the people,
Paganism a Religion contrived for popularity.
and gained its Credit and Authority among 'em by indulging their Sensuality,
and even gratifying their Lusts; it was augmented by degrees, by ambitious,
cunning men, who, to render themselves more popular, and gain an interest among
the multitude, recommended to 'em, under the notion of Religion, what they
found most acceptable to the humor and palate of the populace. By this means,
the various Processions, Games, and Shows were introduced, and became the most
formal part of their Solemnities, men being easily persuaded to like what was
so conformable to their inclinations, that in the exercise and discharge of
their Duties, their Senses were entertained, and their Appetites flattered.

Against a Superstition thus framed for Luxury, and contrived to cajole the
Senses, Christianity was to make its way, and to drive out those Rites, and
destroy a Title founded upon the prescription of many ages, supported by the
authority of the Civil Government, and fortified in its Possession by
Prejudice, Inclination and Interest; and all this to be done with the
assistance only of Truth, and Simplicity of Doctrine and Manners; the Pomp, and
Magnificence of their Solemn Worship was absolutely to be taken away, and their
licentious practices to be restrained, and reformed; and instead of 'em severe
Principles, and an austere course of Life were to be established, in an Age,
and amongst a People, whom the Submission and Tribute of all the World for some
ages, had made wealthy, proud and wanton.

It is not therefore to be wondered, if those early Champions of the Gospel
proportioned their Zeal and Vigilance to the pressingness of the occasion,
Heathen Religion all Ceremony.
and the strength of the opposition. The Games and Shows of the ancient
Heathens were the parts of their Religion the most generally engaging, that
attracted most, and kept the Multitude firmest to 'em. The rest of their
Religion sat but loosely about 'em, they had no fixed, or necessary Faith, and
their devotion consisted only in a frigid compliance with those Forms and
Ceremonies, which were purely matters of Worship; their Zeal appeared for
nothing so much as their Games and Shows. For as Varro Pompa populo ingrata
fuit, quia ludis mora. Var to de Ling. Lat. Lib. 4.
and Seneca Non igno ras quam sit odiosa Circensibus Pompa.
informs us, the preparatory Solemnities were ungrateful to the spectators, who
impatiently expected the Show. The Fathers, who knew where their strength lay,
have employed all their Artillery against these Shows, their Batteries have
played incessantly upon 'em, as the only Forts that were capable of making
resistance, and stopping their Progress.

Tho the ancient Fathers bent their Rhetoric, Idolatry of the Stage, the
principal argument of the Fathers against it.
with all its Force, and in all its Forms and Figures, against the Heathen
Shows; tho they declaimed with all their Nerves, and Vehemence, and displayed
all their Arguments with the utmost strength of Color and Proportion, yet
there was nothing in which they so much confided, in which they so unanimously
agreed, as the objection drawn from the Idolatrous institution and end of 'em.
They were unwarrantable, because Idolatrous. It was (in their opinion)
impossible for a Christian, how well principled, or disposed however, to
partake of the Entertainment, without sharing the Pollution, or to abstract the
Diversion from the Guilt. They thought it dangerous to trust their Converts,
however fortified, to the temptations of so jolly a Religion, which was so far
from curbing the appetites, and laying any restraint upon the desires of its
Proselytes, that many of its duties were but Pimps to their Lusts, and almost
all its acts of Devotion but so many entertainments of their Senses. They knew
the frailty of humane Nature right well, and were aware, that tho Faith might
in some be so strong as to triumph over all temptation, yet that Multitudes
would fall before it, if they were permitted to run the risque.

The portion of those that embraced Christianity was Mortification, and
suffering, perpetual discouragement, and frequent Persecutions (till the time
of Constantine) their Reward was in Reversion; their Expectation indeed was
large, but the Prospect was distant. Now present Ease and Enjoyment are very
apt to prevail against a remote Hope. In our common affairs of the world,
Futurity maintains itself but ill against the Present, and neither the
greatness, nor the certainty of the Reversion, make good head against immediate
Possession.

This was the case of Christianity in its Infancy. The Heathen Priesthood was
contented with the Countenance and Encouragement of the State, and submitted to
the directions and appointment of it, even in matters relating to their own
Mysteries; they assumed no Dominion, or Jurisdiction over private Consciences,
either in point of Principle or Practice; but left those matters wholly to the
Civil Government, which made Laws for the regulation, and appointed Magistrates
for the inspection of Men's Manners; in which regard was had chiefly, if not
only, to the Public Quiet and Security, to the Preservation and Augmentation
of the State. If a scrutiny was made into the Conduct and Behavior of
particular persons, 'twas as they were subordinate to the Public, and might be
instrumental or prejudicial to the common welfare, either immediately, by their
practices, in wronging the State, or those under the Protection of it; or by
withdrawing themselves from, or incapacitating themselves for its service; or
consequently by debauching, and corrupting others by their Examples. In all
these matters the Priest had no concern; and therefore 'twas no wonder, if the
People received so easily, and lived so contentedly under a Religion, which,
tho false, gave 'em so little disturbance, and so much satisfaction. For, as
for the Multitude, their Theology was like their Worship, suited and adapted to
their capacities, the one consisting of surprising Fables, the other of
delightful Solemnities. Those that were wiser among 'em, and saw through their
Mysteries, (who were not a few) were many of 'em Sacris initiati, and engaged
in their support; the rest having no higher warrant than their own Reason, and
nothing more certain to substitute in the room of 'em, were perhaps unwilling
to unsettle matters, and paying a languid Complacence, suffered things to run
on in the old Channel; whose Banks should they break down, they knew not what
course the Stream would take, nor how far the Confusion might spread.

But the Gospel had none of these advantages, it was not contrived and modell^d
for Popularity, it did not humor the Inclinations, and indulge the Appetites
of the People. To the Purity of its Doctrine, a Conformity of Life, and Manners
were required, the Passions were to be curbed, and the Desires moderated;
instead of Pomp and Ceremony, Simplicity and Sobriety were to be their
Entertainments: their rampant Gods, whose fabulous Histories gave countenance
to Men's Lusts, and encouragement to their Debaucheries, were to be cashiered,
and the knowledge and worship of the True One to be introduced, whose Majesty
was as awful, as the other was represented frolicksome.

These were the conditions of Conversion from Heathenism, and the change must
needs appear disadvantageous to mere Flesh and Blood The Fathers therefore, who
knew how hard it was to keep the Appetites in entire subjection, took care to
fortify as strongly as possible those parts, in which they expected the
Rebellion should first break out. Heathen Plays danger^^s temptations (...) new
Christian Converts.
The Plays, of all the Heathen Solemnities, were those that gave the strongest
temptation to the new Converts; they had so little of the Air of Religion, that
they thought if they did not approve of the end and design of 'em, they might,
without imputation, partake of the Diversion, in which they met with frequent.
Examples of Innocence and Virtue. This alarmed the Fathers, who knew that the
transition from one Religion to another (as Mr Collier observes) was natural;
and justly apprehended, that from a liking of the Entertainments themselves,
they might proceed to approve the occasion of 'em; that the seeming Innocence
and Virtue of 'em might reconcile 'em to a Superstition which recommended those
excellent Gifts after so easy and agreeable a manner, or that perhaps the
delights of those places might soften the temper of their mind, and relax the
nerves of their zeal, and so unqualifie and indispose 'em for those
Austerities, which the Posture and Circumstances of the Christian Religion at
that time required.

To obviate these dangers, they summoned all their Prudence, Zeal of the
Fathers ^g^inst 'em not u^ne^es^ary.
and all their Art; they omitted no Topic which Rhetoric or Satyr could
supply, to fright or persuade Men from those Diversions. Nor was all their Zeal
and Caution any more than was necessary, the Danger was great, and so was the
Temptation; the Fort was to be maintained not only against an Enemy without,
but a strong Faction within; the Senses, Appetites, and Passions were already
gained to the Enemy's Party, nothing remained but Religion and Reason, to make
good the defense; those Generals therefore that would hold out, when the
Garrison was inclined to Surrender, must not only display their Courage and
Conduct, but exert their Authority likewise to the utmost This the Ancient
Fathers did, whose examples have been followed by diverse in our Age, tho
without the same Reason, Authority or Success.

Having thus open^d the Case, as it stood in the time of the Primitive
Christians, we shall proceed to examine, Whether there be any manner of Analogy
between the Roman Theater (as to the particulars whereof they are arraigned by
the Fathers) and ours? Whether the Satyr of the Fathers comes full upon the
Modern Poets? View p. 276.
Whether the Parity of the Case makes their Reasons take place, and their
Authority revive upon us?

Thus backed, p. 277.
as he supposes by the Worthies of Christendom, the flower of Human Nature, and
the Top of their Species, Mr Collier bids defiance to all the Stage Poets in
general: He declares 'em to be gone over into another Interest, p. 1.
Deserters to the Devil, p. 124.
that aim to destroy Religion, Praef.
and whose business is an ana of Lewdness and Atheism. For he has a huge mind
to try his strength with 'em, p. 257.
but he dares not enter the Theaters, they are the Devils own Ground; but he
challenges 'em to a trial of skill at the laudable exercises of the Christian
Olympicks of Moorfields; which, if they be so hardy as to accept, he will call a
Ring, and for a broken Head, or Limb, he and his Fathers defy both North and
West. Disingen^ir^ of Mr. Collier.


But hold, Mr Vinegar! have you any commission from the Fathers to give this
Challenge in their Names? Does it appear, that they have any ground, or reason
of quarrel to the present Stage? I believe not; but as things may be packt
together, and translated, an able Interpreter may make 'em speak as he pleases.
If they don't speak to his mind he knows how to correct 'em, it is but throwing
in a word or two (as he phrases it) to clear the sense, to preserve the Spirit
of the Original, Praef.
and keep the English upon its Legs. It Is well he has the knack of Scowring the
Fathers, otherwise their Testimonies would look but rustily upon the present
occasion. But he can wash as well as scowr, and underprop a failing Evidence
upon occasion. It Is pity Mr Collier was not bred to the Bar, this extraordinary
quality had been of admirable service there, to help a bad Memory, and prompt a
bashful Witness. The Fathers, good men, could say but little to the Cause, but
Dexterity and Management may do much, and an able Solicitor (like Mr Collier)
will make out notable proofs from very slender Evidence.

The Fathers, as they had reason, Idolatry the main Objestions of the Fathers
to the Ancient Drama.
prohibited Christians all resort to the Roman Games in general, and without
distinction upon the account of the Idolatry there practiced: But what is that
to our Theaters, which have no such stain upon 'em? If the Heathen Gods appear
upon our Stage, it is neither for their own, nor their Worshipers honor.
Idolatry is as much abhorr^d, and more exposed there, than any where else. Why
then is the Satyr revived upon it? Is there any danger that the Spectators
should turn Idolaters, from our Representations? That which scandalized the
Fathers most in the Dramatick Representations of Antiquity was, that their Gods
were represented lewd, and unjust, Adulterers, Pimps, etc.

Et haec suntscenico r^m ^^erabilior^ (...) do rum Comoediae scilicit and
Tragoediae hoc est fabu lae Poetarum agendae in spectaculis, multa
rerturpitudine sed nulla, saltem, sicut alia multa verborum obscoenitate
compositae quas etiam inter studia quae honesta, and liberalia vocantur, pueri,
legere discereque a senibus coguntur. De Civit. Dei lib. 2.
St Augustine absolves their Comedies and Tragedies from any fault in the
expression, and accuses only the subject matter. The same Indictment he prefers
against Homer, (viz.) that he corrupted Men's Morals by drawing such vicious
Pictures of his Deities. Aug. Conf. lib. 1. cap. 16.
Terence falls under his displeasure likewise, for introducing his young
Libertine animating himself to, and vindicating himself after a Rape, by the
example of Jupiter, whose Intrigue with Danae, represented in a Picture,
afforded him both matter of Encouragement and Excuse. Notwithstanding which
objections, this Didici in eis multa verba utilia se det in rebus non vanis
disci possunt and via tuta est, in qua Pueri ambularent. lib. Confess. 1 cap.
^v.
Father confesses himself to have profited by the reading of 'em, tho he thinks
the same use might have been made of more pious Books, which are fitter for the
use of Children. Thus by the acknowledgment of this Father the Plays were not
so bad. as Mr Collier would infer from him. The quarrel of the rest of the
Fathers to the Drama, was upon the same account, tho Mr Surveyor has given a
wrong prospect of it. I hope there is no reason to apprehend, that Jupiter or
Mercury should be drawn into precedent at this time of day, or that any person
of Quality should turn Whore-master, or Pimp out of emulation.

It Is true, Mimick Shows among the Romans scandalous^ lewd, the Drama no at all.
the Fathers frequently exclaim against the lewdness of the Roman Theaters,
which Mr Collier all along endeavors, both by the turn and application, to
discharge upon the Dramatick Representations, in which I admire his dexterity
more than his ingenuity. For I cannot suppose Mr Collier to be ignorant, that
there were diverse sorts of Ludi Scenici, which were all performed at the
Theater, of which several were scandalously lewd; but these he knows were no
part of the Dramatick Entertainment.

But he finds Comedy and Tragedy Clemen's Alex^ndri^us c^ted against the Drama.
sometimes condemned for company among the other Shows of the Theater, and
therefore he is resolved, out of his singular regard to Justice and Ingenuity,
that whatsoever is pronounced against the Theaters in general, shall light upon
the Drama in particular, which by the unanimous confession of 'em all was the
least offensive, and consequently the least deserved it. View p. 260 Nec
inconcine stadia and Theatra Pestilentiae C^thaedram quis vocaverit. Paedag.
lib. 3. cap. ii.
To what purpose else is Clemens Alexandrinus cited? He affirms, that the
Circus and Theater may not improperly be called the Chair of Pestilence. Whence
does it appear, that the Dramatick Exercises are here aimed at? Were the Mimi,
Pantomimi, and Archimimi, less concerned with the Stage, or more reserved and
modest in their practices upon it? Were dancing naked, and expressing lewd
Postures less criminal, or offensive to modesty? No, he will not say that; View p.
277.
although the comparison were made with the English Stage, which is, (according to
him) much more licentious than the Roman, yet that by his own confession has
nothing so bad. But supposing the Father to take his aim from Mr Collier's
direction, and prophetically to have levelled at our times, what is the
wondrous guilt, that provokes this severe Judgment? Noscitur ex socio, why it is
even as bad as Horse-racing; a very lewd diversion truly. Woe be to you
Inhabitants of New Market, that live in the very Seat of Infection.

But the Fathers were men, The Fathers sametimes over rigorous
mere men, as well as Mr Collier, and subject as well as he to be misled by
passion, and overacted by zeal, in the transports of which they were apt
sometimes to extend their rigor too far, and would upon any terms have (as a
certain Learned Recorder has it) enough for a decent Execution. Sic and
Tragaedos Cothurnis extulit Diabolus, quia nemo potest adjicere cubitum unum ad
staturam suam, men dacem face re vult Christum. Tert. de Spectac. cap. 23.
Thus Tertullian, none of the least considerable among the Fathers, either for
his Learning or Zeal, in this case especially, tho he had already convinced the
Ancient Tragedy of Idolatry, a Crime sufficient in a Christian Court of
Judicature to be capital, yet must needs ex abundanti bring a fresh Indictment
of Blasphemy. The Devil, says he, mounted the Tragedians upon Buskins, because
he would make our Savior a Liar, who says, that no man can add a Cubit to his
Stature. Look to it all ye Tiptoe Beau's.

Here the Devil showed himself an Engineer, to lay a Trap so long before hand,
to contrive and invent these Buskins only to falsify in appearance, what was
said a thousand years after; and the Father himself was a very Matchiavel to
detect, and counterplot him at last. I have read of a famous Scotch Divine,
that signalized himself once upon occasion, by much such another discovery,
when he found out, that at the dismission of all Creatures out of Noah's Ark,
the reason why the Hawks were so merciful to the Doves, as to let 'em escape
unhurt was, that the Prophecy of Isaiah, the Lamb should lie down with the
Lion, might be fulfilled. This is the nearest parallel that occurs to me from
all my reading, in which the Scotch Father comes pretty near the other for a
strange reach of apprehension, tho it is his misfortune to fall short in the
importance of the discovery.

But to wave all further instances of this kind from the Fathers, which are to
be found in great plenty among 'em, I leave 'em to be gathered by those that
take more delight in such Flowers; and shall confine my self to those which Mr.
Collier has picked out for a Nosegay for himself.

To begin therefore with Theophilus Antiochenus; View. p 252.
He tells us, that the Christians durst not see the Prizes of the Gladiators,
for fear of becoming accessory to the Murders there committed, nor their other
Shows, upon the account of their Indency and Profaneness.

Here Mr Collier, as an earnest of his future fair dealing uses the word Shows,
and because perhaps it is the only instance to be met with through all his
Quotations, he is resolved not to lose the benefit of it, and therefore for
fear it should slip by unheeded, he gives it in a different character, and an
asterism along with it, and claps in the Margin Spectacula. By this sample of
his Fidelity to his Author, he thinks his performance warranted to his Readers,
of whom he knows the greatest part cannot nor the rest he hopes will not, be at the
trouble to confront his Translation with the Text; and therefore before the end
of this very Paragraph, he throws off all obligation to Truth and Just^ce and
falls to managing and instructing his Evidence

Ibid. Nec fas est nobis audire adulteria Deorum Hominumque quae suavi verborum
modulantur mercede. Ad Autolyc. lib. 3.
The Stage Adulteries of the Gods and Heroes are unwarrantable Entertainments.
And so much the worse, because the Mercenary Players set off 'em with all the
charms and advantages of speaking.

The Translator very well knew, that the Shows here aimed at, were not the
Tragedies and Commedies of Antiquity, but the Shows of the Mimi, wherein the
Amors of the Gods or Heroes were not related only, but sung to Music in
luscious fulsome Verse, mimickt in lewd dances with obscene Gestures and naked
Postures, and even the very Adulteries and Rapes themselves expressed by
scandalous actions, for which purpose the very Stews were raked for Public
Prostitutes for the Service.

These were the Shows, that provoked the just resentments of the Fathers, which
had nothing in Common with the Dramatick Representations, but the Place, and
the end of their Representation, which were the Public Theaters, and Worship.
But of all the Public Diversions of the Heathens, the Drama only remaining to
us, to keep the Authority upon its Legs, it was necessary to give it a new
direction, and turn in the version, and therefore the word Players was thrust
in, to fix the Scandal in the wrong place.

That these were the Indecencies, and Lewdness of the Theater, so bitterly
inveighed against by these Pious men, I could bring testimonies innumerable;
but to avoid being tedious in a plain case, I shall single out St Cyprian, who
being one of the Worthies of Christendom, and the Top of his Species, I hope
Mr Collier will not except against his Evidence. Theatra ^unt faediora, quo
convenis verundia illic omnis exuitur simul cum amictu, vestis honor corporis,
and pudor ponitur, denotanda ac contrectanda virginitas revelatur. De Habit
Virg.
The Theaters (says he) are yet more Lewd. There they strip themselves of their
Modesty, as well as Clothes, and the honor as well as screen of their Bodies
is laid aside, and Virginity exposed to the affronts both of View, and Touch.
Which Mr Collier knows was not practiced in the Drama.

But our Histrio-Mastix was aware, that there was nothing to be got by square
play, therefore he has recourse to slight of hand, and palms false Dice upon
us. In the very next Paragraph we find him prompting Tertullian to rail at the
Playhouse, and the Bear-Garden Nihil nobis etc. cum insania Circi cum
impudicitia Theatri cum x^sti vanitate. Apolog. adv. Gent. cap. 38.
. Which latter, I suppose, was brought in for the grace and dignity of the
Conjunction. Here the Playhouse, by his old way of Legerdemain, is substituted
for the Theater; and the most innocent of the Roman Diversions charged with the
Guilt and Pollutions of all the rest, with which, by his own Confession, it was
not so much as soiled. But the shifting of Names levelled the Scandal right for
his purpose, and the unlearned Reader might perhaps be induced to believe, that
the Father's quarrel lay against Lincolns-Inn-Fields, and Covent Garden; and
therefore he was resolved not to lose the benefit of so advantageous a Cheat,
for so small a condescension as falsifying a Text.

With the same honest view and intention, he forces Tertullian to call Pompey's
Theater Itaque Pomperius magnus solo Theatro minor, cum illam arcem omnium
turpitudinum extruxisset, veritus quandoque memoriae suae Censoriam
Animadverfionem, Veneris aedem superposuit, etc.
, a Dramatick Bawdyhouse. Here, to conceal the Fathers Age, he shaves off his
Beard, and dresses him after his own fashion, in a Steenkirk and a long Wig,
that he may look like an acq^aintance of our Stage, and keep his Evidence in
Countenance. A just Translation would not answer his purpose, and therefore he
has taken the usual liberty of adding or altering, and has clapped in the
Dramatick Bawdyhouse, to clear, that is, pervert the sense. It is no
justification, to say that he has not changed the Scene, that the Place is the
same, tho he has made bold to change the Terms; in changing the Terms he has
changed the state of the case, and made the Author accuse the Drama of those
enormities, which were peculiar to the Shows of the Mimi, and inveighed against
only by him. Thus he uses his Father like an Irish Evidence, and makes him
depose with as much latitude, as in a Court of Record, would even in these
corrupt times, cost a man his Ears.

To trace him through all his Quotations from the Fathers, were a task much
more tedious, than difficult. It may suffice to take notice, that he keeps to
his Principle, and never quotes any thing right, which he thinks may be made
more serviceable by being perverted. To prevent this Artifice from being seen
through, he endeavors, like a Fish in the Water, to conceal the bottom by
muddying the Stream.

St. Cyprian, Lactantius, Chrysostom and Augustine are all managed at the same
rate; Mr Collier, like a stanch Beagle, makes the hits, whilst his Fathers,
that like Whelps newly entered, are running Riot, have much better Mouths than
Noses, and make up a great part of the Cry, but are of no service in the Chase.
Those that have a mind to tumble and sift over Mr Collier's Rubbish of
Antiquity, may find all his Quotations in Prynne's Histrio-Mastix, honestly
transcribed, and more faithfully translated. To which, or to the Fathers
themselves, I refer 'em. His Translations are all of a stamp, to repeat more of
'em would be tautology; how different soever the Originals might be, the Copies
have all the same Features and Complexions; both Draught and Coloring agree so
well, that a very indifferent Judge might infallibly discover 'em all to be
Copies by one Hand, by the Harmony of the Faults.

But to dismiss the Fathers, who have been obliged to an unnecessary
attendance, through the disingenuity of their Translator, The Authority of the
Fathers short of the Case.
I shall once for all observe, first, that the Authority of the Fathers ought
to affect us no farther than their Reasonings will come up to our case:
Secondly, That their Arguments drawn from the Idolatry, lewd Representations,
and Cruelty practiced upon the Roman Stage, and at their Shows, do not reach
our Stage, where those practices are had in abhorrence. Thirdly, That as they
are cited by Mr Collier, both their Authority and Arguments are subverted by
the corrupt Version. If these three things be fairly made out, as (I hope) they
already are, we need not be any longer alarmed at this unseasonable clamor
from the Fathers.

But tho the main strength of this Attila of the Stage lies in these Worthies
of Christendom, Caution of Mr C-ll-r
yet, like a cautious Commander, lest they should be surpised, or unable to
sustain the shock of the Stage Militia alone, he has provided an Auxiliary Body
of Heathen Philosophers, Historians, Orators and Poets, to guard the Passes,
and check the fury of the first Onset. Here again he shows his care by his
choice, he lists the bottom by muddying the Stream.

St. Cyprian, Lactantius, Chrysostom and Augustine are all managed at the same
rate; Mr Collier, like a stanch Beagle, makes the hits, whilst his Fathers,
that like Whelps newly entered, are running Riot, have much better Mouths than
Noses, and make up a great part of the Cry, but are of no service in the Chase.
Those that have a mind to tumble and sift over Mr Collier's Rubbish of
Antiquity, may find all his Quotations in Prynne's Histrio-Mastix, honestly
transcribed, and more faithfully translated. To which, or to the Fathers
themselves, I refer 'em. His Translations are all of a stamp, to repeat more of
'em would be tautology; how different soever the Originals might be, the Copies
have all the same Features and Complexions; both Draught and Coloring agree so
well, that a very indifferent Judge might infallibly discover 'em all to be
Copies by one Hand, by the Harmony of the Faults.

But to dismiss the Fathers, who have been obliged to an unnecessary
attendance, through the disingenuity of their Translator, The Authority of the
Fathers short of the Case.
I shall once for all observe, first, that the Authority of the Fathers ought
to affect us no farther than their Reasonings will come up to our case:
Secondly, That their Arguments drawn from the Idolatry, lewd Representations,
and Cruelty practiced upon the Roman Stage, and at their Shows, do not reach
our Stage, where those practices are had in abhorrence. Thirdly, That as they
are cited by Mr Collier, both their Authority and Arguments are subverted by
the corrupt Version. If these three things be fairly made out, as (I hope) they
already are, we need not be any longer alarmed at this unseasonable clamor
from the Fathers.

But tho the main strength of this Attila of the Stage lies in these Worthies
of Christendom, yet, Caution of Mr C-ll-r
like a cautious Commander, lest they should be surpised, or unable to sustain
the shock of the Stage Militia alone, he has provided an Auxiliary Body of
Heathen Philosophers, Historians, Orators and Poets, to guard the Passes, and
check the fury of the first Onset. Here again he shows his care by his choice,
he lists none but men of the first Magnitude, he is so severe that a Volunteer
under six foot cannot pass Muster. But after all, the Service of these Gigantick
Men does not answer the terror of their Bulk and Figure; they are pressed men,
that enter the Service against their Wills, and are placed in the Front, like a
Swiss painted upon a Door, for show, not action. It Is true, they are forced to
appear with their Firelocks, and give one charge, but it is, like a Moorfields
Volley, without Ball, or Bloodshed.

The Leaders of these are a Triumvirate of Ancient Greek Philosophers, Plato,
Xenophon, and Aristotle. The first of these appears not in person, Plato's
Authority considered.
nor has his proxy much to say for him, that I can find. Yet as little as it is,
he ought to have produced his Credentials, or his Voice may fairly be protested
against. For a hearsay Evidence ought at least to be as well attested, as a
Nuncupative Will to make it authentic. But, after all, what is it that he
says, or rather that Eusebius says for him? Why, that Plays raise the passions,
and pervert the use of 'em, and by consequence are dangerous ^o morality. But
since he has not thought fit to specify either the nature or measure of the
danger, thus consequentially portended to morality, we need not amuse our
selves any longer about it.

Much such another doughty Authority is that of Xenophon. Xenophon.
Ita de venereis etiam rebus advalde juvenes verba non facimus, ne accidente ad
vehementem in eis libid. levitate, immodice huic libidini suae indulgeant
Cyropaed, lib.. p. 34
The Persians (he says) will not suffer their youth to hear any thing, that is
amorous or bawdy. They were afraid want of Ballast might make 'em miscarry, and
that it was dangerous to add weight to the Bias of nature. This quotation is
strangely drawn in; it does not so much as squin^ toward his purpose. Here Is
no mention of any thing relating to the Drama. Bawdry indeed was forbidden to
be talked to those, whose Reason was not yet grown sturdy enough to curb the
looseness of their Appetites in those Countries, where the heat of the Climate,
and the warmth of their Constitutions inclined 'em very early, and hurried 'em
very precipitously to irregularities of that nature. But if this passage would
not serve his Cause, it would his vanity and ostentatation of reading, and
therefore was not to be slighted.

Of as great service is the Authority of Aristotle, Aristotle.
one single doubtful expression of whose, he would wrest to the overthrow of
one of the most elaborate and judicious of all that great Philosophers works; I
mean his Art of Poetry; in which he has taken the pains to prescribe Rules for
the more easy and regular composition of Dramatick Poems; which certainly had
been in him as well a scandalous, as a ridiculous labor, if he had not thought
the practice of 'em allowable. But he is so far from any such indifference, that
he frequently, both in that piece, and other parts of his Works, commends the
writing of Dramatick Poetry, as the noblest exercise of the mind. Nor do we
find any where in the works of that Philosopher, who (by this Author's own
confession) had looked as far into humane Nature as any man, a greater
profusion of Rhetoric than in the praise (...) of Tragedy, which he takes to
be the highest exaltation of humane Wit. Plays forbidden to young People upon
the score of the tempta^^ns from the Company.


As for this passage, which Mr Collier has picked out, and levelled at the
Comedy of our Age, it amounts to no more than a general Adol^scentulos autem
and ^amborum and Comaediarum Spectatores esse lex prohibeat, prius quam ^^tatem
attigeri^t, (...) qua and (...) caeteris accubar^ jam (...) rit, and ab
omnibus, vel ebrietatis, vel aliarum inde nascentium rerum incommodis
discip^lina liberos efficiat Pol. lib 7. c. 17.
caution against trusting youth into promiscuo^s Company, such as resorted to
public places, till they were sufficiently fortified against the danger of
Corruption, to which they might thereby be exposed. Drunkenness was the Vice,
which the Philosopher particularly instanced in, by which he plainly shows
himself apprehensive of the Company, not of the Play; and therefore he would
not have young people trusted with the liberty, and opportunity of contracting
an acquaintance, before they were arrived at some tolerable maturity of
Judgment. But Mr Collier with a dexterity peculiar to himself, palms the
general term of Debauchery, for the particular one of Drunkenness upon us, that
the suspicion might thereby be shifted from the Audience to the Peformance.

To back this, and cover the conveyance, he brings another Authority as little
to the purpose, View page 234.
concerning the force and power of Music, from whence he concludes, that where
the Representation is foul, the thoughts of the Audience must suffer. What must
they suffer? Would the Music, (as powerful as he supposes it) make the
Audience drunk, or in love with Drunkenness? No, that was no Vice of the Stage,
whatever it might be of the Spectators, yet even by them the Scene was not laid
at the Theaters, tho the Plot might, and the Company perhaps be picked up there.
I suppose this Informer, as inveterate as his malice is against Play Houses,
will scarce charge 'em as Schools of intemperance of that kind, it is not the
practice of the Stage, not so much as behind the Scenes; and I believe he will
acquit Pit, Box, and Gallery of it. For whatever some may bring in their Heads,
he will find but few with Bottles in their Hands there. This made him wave
instancing in the particular of Aristotle; the retail scandal would not fit our
Theaters, and therefore he lumps it among 'em by the general name of
Debauchery, and tacks this Citation concerning Music to it, which he hopes
will give the Reader an Idea more serviceable to his Cause, than Aristotle
intended, and make a suitable impression upon him.

This Philosopher forbad the resort to Comedies, only to those whose virtues he
durst not trust; not to hinder their diversion from the Stage, but to prevent
their corruption from the Pit, as King Charles the 2d suppressed Conventicles,
for the sake of those, whose principles he suspected; not to disturb the
Devotion of a few mistaken wellmeaning Men, but to prevent the practices of
many crafty ill designing ones.

Tully cries out upon licentious Plays and Poems, View p. 235.
as the bane of Sobriety, and wise thinking: That Comedy subsists upon
Lewdness, and that pleasure is the root of all evil.

No one, Licentiousness not defended.
I suppose, will defend Plays, that are really licentious, or if they seem to
patronize any, wherein some warm-headed Enthusiastic Zealots pretend to find
or make some passages exceptionable, they are willing to leave those Passages,
if really guilty, to the mercy of Mr Collier's Inquisition, and yet not deny
their Countenance, and Encouragement to the prevailing merit of the main part
of the performance.

But here I must needs take notice, that either Mr Collier or Tully, are
extremely mistaken, or, which is all one to our purpose, that this quotation
does not speak the sense of Tully. Plautus and Terence are the only Comedians
of his acquaintance, whose works have been preserved to our times; and
consequently are the only Standards, by which we can form any Judgment, or take
any measure of the Roman Comedy before, or about Cicero's time. Mr Coll.
Character of Terence and Plautus. View p. 20.
These Mr Collier assures us are modest to a scruple, especially Terence, who
has but one faulty bordering expression. Plautus, who is of all antiquity the
most exceptionable* rarely gives any smutty liberties to women, and when he
does, it is to Vulgar and prostituted persons. The men who talk intemperately
are generally Slaves. Ib. p. 15, 16, etc.
The Slaves and Pandars seldom run over, and play their Gambols before women.
Plautus does not dilate upon the progress, successes, and disappointments of
Love in the modern way. This is nice ground, and therefore he either stands
off, or walks gravely over it. He has some regard to the retirements of
modesty, and the dignity of humane Nature, and does not seem to make lewdness
his Business.

This is a very fair character from an adversary, This Character In^idious.
a friend could scarce have given a more ample recommendation upon this head.
Here seems to be a run of Candor and Ingenuity, for at least a dozen pages
together; the ancient Dramatick Writers are treated with so much civility, it is
all such Halcyon Weather, so fair a Sky, and so smooth a Sea, would tempt the
cautiousest Pilot from his Anchor; he would have no apprehensions of a Storm,
while all was so serene above, and so quiet and calm beneath him. But this is
all out of Character, the Author forces his temper to serve his design, and
caresses the Ancients in pure spite to the Moderns, as cunning Statesmen
sometimes court and cajole a Party they hate, only to make 'em their tools
against another they fear, and so make 'em ruin each other, and save
themselves both the trouble, and the odium. This honest Policy Mr Collier has
made use of; for, having routed (in his own vain conceit) by the help of these
Ancients, the present Stage Poets, he makes head upon his Confederates, and
those, that in the entrance of his Book deserv^d no censure, in the conclusion
of it are allowed no quarter. The more plausibly and securely to put this
Srratagem in execution, he takes care to destroy his own Authority in their
favor, by that of much better men against 'em, or that are (as he manages the
matter) at least in appearance against 'em.

This Author is a sort of a Long-lane Writer, The A'sci^ation^ patched up of
incoherent fragments.
a Piece-Broker in Learning, one that tacks ends and scraps of Authors together
to patch up a slight Authority, that hangs so weakly together, that it will not
bear the fitting. Thus he has linkt together two or three ill sorted sentences
out of Tully, that make as little to his purpose, as if he had quoted so many
Propositions out of Euclid; the truth of which, tho every body might
acknowledge, yet no body can find the use of in this place. But he found the
name of Comedy joined with an invective, and therefore he was resolved, if he
did not find it so, to make it of his Party, before he took his leave of it. O
praeclaram emendatricem vitae Poeticam, quae Amorem flagitii, and levitatis
autorem in Concilio Deorum c^llocandum putet! De Comaedia loquor quae si haec
flagitia non probaremus, nulla esset omni^o. Quaest. Tusc. lib. 4.
Tully complains, that the Poets gave Love, the author of so many follies and
disorders, a place among the Deities, the irregularities of which were the
constant subject matter of the Comedies of his time.

The severities of a harsh old Father, The Invention of the Roman Comic Poets
barren.
the amors of the Rake his Son, and the intrigues of the Knave his Servant, or
the wiles of a mercenary Prostitute, generally made up the business of those
Comedies. Hereupon Cicero cries out, that if 'twere not for these Love
extravagances, the Comic Poets would be destitute of a Plot. In which he seems
rather to tax 'em with barrenness of Invention, than Immorality. It Is true, the
Moral of such designs could not be very extraordinary, nor could any very
edifying doctrine of application be raised from the usual Catastrophe of these
Plays. For the Poet generally took care, after he had embroiled matters beyond
all seeming possibility of a reconciliation, to disentangle all by some
Providential (if Mr Collier will not quarrel at the expression) Incident, and
crown the young Libertine with his wishes, ^oetick Justice neglected by them.
reconciling the Father to the Son, and the Master to the Servant. By this
means Poetical Justice was eluded, and that which should have been the ground
and occasion of moral Instruction lost. The Ancient Comedy was not therefore so
innocent as his Character, nor so lewd and impure as his corrupted Quotations
would make it.

His next Authority is from Livy, whose Evidence, Livie's Authority abused.
even tho it were faithfully reported by Mr Collier, comes not near our case.
For Livy speaks here of the Stage Representations in general; but the Drama,
properly so called, was not known amongst the Romans at the time of the
Pestilence, when the Ludi Scenici were invented. But this is not all, he is not
contented to make a false Witness only of this Historian, but he must add
Forgery to Subornation, and put his hand to what was not his act and deed.

The Motives are sometimes good, when the means are stark naught: P* 255.
That the Remedy in this case was worse than the Disease, and the Atonement
more infectious than the Plague.

These words Livy utterly disowns; Sine carmine ullo sine imitandorum carminum
actu, Ludiones ex Hetruria acciti, ad Tibicinis modos Saltantes, haud indecoros
motus more Thusco dabant. Dec. 1. l. 7.
he says, that the Ludi Scenici introduced upon this occasion, consisted of
certain dances, or decent movements to Music, performed by Artists fetched out
of Tuscany, after the manner of their Country.

Where lay the force of the Contagion in this? What danger of Infection from a
modest Dance? After this Livy proceeds to show what were the first steps that
were made toward the improvement of these Ludi Scenici, and concludes his
short account of their earliest Gradations with this Reflection.

Inter aliarum parva principia rerum ludorum quoque prima origo ponenda visa
est, ut appareret, quam ab sano initio res in hanc vix opulentis regnis
tolerabilem insaniam venerit. Ibid.
Amongst other things that have risen from small beginnings, I thought fit to
take notice of Plays, that I might show from how sober an Original this
excessive Extravagance, which scarce the wealthiest Nations can bear, is
derived. This Mr Collier translates, The motives are sometimes good, when the
means are stark naught. It Is pretty plain, that it is not the Immorality, The
Luxury and Expensiveness of these Shows, not their Immorality, condemned by
Livy.
but the excess of Luxury and Profusion at these Shows, that Livy condemns, by
his adding that 'twas greater than the wealthiest Nations could well bear. For
it is to be supposed, that wealthy people have as much need of Morality as the
poor, tho they are not obliged to the same measures of Thrift, and good
Husbandry. Whether Mr Collier's construction and application of this passage be
the effect of his Malice or Ignorance, I leave the World to judge.

The following is yet a more perverse misconstruction, to which both Malice and
Ignorance have clubb'd their utmost, even to emulation, so that it is hard to
distinguish which has the better title to it. Livy tells us Itaque C^. Genutio,
L. Aemylio mamerco secundum Coss. cum piaculorum magis conquititio animos quam
corpora morbi afficerent, etc. Ibid.
, that the Romans were so solicitous about methods of appeasing the Gods, that
the anxiety of it was a greater affliction to their Minds, than the disease to
their Bodies. This our Remarker, who out of his superabundant understanding,
knew better than the Author himself what ought to have been said, thinks fit to
render thus, The Remedy in this case is worse than the Disease, and the
Atonement more infectious than the Plague. Valerius Maximus misquoted,


Of the same stamp is the Citation from Valerius Maximus, whom he has quoted,
whither with less Faith or Uuderstanding, is matter of doubt, for he has given
great cause to suspect both. This Author, speaking of the Prizes of their
Gladiators, expresses his resentments of that barbarouscustom, (in which
Citizens of Rome were often butchered) after this manner. Proximus militaribus
institutis ad urbana Castra, id est Theatra gradus faciendus est, quoniam haec
quoque saepenumero animosas acies in struxerunt ex cogitataque cultus Deorum,
and hominum delectationis causa, non sine aliquo pacis, rubore voluptatem, and
religionem civili sanguine, senicorum portentorum gratia, macularunt. Lib. 2.
Cap. 4. Falseness and absurdity of Mr C -- r' s Paraphrase
These things which were at first invented for the Worship of the Gods, and
delight of Men, were converted totheir destruction, staining both their
Religion and Diversions, with the Blood of Citizens, to the Scandal of Peace.
It Is plain, that by the Animosae Acies this Author meant nothing but the
Nurseries of Caestiarii, and Gladiators, and that by the Civilis Sanguis he
intended no more of it, than was spilt in arena at those Prizes in quality of
Gladiators or Gaestiarii, in which the Spectators had no concern further than
in the barbarity of countenancing, and encouraging so cruel a practice.

This, tho bloody and abominable enough to give an abhorrence to honest
considerate Heathens, will not suffice Mr Collier, he despises single Sacrifices,
and calls for Hecatombs; he is for breathing the Veins of the State, and slucing
the Vitals of the whole Commonweath at once. They were the occasion of Civil
Distractions; P. 235.
and that the State first blushed, then bled for the Entertainmeut.

This is rare Paraphrasing, Mr. Collier allows himself a very Christian
latitude in his interpretations. But less would not serve his turn, the Drama
and Arena lay at some distance in Old Rome, and therefore this Gentleman was
resolved to correct the Map, and bring 'em together. But what occasion for
bloodshed at a Comedy? Why Mr. Paraphraser would insinuate, that the Spectators
and the Actors, like Don Quixot and the Puppets, fell together by the Ears, and
so embroiling the State, engaged the whole Commonwealth in a Civil War. If I
could be persuaded of this, I should allow this Divrsion to be altogether as
Antichristian, as Bear-baitings or Ridings, and could be content, that Mr
Collier, like Hudibrass should reduce both Actors and Spectators by force of
Arms; the Prowess of the Champions seems so so exactly equal, that I see no
cause to doubt, their Achievements and Success proving parallel.

He concludes ( says our Paraphraser) the consequence of Plays intolerable;
Ibid. This conclusion not to be found in Valerius.
and that the Massilienses did well in clearing the Country of 'em.

Where he finds this conclusion I cannot tell, I am sure not in either of the
Chapters cited by him, nor I doubt through the whole Book. But he is a
Discoverer, and has good eyes, that will show him at a vast distance what
others cannot see with the help of the best Telescopes. What he says of the
Massilienses (as he calls 'em) is no more to his purpose, than the former
Evidence against the Gladiatorial Shows. Valerius Maximus in his sixth Chapter
says Eadem Civitas (viz. Massi^a) severitatis custos acerrima est: nullum
aditum in Scenam Mimis dando, quorum argumenta majore ex part stuprorum
continent actus, ne talia spectandi consuetudo etiam imitaudi licentiam sumat.
Cap. 6.
, That the Marseillians were a very severe People, that wou^d not suffer the
Mimicks to appear upon their Stage, whose business generally it was to present
the action of Rapes to public view, lest the sight of such licentious
Practices, should debauch the Spectators to the Imitation of 'em.

'Twere needless to insist long upon this passage, having already shown the
vast difference between the Mimick and Dramatick Representations. I shall only
observe, that this Author, by saying that the people of Marseilles denied the
Mimi the liberty of their Stage, Stage allowed at Marseilles.
intimates that they allowed the Stage there, tho under severer restrictions
than at Rome. Now if they permitted it amongst 'em at all, there is no doubt
but Tragedy and Comedy (which by the unanimous confession even of their
Adversaries, were the most innocent, and instructive of all the Ludi Scenici)
took their turns upon it.

S^neca, Seneca's Authority nothing to the purpose.
who is next produced, has but little to say to the matter: He is a little
angry that the Romans were so fond of their diversion, as to bestow their whole
time upon it, and neglect the study of Philosophy, and the improvement of their
Reason. Nor was his complaint unreasonable; for the Romans, who were never much
addicted to Philosophy, or any kind of Speculative Learning, were yet more
averse to 'em than ever under the Reign of Nero, when all sorts of Arts and
Literature, those excepted which contributed to the Prince's pleasures, lay
under public discouragement; on the other hand, the Stage, and all those Arts
that gratified and indulged the Senses, had not only the Countenance, but the
Practice and Example of the Emperor himself to encourage 'em, and to excel in
any of 'em was the high road to his Favor, and to Preferment^ It is not
therefore to be wondered, if the Roman Youth under that general corruption
slighted those Studies, the severity of which made 'em as well unpallatable as
unregarded. Nor are we to be surpised, if Seneca declaimed against these
Entertainments, which drew away, and alienated the minds of the People from
those Studies, upon the merit of which he peculiarly picqu'd himself.

The sum of this Philosopher's Evidence amounts to no more than Nihil vero tam
damnosum bonis moribus, quam in aliquo spectaculo desidere; tunc enim per
voluptatem vitia facilius surrepunt. Epict. 7.
that he thought Idleness a great corrupter of Manners, and that the Shows in
use among the Romans, contributed to the making the people Idle, and tainting
'em with Luxury, and thereby rendering 'em more disposed to Vice. His charge
against the Shows is in this place general, and respects indifferently any of
'em, many of which were in their own Natures innocent, and void of offense, yet
were equally submitted to censure in this passage with the most scandalous
Seneca was not so mean a Judge of Men, (...) p^^verted.
or Things, as to think all their Shows equally reprehensible, but he found all
liable to the same abuse, that is, detaining the people from their business,
and giving them too great an itch after Diversions. But this had not been worth
our notice, were it not to show, that our modern Reformer, tho he has been used
to greater Stakes, can play at small Game rather than stand out. For in the
latter part of this short Citation he has made a shift to steal in two
falfications Tunc enim per voluptatem, etc. p. 235.
.

For there Vice makes an insensible approach, and steals upon us the disguise
of pleasure.

Here he would insinuate that the Vice, of which the Philosopher seems so
apprehensive, was of the growth of the place, to which purpose he translates
the words. Tunc enim, For there, by which he endeavors to make the infection
local, and renders the words, Per voluptatem, In the disguise of Pleasure, that
it may seem to come artificially, and industriously recommended. Whereas, all
that he says imports no more, than that, when men's Minds, by the flattery of
those Diversions, were disarmed of that severity, that the Stoics (of which
Sect he was) think requisite to the guard of Virtue, they were more easily
prevailed upon, and led away by vicious inclinations.

There are yet behind in the Train, Tacitus, Plutarch, Ovid, and Mr. Wycherley,
whom (whether to show his Judgment or his Manners I know not) he has rankt
amongst, and under the head of Pagan Authorities; and truly I think he may as
well make a Pagan of him, as an Evidence in this case. But that ingenious
Gentleman ought not to take it amiss; for since all those great Men of
Antiquity, nay, even the Fathers themselves, the Worthies of Christendom, the
Flower of Human Nature, and the top of their Species, are obliged every one of
'em to wear a Fool's Coat, he has the less reason to repine at the Livery.

These are all summoned to make up the Parade of Learning, (...), etc.
impertinently cited.
and have no more business than an Ambassador's Coach of State at his public
Entry. Tacitus tells us, that Nero did ill to make the necessities of decayed
Gentlemen pimp to the betraying of their honor and dignity. And that the
Germans did well to keep their Wives out of harms way. The complaint of Tacitus
is nothing to us; his Caution indeed may be of service, as matter of
instruction to Mr Collier, and his Proselytes, if he has any, who I hope will
reap the benefit of the German Example.

Plutarch thinks, that Licentious Poets ought to be checked: Ay, and licentious
Critics too, and corrected into the bargain: tho Sancha Pancha and His Critic
were both submitted to the lash, till one learnt Wit, and the other Manners, and
both Modesty. For saw^y Reformers, as well as lewd Poets, require abundance of
Discipline to keep 'em within bounds.

Ovid, Ovid and Mr Wycherly say nothing against the Stage, but the Audience.
and Mr Wycherley, as Poets, and Men of Wit, may be joined, tho not as
Heathens; and their Evidence, being exactly of a piece, is the more properly
considered together. This amounts to a proof, that at the Theaters, as well as
at all other places, where there is a promiscuous resort of company of both
Sexes, the business of Intrigue will go forward. It were much to be wished,
that no body came to the Playhouse for a less innocent diversion, than that of
the Stage; to Churches and Conventicles with a less pious intention, than that
of Devotion; to the Park for a less wholesome refreshment than that of Air,
etc. But it is as much to be feared, that this universal Reformation will never
be brought about, till the accomplishment of the Prophecy (if I may call it
so, without offending Mr Collier) of one of our Poets Till Women cease to
Charm, and Youth to Love. So long as there are appetites, Too great severity of
no service to Morality.
there will be means found to gratify 'em. I will not deny, but that the
promiscuous conflux of people of all Ages, Sexes, and Conditions, facilitates
enterprises of this nature. But I question whether an absolute restraint would
not more inflame the desire, than it could prevent the practice; and whither
the Morals of the Public would not suffer more by vitiating the Imaginations of
the People in general this way, than they could gain by the severest methods of
prohibition the other. Spain and Italy are Countries as jealous and vigilant in
this point, as any in the world, and yet the people so generally lascivious,
that there is no place where Virtue has less interest in the Chastity of either
Sex. Whereas on the contrary, in many places under the Line, where the People
go constantly naked, the familiarity of the Objects takes away all wantonness
of Imagination, which the artificial difficulties of some Countries promote.

But Ovid, it seems, does in some measure plead guilty, and owns, that not only
the opportunity Ludi quoque semina praebent Nequitiae. De Trist. lib. 2.
, but the business of the place sometimes promotes lewdness. Nor is it to be
wondered at, since some of the representations there were so scandalously lewd,
as to give offense to the loosest of their Poets. Junctam Pasiphae^ ictaeo
credit Tauro, Vidimus, accepit Fabula prilca fidem. Mart.
Martial tells us ^, that he saw the Story of Pasiphae acted upon their Stage.
But these were the Representations of their Mimi, the scandal of which reflects
no way upon the Drama, either Ancient or Modern, and will therefore give us no
occasion to dilate upon 'em here.

I have at length run through all his private Authorities against the Stage, Mr C
-- 's licentious Method of misquoting unsufferable.
wherein I cannot find so much as one, which is not either impertinently, or
falsely cited, as I doubt not, but will upon collation appear. For which reason
I have all along put the words of the Original, or of the most approved Version
in the Margin, that they might without trouble be collated, and my charge
justified. He owns, that he has taken the liberty of throwing in a word or two,
(in translating the Fathers) to clear the Sense, to preserve the Spirit of the
Original, and keep the English upon its Legs. I hope by this it appears, that
he has confounded the Sense, corrupted the Spirit, and set the English upon
Stilts. His Modesty's too plain a counterfeit, to cheat those that are not
wilfully blind, it is so slightly washed over, that the Brass appears at first
view; so that whatever denomination he may give it, like an Irish Half Crown,
'twill soon fall to its intrinsic value. After all, his pains in citations are
as unluckily bestowed, as the Malefactors Fee, who, after he has bribed the
Ordinary, is called to read over again to the Court, and suffers at last for
his ignorance.

To close all, and crown his Victory, Mr Collier gives us some State Censures
(as he calls 'em) to show how much the Stage stands discouraged by the Laws of
other Countries, and our own.

To begin with the Athenians. P 240.
This People, tho none of the worst Friends to the Playhouse, thought a Comedy
so unreputable a Performance, that they made a Law that no Judge of the
Areopagus should make one. The Athenia^s, the greatest friends in the world to
the Stage.


It Is something surprising to find the Authority of the Athenian State produced
against the Drama, of which they of all the people of the world were the
greatest Encouragers. And this very Law, which is urged against Comedy in
particular, is an argument of the general Esteem it was at that time possessed
of. For, had the Writing of Comedy been so unreputable a performance, as Mr
Collier from this passage of Plutarch would insinuate, there had been no reason
to suspect, that any of the Judges of the Areopagus would have been so madly
indiscreet, as to have forfeited his Character and Reputation, by so open and
public a Scandal; and consequently a provision by Law against a folly of that
nature, must have been as senseless a Caution there, as an Act here would be,
to forbid any of the twelve Judges dancing upon the Ropes, or tumbling through a
Hoop in public.

But this Law makes directly against the purpose it was quoted for, This Law a
direct Argument against (...) Collier.
and seems plainly to argue, that Comedy was in so great reputation amongst em,
that persons of the highest condition sought the applause of, and made their
court to the people by performances of that nature. For which reason they found
it necessary to restrain their Judges by a Law, from running into those popular
amusements.

That these Performances were not in fact dishonorable amongst the Athenians,
might be made appear from a million of instances, were it necessary. But the
credit that Aristophanes had among the Athenians, which was powerful enough to
ruin Socrates, is singly sure sufficient to destroy an assertion so weakly
founded. So far were they from having Comedy in disgrace, that they encouraged,
and maintained it at vast expense to the Public, and thought it so proper an
instrument of Reformation Apud Graecos fuit Lege concessum ut quod vellet
Comaedia nominatim, and de quo vellet diceret. Cic. de Rep. apud S. August. de
Civit dei, cap. 9.
, that they gave it free liberty of Speech, and priviledg'd it to say any
thing, and of any body by name; and this not by connivance, but by Law; there
lay no Action of Scandal either against Poet or Actors.

This probably gave occasion to the excessive liberties of the old Comedy, The
old Comedy of the Greeks exceeding licentious.
which at length grew so offensive, as to make way for a Reformation, and the
introduction of the new Comedy upon the Athenian Stage. And here the reason why
the Areopagites were not allowed to meddle or engage in Comedy, appears pretty
plain; for the Liberties, allowed to the old Comedy, naturally engaged 'em in
Parties, Factions, and personal Quarrels, which a Judge ought, to the utmost of
his power, to keep himself clear of. Beside, the ancient Dramatick Writers were
generally Actors in their own Plays, which by no means befitted the gravity of
a Judge.

These reasons (since Plutarch is silent) may suffice to show, Comedy, why no
proper exercise for a Judge.
that the Athenians might have a very great honor for their Comic Writers and
yet forbid their Judges to be of the number. The Avocation from their proper
Studies, the Laws of the Republic, the quarrels, and consequently the
partialities they were by the exercise of that sort of Poetry liable to be
engaged in, and the Indignity to their Office, are sufficient to justify such a
prohibition, even amongst a people, that had the highest respect for all other
persons that excelled in this kind.

Nor was their kindness extended only to the Drama; for the Bacchanalian Games,
even after the abdication of Tragedy and Comedy, tho they held not an equal
rank with the other, yet had some share of their Favor; and Aeschines, who,
according to the testimony of Locata Opera tua illis Histrionibus, qui
suspiriosi cognominantur, tertias parts actitabas. Demosth. Orat. de Coron:
And in the same Oration he calls him Tertianum Historionem.
Demosthenes, and Aeschines tertias parts in Bacchanalibus apud Aristodemum
actitavit. Plut. Aeschine.
Plutarch, was but a third rate Actor Aeschines legationes obiit, and multas
alias, and ad Philippum de pace. Ibid.
, yet was so well considered by the State, as to be sent on several Embassies,
and particularly to conclude a Peace with Philip of Macedon, than which the
State could not have given him a more honorable Employment.

This, I suppose, may almost amount to a demonstration, that the Athenians had
no such scandalous opinion of the Stage, as Mr Collier would insinuate, making
even Plutarch himself Judge in the case. It would be impertinent after this to
insist upon the great Employments, with which Sophocles, and some other of
their Poets were honored; since the already mentioned honors and privileges
are a sufficient evidence of the Public Esteem.

His next State Opinion is that of the Lacedaemonians; Opinion of the Spartans-
and here after a flourish of his own, he appeals to Plutarch again. The
Lacedaemonians, P. 240.
who were remarkable for the Wisdom of their Laws, and Sobriety of their
Manners, and their breeding of brave Men: This Government would not endure the
Stage in any Form, nor under any Regulation.

I find, if this Author can but make his reading appear, it is no matter whether
his sense does or not. Here is a Period of five lines and a half, without any
principal Verb. But the Author is got into his Rhetorical strain, and it is no
matter for Grammar. For when his Fury's up, Priscian had best stand out of his
way; or take a broken Head quietly, or woe be to his bones.

But who told him, that the Lacedaemonians were so remarkable for the Wisdom of
their Laws? They were indeed notorious for the unreasonable severity and
singularity of 'em. But I beg Mr Collier's pardon, if ill Nature and
Singularity ben't arguments of Wisdom, a certain sour, singular Remark^r may
have written a Book to call his own understanding in question.

The Gentleman, Theft tolerated at Lacedemon,
I suppose, had heard of a famous Lawgiver called Lycurgus, who was a
Lacedemonian, and left his Country several wholesome Laws, the just
commendation of which particular Ordinances he was resolved to transfer to the
whole Body, or System of their Laws, in which Violence, Rapine, and Theft were
not only tolerated, but recommended to practice and imitation; but all
ingenious Arts, lay together with the Stage, under discouragement.

The Spartans were a people something of Mr Collier's Kidney, Character of the
Spartans^
Cynicks in their Temper, Morose, Proud, and ill Natured, that hated mortally,
as well the Improvements, as the Persons of their polite Neighbors the
Athenians, were fond of their primitive Rust, and Barbarity, had an aversion to
Elegance, or Neatness of any kind; their principal Virtues were a senseless
inflexible obstinacy, whether in the right or wrong, and a sullen sufferance
under Adversity. They were in short incorrigible Humorists, a people that would
neither lead nor drive, men that were as hard to be persuaded to reform an old
abuse, as the Irish formerly to leave off drawing by their Horses Tails, or a
Spaniard would be to part with his Mustachio's, or Mr Collier to retract an
Error. This Frame and Constitution of mind, might perhaps recommend and endear
'em, as it seems to ally 'em to a person of the Authors complexion.

But why did this Scourge of the Stage suppress the reason of this Aversion of
the Spartans to the Drama? Was it not for his purpose? Well, if he^s resolved
not to to tell us, Plutarch is better natured, and will. He says, Comaedias,
and Tragaedias non admittebant Lacones, ut ntque serio, eos qu^legibus
contradicerent audirent. Instit. Lacon. This Authority falsified likewise.
that the Lacedaemonians allowed neither Tragedy nor Comedy, that they might not
hear any thing contradictory to their Laws.

Here was an Authority in appearance as serviceable to his purpose, as the old
broad Money was to the Clippers, but he, like some of those unconscionable
Artists, that when they had clipped a Sixpence, would clap a Ninepenny stamp upon
it, could not be contented with the advantage of diminution, but he by
covetously endeavoring to raise the value, spoiled the currency of his
Authority.

This Government (says he) would not endure the Stage in any form, nor under
any Regulation.

What warrant has he from Plutarch for this Assertion? Politeness, the
Objection of the Spartans to the Drama.
Plutarch tells us, that they did not admit Comedy nor Tragedy, but he says not
a syllable of Forms or Regulations. The Lacedaemonians were a rough unpolished
people, that were afraid, if the study of Politeness (the inseparable companion
of the Drama) were introduced, their Laws, which were as Clownish, and unlickt
as themselves, should be affronted, and therefore kept Tragedy and Comedy, like
Enemies, at a distance.

But what does he mean here by the Stage? All sorts of Plays not prohibited at
Lacedemon.
Would he insinuate, that all sorts of Shows and Games were prohibited? If so,
his Position is absolutely false; for all the rough Bear Garden Play (if I may
call it so) was not only tolerated, but very much encouraged by the State.
Their Women too had their Religious Plays, Lib. 4.
a memorable stoy of which Pausanias * tells. And it is probable, that the Plays
in use over all the rest of Greece, were permitted there too in their Primitive
Rudeness and Simplicity, conformable to the humor of the people, and the drift
of their Policy.

In the exclusion of the Drama, they aimed only to preserve that Martial
Spirit, which by the whole course and method of their Education and Exercises,
they endeavored to infuse into, and nurse up in their youth, which they were
afraid the Delicacy and Luxury of the Drama, as 'twas practiced at Athens,
might soften, and that the Elegancy and Pleasure of those diversions would
breed a niceness, which would insensibly create a disgust in their youth to the
Manners and Customs of their Country, and consequently make 'em think their
Laws harsh and unpolished.

It was not therefore the Virtue of the Spartans, Morality, not the reason of
rejecting the Stage.
nor their care of Morality, that made 'em reject the Drama, but an austerity
of temper, which rendered 'em ambitious only of Military Glory. In which,
notwithstanding their Neighbors and Rivals the Athenians, with all their
Delicacy and Luxury, were their equals, if not superiors. What infection of
Manners from the Stage, could that State fear, which tolerated Theft and
Adultery? It Is plain, their fear was, lest the natural asperity of their
humors, which they industriously cultivated, should be softened, and their
minds enervated. For the same reason all sorts of Learning lay under neglect
and discouragement.

Whatever were the reasons that induced 'em to banish the Drama, if Virtue was
not, it is nothing to Mr Collier's purpose. As for their breeding brave Men, I
believe they may be matched from the opposite State of Athens, both for number
and quality. But if the Athenians rivall'd 'em in Military Glory, they
infinitely excelled 'em in all other valuable Qualities, and had as much more
Manners, as they had Wit or Wealth. So that if Mr Collier will needs have them
for his Champions, I must oppose their old Antagonists to 'em, and leave them
to decide the Fate of Greece. For I think the opposition as unequal, as that of
Ovid, Mulieber in Trojam, pro Troja stabat Apollo.


The next step he takes is into Italy, and there indeed he endeavors to draw a
mighty Republic into a League Offensive and Defensive. And here, by the means
of St Austin, he draws Tully in; but since Tully does not appear in propria
persona we shall not spend Time and Ammunition upon him, but pass on to Livy:
Livy's Authority considered. P. 241. Postqu^m lege (...) fabularum ab risu,
(...) soluto i^co res avocabatur, and ludus in artem paulatim verterat,
Juventus histrionibus fabellarum actu relictu, ipsa inter se more antiquo
ridicula intexta versibus jactitare caepit, quae inde exodia postea appellata,
conserta^; Fabellis potissimum Atellanis sunt, quod genus ludorum ab Oscis
acceptum tenuit juventus: nec ab histrionibus pollui passa est. Eo institutum
manet, ut Actores Atellauarum nec tri^a moveantur, and stipendia tanquam
expertes artis Ludicrae faciant. Dec. 1. l. 7.
Who, making his personal appearance, is more formidable.

We read in Livy, that the young people in Rome kept the Fabulae Atellanae to
themselves. They would not suffer this diversion to be blemished by the Stage.
For this reason, as the Historian observes, the Actors of the Fabulae Atellanae
were neither expelled their Tribe, nor refused to serve in Arms. Both which
Penalties, it appears, the common Players lay under.

Here Mr Collier has used a piece of Ingenuity uncommon with him, and put the
words, Ab Histrionibus pollui in the Margin to justify his Translation. This
is a strain of fair play, that he has not been persuaded to come up to, since
his first quotation from Theophilus Antiochenus. Not but that he was satisfied
of the reasonableness of the conduct, (as appears by his using it, when it is
for his turn) but because he had cause to fear the service of it.

In this Translation is another of his elegancies of Speech: Were neither
expell^d their Tribe, nor refused to serve in Arms. He means, I suppose,
prohibited, or denied the liberty of serving in Arms: for refused to serve in
Arms is not English.

To understand this passage of Livy rightly, Ancient Romans an unrefined People.
we must consider that the Romans in the Infancy of their State were a severe
sort of people, not much unlike in that particular to the Lacedaemonians,
ambitious only of Empire, and sollicitous for nothing so much as the glory of
their Arms: This humor lasted some Ages, and grew and increased with their
acquisitions; every augmentation of their State animated 'em to new Conquests,
and their Ambition rising with their hopes, success made 'em fierce and
haughty. 'Twas the universality of this Spirit, (which would be dangerous to
any other than a Popular Government) that laid the Foundation, and was the
Instrument of their future greatness. To support, and keep up this Spirit, all
manner of Arts here, as at Lacedemon, lay under neglect and contempt, except
such as contributed to the forming of their Youth to hardiness, and military
virtue Virtus superstitione animis Ludi quoque Scenici nova res bellico^o
populo, instituti dicuntu^. Et ea ipsa percgrina res suit. Ludiones ex Hetruria
acciti. Ibid.
. So that when there seemed to be a necessity of instituting expiatory Plays,
the Romans were such absolute strangers to things of that nature, that they
were forced to fetch Artists out of Tuscany.

It is no wonder if the Romans, who Imitari deinde eos juventus, simul
inconditis inter se jocularia fundentes versibus, cepere. Ib. Acting of Plays
first left off by the Roman youth, because of the difficulty.
were a people very proud, and conceited of their own performances, treated all
those Arts, and Artists, which were not adapted to their proper Genius with
contempt, especially after they had received those Improvements, which rendered
'em more artificial, and consequently more difficult. By which means the Roman
Youth, who at first began to imitate the Tuscan Players, were forc^d to throw
up those refined diversions to their Vernaculis Artifiribus. Ib.
Slaves, and stick themselves to the old, rude, simple way of mixing indigested
Verses, and crude extempore raillery. Histrio^e^, who so called.
Thus the Ludi Scenici being refined, fell wholly into the hands of Mercenary
Players, who were upon this occasion distinguished by the name of Vernaculis
Artisicibus, (...) Hister (...) Ibid.
Histriones, the Roman Youth retaining to themselves only the Fabulae
Atellanae, which, because of their rudeness and simplicity, required no great
skill or application, as the other did; which, for that reason, perhaps they
were either too Saturnine, or too proud to learn of those, whom they esteemed
as Vassals, or Slaves.

That this was the reason of their giving over the acting their other Plays,
and not any turpitude, or dishonesty in the things themselves, Livy himself
declares, by saying Postquam lege
, that after the introduction of the Fable, they became too artificial for the
practice of their youth, and therefore reserving to themselves the Atellanae
only, they left the rest of the Shows to those that made it their sole business.

It Is observable, that the Historian in this account of Plays includes not the
Drama at all; for he speaks here only of the Fables, which, after the Satyrae,
were introduced by one Livius, and were repeated in Verse with action and
gestures to Music. Tragedy and Comedy were not known to the Romans till some
ages after, the progress of their Arms had not made them acquainted with the
Learning of Greece, and the Wealth and Luxury of Asia.

This mark therefore of Infamy, which was set upon the Histriones (from which
(as Mr Collier observes) the Actors of the Fabulae Atellanae were exempt, cannot
properly stick upon the Actors of Tragedy, and Comedy as such, that Law having
been made long before the Drama was brought to Rome from Greece

But it was the misfortune of the Drama to make its Public Entry into Rome,
Conjectural Reason why Players were noted with Inf^my.
not only long after this voluntary, and unanimous secession, or separation of
the Youth of Rome from the Mercenary Players, but even after the Law had
branded these latter with Infamy and Disgrace, by excluding 'em from their
Tribes, and denying 'em the liberty of bearing Arms. Whether, because making a
business, and profession of diversion only, the Roman State, which encouraged
those exercises only that tended toward hard'ning their Youth, for labor and
military action, as partly through inclination, so also out of necessity and State
interest, being in its infamy surrounded by Neighbors more potent than
themselves, and obliged to subsist almost altogether upon the purchase of their
Swords, thought fit, by a public discouragement, to deter their Youth from
giving themselves up to an Employment, that so little suited the posture, and
condition of their Affairs at first, and the vastness of their Ambition
afterward. Or, that after the first separation, occasioned (as Livy hints)
rather by the incapacity and unfitness of the Romans for Elegancy, and polite
Exercise, the practice of the Stage, fell wholly into the hands of Slaves, and
Mercenary Foreigners, to join with whom, the Magistrates and People, who were
extremely proud, and jealous of the honor, and dignity of their Citizens as
such, thought it so great an indignity and debasement that they made provision
by this Law against it. Or, lastly, that their Mimes and Pantomimes were
already, before the making of this Law, arrived at that lewd height of
impudence, that we have already taken notice of, which obliged the Government
to take this method to fright their Citizens from mixing in the proctice of
such impurities.

Of these Reasons the two first seem jointly to have contributed to the
production of this Law: Two sins most probable.
and Livy, tho he does not formally assign any reason for this severe usage of
the Players, yet seems implicitly to intimate 'em to us in the notice that he
has taken of 'em, tho not as causes, yet as circumstances considerable at that
time. The silence of Livy concerning any such licentiousness in their Shows at
that time, is a sufficient argument against the last cause. For that Historian,
who upon all occasions shows abundance of zeal for the honor of his Country,
would not have failed to have done 'em justice upon this occasion, had this
rigor been the product of their Morals, and regard to Virtue. It is apparent
therefore, that this discouragement of the Shows, or rather this restraint of
the Action to Servants and Strangers, was the result of their Policy, not
Manners, and is therefore an impertinent instance to Mr Collier's purpose, who
I suppose writes for the Reformation of Men's Morals, not Politics.

It Is probable, Drama at first necessitated to use the Actors of the Ludi
Scenic^
that when Tragedy and Comedy came upon the Roman Stage, being destitute of
able Actors of a higher Character, they were necessitated to make use of the
Actors of the Scenic Shows, who, tho used to Representations differing very
much both in their manner and end, yet by their practice and pronunciation and
gestures, had both Voice and Motion under great command; which made the
exercise of the Tragic or Comic Stage, tho new and unknown to 'em before, not
difficult.

By this means the Actors of Tragedy and Comedy, The Actors of Tragedy and
Comedy, therefore only called Histriones.
who could not be aimed at by a Law made long before any such were in being,
might yet be brought under the censure of it in quality of Histriones, or Scene
Players before noted. Thus these different Characters meeting constantly in the
persons of the same men amongst the undistinguishing Crowd, the Infamy of one
might affect the other.

But granting the meaning and intention of that Law to reach the Dramatick
Actors, and that using a craft, which submits 'em to those compliances, for
which the other are censured; they also are offenders against the design of it,
and consequently are comprehended within the intent of it, and liable to the
penalty. Yet even thus this instance, giving it all the scope that may be in
the utmostlatitude of construction, is no way serviceable to this Reformer's
purpose. This would have appeared very plain, had the Law itself, instead of
the instance from Livy, been produced.

Praetorian Edict.
Infamia notatur qui Artis Iudicae, pronunciandive causa in Scenam prodierit.
Scena est, ut Labeo definit quae ludorum faciendorum causa quolibet loco, ubi
quis consistat, moveaturque spectaculum sui praebiturus, posita est. L. 1. and
2. F. de iis qui notantur infamia.
The Pretorian Edict runs thus Whoever appears upon the Stage to speak, or act,
is declared infamous. Which Labeo expounds thus. The Stage is any place fitted
up for the use of Plays, where any one is to appear, and by his motion make
himself a public Spectacle.

This Law being conceived in general terms against all that speak or act, upon
the Stage for the diversion of the People, seems indeed naturally to include
Comedians, and Tragedians, who do both speak, and act upon the Stage, and make
a show of themselves to the People too. Yet it does not serve our Adversaries
cause at all, who must show, that their Profession was branded for the
Immorality of it, or he talks nothing to the purpose.

This Exposition of Labeo's upon this Law, Labeo's Position shows the intent of
that Edict
like the Preamble to one of our Acts of Parliament, may let us into the
meaning of the Letter, and the motives that induced 'em to make it. What this
Learned Roman Lawyer here observes as matter of offense, is only, that they
did, Spectaculum sui praebere, make a show of themselves for hire; which the
Pride of the Romans might very naturally make 'em think to be a Prostitution of
the Dignity and Character of a Citizen of Rome, which deserved to be punished
with the privation of that which they had dishonored.

To secure this point, Mr Coll^ers disingenuity in this point.
the words, ab Histrionibus pollui, which he renders to be blemished by the
Stage, are (as has already been observed) put into the Margin, by which he
hopes to cast that blemish upon the Morality of the performance, which in
strictness regarded only the Persons, and Dignity of the Actors, and that not
upon any Moral, but a Political Consideration. By these Instances it may
appear, what violence of Construction is used to rack and torture these ancient
Authors to confess, and depose against their Consciences. Stretching the Text
is nothing with him, to serve his purpose it must be dismembered, that he may
have the cementing the fragments as he pleases; by which means he has shown 'em
in more unnatural figures, than even Posture Clark knew; Heads and Tails are so
promiscuously jumbled together, that the most familiar posture you find 'em in,
is that of a Dog couchant, with their Noses in their A -- s.

But if after all, The Roman Censure extended only to the Mercenary Actors as
such.
this Censure should reach the Mercenary or Hireling Actors only, and merely
upon that account, I think 'twill be pretty evident, that 'twas not the
exercise of their Mystery that made 'em scandalous, but the Motives that
induced 'em to it. To clear this point, let us look a little forward, and to
the former Law, we shall find the following subjoined.

Eos enim qui quaestus causa in certamina descendunt, and omnes propter
praemium in Scenam prodeunres, famofos esse Pegasus, and Nerva filius
responderunt. L. 2. de iis qui notantur infamia.
Those that enter the Lists for the sake of Gain, or appear upon the Stage for
Reward, are infamous, says Pegasus, and Nerva the Son.

Here it is plain that 'twas not the nature of their Profession that drew the
censure upon 'em, but the condition of their exercising it, which was for hire,
whereby they became Mercenaries. This disgrace, affecting only the Mercenary
Actors, reflects no way upon the Poets of the Drama, and their Performances.
For had they been scandalous, it is not to be imagined, that so many of the
greatest men that ever Rome bred, and the tenderest of their honor, would have
amused themselves about Works, in which they must have employed abundance of
Time, Learning, and Judgment, to forfeit their Reputation and Dignity.

Scipio Africanus and Laelius were Scipio and ^^lius Writers to the Stage, ^r
assisting to it.
publicly suspected to have assisted Terence in the composition of his Plays;
and the Poet, when taxed with it, is so far from vindicating his great Patrons,
(which had it been matter of reproach and diminution of honor to those noble
Persons, he certainly would have done) that he does in a manner confess the
charge to be true, and with a dexterity, in which he was singularly happy,
converts what was intended as an imputation, to a complement upon himself, and
values himself more upon the condescension, and friendship of men of their high
Character and Station, than upon the merit of his performance; which, this
objection was raised to lessen, by dividing the honor.

Julius and Augustus Caesar, Julius and Augustus Caesar, and Seneca, etc.
are both said to have busied themselves at vacant hours in Tragedy; and even
Seneca the Philosopher. However, Mr Collier* has lately seduced him over to his
Party, and made a Malecontent of him, was once very well contented, and easy at
a Play, and that too, not a sober Tragedy or Comedy, In meridianum
Spectaculumincidi lusus Spectans, and sa^les, and aliquid Laxamenti Epist. 7.
but one of their Noonday Drolls, a kind of their Ludi Senici, more wretched
and contemptible, than our Smithfield Farces, and less modest. Yet his Gravity
was it seems refreshed by it, tho he is grown so very squeamish, since his
acquaintance with Mr Collier that it would be a h^rd matter to reconcile (...)
to a grave Tragedy, tho of his own Wri^ing (before his rigid new friend, Mr
Collier) some of which are supposed to be yet extant amongst his Name sake^s
Collection of Tragedies.

Brutus, who left behind him (notwithstanding his fatal engagement in the
assassination of Caesar,) as high an Idea of his Virtue, and as a perfect
character of an excellent moral m^n, as even Ca^o himself, was as great an
admirer and encourager of the Drama, as any Roman of 'em all. And Tully
himself, who had as much Vanity and Pride as any man breathing, thought it no
diminution of his dignity and character, to contract an intimate friendship
with Roscius an Actor, and publicly to espouse his Interest, and defend his
Cause, which a man of his vanity and caution would not have done, had the
Censure of that Law upon his Profession, any way affected in the public esteem
the reputation of those among 'em, that had any personal merit, as Roscius,
AEsopus, and some others.

But tho these, and many others of the most eminent among the Romans, were
avowed Patrons, and the supposed at least, if not the real Author of many of
their Dramatick Pieces, yet our Remarker finds, that in the time of Theodosius
all sorts of Players did not come up to the Reputation of those Great Men, Law
of the Theodosian Code considered.
and make the top figures of their time, and therefore he claws 'em away with
another swinging Authority.

In the Theodosian Code, Players are called Personae inhonestae, P. 241.
that is, to translate it softly, persons maimed and blemished in their
Reputations. Their Pictures might be seen at the Playhouse, but were not
permitted to hang in any creditable In loco honesto.
place of the Town.

So says Mr Collier, but the Emperors Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius, by
the Authority of whom this Law was enacted and continued in force, were
somewhat less severe, and something more particular, and this Gentleman^s
Version of that Law, however soft he may pretend it to be, is no very fair one.
Faithfully rendered it runs thus.

If, Siqua in publicis Porticibus, vel in his Civitatum locis, in quibus
nostrae solent Imagines consecrari pictura ^^^cmimum vest^ hum^^i, and rugosis
sinubus Agitatorem, aut vilem offerat Histrionem, illico revellatur: neque
unquam, post hac liceat in loco honesto personas in honestas ad no^are. In
aditu vero Circi, vel in Theatri prosceniis ut collocentur, non vetamus, L.
Siqua. Cod. de Spectac.
in the public Porches, or other Places of the City where Statues use to be
dedicated to us, the Picture of any mean habited Pantomime and Charioteer with
his ruffled Garment, or base Droll Actor be put up, let it be immediately
pull^d down: nor shall it be lawful for the future to represent persons of such
despicable Characters in places of honor. But in the entrance of the Circus,
or before the Stage of the Theaters they may be allowed.

This, Meaning of the Theodosian Law.
when produced faithfully, and at length, is a worshipful Authority for Mr
Collier^s purpose, and the Strowlers all over the Kingdom must needs be
extremely mortified, when they reflect upon this Article, and find, that they
are not yet so proper Companions for the King, as to be hail fellow, well met
with him at a Public Entry, or Audience. These Emperors, it seems, thought it
a sort of Indignity to have every Scoundrel Hackney Coachman, Antic Tumbler,
or Droll Actor set up in Effigy by their own Statues, which in the times of
Paganism were the objects of Solemn Worship, and afterward of the highest
veneration imaginable below it. They thought it a derogation to Majesty (as
well they might) to have objects of ridiculous mirth and scorn placed so near
'em, and that the tickling to laughter, which these produc^d in the people,
would lessen the awful Respect and Reverence expected to be paid to the other.

But not to carry matters so high; Parallel instances.
If any one should take a fancy to set Tom Dogget's Effigies in his Sailors
dress, familiarly cheek by jole in the same, or the next Niche to the King upon
the Exchange (tho that ben^t so solemn a place of honor to our Kings, as the
Roman Porticus to their Emperors) I suppose it wou^d be resented as an affront,
and be by order pulled down. But if any man should take a fancy to the sign of
the King^s Head, and his next Neighbor to Mr Be^terton's, I hardly think there
would come any order from Whitchall to demolish or Lamb-black the Sign. And tho
perhaps the two first may actually be found at Murray^s or some other eminent
Limners in the same Room yet I fancy the Painter will hardly incur the penalty
of Crimen laesae Majestatis, tho he should happen to have drawn 'em both with
the same Pencil too. Princes, tho very zealous and tender of their honor, (as
they have reason to be) yet are not half so nice and scrupulous as Mr Collier.
These instances are exactly parallel to, and show the difference between the
drift of the Theodosian Code, and of his extravagant Paraphrase, which having
already given the words of, I leave the Reader to judge of the Intention.

His instances from our English Statutes and the Petition of his Godly
Citizens, I shall take no notice of, both because I find it sufficiently done
already to my hands, and because I think em nothing to his purpose, as I think
indeed of the greatest part of what I have already examined; but hitherto they
seemed to carry a face of Learning and Authority, which might mislead the
unlearnd, or surprise the unwary, if they were not warned in time of his
disingenuity in Quotation.

His Authorities drawn from the several Canons of some Councils, Authori^ies
from the Councils already answere^d.
are liable to the same reprehension with the rest of his Citations. But I am
willing to compound with my Reader for my past prolixity, and to dismiss 'em
without any further trouble, or examination; especially since the formal
Reasons of em are contain^d in the Objections from the Fathers, and already
answered there. Since therefore the Idolatry, Lewdness, and Cruelty of the Roman
Shows, (which provok^d the indignation of the Fathers, and the censure of those
Councils) are banished our Stage, I see no reason, why the Batteries, that were
raised only to demolish them, should be continued against it. But Mr Collier,
and the Bishop of Arras are gotten into Confederacy, and are resolved, that tho
the Theaters have long since perform^d their Articles on their parts, not to
allow 'em the benefit of the Capitulation, and surprising 'em, lulled into
security by a long cessation of Arms, to raze 'em utterly to the ground.

Delenda est Carthago, Quarrel to the Stage unjust.
was the word, the ruin of the Stage was agreed upon between 'em, but they
wanted a fair pretense of quarrel; and therefore General Collier publishes a
tedious Manifesto, filled with specious pretexts, to give a color to his
proceedings, and at the same time makes his Invasion. His quarrel to the Stage
is like that of the Wolf to the Lamb, when the Prey was ready, the varnish of
Justice was but a formality, that served like a Hypocrite's Grace, to make his
Meal the more decent; when the personal accusation proves too light, the Family
differences are thrown into the Scale, and he runs 1500 years backward to make
weight. Thus he makes a true Italian grudge of it, no change of Air, or Soil
can can make it degenerate, but it remains entailed upon the Posterity, and
successors of those, between whom it first began, tho the true reason why it
ever began, were long since ceased, and perhaps forgotten.

But after he has, like a hot mettled Car, with a bad Nose, overrun the Scent,
and cried it false through all the ^ields of Antiquity, he begins to be afraid of
being whipped home, and therefore begins to draw toward it of himself. He Is
sensible, that the comparison betwixt the Roman and English Stages will not
hold water, and to answer the leaks, he begins to ply the Pump, in order to
keep it afloat, but it works as hard, and refunds as little as a Usurers
Conscience.

But it may be objected, P. 277.
is the Resemblance exact between old Rome and London? will the Parallel hold
out, and has the English Stage any thing so bad as the Dancing of the
Pantomimi? I don't say that. The Modern Gestures, tho bold, and lewd too
sometimes, are not altogether so scandalous as the Roman. Here then we can make
'em some little abatement.

Ay! Ancient Stage infinitely more scandalous, and lewd than the Modern.
is that your Conscience? can you make but little abatemant? I find you have a
Stomach like a Horse, nothing rises upon it, let it be never so provoking
either, for quantity or quality. Dancing naked with Gestures, expressive of
Lewdness between both Sexes at a time, and public and open prostitutions in
the representations of the Rapes and Adulteries of their Gods, were frequently
the diversions of the Roman Theaters. All these provoke no Qualms in him; he
can scarce make any abatement. What would a queasie Stomach'd Atheist give for
his digestion.

But where is the Boldness, Stage dancing as now practiced inoffensive to
Modesty.
and Lewdness of the Modern Gestures; which Mr Collier makes bold to charge 'em
with? I dare answer for the Audience, that could they find any such thing in
our Dancing, they would be so much more reasonable than he, that they would
part with all that part of the Entertainment. But perhaps he suspects some
intentional Lewdness, which is not expressed any way, and thinks that Monsieur
L'Abbe is fallen into Sir Fopling Flutter's stratagem, and is sparing of his
Vigor in private, only to be lavish of it in public, and thinks no one Woman
worth the loss of a Cut in a Caper, which is designed to make his Court to the
whole Sex. This indeed is a dangerous design, and the discovery is worth Mr
Collier's time and pains, it is a Plot upon the Virtue of the whole Sex;
therefore if he has any such thing in the Wind, even let him follow his nose,
and cry it away as loud as he pleases.

Well, but he begins to relent again already, these wamblings are a certain
sign of Breeding, he is in a longing condition, that is plain. Come the other
strain Sir, and up with it. So now it is out.

And to go as far in their Excuse as we can, P. 277.
it is probable their Music may not be altogether so exceptionable as that of
the Ancients.

Really Sir this is very kind, and condescending. Mr Coll's Notion of the
extravagant Power of Music ridiculous.
But do you truly, and from your heart think, that our Theater Music is not
altogether so pernicious, as the Music of the Ancients? Now were I as cross,
and captious as a Stage Reformer, and as full of Mr. Collier's own Devil of
Opposition, as himself, I could raise his, and divert the Spleen of other
People. But Foolery apart, I desire to know wherein consists this imaginary
Force of Music, Collier's Moral Essay Vol. 2d P 21 Ib. P. 22.
that Charms, and Transports, Rufflles, and Becalms, and Governs, with such an
arbitrary Authority, that can make drunken Fellows, as soler, and shame-faced,
as one wou^d wish. If he can tell me this, erit mihi magnus Apoll, or, what is
but one remove from him, first Knight of his own order of the Welsh Harp. Our
Fiddlers find to their cost sometimes the want of this coercive power, but
perhaps they cannot play a Dorion, and for that piece of Ignorance deserve the
Fate they sometimes meet with, when they unluckily fall into the Company of
these Drunken Fellows, and get their heads broke with their own Fiddles, in
return for their Music. Yet to do the Gentleman all the Justice, ay and the
Favor too, that we can, in return for his late Civility, I must own, that I
have seen at a Country Wake, or so, one of these Harm onious Knights of the
Scrubbado, or a Melodious Rubber of Hair and Catgut, lug a whole Parish of as
arrant Logs, as those that danced after Orpheus, by the Ears after him, to the
next empty Barn, frisking, and curvetting at such a frolicksom rate, that they
could scarce keep their Legs together; nay, such was the power of the Melody,
that even the solitary deserted Gingerbread Stalls wagged after; and all this
without the help of one illegal string, and but four very untunable ones. What
could Timotheus, or even Orpheus himself do more.

However I would not have the Gentleman swell too much in the Pride of his
Victory, I would not have him insult too soon. For, tho possibly these Knights
of the Harp and Catgut might know, Moral Essay vol. 2. P. 21.
how to arm a sound, and put force and Conquests in it, yet had there not been
a Favorable Conjuncture of Circumstances, the Harmony, as charming as it was,
had not succeeced so miraculously, nor produced such extatick Raptures. For
example, had this Descendant from Orpheus surpised 'em at a time, when the
Holyday Clothes were laid up in Lavender, when the Hay, or Harvest was abroad,
or the Snow upon the Ground, and the Cattle wanted Foddering, when the Calf was
to be suckled, and the Cheese to be set, he might have thrummed his Harp out,
and could no more have stirred those very Clods, that leapt as mechanically
before at the first twang, as if they had been mere Machines (Instruments
strung, and tuned to an Unisone) then he could have raised the Turf, they trod
upon, by virtue of Ela, and F-ffaut. The Critical Juncture mist, Roger had not
jogged a foot out of his way, nor Madge out of her Dairy, they had been as
regardless of his Harmony, as a London Milk Maid, after the first week in May;
(...) ^ntient Britto^^ (...) as easily have been charmed from his scrubbing
Post.

There are indeed certain opportunities to be found by those that skilfully
watch 'em, Power of Music owing to contingent circumstances.
wherein Men's Souls are to be taken by surprise, wherein they give themselves
up wholly to the direction of their Senses, when Reason tired with perpetual
mounting the Guard, quits her Post, and leaves 'em to be drawn away by every
delightful Object, every pleasing Amusement. At these times Sound, Color,
Taste, and Smell have all an unusual Influence; a Face, a Voice, or any thing
else, that gives us pleasure for the time, Commands us, and we are hurried,
like Men in Dreams, we know not how, nor whither. Yet this is easily accounted
for, without recourse to natural Magic, or any suitable Power in those Agents,
that work upon us. Our Souls are at these times, like Vessels adrift, at the
mercy of Waves and Winds, from what corner soever they blow; our Senses are the
Compass they sail by, from whence those Blasts of Passion come, that drive us
so uncertainly about, but it is without any peculiar inherent force of Direction
more in one point than another.

Thus far Music, Influence of sounds indeterminate.
as well as other things that gives us delight, and flatter the Senses, may
influence us. It may when we are under a lazy disposition of mind, produce a
degree of satisfaction something above Indolence, but the motions of it are
languid and indeterminate, that incline us only to an unactive easiness of
mind, a barren Pleasure, that dies without Issue, with the Sounds that begat
it; so little danger is there that it should be in the power of a few mercenary
Hands, P. 279.
to play the People out of their Senses, to run away with their understanding,
and wind their Passions about their Fingers, as they list. I suppose few will
take it upon this Gentleman's word, that Music is almost as dangerous, as
Gunpowder; and requires no less looking after, than the Press or the Mint.

This Gentleman sure has a Noise of Music in his head, that has put the Stumm
in his Brain into a Ferment, and caused it to work over into all this windy
fancy and froth. He has been a Tale-gathering among the Ancients, and wou^d put
his Romantic Rhapsody upon us for Authentic. But what is yet more
unreasonable is, that without offering one Argument to prove either the
reasonableness of his Opinion, or the reality of his Instances, he dogmatically
asserts things monstrously, exceeding the stretch of the most capacious faith,
and yet expects that, which alone is sufficient to destroy the credit of things
infinitely more probable, the vast distance of time should warrant the truth of
them. As if he believed all Mankind to be proselyted to the Paradox of a
certain Father certum est quia impossible.

But if the Power of the Ancient Music was so great, as he would persuade us,
certainly Timotheus was a Fool for suffering his harp to be seized for having
one string above public Allowance. P. 280. p. 179.
For if altering the notes, were the way to have the Laws repealed, and to
unsettle the Constitution, he might with a twang, instead of taking a string
from his Harp, have put one about the Magistrates Neck, and for a Song have set
himself at the head of Commonwealth. But this Author, who is all along a
Platonist in his Philosophy, is in this point an arrant Bigot. The whole scheme
and strain of the Platonic Philosophy, The Author a Platonist.
is very romantic and whimsical, and like our Author's works, savours in every
particular more strongly of Fancy than Judgment, yet in nothing more, than in
the imaginary power of Harmony, to which he ascrib^d the Regulation, and
Government of the Universe, and other Powers more fantastical and extravagant,
than that of the Pythagorean numbers.

Now were I in as cross a mood, and as much at leisure to be impertinent as
this Admirer of the Ancient Music, who has ventured to affirm it as certain,
Moral Essay, Vol. 2. P. 23.
that our Improvements of this kind, are little better than Alehouse Crowds,
with respect to theirs. I could with a certainty of Evidence, next to
Demonstration, maintain just the Reverse of his Assertion, and prove that the
Music of the Ancients fell infinitely short of the Modern in point of
perfection, as well in Theory as Practice, and that, waving the fabulous
accounts, (which none but an Enthusiastic Bigot can seriously insist upon) all
our Memoirs from Antiquity will scarce make the Harps of Orpheus and Arion,
etc. to triumph over a Jew's Harp, or Rival a Scotch Bagpipe.

But after all, Not acquainted with the Subject he treats of.
it seems that he has been raving all this while in Pedantick Bombast, at he
knows not what. He confesses that he is not acquainted with the Playhouse
Music, and that he is no competent Judge. P. 278.
I don't say this part of the Entertainment is directly vicious, because I am
not willing to censure at Uncertainties. How long, I wonder, has he been thus
modest? had he been thus tender all along, he had suppressed his whole Book,
and the truth had suffered nothing by the loss of it. But in earnest, is he
deaf? or does he wax up his ears when he goes to a Play, as (he says) Ulysses
did, when he sailed by the Sirens? No, neither; but, if we may believe him, P.
278.
he never comes there. Those that frequent the Playhouse are the most
competent Judges. Why that is honestly said, they are so; keep but to this, and
there is some hope of an accommodation. But alas! tho his zeal is a little
Aguish now, the hot ^it comes on apace, and then right or wrong, He must say,
that the performances of this kind are much too fine for the place. Ibid.


Tho he has never heard of one, His charge rash.
nor seen the other, yet he cries hang scruples, the Music must be bawdy,
Atheistical Music, and the dancing bold and lewd too sometimes. Now whether he
means that the Fiddler himself is an Infidel of a Fiddler, or that he has an
unbelieving Crowd, he is desired to explain; for they are both left to be
catechized by him. But as for the sounds produced betwixt them, care has been
already taken to clear 'em, not only from guilt, but from all manner of meaning
whatsoever. As for the dancing, which he calls bold, it may in one sense be
allowed him; for it must be granted, that he that ventures his neck to dance
upon the top of a Ladder, is a very bold Fellow. If this concession be of any
use to him, it is at his service, whether the fraternity of Rope-dancers take it
well at my hands or not. But for the Lewdness, I must remind him of his appeal
to those who frequent the Play Houses, (whom he allows to be) the most
competent Judges. But as their Judgment in these matters appears to be
indisputable, so the modesty of the better part of 'em at least, (I mean the
Ladies) who are the particular favorers of this part of the entertainment, is
unquestionable. Their countenance therefore in so plain a matter, which being a
question of fact, admits of no other decision, ought to be looked upon as a
definitive Judgment against him, and a sufficient vindication of our
Stage-dancing.

I should here dismiss this point without further debate, Comparative Morality
of the Vocal Music of the Ancient and Modern Stages.
if I did not find him closing it on his side with a notorious false assertion
concerning the comparative Morality of the vocal Music of the Ancient and
Modern Stages, which, not designing to resume this branch of the Controversy
any more, I am bound here to take notice of, and rectify.

If the English Stage is more reserved than the Roman in the case
abovementioned. P. 280.
If they have any advantage in their Instrumental Music, they lose it in their
Vocal. Their Songs are often rampantly lewd, and irreligious to a flaming
excess. Here you have the Spirit, and Essence of Vice drawn off strong scented,
and thrown into a little compass. Now the Ancients, as we have seen already,
were inoffensive in this respect.

Here again I am at a loss to know whether this is a fault of ignorance or
design. But be it whether he pleases, the falseness of his assertion is
unpardonably scandalous; for whether he has ventured to affirm beyond, or
contrary to his knowledge, it is manifest he did it with an intention to impose
upon his Readers, by asserting that which he could not know to be true, if he
did not certainly know it to be false.

The Vocal Music of the Ancient Stage was of two sorts, Ancient Vocal Music.
one whereof was interspersed among their Dramatick Writings, and consisted of
Hymns, and Praises of their Gods, which were sung and danced by the Chorus to
certain grave Aires and Measures. Here indeed the Poets must have been more
impertinently and perversely lewd, than Mr Collier^s own corrupt imagination
can positively make the Moderns to be, if they could have found room for any
thing very indecent; tho an ill natured Critic, with much less Gall or
Straining, than Mr Collier has made use of, might show, that they were not so
absolutely inoffensive, Chorus, its office.
as he affirms. The Chorus represented the Spectators, and their business was
to make occasional reflections upon the several incidents and turn of the
Fable, which was the artificial Instrument, the Ancient Poets used to convey
the Moral into the Audience, and teach 'em what to think upon such occasions,
and how to behave themselves in reference to their Gods and Religion, and were
therefore supposed to speak the sense of the Poet, or what at least he desired
should be taken for such. Now I dare answer for the meanest of those Poets,
upon whom this Author has made his reflections, that taking our Estimate of
their understandings by his own diminutive survey of 'em, there is not amongst
'em one so arrant a Blockhead, as under the circumstances of the Ancients to
have taken more liberty, than they did.

But if their Chorus was modest and harmless enough; the other part of their
Stage Vocal Music will make ample amends, and make the lewdness of our Poets
appear, as demure as a Quaker at a silent meeting. The Ancients had lustier
Appetites, and stronger Digestions, than the Moderns, and their Poets cookt
their Messes accordingly, they did not stand to make minced Meat, or
artificially to steal in their Ribaldry, and disguise it in nice Ragou's after
the modern way; they were for whole Services, substantial Treats of Bawdy. Nor
do I find, that it recoiled upon the Stomachs of the generality of their Guests
for many Ages together. The Reader I suppose will immediately guess that I mean
the Ludi Scenici, Their Mi^i.
which made the Amors of their Gods, and Heroes their subject, in which the
lewdest actions were represented in the lewdest manner, and sung in the most
fulsome luscious Verse. Upon our Stage no such Practices are allow^d, if a
light wanton thought happens to creep into a Song, it is not suffered to show
its face bare, but is presently maskt, and clothed decently in Metaphor, that
many would not suspect the modesty of it, and even the most squeamish cannot
take offense without offering violence; for it comes into your Company like a
bashful young sinner, she is civil company amongst sober people.

The Ancients, it is plain, were not by abundance so scrupulous; if they had,
those lewd Drolls had never been composed, much less represented. But they were
for all naked, without the vail of Figure or Dress, they requir^d Nudities in
Speech, as well as Action, the Audience went away with satisfaction, and the
Poet with applause.

By this we may see, that our Stage upon the comparison is not so rampantly
lewd, as Mr. Collier represents it, nor the ancient so inoffensive. To dilate
upon this head, would be both improper and impertinent; but these few hints,
which, all that are acquainted with the practice of the Roman Stage, know to be
true, whether Mr Collier does or not, may suffice to show what an unfair
Adversary the Stage has met with; and to prove that he is not an upright, or
not a competent Judge of these matters, in which he unauthoriz'd undertakes to
determine, and arrogantly obtrudes his false Judgment upon us.

Another of his objections to the Stage in general, P. 281.
is their dilating so much upon the Argument of Love.

Upon this article he is very lavish of his Rhetoric, His Objections from the
Topic of Love, a Declamatory Rant.
and lays about him in Tropes and Figures, he is got into his old road of
declamation, and posts Whip and Spur through his Common place upon the subject.
His fancy, like a Runaway-horse, has got the Bit between her Teeth, and ramps
over Hedge and Ditch, to the great danger of his Judgment; no bars or fences of
sense or reason can stop her Cariere, till jaded and out of Wind she flags of
her self. Here then, let us come up with him.

I don't say the Stage fells all before 'em, and disables the whole Audience:
P. 282.
It Is a hard Battle, where none escape. However, their Triumphs and their
Trophies are unspeakable. Neither need we much wonder at the matter. They are
dangerously prepared for Conquest and Empire. There Is Nature, and Passion, and
Life in all the circumstances of their Action. Their Declamation, their Mein,
their Gestures, and their Equipage, are very moving and significant. Now when
the Subject is agreeable, a lively representation, and a passionate way of
expression, make wild work, and have a strange force upon the Blood and Temper.

What means all this unseasonable Cry Fire, Mere Frenzy.
Fire, where there is not so much as a spark? If the Audience were mere Tinder,
they were out of danger. Sure the Author had Wildfire in his Brains, that the
thoughts of the Players could put him into such an uproar. It Is granted the
Actresses may appear to advantage upon the Stage, and yet their Triumphs and
Trophies not be so unutterable neither. For as dangerously as they are prepared
for Conquest and Empire, the highest of their acquests, that I could ever hear
of, was a good keeping, which has fallen to the share of but a few of 'em; when
multitudes of their Sex have arrived at greater matters without any such
formidable preparations. However, here is Mein, and Equipage, and the Author
seems afraid, lest the raw Squires of the Pit should take em for Quality in
earnest, and be dazzled with the luster of the inestimable Treasure of Glass,
and Tinsel, and so catch the real Itch of Love from their counterfeit
Scrubbado. And truly there is as much reason to fear, they should be pursued for
their Fortunes, as their Love off the Stage.

To answer this Rant of Whimsie and Extravagance seriously, were as ridiculous
an undertaking as Hudibras's dispute with the Managers of his West Country
Ovation, and by the sample we have of our Antagonist, the issue wou^d probably
be as cleanly. But if any one thinks an answer to this charge necessary, he may
see as much as it will bear, and more than it deserves, in a late Piece
entitled, A Review of Mr. Collier' s View, etc.

He has yet another charge upon the Stage left, P. 283.
and that is their encouraging of Revenge. What is more common than Duels and
Quarrelling, in their Characters of Figure? Those Practices, which are infamous
in Reason, Capital in ^aw, and Damnable in Religion, are the Credit of the
Stage. Thus Rage and Resentment, Blood and Barbarity are almost deified; Pride
goes for Greatness, and Fiends and Heroes are made of the same metal. And thus
the notion of Honor is mis-stated, the Maxims of Christianity despised, and
the Peace of the World disturbed

One would think he had found out another passage in Valerius Maximus, and that
the Civilis Sangu^s was abroach again. But Rome contented him then, now nothing
less than the Peace of the whole World must be disturbed about a Bawble. Sure
he thinks all the World of the Country-Wife's opinion, that the Player Men are
the finest folks in it.

But so far is Revenge from being encouraged, Revenge not encouraged by the
Stage.
or countenanced by the Stage, that to desire and prosecute it, is almost
always the mark of a Tyrant, or a Villain, in Tragedy, and Poetic Justice is
done upon 'em for it; it is generally turned upon their own heads, becomes the
snare in which they are taken, and the immediate Instrument of their miserable
Catastrophe. Thus in the Mourning Bride, Don Manuel, to glut his lust of
Revenge, Instance in the mourning Bride.
puts himself into the Place and Habit of his unhappy Prisoner, in order to
surprise, betray, and insult his own pious, afflicted Daughter, over the
supposed Body of her Murdered Husband. In this posture Poetic Justice
overtakes him, and he is himself surpised, mistaken for him whom he
represented, and stabbed by a Creature of his own, the villainous Minister of
his Tyranny, and his chief Favorite. Nothing is more common than this sort of
Justice in Tragedy, than which nothing can be more diametrically opposite, or a
greater discouragement to such barbarous Practices.

Comedy indeed does not afford us many instances of this kind; Passion not
proper in Comedy.
Rage and Barbarity are Crimes not cognizable by her; they are of too deep a
Dye, and the Indictment against 'em must be preferred at another Bar. If she
admits of any thoughts of Revenge, they must be such as spring from the lowest
Class of Resentments; that flow rather from a weakness of Judgment, or a
perverseness of Temper in the Parties that conceive 'em, than from the Justice
of the Cause, or the greatness of the Provocation. Accordingly they ought to
have no great malignity in 'em, they ought to spend themselves in little
Machinations, that aim no farther than the crossing of an Intrigue, the
breaking of a Match, etc. and never to break out into open violence, or ravage
in Mischief. The Passions have little to do in Comedy, every one there
according to his capacity acts by design, or carelessly gives himself up to his
humor, and indulges his pleasure and inclinations. This equality of temper of
Mind, with the diversity of Humors, is what makes the business of Comedy. For
while this general calm lasts, all busily pursue their several inclinations;
and by various ways practice upon one another. And the Man of Pleasure follows
his design upon the rich Knave's Wife, or Daughter, while the other is working
into his Estate. The Cully is the Sharper's Exchequer, and the Fop the
Parasite's, or Jilt's, etc. which, were the Passions too much agitated, and the
Storm raised high, would become impracticable; the Commerce would be broken
off, and the Plot wholly frustrated. Besides that both the Thoughts and Actions
of Men, very much disordered by Passion, or filled with too deep Resentments,
are naturally violent and outrageous, and absolutely repugnant to the Genius,
and destructive of the End of Comedy.

I grant that some Passions, Love, Jealousy, etc. how to be used in Comedy.
such as Love, Jealousy, Anger, are frequently, and sometimes justly employed
in Comedy; but then they are to be kept under, and must not be suffered to get
the Ascendant, and domineer over Reason; if they do, they are no longer Comic
Passions. Love must not carry 'em beyond Gallantry, and Gaiety of Spirit in the
Pride of Success, nor further than a light disquiet, such as may excite their
Industry, and whet their Invention under disappointments. Jealousy must not
hurry 'em beyond their Cunning, or make their Impatience betray their Plot. Nor
must their Anger break out into Flames, and push 'em upon rash unadvised
Actions. Such Revenges therefore, as are the result of Passions so moderated,
and circumstantiated, are allowable in Comedy; which can never produce any such
terrible effects, as to deserve all these furious Claps of Thunder, which Mr
Collier has discharged upon 'em.

Horace indeed tells us, that Comedy will raise its voice sometimes, and scold,
and swagger violently.

Interdum tamen and Vocem Comoedia tollit, Hor. Art. Poet.

Iratusque Chremes tumido delitigat ore.
But this very Instance shows, Exposition of Horace's Observation.
that the Passion of Comedy should proceed no farther than Scolding, or
Menaces. Nor do these fit every one's mouth, a Father, a Husband, or a Master,
when they conceive their Authorities to be outrag'd, may be allowed to vent
their Indignation, to unload their Stomachs, and in the discharge of their
Choler to break out into expressions of Threatening, or Reproach. But this is
not to be allowed upon slight Provocations, or to every Person in Comedy, who
by their Place and Character can pretend to no such Power, or Authority. These
Rants of Passion are not to be indulged amongst Equals in Comedy, much less to
Inferiors; because such provocations naturally produce effects too great, and
too like Tragedy.

Chremes, in the Heautontimorumenos of Terence, who is produced by Horace as an
example of the height of Comic Passion, Instance from Terence ex
was a Husband, a Father, and a Master, injured (at least in his own Opinion)
and abused in all these capacities by his Wife, his Son, and his Slave; his
Authority slighted, and what was worse, his Understanding, (of which he was not
a little conceited) affronted, and He practiced upon, and made a Cully of by
his Son, and his Slave, even in the exaltation of his Wit, and Cunning, by his
own Plot and Management. These were provocations as high as Comedy could well
admit, and consequently the rage, which they must naturally produce in a man of
his Temper, and Opinion of his own Prudence, must be in proportion. Yet, what
follows? Chremes does not lose his Reason in his Anger, Hic, ita ut liberos est
(...) contutabitur. Sed Syrum -- Si vivo adeo exornatum dabo, adeo depexum, ut
dum vivat meminerit semper mei: Qui sibi me pro ridiculo, ac delectamento
putat. Non (ita me Dio ament) auderet facere haec Viduae mulieri, Quae in me
fecit.
His Son (he tells you) shall be reduced by Words to Reason: But as for Syrus,
that Rogue, that had made him his Sport and his Laughing Stock, he would take
such care of him, and put him in such a Trim, he should not dare to put his
tricks upon a Widow hereafter, as he had done upon him. What is there in all
this, that Mr Collier with all his Scruples about him can quarrel with? It Is
true, a Scene or two after he falls upon his Son, in very opprobrious terms,
and calls him Drunkard, Blockhead, Spendthrift, Rake-hell, etc. But his Fury
spends itself in a few words, and he comes immediately to composition with his
Son, and is easily wrought to forgive even Syrus too, so that all his fury is
spent, not to revenge the affront received, but to reclaim his Son.

But Mr Collier's Resentments are of another Nature; P. 283. Tragedy in the
Judgment of Aristotle.
Rage, Blood and Barbarity are the Ingredients of 'em, and consequently they are
no composition for the Ingredients of Comedy; and Tragedy, as we have already
shown, is no encourager of 'em, but just the contrary. I cannot see how he can
make 'em to be of the proper growth of the Stage. For Tragedy, by giving 'em so
odious a Dress and Air, and so calamitous a Catastrophe, as it always does,
takes the most effectual course absolutely to eradicate 'em, and to purge the
minds of the Audience of those turbulent Guests. Upon this Prospect it was,
that Aristotle pronounced so largely in favor of Tragedy, That it made Terror
and Compassion the instruments, Arist. P^et. lib. cap. 6. (...). P. 283. Du^^g
and Rencounters against the Nature and Laws of Comedy.
by which it purified and refined those very Passions in us, and all of the
like nature.

But, if Tragedy be no Encourager of such Disorders, much less can Comedy,
which meddles not at all with 'em, be with any color of Justice accused.
Comedy has nothing to do with either Fiends, or Heroes, whatever Stuff, or
Metal they may be made of. It Is indeed a Fault to bring Duels and Rencounters
upon the Comic Stage, from which some of our Poets cannot excuse themselves.
But it is a Fault rather against the rules of Poetry, and true Dramatick
Writing, than those of Morality. For, in Poetry as well as Painting, we are
obliged to draw after the life, and consequently to copy as well the Blemishes
as the Beauties of the Original; otherwise the finest colors we can bestow,
are no better than gay dawbing. The fault therefore of the Poet lies not in
showing the imperfections of any of his Persons, but in showing them
improperly, and in the wrong place, which is an Error of his Judgment, not his
Morals, and would be as great if he should untowardly produce in Comedy the
highest Examples of Heroic Virtue and Fortitude.

An Instance of this kind we have in the Comical Revenge, Duel in Love in a
Tub, against the rules of Comedy.
or Love in a Tub, of Sir George Etherege, in which the Duel, and the Action of
Bruce after it are of a strain above Comedy. Those niceties of Honor, and
extravagancies of Jealousy and Despair are unnatural on the Comic Stage; and
the Rescue from the Ruffians, for which Bruce in the same Scene is obliged to
his Rival, however brave and generous an action it may appear, considered
simply in it self, is a trespass against Justice and Propriety of Manners in
that place. Indeed that whole Walk of the Play, and the set of Characters
peculiarly belonging to it, are more nearly related to the Buskin, than the
Sock, and render the Play one of those which we improperly call Tragicomedies.
The other Walk, as it is one of the most diverting, so it is one of the most
natural, and best contrived that ever came upon the Stage.

This may suffice to show that a Comic Poet cannot trespass against the Laws of
Morality in this nature, without offending against the Laws of his own Art; and
consequently that such a fault ought rather to be looked upon as an Error of his
Judgment than of his Will, which may deserve the correction of a Critic, but
not of a Moralist.

But supposing that a Writer of Comedy Comic Poet obliged to draw according to
nature.
should (as many of 'em have done) either through want of Skill or Caution in the
conduct and management of his Plot, so embroil his Gentleman as to reduce him
to the hard choice either of accepting or refusing a challenge, the question
is, whether the Poet ought to allow him to accept, or answer it, like (what the
World calls) a Man of Honor, or to introduce him and his Friend playing the
Casuists like Philotimus and Philalethes, Collier's Moral E^say about Duelling.
and argue him out of his resentments. In this case the Poets business is to
draw his Picture, not to inform his Conscience; which would be as ridiculous in
him, as for Sir Godfrey Kneller to set up for taking Confessions, and enquire
into the Principles of any man, in order (...) true draught of his Face. The
Poet, as well as the Painter is to follow, not to pretend to lead Nature: and
if custom and common practice have already determined the Point, whether,
according to Equity, or not, the Poet exceeds his Commission, if he presumes to
run counter to 'em. So that if a Comic Poet be so far overseen, as to bring
his Gentlemen into the Field, or but so far toward it as a Challenge, there is
no taking up the matter without action, or (which is all one to Mr Collier's
objection) showing a readiness, and disposition for it on both sides. And the
Poet stands in need of all his Skill, and Address to save their Honor, and
reconcile 'em without engagement.

Since therefore both by the nature of his subject, No breach of Morality
without offending against the Laws of the Stage.
and the rules of his art, a Dramatick Poet is limited, and obliged, he cannot
reasonably be charged with any thing, as a trespass against Morality, in which
he does not offend likewise against them. For Dramatick Poetry, like a Glass,
ought neither to flatter, nor to abuse in the Image which it reflects, but to
give them their true color and proportion, and is only valuable for being
exact. If therefore any man dislikes the Figures, which he sees in it, he finds
fault with Nature, not the Poet, if those Pictures be drawn according to the
life; and he might as justly snarl at the wise Providence which governs the
world, because he meets more ugly Faces than handsome ones, more Knaves and
Fools than Honest and Wise men in it, and those too, generally more prosperous
and fortunate.

But because some of those Gentlemen, that have taken pains to proclaim War
against the present Stage, and have published their censures of it, seem to
have no true Idea of the business of a Dramatick Poet, and have arraigned some
of the present Writers for the Stage, either through malice or
misunderstanding, of high crimes and misdemeanors, in many particulars for
doing those things which the duty of a Poet obliged 'em to; it may not be
amiss, for the information of Mr Collier more especially, and those whom his
furious misgrounded invectives may have misled, to enquire into the nature and
Laws of Stage Poetry, and the Practice of it, both among the Ancients and
Moderns, as far as concerns Morality, and the depending Controversy only, and
no farther.

And here we may join issue with Mr Collier, P. 1. Mr Collier in his end of
Stage Poetry.
and allow, that The business of Plays is to recommend Virtue, and
discountenance Vice; To show the Uncertainty of Humane Greatness, the sudden
turns of Fate, and the unhappy Conclusions of Violence and Injustice. It Is to
expose the Singularities of Pride and Fancy, to make Folly and Falsehood
contemptible, and to bring every thing that is Ill under Infamy and Neglect.

Thus we set out together, Mistaken in his method of prosecuting that end.
and are agreed upon the end of our Journey, but we differ about the road to
it. Here therefore we part, and whether we shall meet again is the question. Mr
Collier, by the tenor of his discourse through the whole Book, seems to think,
that there is no other way of encouraging Virtue, and suppressing Vice, open to
the Poets, but declaiming for or against 'em, and would therefore have Plays to
be nothing but mere Moral Dialogues, wherein five or six persons should meet,
and with abundance of Zeal and Rhetoric preach up Virtue, and decry Vice.
Hereupon he falls upon the Poets with all the Rage and Fury imaginable, for
introducing in their Plays vicious Characters, such as in Tragedy, Tyrants,
Treacherous Statesmen, Crafty Priests, Rebellious Subjects, etc. In Comedy,
Libertines, Whores, Sharpers, Cullies, Fops, Pimps, Parasites, and the like.

Now, whether this conduct of the Poets, or his Censure of it be more
justifiable, is the subject of our Enquiry. To facilitate which, it will be
proper to establish some certain Standard, by which we may measure the Morality
or Immorality of a Dramatick Poem, and try thereby some of the most celebrated
Pieces, as well of the Ancients as Moderns; that their Beauties and Deformities
of this kind, either absolute or respective, may appear either severally, or
upon collation, and the Poet be accordingly justified or condemned.

The Parts therefore of a Play, Morals of a Play wherein shown. Poet. c. 6.
(...).
in which the Morals of the Play appear, are the Fable, the Characters, and the
Discourse. Of these the Fable (in Tragedy especially) is the most considerable,
being (according to Aristotle) the Primum Mobile by which all the other parts
are acted and governed, and the principal Instrument by which the Passions are
weeded and purged, by laying before the Eyes of the Spectators examples of the
miserable Catastrophe of Tyranny, Usurpation, Pride, Cruelty, and Ambition,
etc. and to crown suffering Virtue with Success and Reward, or to punish the
unjust Oppressors of it with Ruin and Destruction.

In Comedy, Folly and Knavery, the Subjects of Comedy.
as it acts in a lower Sphere, so the Persons are less considerable. Knaves,
Misers, Sots, Coquets, Fops, Jilts and Cullies, all which Comedy corrects by
rendering 'em unsuccessful, and submitting them in her Fable, to the Practices
and Stratagems of others, after such a manner, as to expose both Knavery,
Vanity, and Affectation, in the conclusion, or winding up, to the Scorn and
Derision of the Spectators. And thus by making Folly and Knavery ridiculous to
the View, Comedy gains her end, stops the contagion, and prevents the imitation
more effectually than even Philosophy herself, who deals only in Precept can
do, as Horace, and before him Aristotle have observed, by presenting that
lively to the Sight, which the other can only inculcate in words.

Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures, De Art. Poet.

Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus.
Thus while in the large Forest of Humane Affections, Tragedy labors to fell
those sturdy overgrown Plants the Passions, Comedy employs itself in grubbing
up the underwood of Vice, Folly and Affectation; and if its Operations are of
less importance than those of the former, they make ample amends by their more
extended, and almost universal Influence.

But this it seems is not the design of the Modern Stage Poets; Praef. Page 1,
2.
Virtue and Regularity are their Great Enemies; and to promote Lewdness and
Atheism, and to destroy Principles is their business, if we may believe Mr
Collier, who has taken abundance of malicious Pains to incense the World
against 'em; and like an experienced Incendiary, not only gives the Fire, and
blows the Coals, but furnishes Fuel of his own too, to increase the Flame.

To inflame the Reckoning of the Modern Poets, Mr. Collier's Character of the
Ancient Poets invidious.
especially the English, by the comparison, he enlarges very much upon the
great Modesty and Regard which the Ancients had to Virtue, and Decorum, falsely
insinuating thereby as great Neglect and Violation of 'em among the Moderns.
What he has said in Commendation of the Ancients, simply and abstractedly
taken, without any Application of comparison, or relation to those that have
exercised themselves the same way in this Age, and in our Country, may be
allowed as their due; And Mr Collier's deference to the just merits of those
great Genius's of Antiquity would turn to his own Praise, if it were paid only
as a debt to Justice. But proceeding from a disingenuous design, invidiously to
depreciate the worth, and blacken the reputation of others, the Justice is sunk
in the Malice of it, and the venom couched under it gives an ill Complexion to
the fairest Part of his Productions. That this was the motive that induced Mr
Collier to speak honorably of the Stage Poets, is apparent from his perpetual
grumbling, and snarling at 'em, ^ven in the midst of his most favorable
account of 'em. For tho upon many occasions he declares very largely in their
favor, yet it is only to balance and sway the competition betwixt them and the
Moderns on their side, and by raising the value of their Characters, to depress
the others in the esteem of the World. This partiality will plainly appear upon
the examination of some of those Pieces of Antiquity, which Mr Collier so
justly commends, with some of those of later production, which he so unjustly
decries.

Mr Collier is not content to charge the English Poets with Faults of
Negligence, Fable the principal part of a Play.
or even of licentious wantonness; but he treats 'em with the utmost despite,
and brands 'em with the Infamy of a professed Hatred to Virtue, a studied
Lewdness, and of subverting the end and use of their Art. If this were really
their Aim, unquestionably the Fable, which is the Principal Part, and of
greatest Influence and Operation, is contrived and modeled so as to be
serviceable to their grand design. That this may more certainly appear, we
shall take the Pains to analize some of those Plays, at which Mr Collier takes
greatest offense, together with some of the most celebrated of Antiquity.

The Oedipus Tyrannus of Sophocles has by the universal consent of the learned
of all Ages, the greatest reputation of the Dramatick Performances of
Antiquity, I shall therefore begin with that, and show that the Fable of that
deservedly admired Piece is by no means so noble, instructive, and serviceable
to Virtue, by its main or general Moral, as many of those Plays, against which
and their Authors Mr Collier inveighs with so much Bitterness.

The Fable of the Oedipus is this; Fable of the Oedipus of Sophocles.
Laius, the Father of Oedipus, and King of Thebes, was informed by an Oracle,
that it was his fate to be slain by his own Son, who should be born of his Wife
Jocasta. To elude the threats of the Oracle, Laius, as soon as the Child was
born, delivers him to one of his Servants to be murdered. This man, moved to
compassion by the innocence of the Babe, instead of taking away his life,
perforating both his Feet, and passing a Bend through 'em, hanged him up by the
Heels, and left him to the disposal of Providence. In this posture he was found
by a Domestic of Polybus King of Corinth, who, taking him down, carried him to
his Master, who being childless, received, educated, and owned him as his own.
Oedipus being at length grown up, and being in a contest of words with a
Corinthian, he reproached with his unknown Birth, and being a Foundling, of
which till that moment he had by the express order of Polybus, been kept in
ignorance, resolves to consult the Oracle at Delphi about his Parentage, and is
ordered by the Oracle to seek no further, for that it was his destiny to kill
his Father, and beget Children upon his Mother. Upon this answer, he resolves
for ever to abandon Corinth, his supposed Country, and in order thereto, takes
his way toward Thebes, and on the Road meets Laius, and a quarrel arising
between 'em, he kills him, and all his followers, one excepted, to whom upon
his supplication he gives quarter. Arriving at Thebes, he finds that City in
great confusion, both for the loss of their King, whom he knew not to be the
person slain by him upon the Road, and for the prodigious ravage and waste
committed by the Monster Sphinx, who distressed 'em so, that they durst scarce
stir out of their Walls. To rid themselves of the terror of this Monster, the
Thebans offer their Queen and Crown to any man that could resolve the Riddle
propounded by the Sphinx, upon the resolution of which only they were to be
quit of her. This Oedipus, notwithstanding the miscarriage of diverse before
him, who failing in their attempt were destroyed by her, undertakes, and
succeeding in it, the Monster breaks her own Neck, and he in reward, receives
the Crown, and Queen to Wife. For some time Oedipus governs with great
prudence, and has several Children by Jocasta. At length a furious Plague
arising, and making great Havoc in the City, Oedipus deputes Creon to the
Oracle, to consult about the Causes of, and Means to be delivered from the
Pestilence.

Thus far the History of Oedipus proceeds before the Action of the Play
commences; and tho the whole action of the Play naturally arises from this
antecedent part, yet Sophocles had very artificially reserved it to be
delivered by way of Narration at the unravelling of the Plot, which is the most
natural and beautiful of all Antiquity. But what is only considerable to our
purpose is, that hitherto Oedipus bears the character of a Just and a Wise man;
and if he be involved in any thing that bears an appearance of Guilt,
invincible Ignorance (which the Schoolmen hold to be a good Plea) is his excuse.

But if he is hitherto innocent of any intentional Guilt, he is through the whole
course of the Action exemplarily pious. At his first appearance upon the Stage,
Piety of Oedipus.
he shows an extraordinary concern for the calamities of his Country, and an
anxious solicitude for a Remedy. Jupiter's Priest addresses to him, as if he
were their tutelar Deity, and tells him, that 'twas this miserable experiment
of his being unable to relieve 'em, that had convinced him, and those with him,
that he was not equal to the Gods, and had made 'em have recourse to their
Altars.

(...), Sophocl. Oedip. Tyrann.

(...).
This was a bold complement from a Priest, and the Priest of Jupiter too, the
Sovereign of the Gods. But not to insist too much upon this Passage, Creon
enters, and breaks off the Parley betwixt 'em; He brings word from the Oracle,
that the Murderer of Laius must be expelled the Territories of Thebes.
Oedipus' Proclamation.
Who was this Murderer was yet a Secret, the Oracle not making that discovery.
Oedipus hereupon summons a meeting of the People, and makes Proclamation, that
if any one privy to the Fact would come in, and make a discovery, he should, if
concerned therein, be indemnified in his Person, and be obliged only to leave
Thebes. But that if he could inform of any other Person therein concerned, he
should be liberally rewarded, and purchase his Favor by such Discovery. And if
any one, conscious of this matter, did out of fear for himself or his Friend,
obstinately refuse to break silence, he required all his Subjects not to give
him harbor or sustenance, or to hold any manner of Commerce or Correspondence
with him. After this he proceeds to imprecate the Actor or Actors of this
Regicide, and extends the curse to his own House, if with his privity he was
protected there.

But this method failing to produce the desired effect, he consults Tiresias
the Prophet, by whom Oedipus himself is accused of killing his Father, and
committing Incest with his Mother; which Accusation being afterward confirmed
by the concurring report of the old Servant of Laius, by whom he was exposed in
his Infancy, and of the Domestic of Polybus, despairing in the horror of
these involuntary crimes, he tears out his own Eyes; and Jocasta, who equally
ignorant was involved in the guilt of Incest, hangs herself.

This Plot, (...).
however noble and beautiful to admiration, for the Structure and Contrivance
of it, is yet very deficient in the Moral, which has nothing great or
serviceable to Virtue in it. It may indeed serve to put us in mind of the
Lubricity of Fortune, and the Instability of human Greatness. And this use
Sophocles himself makes of it; for the Chorus closes the Tragedy with this
remark, by way of advice of the Audience, that they should not rashly measure
any man's Felicity by his present Fortune, but wait his extremest Moments, to
make a true estimate of his Happiness.

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...);
(...)
(...)
(...).
Mr Dryden, Moral of the English Oedipus the same.
who has borrowed this Story from Sophocles, has summed up his Moral in the two
concluding lines of his Play, in which not only the application seems to be the
same, but the Lines themselves are a contracted Paraphrase of Sophocles own
conclusion.

Let none, tho never so virtuous, great, and high,
Be judged entirely blessed before they dye.
This Moral, as it carries nothing in it but a lazy, Merely speculative.
unactive speculation, can be no great Incentive to Virtue; so on the other
hand, as it lays before us the Miseries and Calamitous Exit of a person of so
Heroic Virtue, it seems to carry matter of discouragement along with it; since
the most consummate Virtue meets with so disproportionate a return.

But with Reverence to the Ashes of Sophocles, and submission to the better
Judgment of Mr Dryden, Not very natural.
this does not seem to be the true and genuine Moral of this Fable. For
according to this Moral, the misfortune of Oedipus ought to have been the
result of a kind of negligent Oscitation in the Gods, and a loose
administration of Providence. Whereas on the contrary it appears, that all the
Actions of Oedipus, as well those that were Pious, Wise, and Brave, as those
that were Criminal, or rather Unfortunate, were the necessary and unavoidable
Consequences of a fixed decree of Fate, backed by several Oracles, carried on,
and brought about by variety of Miraculous or Providential Incidents. This
Tiresias seems to hint plainly to Oedipus, when he tells him.

(...).
Fortune herself, (or Fate) destroys
And Oedipus himself, finding by the relation of Jocasta, that the
circumstances of the death of Laius, agreed with those of the persons slain by
him on the Road, and beginning to be convinced of his own guilt, ushers in his
account of that action, with the fatal necessity that obliged him to leave his
own Country; and relates his Piety, as 'twere by way of alleviation for what
follows. He pleads, that being informed by the Oracle, that he should kill his
Father, and commit Incest with his Mother, he had quitted the expectation of a
Crown, and made himself a voluntary, and perpetual Exile from Corinth, to avoid
the Crimes he was threatened with.

(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
The English Oedipus is more plain, and expresses himself more clearly in
defense of his Innocence, even while he suspects himself to have been an Actor
in the Tragedy of Laius.

To you good Gods, I make my last appeal, Oed p. 39.

Or clear my Virtues, or my Crime reveal:
If wandering in the Maze of Fate I run,
And backward trod the paths I thought to shun,
Impute my Errors to your own decree;
My Hands are guilty, but my Heart is free.
Here Oedipus seems to suspect the truth of the matter, and alleges his own
Ignorance, and the decree of the Gods in his Justification; but the Ghost of
Laius clears the point of Fatality, and makes a better Apology for Oedipus,
than 'twas possible for him to do for himself.

But he who holds my Crown, Oed. p. 33.
Oh must I speak?
Was doomed to do what Nature most abhors;
The Gods, foresaw it, and forbad his being,
Before he yet was born. I broke their Laws.
And clothed with flesh, the pre-existing Soul.
Some kinder Power, too weak for destiny,
Took pity, and indu'd his new formed Mass
With Temperance, Justice, Prudence, Fortitude,
And every kingly Virtue; but in vain.
For Fate, that sent him hoodwinkt to the world,
Performed its work by his mistaken hands.
These instances considered, together with the Order, Contrivance and Nature of
the Fable, as well of the Greek, as the English Poem, will readily point out to
us a greater Moral, and more naturally arising from the subject, than that
which the two Poets have assigned. For it seems plainly to hold forth to us,
the irresistible Power of Fate, Proper Moral.
and the Vanity of human Wisdom, when opposed to the immutable decrees of
Providence, which converts to its own purposes, all our endeavors to defeat
'em, and makes our very Opposition subservient to its own designs.

Seneca, Moral of Seneca
who has taken this Fable from Sophocles, with very little alteration, has
however given this turn to the Application, in conformity to the Doctrine of
the Stoics, who were the Predestinarians of Antiquity, and held as Ours do, a
Fatality, that directed and controlled all human Actions, that all things came
to pass by pre-ordination and invincible necessity, and that there was no such
thing as a free Agent in the World.

Some Learned Men are of opinion, Seneca the Philosopher supposed the Author.
that this Tragedy was written by Seneca the Philosopher, and this change of
the Sophoclean Moral, in favor of his Principles, seems to be no despicable
Argument on their side. But whether they be in the right or wrong, I cannot but
wonder that Mr Dryden should overlook this alteration, or rather amendment to
Sophocles's Moral, it being the principal part of the Play, and the mark at
which all is levelled. His Morals neglected by the Authors of the English
Oedipus.
But perhaps Mr Dryden being justly prepossessed for the performance of
Sophocles in preference to Seneca's, his aim was not so much to enquire after
any improvements, as additions to Sophocles's design, and by that means let
slip this, which was not to his purpose, which was to fit it up to the English
Stage; for the use of which it needed not correction, so much as enlargement;
the simplicity of the Original Fable and the Chasms, which the omission of the
Chorus must necessarily make, requiring to be filled up, and supplied with an
Vnderplot and proper Episodes. And indeed he seems to confess as much, when he
says, that Seneca supplied 'em with no new hint but only a relation, Preface to
Oedip.
which he makes of his Tyresias raising the Ghost of Laius.

But having declared for the Moral of Seneca, as more natural than that of
Sophocles, considering the disproportion both of Reputation and Merit of these
two Authors in the Dramatick way, I must expect the censure of those Critics,
that judge by wholesale, or hearsay, that will admit of no error in any
Author, that themselves, or those, in whom they have an implicit Faith, admire;
nor allow any Graces to him, that has not the good fortune to be their
Favorite. I shall therefore produce Seneca's application at large in his own
words, as I have already done Sophocles's, and then back my opinion with an
Observation or two, drawn from the state of the Fable, as it lies in these
Authors, and leave 'em to the courtesy of the Reader.

The last Song of the Chorus in Seneca, which is what the Poet delivers by way
of Instruction, or Application to the Audience, runs thus.

Cho. Fatis agimur: Senec. Oedip. p. 107.
cedite fatis.
Non solicitae possunt curae
Mutare rati stamina fusi.
Quicquid patimur mortale genus,
Quicquid facimus, venit ex alto:
Servatque sua decreta colus
Lachesis, dura revoluta manu
Omnia certo tramite vadunt;
Primusque dies dedit extremum,
Non illa deo vertisse licet,
Quae nexa suis currunt causis.
It cuique ratus, prece non ulla
Mobilis, ordo. Multis ipsum
Timuisse nocet. Multi ad fatum
Venere suum, dum fata timent.
The sum of this is; Sum of Seneca's Moral.
That there is ( according to the Doctrine of the Stoics) an overruling
Providence, or Fate, that disposes and governs all things; That the Sources of
men's Fortunes, and the Springs of their Actions are placed out of their reach,
inaccessible to human Prudence, and inflexible to Entreaties; that they move in
a constant course, inviolable even to the Gods themselves; that causes and
their effects are inseparably linkt, the first day (of Life) determining the
last; that the Caution of many has been destructive to 'em, and that in
shunning their Fate, they have run upon it.

That this is the most natural Application, the very contrivance of the Fable
in all these three Plays, will sufficiently make out. Seneca, and the English
Authors have, in imitation of Sophocles, made the Parricide and Incest of
Oedipus the proper Act, and Deed of Fate, of which he was only the unhappy and
unwilling Instrument. Both his Father and himself had been forewarned, and had
used their utmost endeavors to evade the calamities that threatened 'em. But
those very efforts, however seemingly prudent, became the Snare in which they
were taken, and the means of verifying the Prediction of the Oracle. For the
exposing Oedipus in his Infancy, was the occasion of his Ignorance of his true
Parents, and that Ignorance of all his ensuing miseries. All these Authors give
us a high Idea of his Virtue and Prudence; and Seneca as well as the aforecited
Authors, makes him sacrifice his Expectations of a Crown, and become a
voluntary Exile out of an Abhorrence of those Crimes, which were predicted of
him.

Hic me Paternis expulit regnis Timor.
This fear has banished me my Fathers Realm.
And when he had been accused of the murder of Laius, Oedipus's Justification
of himself.
upon the Information of the Gods, he appeals to his own Conscience for his
Innocence.

Obiisse nostro Laium scelere autumant
Superi Inferique sed animus contra innocens.
Sibique melius quam Deis notus, negat.
The Gods accuse me; but my guiltless mind
The better Judge acquits me.
And in the next Scene upon the news of Polybus's death, he cries out, Genitor
sine ulla caede defunctus jacet,
Testor, licet jam tollere ad caelum pie
Puras nec ulla scelere metuentes manus.
Extinct my Father by a Bloudless death!
Now I may stretch to Heaven my guiltless hands
Fearless of any stain.


Thus they all agree to make him just and virtuous in his Intentions to an
Heroic Pitch, Harmony of the Greek, Roman, and English Authors.
yet they involve him in a Fatal Necessity even before his Birth, of acting
those things, to which in his Nature he had the greatest abhorrence, and make
his Piety and Aversion to Wickedness, the very means to entrap and entangle him
in that Guilt, which he so industriously fled from, and which occasioned the
Calamities, that afterward befell both himself and Family.

The structure and disposition of this Fable, Levity of Fortune not the
occasion of the Fall of Oedipus.
afford no occasion of complaint, or reflection upon the Levity of Fortune, or
the Instability of Human Affairs. For nothing is more evident, than the steady
and regular administration of Providence through the whole course of the
misfortunes of Oedipus, and his Family. Nothing befell them, which was not
predicted long before hand, and of which they had not a terrible apprehension,
as well as a certain Expectation. Opposition of Providence.
And when they bent their endeavors to defeat the decrees of Fate, such a
manifest Series of Providential Incidents attends their management, as suffices
not only to baffle their Cunning and Devices, but likewise to show the
Uncontrolableness and Superiority of that Power, which influenced their
Counsels, and served itself of their Presumption, as the immediate Instrument
to accomplish, and effect its Purposes, and at the same time to demonstrate the
Vanity of Humane opposition to the Will of Destiny.

Had Laius submitted himself to the Pleasure of Providence, Presumption of
Laius.
and not presumed to have thwarted the Divine Appointment, and triumphed over
his Destiny, his Son had not been ignorant of his true Parentage; and being a
person of Inclinations so extraordinary Virtuous, it is morally impossible he
should willingly have incurred the guilt of two Crimes of so monstrous a Size
as Parricide and Incest. Or had Oedipus submissively resigned himself to the
Conduct and Direction of Fate; whatever his Regret and Abhorrence of his
predicted Fortune had been, he had returned to Corinth, and his Patience, and
Resignation had avoided that Misery, which his mistaken Piety and Opposition
brought afterward upon his head.

This consideration may supply us with another Moral to this Fable, Another
Moral.
different from any (that I know of) hitherto raised upon it by any Poet,
either Ancient or Modern. It may instruct us, that the Will of Heaven is not to
be disputed by Mortals, how severe soever, even to Injustice, the Conditions of
it may seem to us; and that whoever sets up his own Wisdom in opposition to it,
shall in that Presumption meet both his Crime and his Punishment.

Nothing, if we consider it simply in itself, could be more heroically pious
than the resolution of Oedipus to abandon a Crown, Presumption of Oedipus.
his Parents and Country, rather than suffer those Pollutions with which he was
threatened. But if we consider the Impiety of advancing his own Judgment in his
conceit above that of his Gods, and thinking by his own Wisdom, to reverse the
immutable decrees of destiny, his Vanity deserved the heaviest chastisement.
The same may be said of his Father. It may be objected, that this irresistible
Predestination was not so universally received an Opinion among the Ancient
Heathens, but that many held the contrary; and that consequently it is but
supposing Oedipus one of the number, and my Moral falls to the ground. Oedipus
in Sophocles, and the rest of the Tragedians a Predestinarian.
I grant it does so, if he were, but the contrary appears from the Story
itself. For if Oedipus did not believe such a Fatality, why did he upon the
credit of an Oracle, which must signify no more to him than one of Partridge,
or Gadbury's Astrological Banters, leave his Friends, and his great
Expectations? But this supposes him a rank Fool, to abdicate for a tale of a
Tub, a Story that he did not believe* If he did believe, he ought not to escape
the Censure and Punishment of a rash presumptuous man, for suffering his Vanity
to triumph over his Faith, and daring upon an insolent opinion of his own
Ability to insult his Religion, and hope ^o prevail against, and defeat the
purpose of Fate.

Some French Critics, French Moral.
that seem sensible of the defect of the Moral in Sophocles, have endeavored
to supply that want, by starting an imaginary Guilty, and impute as a Crime to
Oedipus, his curiosity to know his Fate. I call it an imaginary Guilt, because
I think it is urged against him without Foundation. For certainly it could
never be a Sin in him, when his Parentage was become doubtful to him,
N^cromancy and all sorts of Divin^tion allowed by the Religion of the Heathens.
to have recourse to such means, as his Religion allowed, to clear up his
doubts, and take off the Reproach that was thrown upon him. Divination was so
far from being a Criminal Art among the Ancient Heathens, that it was practiced
with great Reputation in all its several kinds, and the Professors of any part
of it, were esteemed as Prophets, and held in great veneration. It could not
therefore be scandalous to consult 'em upon any occasion, much less the Oracle
of Apollo; to repair to which, was thought an act of high Devotion, and was the
constant Practice of all the Cities and States of Greece, upon all great and
sudden Emergencies. But their mistake lies in raising a Christian Moral upon a
Pagan bottom; to fill up, they have grafted a Doctrine many ages younger upon
the old Stock, and piec'd out a defect with an Absurdity.

I am apt to think upon consideration, Conjecture at the Reasons that Induced
the Authors of the English Oedipus to prefer the Greek Moral to the Latin.
that the Authors of the English Oedipus, in adhering to the simple old Greek
Moral, acted rather by Judgment and Choice, than Oversight. For the Moral of
Seneca, tho more naturally deducible from the Story, is yet less serviceable,
or (to speak more properly) more destructive to Practical Morality, as
preaching up the Doctrine of absolute and universal Predestination, by which
men are denied the liberty of so much as a thought, as free Agents, and are
supposed to be acted, and workt like Machines by an invisible, irresistible
Agent, which winds 'em up like Watches, and orders their several Movements.
This Doctrine, as it destroys all title to Merit from the best, so it takes off
all fear of Guilt from the most villainous actions, and must necessarily (if
heartily believed) discourage men from the severer and more troublesome Duties
of Religion, and Morality at least, and dispose them to resign themselves
loosely up to the government of their Appetites, and indulge their sensual
Inclinations; to gratify which could be no sin, to oppose 'em no Virtue, and
deserve neither blame nor thanks, according to this Principle.

Besides the unserviceableness of this Moral to the general end of Dramatick
Poetry, Seneca's Moral (...) proper for the English Stage.
it was upon that Score disabled for the particular service of the English
Stage, where it could not hope for a favorable Reception; and might therefore
be by these Authors judiciously rejected. For tho this Musty Rag of Heathen
Stoicism be still worn by a Party amongst us, that affect to distinguish
themselves by Opposition, and Contradiction, tho to their own Principles, and
that pretend to act contrary to the natural result of their Opinion, and
profess a severer Morality than their Neighbors; yet by the more Polite and
Civilized Part of the Nation, who are the chief Frequenters, and Support of the
Dramatick Performances, it has been long left off, as a Principle destructive
to Humanity, Virtue, and all good Manners; and consequently would have been
exploded upon the Stage, and hazarded the success of the whole Piece.

But whether this Moral were neglected by 'em out of design or oversight, Greek
and Roman Moral unservi^^^ to virtue.
is not much to our purpose. It Is evident, that neither the Greek nor Latin
Moral, have any tendency to the promotion of Virtue, and the Reformation of
Manners, but rather to the contrary. So that if Mr Collier has any thing of
this Nature to object against any of the present Stage Poets, they may defend,
or at least excuse such a slip by this Precedent, which being the Masterpiece
not only of Sophocles, but of all Antiquity; for that reason, I hope Mr Collier
(who has already declard, P. 28
that this Author has nothing but what is great and solemn throughout) will not
charge him with any ^ill design, or acting upon Malice prepense against Virtue.
But if he should, he has already taken his Trial before Aristotle, a more
competent and more upright Judge, and stands acquitted on Record, and must be
allowed to be rectus in Curia.

I have been the more particular in examining the general Moral of this Play,
Oedipus, why so mi^^^ly examined.
and have considered not only what has been made of it, but what might have
been drawn from it, that I might for the remainder be excusd from the trouble
of descending to minute circumstances, and for the future be allowed to sum up
what I have to say to any other Plays of Antiquity upon this general head of
the Fable, and so proceed to our Poets, with whom also I shall be as brief as
the matter will allow me.

The rest of Sophocles's Plays, being much less considerable for their Success
in the World, I shall dispatch the consideration of 'em in as few words as
possible. His Ajax Flagellifer stands first in order, and affords us no great
matter to reflect upon.

Ajax, Fable of of Ajax Flagelli^er.
disappointed and disgraced in his suit for the Arms of Achilles, resents
extremely the Injury and Indignity, and resolves to be revenged upon the whole
Grecian Army. In order thereto he makes a Sally from his Quarter by night, in
order to kill all the Principal Officers. Minerva, to divert the mischief
intended, infatuates him, and turns him loose upon some herds of Cattle,
amongst whom, mistaking 'em for Greeks, he makes most terrible havoc; and
returning to his Tent and Senses in the morning, he perceives his Error, through
the confusion, shame, and vexation of which, he grows desperate, falls upon his
Sword, and dies. This is the whole of the Fable. For the contest that follows
between Teucer, Menelaus, and Agamemnon, is an Episode detached from, and has
nothing to do with, and scarce any dependence upon the main Action.

Here we see a man of Impetuous, Ungovernable Passion, and of a Nice,
Capricious Honor, that conceives himself injured in the most sensible part,
his honor, and meditates a Revenge proportioned to the Fierceness of his
Temper, and the imagined Greatness of the Affront. Minerva interposes, and
turns his Rage, and Fury, first to his further disgrace, and then to his
destruction.

The Moral of this Play is not very obvious, Moral somewhat obscare.
and Sophocles himself does not hint it at or near the conclusion of the Play,
but leaves it to be picked out by the Audience, or Readers; which may be done
two ways. First, By considering the Quality of the Instrument of Engine of
Ajax's Ruin, which was a Goddess; and the manner of bringing it about, which
was by making him ridiculous through a Deceptio Visus, or an Illusion of the
Sight; and then the Moral will be, Quos Deus vult perdere, Moral.
prius dementat.
When the Gods resolve upon a man's ruin, they make away his Wits.


Or 2dly, We may consider the Character of the Person, a man of Undaunted
Boldness, and Turbulent Headstrong Passions, and the Nature of his Attempt,
which was to kill all the Grecian Chiefs; and then the Moral may be

-- Qui non moderabitur Irae 2d Moral.

Infectum volet esse Dolor quod suaserit. --
He that suffers himself to be precipitated into action by his Rage, will have
cause to rue the effects of it.

The first of these is the most genuine, and natural. For the misfortune of
Ajax seems not to arise so much from a repentance of his Undertaking, as from
indignation, and a bitter sense of the Scorn and Contempt he had drawn upon
himself by so ridiculous a miscarriage, and the trick put upon him by Minerva.
Moral of the Author not arising naturally from the Action.
This is all that naturally arises from the Action; and the Author, who seems
sensible of the barenness of his Plot, forages without his lines to subsist his
Moral. By this means he has provided himself of a noble Moral, which he
intimates in the close of the first Scene, betwixt Minerva and Ulysses, where
the Goddess, after having informed Ulysses how she had besotted Ajax, advises
him to take warning, and not to be so far transported upon any good Fortune, or
presume so far upon his own Prowess as to provoke the Gods by insolent
Language; who loved Modesty, and hated Arrogance. And about the middle of the
Play, a Messenger relates to the Chorus, what passed between Chalcas and Teucer
about the quarrel, and hatred of Minerva to Ajax, Which was for presuming upon
the sufficience of his own Strength and Courage, and refusing her Protection
and Assistance, which she offered him against the Trojans. But this is wholly
without the Action (which cannot properly suggest any such thing) and is
introduced by way of Narration, only to justify the proceeding of Minerva
against Ajax, and is no longer insisted on after the death of Ajax.

The other Moral, 2d Moral not very natural.
as it does not seem to flow so naturally from the Fable, as the first, so it
seems never to have been in Sophocles's thoughts. For the last disgrace, and
the Desperate Action that followed it, are the effect of a supernatural Agent,
( viz.) Minerva, and produced by a sudden Infatuation after a supernatural
manner; and therefore the Poet could have no just occasion to reflect upon the
natural ill consequences of Passion, how outrageous or ungovernable soever. For
this reason I shall pursue the consideration of it no farther.

The next in order is the Electra, Fable of the Electra.
in which there is scarce the shadow of a Plot, nor much more of a Moral.
Orestes (who after the murder of his Father Agamemnon, had by the care of his
Sister Electra escaped the fury of his Mother Clytemnestra and her Paramour
Aegisthus,) comes to Argos with his Tutor, whom he sends to deceive his Mother
with a Sham Story of his Death, and in the mean time discovers himself to his
Sister, with whom he consults about means to revenge the Death of his Father;
is introduced to his Mother as a stranger, kills her, and afterward Aegisthus.

Through the whole Play the Poet does not so much as squint toward a Moral, he
lets nothing fall by which the Audience may so much as guess what he drives at.
But by the contrivance of the Fable, wherein a Wife, that had embrued her hands
in her Husbands blood, after having abused his Bed, is, together with her
Adulterer and Fellow Murderer, after a succession of some years of prosperous
Villainy, overtaken by Vengeance from the hands of the Son, and slain; we may
conclude with Horace, Raro antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede paena claudo. Moral.

That Divine Vengeance seldom fails to overtake great Villainies.

This is all the Moral that I can find in this Play, nor do I perceive that
Sophocles himself took care by any overt Expression to intimate it to the
Audience.

The Antigone is something better contrived. Fable of the Antigone.
Antigone, contrary to Creon's order, buries her Brother Polynices. Creon
orders her to be shut up in a Cave alive, and commands, that no body should
relieve her. Haemon his Son pleads for her, and unable to prevail, goes to the
Cave, and finds that Antigone his Mistress had hanged herself. In the interim
Tyresias comes to Creon, and tells him, that he did amiss, and that he ought
with all expedition to repair his Fault. Creon continues obstinate, and reviles
the Prophet, who returns the complement, and threatens Creon with the
calamities that should come immediately upon his Family for his Impiety and
Obstinacy, and so leaves him. Creon after his departure relents, and makes
haste to save Antigone, but comes too late, and finds his Son raving for the
loss of his Mistress, and hardly escapes being killed by him. Haemon kills
himself, and his Mother upon the News herself.

Here Sophocles speaks out for himself, Moral.
and tell his Audience what Judgment they are to make of these surprising
Events, which had in a moment overturned a flourishing Family. The Chorus in
the Conclusion says (...)
(...)
(...). --


Wisdom is the first step to Happiness. The Gods must not be irreverently
treated. For the great Punishments, that attended the Profane liberties of
speech of Insolent Men, were Lessons of Humility at last.

The Oedipus Coloneus is a Play, Oedipus Coloneus.
that we are told was very much admired at Athens; and it is no great wonder.
For it was written on purpose to Flatter, and do honor to the Athenians, and
therefore could scarce fail of a good reception. This Policy of Sophocles will
furnish us with both a Plot, and a Moral, which 'twill otherwise be hard to
find in this Play. The Poet was now in his old age, and had long outlived Mr
Dryden's Fumbling Age of Poetry, and perhaps began to be sensible of some
decay, and therefore to support the weight of that reputation, which he had
acquired in the vigor of his Poetry, he pieces out the Lions Skin with the
Foxes Tail, and suspecting his own power to move their Passions as formerly,
makes use of their Vanity to scrue them up to the desired pitch of Admiration
and Satisfaction. This, if the Reader pleases, may serve instead of a Plot, and
the success of it may afford us this Moral; that no people is so strongly
fortified against Flattery, but that, if their Vanity be skilfully tickled, it
will be roused, and exert itself in favor of the Flatterer.

This is, indeed, beside the Action, and in probability was not the Moral,
which Sophocles intended for the Public; but it is plain, that 'twas the secret
Motive upon which he acted, and the genuine Moral of his Conduct.

The Fable of Oedipus Coloneus, Fable of Oedipus Coloneus
such as it is in this. Oedipus, under the Conduct of his Daughter Antigone,
arrives at a Grove near Athens consecrated to the Furies, whither he had been
directed by the Oracle to go. Creon, endeavors to fetch him away by force;
Theseus intervenes, and rescues him. Oedipus dies at last in the place
appointed by Fate and the Oracle.

This is a plain story, No Moral.
without either Turn or Consequence, upon which there is no possibility of
raising a Moral. Sophocles seems to have endeavored at something like one in
the Conclusion. For when the Daughters of Oedipus lamented immoderately his
death, the Chorus tells 'em, That they ought not to bewail any longer one that
was come to his desired end.

The Trachiniae seems almost as little contrived for Edification as the
foregoing. Trachiniae its Fable.
Dejanira being informed that Hercules grew amorous of his Captive Jole, to
retrieve and ensure his Affection to her, sends by Lichas an envenomed Shirt,
which she supposed to have been dipped in a Philtre. This unhappy Present being
upon his Back, immediately corroded the Flesh in such manner, that in a rage he
dashed out Lichas the Bearers Brains. Dejanira hearing the Fatal Effects of her
Error, kills herself. Hercules having charged his Son Hyllus to marry his
Concubine Jole, burns himself.

The reflection that Sophocles makes upon all this, Moral of Sophocles.
is, that, it is all Jupiter' s doing. Hyllus, in the close, boldly accuses the
Gods of (...), which signifies Folly or Injustice.
Injustice, for deserting their own Offspring. He adds, (...),
(...).
These things are a heavy Affliction to us,
But a scandal to them.


The Chorus seconds his Complaint, and says, that all their Calamities are of
Jupiter' s sending.

(...). This Fable and Application afford very little matter of Moral
Instruction; and the use that the Poet himself makes of it, is rather a
discouragement to Virtue, since neither the Heroic Qualities, nor Actions of
Hercules, nor the relation to Jupiter, could exempt himself or Family from such
lamentable disasters.

However, the misfortune of Dejanira may serve as a caution against Jealousy
and Adultery, which two failings in conjunction, occasioned her ruin. And
Hercules himself may be an instance of the dangerous consequenees of a
licentious ungoverned Flame, which at last was the destruction of him, who had
withstood, and baffled the utmost Malice and Invention of Juno.

The Fable of the Philoctetes is this. Philoctetes, the Fable.
Philoctetes having an incurable Ulcer in his Foot, from the bite of a Serpent
in his Voyage to Troy, was deserted, and left by the Greeks alone upon the
desert Shore of Lemnos. But his Presence being declared absolutely necessary to
the taking of Troy, Ulysses and Pyrrhus are sent to fetch him. He refuses
obstinately to go along with 'em, but Hercules appearing, and persuading him,
he complies.

This likewise is a barren Story, No Moral.
of which Sophocles himself has made no moral Use, and has scarce given
occasion for any one else to do it.

Philoctetes had been barbarously exposed by his Confederates the Greeks, for
which he was irreconcilably angry with 'em, especially Ulysses, who had been
the Executioner of their Resolutions in relation to him. He therefore refuses
obstinately to go with, or to those that had served him so basely; but Hercules
appearing, and telling him, that upon those terms, and no other, he must expect
his cure, and prosperity, the man had so much Wit in his Anger, as to prefer
Health and Fame before sullen Revenge, which must be his own as well as their
disappointment.

Mr Collier would pass the Speech of Hercules upon us for a Moral. Speech of
Hercules not pertinent to the Action. P. 93.
But by his leave, how remarkably Moral soever the Conclusion of this Play may
be, the morality of it no way depends upon the Action foregoing. Hercules
prevails with Philoctetes to go with Ulysses, and Pyrrhus promises him Health,
Honor, and Riches, and recommends the care of Religion to him. (...). Which,
says he, Jupiter regards above all things.

This was indeed good advice, and matter of Instruction to the Audience, as
well as Philoctetes; but not arising any way from the main Action, it might as
properly have been said at any other time, and upon any other occasion, as
this; and if it must serve for a Moral, might as justly have been the Moral of
any other Play.

Thus I have run through Sophocles, Ibid.
whose Plays ( by Mr Collier' s own confession) are formed upon Models of
Virtue, join Innocence with Pleasure, and design the Improvement of the
Audience.

Upon this account, and the great Reputation of this Author, I have been more
particular with him upon this head, than I design to be with any of the rest of
the Ancient Tragedians. I have set before the Reader the several Models of all
his remaining Plays, and have inquired into the Disposition of the Fable in
relation to the service of Morality, that upon collation we may with more
certainty measure the comparative Morality of his and the Modern Plays on this
Article.

Euripides, Art. Poet. Cap. xiii.
who came nearest him both in Time and Reputation, is yet more defective in
this point. Aristotle has taxed him with want of Conduct in the Economy of his
Fable; but this Censure being levelled rather at the want of Artifice, than of
Moral in the Plays of Euripides, I shall make no further use of it here. The
character of this Author's works would make us naturally expect, that he should
be more careful of this Article, than either Aeschylus, or Sophocles, who aimed
more at the Pathetick. The Plays of Euripides betray all along an affected
Ostentation of Learning, Character of the Plays of Euripides in general.
and as great an Ambition to be thought a Philosopher, as a Poet. For this
reason he abounds more in Points, and Sentences of Morality, florid Harangues,
and subtle Speculations, than Sophocles; but he does not touch the Passions, or
raise the Concern of an Audience like him. And therefore whatever we may think
of his Dialogues considered separately, and independent of one another, his
Plays in the aggregate are far inferior to those of Sophocles.

Euripides has yet remaining nineteen Tragedies, to examine all which, as we
have done those of Sophocles, would be an impertinent, as well as a tedious
labor, both to the Reader and my self. I shall therefore content my self to
instance in a few of 'em, and refer those that have the Curiosity and Patience,
to proceed further to the Author himself.

The Orestes challenges the first place upon the score of its Reputation, and
the great Success it had on the revival of it, five hundred years after the
death of the Author.

This play commences, Fable of the Orestes
where the Electra of Sophocles and his own conclude. Orestes, by the help of
his Sister Electra, having slain his Mother, is very much troubled in mind, and
haunted by Furies, and desponds upon the account of his Guilt. Tyndarus, his
Mother's Father, endeavors to revenge her death, and excites the People
against him, who vote him to be stoned to death with his Sister. Menelaus, with
his Wife Helena, and Daughter Hermione, arrives in the mean time and offers his
assistance to his Nephew in this exigence, but is over-awed by Tyndarus, and
deserts his Party. Pylades comes opportunely, and persuades Orestes to appear,
and make his defense in person, which he does, but without success, yet upon
his promise that his Sister and himself shall be their own Executioners, he is
let go by the Mob upon Parole. Being returned to his Sister, they consult about
means of Safety. Electra advises him and Pylades to seize upon Helen and
Hermione, to kill Helen, and to Article with Menelaus for their own safety,
with a Sword at Hermione's Throat; and if her Father would not comply with
their demands, first to dispatch her, then themselves. This Project is put in
execution, and the Ladies are surpised, Apollo rescues Helen, and appearing,
reconciles Menelaus and Orestes, and makes a match betwixt him and Hermione,
and betwixt Pylades and Electra, and promising happiness to 'em all, tells 'em,
that Helen is made a Goddess, and so concludes the Play.

In this Play most of the Characters are wicked, Characters all vicious.
Orestes and Electra are Parricides; Tyndarus is (in his heart at least) the
Murderer of his Grandchildren; Menelaus, the Betrayer of his Nephew, and
Niece, whom he ought to have protected; Helen, an infamous Woman, and the
accidental cause at least of the Miseries of a great part of Asia and Europe,
yet clear of any intentional Guilt in this case; Pylades is engaged with his
Friend in an unjust attempt to murder Helen and her Daughter; Hermione, who is
next to a Mute in the Play, is the only unexceptionable Character.

This Play begins well, Not of a piece all through.
the Agonies of a guilty Conscience, the Despair, and the Horrors of Orestes
promise a good Moral: But the hopes of that soon vanish; for the first word of
comfort from Menelaus dispels all his Anxiety for his crime, and converts it to
a solicitude for his Safety. In order to this, he enters upon a piece of
Villainy, more execrable than that for which he was then prosecuted, because
'twas without provocation: A Feint of that kind had been an allowable Stratagem
to have brought Menelaus to Articles; but to project it in earnest was an
unparalleled piece of Barbarity. But what after all is more surprising and
unnatural is, that the Catastrophe is happy, and the Parricides rewarded, and
all this seems to be the result of Electra's latter contrivance, which however
wicked was successful and prosperous.

The Moral (if I may call it so) of this Story is properly this, Moral.
that there is no dabbling in Villainy, but that those that are once entered,
must wade through, if they will be safe, and justify one Crime by another. But
that which makes the winding up of this Play more notorious, is, that the Gods
are made the Arbiters of all; Apollo appears in person, and justifies Orestes,
and promises him his protection, and ensures the happiness of Pylades and
Electra, who had been the sole Incendiary and Contriver of all this Mischief;
which is adding Impiety to the want of Poetic Justice, and making Providence
accessory to Parricide, and the Gods Abbetors of Violence and Injustice, not to
take notice of the Deifying of Helena, who, tho Jove's Daughter, is a Woman of
a very infamous Character all through the Play.

I suppose the Moral of this Play will hardly rise in Judgment against the
Moderns. Nor has the Electra of of the same Author any more reason, it being
liable to the same exceptions with the former, only in this the Murder is
perpetrated, in that but designed; in short, this Play is the ground work of
the former, and the action of this gives the reason, and occasion of all that
happens in the other. Here likewise the Gods are impertinently brought in to
finish that, which would of it self have closed very naturally without 'em. For
after the Death of Aegisthus and Clytemnestra there was nothing more to be
done. But this Poet, who is very fond of Machines, tho^ unnecessary, after
all is over brings down Castor and Pollux to condemn the Fact, acquit the
Murderers of their Sister, and transfer the Guilt to Apollo, whom they accuse
of (...).
uttering a foolish Oracle.

However the Fable of this Play being the same with that of the Electra of
Sophocles, we may do it the same Grace, and allow it the benefit of any Moral
that may be raised out of it, tho not without some violence, as this Author has
managed it. What that is I have already observed in the foregoing Remarks upon
the Electra of Sophocles.

The Medea, Media, etc.
Hippolytus, Ion, Hercules distracted, and several other are likewise built
upon various Models. In these, as in most of Euripides's Plays, the Gods are
always at one end or the other of the business, they are either the Promoters of
the Crime, or the Protectors of the Criminals. All is acted by Machine, the
Action is frequently forced, and the Catastrophe generally unnatural. Yet
notwithstanding this extraordinary license, which this Poet assumes in almost
all his Plays, but very few of 'em are so modeled as to be serviceable to
Virtue upon that Score.

Medea, after a course of Murders, having slain her own Brother, and Children
with her own hands, and Pelias, Creon, and Creusa by her charms, is taken
particular care of by Phoebus, and provided of a flying Chariot to make her
escape from Justice in.

Hippolitus has the Character of a just, Fable of the Hippolitus.
and a Pious Person, and his conduct all through the Play, both in relation to his
Mother in Law Phaedra, and his Father, by whose curse he is devoted, and
brought to ruin, justifies this Character, and he in the Agonies of Death
expresses a greater concern for, and a more sensible impression of his Fathers
misfortunes and afflictions, than his own. A Disposition so extraordinarily
pious, one would think, should, if it might not exempt him from those disasters
that attend the Infirmity of humane Nature, and the malignity of his Fellow
Mortals, at least protect him from any supernatural calamities, and ensure the
favor of Heaven to him. But he was a Votary to Diana, and his vow of Chastity
gave such offense to Venus, who thought herself slighted, that she resolves his
ruin, and declares her resolution, and the methods she intends to take to
effect it, in the Prologue which she speaks. And she lays her Plot so, that by
means of an antecedent Promise to Theseus she engages Neptune in the
Destruction of an innocent Young Man, whose only crime is an obstinate,
inviolate Chastity; and Phaedra, who is her instrument, is involved in the
guilt of a heinous, but involuntary Crime. The consideration of the several
Fables of these Plays could furnish the Audience with no venerable Ideas of
their Gods, who could be the Promoters, or Protectors of such horrid Actions;
nor could any encouragement to Justice and Morality be drawn from 'em, which
afforded such examples of Partiality, and prejudice among their Deities, that
the blackest Crimes could not forfeit their favor, nor the most exemplary
Virtue ensure it.

The Ion is reckoned by the Learned Monsieur Dacier among that kind of
Tragedies, Ion a moral Tragedy.
which Aristotle calls Moral, and which this judicious Commentator defines
thus; Remarques surle xix Chapitre de la poetique d' Aristote.
The Moral Tragedy is a sort of Tragedy contrived purely for the formation of
Men's manners, whose Catastrophe is always happy. And in the Page immediately
foregoing, The Moral Tragedy (says he) treats neither of Death, Torments, nor
Wounds, but of the happiness of some Persons recommendable for their Virtue.
Here therefore one might reasonably expect a perfect Model of Virtue, and a
exact Scheme of Manners; for which reason it may seem justly to challenge our
consideration.

Ion, Fable of Ion precedent to the Action.
a Slip of Creusa by Apollo, is privately born, and exposed by his Mother, is
taken up by Mercury and conveyed to Delphi, where he is found by the Priestess,
and brought up in the Temple of his Father, of which he is at length made the
Treasurer, or Keeper of the rich Movables, in which Office he discharges his
trust faithfully. Thus far the Prologue spoken by Mercury informs the Audience
of the History of Ion before the Play commences.

Creusa his Mother, Fable commencing with the Action.
having no Issue by her Husband Xuthus, repairs with him to the Oracle at
Delphi, to petition for an Heir. The Husband puts up his request according to
form, and is answered, that the first man he should meet in his return from the
Altar, was his Son; this happens to be Ion, who is upon the faith of the Oracle
received by him as his Son. Ion, who being a Foundling, was ignorant of his
Parentage, in return joyfully acknowledges him to be his Father, and is proved
of so honorable an Extraction. This enrages Creusa, who not suspecting the
relation of Ion to herself, supposes him to be some byblow of her Husbands, as
Xuthus himself does, but begotten before his Marriage to Creusa. In this rage
she resolves and attempts to poison Ion, which is discovered, and Ion in
revenge pursues her life. She takes refuge at the Altar, from whence while Ion
is endeavoring to force him, the Prophetess interposes, and produces the
Swathing Bands, and other things in which Ion was wrapped when found. These
Creusa knows, and discovers him to be her own Son by Apollo; Minerva appears,
and confirms her Story, and advises 'em both to conceal this circumstance from
Xuthus, and concludes with a sort of Epilogue, predicting the happiness of Ion,
Main Condition of Moral Tragedy neglected in this.
and other Children, which Creusa was to have by her Husband.

If this was designed for a Moral Tragedy, as Monsieur Dacier thinks, and as
the Contrivance of the Fable, as well as the Catastrophe seems to argue, it
must be confessed that Euripides has forgot the main circumstance. For the good
Fortune of those Persons, whom he makes happy in the Conclusion is not owing to
their Virtue or Prudence, but to the favor of Phoebus, who had too great a
Personal Interest in 'em, to suffer 'em to miscarry.

Creusa's Character is vicious all along, Creasa's a wicked Character.
she was with Child by Apollo, and privately delivered, and to conceal her
Shame, she exposes the Infant as a Prey to the Wild Beasts, as she herself
confesses to her old Servant, and Confident, the Contriver and Instrument of
her intended Villainy afterward.

(...).
He died a Prey to the Wild Beasts.
Here she confesses herself guilty of a Crime, that is capital in our Law, and
is so far from repenting, that she engages immediately in the design of another
of a Dye something deeper, because Treachery and Violence enter the
composition; in this she is active in the Murder, in the former she was only
Passive. This Character can hold forth nothing of Instruction, except it teach
Women, that have given up their Honors, to secure their Reputations by
murdering their Bastards; and furious, jealous Wives to destroy their Husbands
Children and Heirs by other Women.

The Character of Ion is indeed not so criminal; Ion's Character indifferent.
his highest commendation is, that he had not imbezzled the Stores of Apollo
committed to his keeping. Now, tho Faithfulness be very commendable in a
Servant, yet his was never exercised in so superlative a way, or endured any
such severe trial, as might upon that score entitle him to the great Fortune
and Preferment which befell him afterward. His highest Merit was bare Honesty,
enough to have procured him a Certificate now adays upon change of Service; not
to challenge any considerable Reward. He laid claim to no active virtues, his
Innocence was his strongest Plea, and that too seems to be a little sullied at
last by his too eager Prosecution of Revenge upon Creusa. A generous Heathen
(without reaching the Pitch of Christian Morality) would have forgiven, or
slighted the Feeble Malice of a Woman, especially at that Critical Juncture,
when he ought to have shown himself worthy of his sudden exaltation by some
extraordinary act of Generosity. But his collusion at last with his Mother to
cheat Xuthus is a piece of Condescension so base, as forfeits all pretense to
common merit or honesty. For he that is content to hold his good Forrune by
Trick and Imposture, don't deserve it.

Thus we see in this Moral Play, Of no Service to Morality.
of the two fortunate Persons, one is wicked, and ought not to be drawn into
Precedent, much less to be proposed for an Example; to others Virtue is of so
dwarfish a size, and so weakly a Constitution, that it is not very likely to
propagate, and by no means a proper Standard to measure full grown Worth by.
And therefore this Play (tho we should, with Monsieur Dacier, allow it to be of
the Moral kind) is like to do no great service to Morality by the Design and
Management of its Fable.

Because I have mentioned the Hercules Furens, Hercules Furens compared with
the Trachiniae of Sophocles.
I will not pass it absolutely over in Silence, tho it affords no great matter
of reflection; having had occasion to take notice of the Character and
Sufferings of Hercules in the Trachiniae of Sophocles. There is indeed this
considerable difference to the disadvantage of this Play, in regard to the
Moral, Art, and Beauty of it, that here the misfortunes of Hercules are wrought
altogether by Machine: Juno, Iris, and Lyssa or Madness (which is here supposed
a Demon) are all, and only concerned in the contrivance; whereas in Sophocles
things are naturally brought about, and made the result of Jealousy and
Credulity. What therefore in that is but obliquely charged upon the Gods, is
here directly laid upon 'em. So that, what from the last Speech of Hyllus, and
the Chorus is there urged against the Moral of that Play, holds more strongly
against this. Besides the atrocity of the Fact, which extending here to the
Lives of his Wife and Children, aggravates the guilt of Juno, who could not
limit her malice to his Person, without comprehending those Innocents, who by
no crime of their own could have incurred her displeasure.

These few instances may suffice to give us a true estimate of the care of
Euripides, in the formation of his Fables in general, in relation to the Grand
or General Moral.

Aeschylus should follow, Character of Aeschylus.
who, tho first in order of time, comes naturally last into consideration, as
affording very little upon this Topic. This Author seems scarce to have
designed any Moral to his Fables, or at least to have regarded it very little.
His aim was wholly at the Pathetick, and he deals almost altogether in Objects
of Terror; accordingly his Flights are frequently lofty, but generally
irregular, and his Verse rumbles, and thunders almost perpetually, but it
usually spends itself, like a Wind-Gun, in Noise and Blast only. He sets out
gloriously, launches boldly, blown up with a Tympany of Windy Hyperboles, and
Buckram Metaphors; but he carries more Sail than Ballast, and his course is
accordingly uneven; he is sometimes in the Clouds, and sometimes upon the
Sands. In short, Aeschylus's sole Care and Ambition seems to have been (as Mr
Bays has it) to elevate and surprise; in the eager pursuit of which, he has
missed many things, which are the lasting graces of his more temperate
Successors. The Ground work of his Plays are plain simple Stories, without
either Plot or Moral, told only in the most pompous formidable manner the Poet
could invent, to strike a Pannick Terror into the Audience; and consequently
they afford no great matter of reflection here. I shall therefore dismiss this
Poet without any formal examination to this Article, and only present the
Reader with one Instance of his neglect of Moral, which stares me in the Face
in the very first Page of his Prometheus. Edit. Hen. Steph.


Power and Force, two Poetical Persons, are sent by Jupiter to assist Vulcan in
the chaining Prometheus to a Rock. His Prometheus immoral.
They begin the Prologue, and declare his crime, which was communicating the
Celestial Fire to Mortals; and the reason of his Punishment, which was that he
might learn to acquiesce in the administration of Jove, and shake off his
tenderness for Mankind.

(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
This reason is pretty singular and extravagant, Jupiter abused by the Poet
under the Persons of Power and Force.
that a Brother Immortal should be treated so inhumanely by Jupiter, and his
Fellow Gods, only for his Philanthropy, or Love to Mankind; and must needs have
a very serviceable effect upon Mortals. For no doubt but Jupiter's Altars must
smoke very plentifully, when Men were informed, that so well he stood affected
toward 'em, that 'twas Capital in any of his Under-Gods to bear 'em any good
will. This must needs impress upon 'em a great veneration for his Person, and
zeal for his Service; their Gratitude must needs work over abundantly for so
signal a Grace.

That this was all Prometheus's offense Vulcan assures us in his reply. The
abuse back^ (...) Vulcan.
seems to have some Bowels of Commiseration for this poor Devil of a God, and
in a compas^sionate sort of Remonstrance tells him, that this comes of his
fondness of Mankind, and thereby provoking Jupiter, who was fierce, and
implacable, as all new Governors are.

(...).
(...).
(...),
This account of Jupiter seems to countenance a harsher Translation, than I
have given of the foregoing words (...), and to expound 'em in the scandalous
sense of Tyranny, rather than of a just and equal administration of Affairs.

After this Prologue I suppose no good Moral will be expected from this Fable;
the rest of Aeschylus's Fables are managed after a manner little more
serviceable, for which reason I shall not tire the Reader with the examination
of 'em.

After the decease of this Triumvirate of Poets, Deficiency of the Greek
Tragedy.
the Tragedy of Athens disappears. Not but they had many Tragedians after 'em,
but neither did they rise to a height of Reputation equal to these, nor did
their works very long survive 'em that I know of. Here therefore we lose the
view of the Ancient Tragedy, for above five hundred years together.

The next sight we have of it is at Rome, Tragedy at Rome.
where we find in all but ten Tragedies, which are all collected under the name
of Seneca's, tho belonging (as many Learned men think) to several Authors. Of
these nine are of Greek Extraction, Bo rowed from the Greeks.
all but one taken from Plays yet remaining to us. The Medea, Hippolytus,
Troas, and Hercules Furens are taken from Plays all bearing the same names in
Euripides, except the Troas, which, tho it bears the same name, yet is not upon
the same argument with the Troades of Euripides, but is taken from the Hecuba,
another Play of the same Poet. The Oedipus, and Hercules Oetaeus, are descended
immediately from the Oedipus Tyrannus, and Trachiniae of Sophocles. And it is
very probable the Thyestes is owing to the same Author, tho the Greek Original
be now lost. For it is not only certain that Sophocles wrote three Plays which
bore that name, but the Model seems to bear more resemblance to the manner of
Sophocles, than either of the other Tragedians. The Agamemnon plainly belongs
to Aeschylus, as does likewise the Thebais, in right of his (...), tho the
Thebais of Seneca being imperfect, it does not so plainly appear whether he
copied it immediately from thence, or at second hand from the Phaenissae of
Euripides. The Octavia only is of Roman Original, its Author is uncertain. For
it is justly suspected to belong to neither of the Seneca's.

This Author, (for Mr Collier seems to take all these Plays to be the work of
one man) is censured and stands in some measure condemned, by Mr Collier, and
therefore I should wave any other scrutiny into his conduct, if I did not find
him in some measure justified, and in a manner absolved upon the comparison
with the Moderns.

But, Seneca the Philosopher supposed the Author of 'em.
if we believe with those Prodigies of Letters, Lipsius, Joseph Scaliger, and
Heinsius, and diverse others very eminent for their Learning, that we are
beholding to the famous Seneca the Philosopher, for three at least of these
Plays, the Medea, Hippolytus, and Troas, to which Farnaby adds the Oedipus, we
shall be obliged to pay more deference or respect to 'em, and not to pass a
rash and unmannerly censure upon any of the remains of so illustrious an Author.

But Seneca is not at present in Mr Collier's favor, Seneca udjustly aspersed
by Mr Collier. P. 94.
he is declared an injudicious, licentious Poet, upon whose liberties the
Modern Poets proceed; and therefore he is not to be received into Grace, till
he has had the Penning of a Recantation for him If Mr Collier did believe that
Seneca the Philosopher was the Author of any of those Plays, he ought upon the
merit of his other works, (by which he may at least pretend to vie with Mr
Collier both zeal and service in the cause of Virtue) to have treated so
excellent a Person with more respect and honor, than to have ranked him with,
and made him the Ringleader of those, whom he reckons Atheists and Buffoons. If
he did not, he could in Justice have done no less than set him clear of the
Imputation, which by so rude and indiscreet a charge he has brought him under.
For he could not but know, that the learned Persons beforementioned, whose
Authority is of great weight amongst Men of Letters, had delivered their
Opinions, that he was the Author of some of those Plays, especially the
Judicious Heinsius, whom he cites, and I should suppose he is well acquainted
with, unless he does (which I suspect) like some Persons, that boast of their
familiarity with great men, whom they have not the honor to know.

Had he known their Opinions in this matter, it had but been a becoming piece
of Modesty to have laid his reasons for his dissent from 'em before his Reader;
and not haughtily to have slighted their Authorities as not worth his notice.
Or at least he ought not in good manners to have treated the Memory of that
Philosopher at so scoundrel a rate. I suppose he will hardly justify this
Indignity from the misrepresentations that have been given of him. For, not to
enter improperly into a dispute about the validity of those Reports here,
whatever his private infirmities might be, we are sure from his works, that he
bent his Studies and Endeavors to the service of Morality as heartily and
successfully, as some Christians who with greater helps and stronger
invitations, seem to value their Services much higher, with less reason.

However Seneca, Seneca careless of Poetic Justice.
tho he cannot without extreme injury be accused of Writing for the
encouragement of Debauchery, has been very careless of Poetic Justice in
winding up his Fables. Phaedra in the Hippolytus, and Lycus in the Hercules
Furens are only the Malefactors that are brought to condign Punishment. For, as
for Oedipus, we have had occasion already to clear him from the Aspersion of
Guilt, tho his Misfortunes are the most notorious, and his Calamities the most
deplorable of any upon the Ancient Stage. Ajax and Oileus.
Ajax Oileus, whom Mr. Collier produces as the only instance of this kind, An
improper instance of it.
is indeed none. For he is no Person of the Drama, nor has his Fate any
influence upon the success of the Action either way. He is only mentioned by
Eurybates, in the relation which he makes of the Voyage of the Greeks from
Troy, to increase the horror of that Storm, of which he was then giving a
description; which is no more to the business of the Play, than 'twou'd have
been, if Mr Congreve in his Mourning Bride should have taken occasion from the
Wreck of his Hero on the same Seas, to have brought in the Storm that cast away
the Turkey Fleet, and described the manner of Sir Francis Wheeler's Wreck.

But if Seneca has been remiss upon this Article he sins at least by Precedent,
Seneca limited by Precedent.
and may plead in his Justification, that he leaves the Story generally no
worse than he found it. He built, as we have already observed, upon other men's
bottoms, and could not make any great alterations in the Foundations they had
laid, without endangering the superstructure. Aristotle observes, in favor of
the Poets of, or near his time, that taking the Fables of their Plays from
Stories vulgarly known either from History, or the works of some precedent
Poet, they had not the liberty of receding so far from the received Tradition
in the Contrivance, and disposition of their Fables, as was frequently required
to the forming a just and truly artificial Model. This may be urged with more
justice in defense of Seneca, who, taking his. Models from Authors of great
reputation, would have been thought guilty of a high piece of Presumption, if
he had varied too much from Originals so well known and received. Besides, had
he changed the Fortune of his Principal Persons he had effaced the Images of
'em, which had been impressed upon the Audience, who would not have owned, or
acknowledged 'em for the persons they pretended to represent, who were best, or
perhaps only by those marks to be distinguished.

However, Hippolytus of Seneca examined.
it must be granted, that in his Hippolytus, wherein he has ventured to deviate
a little from the Original, he has done it very judiciously, and very much to
the advantage of the Moral; the application of which he has thereby rendered
not only more easy and natural, but it self likewise more useful, and
instructive. In Euripides the Gods do all. His Persons move like Puppets by
wires; Venus contrives and acts all. Phedra's a mere Machine, a passive
Vehicle, that serves purely for the more cleanly conveyance of the Goddesses
malice. The unraveling likewise is performed by Machine, Pallas descends to
clear the Innocence of Hippolytus, and accuses Venus. In short, the Action is
all forced and unnatural, and of consequence, the Moral, if any, must be
strained.

Seneca has artfully avoided these inconveniences, More artificial than the
Hippolytus of Euripides.
by making the incestuous Love of Phaedra spring from her own Infirmity, and
the death of Hippolytus, the effect of her Revenge of his Scornfully rejecting
her Passion, and her fear of his making a discovery of her Infamy to his
Father. Her punishment by this means becomes just, which was not so in the
Greek, and her Rage, Despair, Confession and Death, are the natural result of
her Guilt and Folly. The Moral.
From the unhappy Catastrophe of this Lady,, matter of fair Instruction may be
drawn to check such licentious Flames in their first Birth, which if indulged
draw after 'em such fatal consequences. And from the rash misplaced imprecation
of Theseus, Parents may be cautioned against too easy a credulity in such
extraordinary cases, and to guard against such violences of Passion, as may
extort Curses from 'em, that may return upon their own Heads, and involve
themselves in the conclusion.

This Plot, as it stands in Seneca, is one of the neatest of Antiquity, and had
the Author taken care to disencourage himself as happily from Neptune, as he
has from Venus and Minerva, I see nothing inartificial in the disposition of
it. But Neptune performing his part extra Scenam, this fault is the more
pardonable, especially since it is originally the oversight of Euripides.

The rest of this Author's Plays varying little or nothing in the Fable from
the Greek Originals, The rest chose Copies from the Greek.
(those I mean, that we know, for the Thyestes of Sophocles is lost) whatever
the faults of 'em may be in that respect, the Latin Author is not so properly
accountable for 'em. The Octavia, Octavia illcontriv'd and insipid.
being the only Tragedy of Roman Stock that remains to us, seems to challenge
upon that Score some regard, whosoever was the Author of it. But being rather a
relation by way of Dialogue between the several Parties concerned of an unjust
Tyrannick Action, in which there is neither Plot, Turn, Moral, nor Consequence,
it would be time lost to bestow an Examination upon it here.

Having thus run through the Tragedies of Antiquity, perhaps something more
minutely, than may be thought requisite upon this Article, I shall not make
many reflections upon the whole, but leave 'em to the further consideration of
the Reader, after a Remark or two, concerning the Practice of the Ancients in
general, in this respect.

It is observable, General Reflections on the Ancient Tragedy.
that the Ancients in the disposition of their Fables, seem to have had such
very little regard to the Moral of 'em, they contented themselves with
delivering their Instructions in wise sayings, scattered here and there up and
down the Dialogue, or at the close of all; and only sought in their Fables
matter and occasion of moving the Passions, which was generally done by way of
Narration; to which end they furnished out their Dialogue with all the Force,
Pomp, and Terror of Expression they could, in which how well they have
succceded, is not to the present purpose to take notice.

Aristotle had, Aristotle's division of Tragedy.
no doubt, this practice of theirs in view, when he divided Tragedy into Moral
and Pathetick. By this Division of Tragedy ( ratione Subjecti) Aristotle
plainly indicates, not only that the Subjects of the Ancient Tragedy were not
all Moral, but likewise that it was not necessary, that they should be so. He
instances in the Phthiotides, and Peleus, two Tragedies that are lost, as
examples of the Moral kind; and besides this mention of 'em, I do not remember
any notice that he has taken of this sort of Tragedy. For all his Rules seem to
be calculated for the service of the Pathetick and Implex kinds.

From this silence of Aristotle, Moral Plays not much encouraged at Athens.
and the scarcity of 'em amongst the remains of the Greek Tragedy, we may
reasonably collect, that this sort of Tragedy was not much in use amongst the
Ancients themselves. For of all the Pieces of Antiquity the Alcestis of
Euripides alone in my opinion deserves the name of a Moral Tragedy. In this
Play both Admetus, and his Wife Alcestis are Persons of strict Probity, and
great Piety. Alcestis out of a singular Piety, offers her self to Death a
voluntary Sacrifice, in lieu of her Husband. In the depth of Admetus's grief
while his Wife was yet in the House, and the rites of Funeral unperform'd,
comes Hercules, who observing the Family to be in Mourning, desires to be
excused from troubling his House at so unseasonable a time. Admetus, unwilling
to turn away such a Guest, dissembles the real cause of his Grief, and receives
him nobly, but Hercules enquiring, and being informed of the Truth of Admetus's
loss, combats Death, recovers Alcestis, and restores her to her Husband.

The Fable of this Play is truly Moral. Alcestis of Euripides a Moral Tragedy.
Alcestis first by her Piety redeems her Husband from Death; and Admetus
afterward by his Generosity and Hospitality, by means of Hercules, rescues her
from the Grave. Thus they reciprocally owe their lives to each others Virtue.
But if this Play be remarkably Moral, it is on the other hand monstrously
unnatural, and consequently on that account is incapable of affording any
extraordinary Pleasure, or Improvement. This probably might be the reason, why
this sort of Tragedy was so little in request.

From the whole it appears, Ancients careless of the General Moral of the Plays.
that the Ancients were not so careful of their Models, as Mr Collier pretends;
but were on the contrary extremely negligent of the Moral in the Fables of
their Tragedies. So that if one or two do afford a tolerable one, we may
conclude by the slight notice they take of it, that they did not see it, or but
casually found it there, rather than industriously sought it; and that we are
more beholding to their luck, than Judgment or good Intentions for 'em. I grant
this way of arguing not to be demonstrative, but it is not therefore
unconclusive. For since the sense of the Ancients, is not any where (that I
know of) delivered in express terms concerning this matter, I take their
Practice, backed by the Authority of Aristotle, to be a sufficient warrant for
any conclusions, that shall be drawn naturally from 'em. Consequence of Mr
Collier's loose way of Writing.


But if I would indulge my self in the Liberties of Mr. Collier, and charge the
Antiens at that loose rate, that he does the English Dramatick Poets, I might
not only tax 'em with negligence of their Morals, but with maliciously
discouraging Virtue, and industriously promoting Villainy, and Impiety. Nor
would the Poets suffer alone, all the great Men of Antiquity, that have
commended their works, must share both the Guilt, and the Sentence; and
Aristotle above the rest would be even capitally criminal, his Art of Poetry is
an inexhaustible Spring of Corruption, an everlasting Source of Infection, that
has diffused its Venom over the whole World, and poisoned Mankind almost
universally with Villainy, Impiety, Lewdness, and Debauchery, of all kinds, for
above sixteen hundred years together. This would be high Treason among the
Admirers of the Ancients, yet it is nothing to one of Mr Collier's declamatory
Rants, when he is in one of his Rhetorical Fits, and about to dress up a
Character for Aristophanes, or any of the English Poets. After this
disingenuous rate 'twere easy to turn the Satyr upon Ages long since past, and
railly in his own words, those whom he himself recommends to the Imitation of
our present Writers. An instance of this kind may not be amiss to show how easy
it is to misrepresent the fairest intentions, and to improve Peccadillo's into
Crimes of the blackest Dye, to make a hellish Plot of an oversight, and plunge
Men over head and ears in Brimstone, for Humane infirmities.

It Is a Jest, Turned upon the Ancients.
that the Ancients would make us believe, that their design was Virtue and
Reformation. In good time! They are likely to combat Vice with Success, P. 286.
who destroy the Principles of Good and Evil. Would Euripides persuade us that
his aim is Virtuous, and his design Moral? Why then does he make choice of
means so disproportionate to the end he pretends to drive at? Why is Vice
represented successful, and Villainy triumphant, but to encourage Men to the
Practice of it? Why is Medea, the betrayer of her Father, and Country, a
Poysoner, a Sorceress, and a Murderer, one that had run through the whole
compass, and measured all the Paces of Villainy, suffered to make her escape? Or
if she must not be punished, why are the Gods engaged in the matter, and she
taken into the care of Providence, and furnished with means of Escape at the
expense of a Miracle? Why are Orestes and Electra, Parricides, taken
immediately into the Protection of Heaven, under Despondency, and the lashes of
a guilty Conscience? Why are they encouraged to bear up against the convictions
of their own minds, and promis^d prosperity from Heaven? Why is Hippolytus
maliciously persecuted, and no less then two Deities employed in his ruin,
only for being chaste by vow? unless it be to show us, that the World has been
mistaken in its notions of Providence, that wickedness is meritorious, and
Innocence a Crime, that Virtue, and Vice, of which the Philosophers prate so
much, are but the Whimseys of Hypocondriacks, the Dreams of speculative
Enthusiasts. Are these the Socratick Dialogues, and this the result of the
Philosophers Lectures? Is this the Admirer of Socrates, that was reciprocally
so admired by him, that he could sit whole days with Patience at the recital of
his Plays? If we may judge of one by the other, the Scholar was an Atheist, and
his Master little better. Why else did he not reprove him for his blasphemous
Fictions, and making the Gods the Actors, and Patrons of Villainy, and reprehend
him for mistaking the notions of Providence, confounding the Ideas of Virtue
and Vice, and subverting the Maxims of Morality?

Thus we see at this rate of declaiming not only Euripides, Socrates by this
means condemned.
who affected Philosophy a little too much in his Poems, but even Socrates
himself, the Boast of Antiquity, and the Glory of the Heathen World stands
condemned, as an Abettour of Murder, Incest, and Blasphemy. Let us see whether
Aeschylus or Sophocles can acquit themselves any better.

If Aeschylus had taken due care of his designs, Aeschylus arraigned by Mr
Collier's Precedent.
and built only upon Models of Virtue, we had never heard of his Prometheus.
This Poet strikes at the Root of all Moral Virtue. He scorns to trifle, and
pluck it down piecemeal, but blows it up all together. Philanthropy, or
Charity is the Ground and Foundation of all Morality. This in the Prometheus is
made a Crime, and a God sentenced to perpetual Punishment for his love to
Mankind, which is all that is objected to him. This must needs create in
Mankind a great Veneration, and impress a suitable Reverence for the Gods, who
are so very tender of 'em, in return for their oblations, that it is high
Treason to bear 'em any good Will. No doubt. but Religion must shoot, and
flourish mightily under such a hopeful Prospect of Reward.

Sophocles has been altogether as careful of Religion in his Philoctetes.
Sophocles
That Spark, with his Carcass rotten, and full of aches and ulcers, hectors the
Gods at a strange rate, and they think it worth their while to cajole him into
their service. Hercules is sent to make him a fine Speech, and large promises
to invite him to obedience, and allure him over to their Party. Oedipus is made
Virtuous, Just, and Wise, but unhappy through a Fatality, against which his Virtue
is no security; Justice requires that he should be rewarded and encouraged, but
Providence will have him afflicted, and punished with extremity of Rigor.

Can any thing be more disserviceable to Probity and Religion, than these
Examples of Injustice, Oppression, and Cowardice in their Gods? They cherish
those Passions, P. 28^.
and reward those Vices, which it is the business of Reason to discountenance.
They strike at the root of Principle, and draw off the Inclinations from
Virtue, and spoil good Education: They are the most effectual means to baffle
Discipline, to emasculate people's Sprits, and debauch their Manners. How many
of the unwary have these Sirens devoured? And how often has the best blood been
tainted with this Infection? What disappointments of Parents, what Confusion in
Families, and what Beggary in Estates have been hence occasioned: And which is
still worse, the Mischief spreads, and the Malignity grows more envenomed. The
Fever works up toward Madness, and will scarce endure to be touched.

I doubt not but the sober admirers of the Greek Tragedy will think that the
fumes of Mr Collier's stumm'd Rant are got into my Head, Extravagance of this
way of declaiming.
and work me out of my Wits. And had he so far debauched my Judgment, as to
make this my serious Opinion, I would grant, that he and I were only fit to
lead a Collony to settle at An Island famous for plenty of Hellebore, used in
the cure of Madness.
Anticyra, and diet upon Hellebore. But tho I have no such lewd thoughts of the
great Men of Antiquity, yet so far I shall presume to venture, (without
trespassing against Modesty, or breaking rudely in upon the harmonious Judgment
of the Learned for a long Succession of Ages) as to say, that Mr Collier's
unreasonable Satyr comes as full upon the Ancients whom he admires and
commends, as upon the Moderns, whom he vilifies and condemns.

The Modern Tragedy is a Field large enough for us to lose our selves in, and
therefore I shall not take the Liberty of ranging through 'em at large, but for
the most part confine my self to such as Mr Collier has already attackt. Upon
presumption therefore that these are the weakest, if these can be defended, the
rest I suppose may hold out of themselves.

I shall begin with Shakespeare, whom notwithstanding the severity of Mr Rhimer,
Shakespeare preferred to all the rest of the English Dramatics.
and the hard usage of Mr Collier, I must still think the Proto-Dramatist of
England, tho he fell short of the Art of Johnson, and the Conversation of
Beaumont and Fletcher. Upon that account he wants many of their Graces, yet his
Beauties make large amends for his Defects, and Nature has richly provided him
with the materials, tho his unkind Fortune denied him the Art of managing them
to the best Advantage.

His Hamlet, Censure of Hamlet unjust.
a Play of the first rate, has the misfortune to fall under Mr Collier's
displeasure; and Ophelia who has had the luck hitherto to keep her reputation,
is at last censured for Lightness in her Frenzy; nay, Mr Collier is so familiar
with her, as to make an unkind discovery of the unsavouriness of her Breath,
which no Body suspected before. But it may be this is a groundless surmise, and
Mr Collier is deceived by a bad Nose, or a rotten Tooth of his own; and then he
is obliged to beg the Poets and the Ladies pardon for the wrong he has done
'em; But that will fall more naturally under our consideration in another place.

Hamlet King of Denmark was privately murdered by his Brother, Fable of
Hamlet, before the commencement of the Action.
who immediately thereupon married the Dowager, and supplanted his Nephew in
the Succession to the Crown. Thus far before the proper action of the Play.

The late Kings Ghost appears to his Son young Hamlet, Fable after the Action
commences.
and declares how and by whom he was murdered, and engages him to revenge it.
Hamlet hereupon grows very much discontented, and the King very jealous of him.
Hereupon he is dispatched with Ambassadors to England, then supposed Tributary
to Denmark, whither a secret Commission to put him to Death, is sent by 'em:
Which Hamlet discovering writes a new Commission, in which he inserts the names
of the Ambassadors instead of his own. After this a Pirate engaging their
Vessel, and Hamlet too eagerly boarding her is carried off, and set ashore in
Denmark again. The Ambassadors not suspecting Hamlet's Trick, pursue their
Voyage, and are caught in their own Trap. Polonius, a Counselor to the King,
conveying himself as a Spy behind the Hangings, at an enterview between Hamlei
and his Mother, is mistaken for the King, and killed by him. Laertes his Son,
together with the King contrive the Death of Hamlet by a sham Match at Foyls,
wherein Laertes uses a poisoned unrebated Weapon. The King, not trusting to
this single Treachery, prepares a poisoned Bowl for Hamlet, which the Queen
ignorantly drinks. Hamlet is too hard for Laertes, and closes with him, and
recovers the envenomed weapon from him, but in so doing, he is hurt by, and
hurts him with it. Laertes perceiving himself wounded, and knowing it to be
mortal, confesses that it was a train laid by the King for Hamlet's Life, and
that the foul Practice is justly turned upon himself. The Queen at the same
times cries out, that she is poisoned, whereupon Hamlet wounds the King with
the envenomed weapon. They all die.

Whatever defects the Critics may find in this Fable, Poetic Justice exactly
observed in this Play.
the Moral of it is excellent. Here was a Murder privately committed,
strangely discovered, and wonderfully punished. Nothing in Antiquity can rival
this Plot for the admirable distribution of Poetic Justice. The Criminals are
not only brought to execution, but they are taken in their own Toyls, their own
Stratagems recoyl upon 'em, and they are involved themselves in that mischief
and ruin, which they had projected for Hamlet. Polonius by playing the Spy
meets a Fate, which was neither expected by, nor intended for him. Guildenstern
and Rosencraus, the Kings Decoys, are counterplotted, and sent to meet that
fate, to which they were trepanning the Prince. The Tyrant himself falls by his
own Plot, and by the hand of the Son of that Brother, whom he had murdered.
Laertes suffers by his own Treachery, and dies by a Weapon of his own
preparing. Thus every one's crime naturally produces his Punishment, and every
one (the Tyrant excepted) commences a Wretch almost as soon as a Villain.

The Moral of all this is very obvious, Moral of Hamlet.
it shows us, That the Greatness of the Offender does not qualify the Offense,
and that no Humane Power, or Policy are a sufficent Guard against the Impartial
Hand, and Eye of Providence, which defeats their wicked purposes, and turns
their dangerous Machinations upon their own heads. This Moral Hamlet himself
insinuates to us, when he tells Horatio, that he owed the Discovery of the
Design against his Life in England, to a rash indiscreet curiosity, and thence
makes this Inference.

Our Indiscretion sometimes serves as well,
When our dear Plots do fail, and that should teach us.
There Is a Divinity, that shapes our ends,
Rough hew 'em how we will.
The Tragedies of this Author in general are Moral and Instructive, Tragedies
of this Author generally moral.
and many of 'em such, as the best of Antiquity cannot equal in that respect.
His King Lear, Timon of Athens, Macbeth, and some others are so remarkable upon
that score, that 'twou'd be impertinent to trouble the Reader with a minute
examination of Plays so generally known and approved.

The other Tragedies upon which Mr Collier lets his indignation fall so heavy,
are so recent, and so common in the hands of every Play Reader, that it is
almost an affront to their memories to trouble 'em with too particular a
Recapitulation. But since we have obliged our selves to make good the
Comparative innocence of the Moderns by instances upon the Parallel, Mr Collier
can never desire fairer Play, than for us to undertake the defense of those
very Plays, which he himself has marked out, and assigned us; of which the next
in order is the Orphan, against which he enters the Lists as the Chaplains
Champion, in whose Quarrel and upon whose account he is most implacably enraged.

The Model of this Play is something like that of Oedipus, The Orphan.
except that in this the crime of Polydore, being voluntary, his guilt is real,
and by consequence Poetic Justice is observed in his punishment, which is
just. In this Tragedy likewise Acasto, Castalio, and Monimia are innocent,
virtuous Characters, and their misfortunes undeserved, which made 'em naturally
objects of Pity and Commiseration. The fatal consequences of Polydore's
intemperate lust, and base rash action, afford matter of Terror and Example.
This Play is exactly constituted according to Aristotle, who requires only that
Tragedy should move Terror and Compassion, which are the proper Springs, by
which it works upon the Audience. The Moral good.
In this it excells the Fable of the Oedipus, that it bears naturally a good
Moral, and in the wretched Catastrophe of Polydore, and the miseries which his
incontinence brought upon his Family, preaches Chastity to the Audience after
the most effectual manner.

But Mr Collier's in the humor now, Mr Collier's Zeal for the Pagan Priesthood
injurious to the Christian Ministry.
and he scorns to circumscribe his kindness to the limits of the Christian
Priesthood, whether Orthodox, or Heterodox. For even the Mufti is allowed the
benefit of his Clergy, and shares his Patronage. He is furiously provoked at Mr
Dryden for saying that Priests of all Religions are the same, when he himself
at the same time makes no distinction, but treats the Priests of God Almighty,
Mahomet and Anubis with the same respect. He is for strengthening his Party,
and contracting an Alliance with all Faiths and Complexions; he ransacks
Europe, Asia, and Africa, and enters into a religious League offensive and
defensive with Sunburned Africans, and Monsters of the Nile. To this end, he
labors hard to find out some relation between the Mufti and the Bishops, and
very dutifully strains to extend the scandal from Africa to England, that what
is said of their Archpriest may reflect upon our Prelates. The most bigoted
Mussulman of 'em all could not have acted more for the service of their
Priests, than to have shifted the reproach from them to ours. But I hope there
is no such Sympathy between 'em (as Mr Collier injuriously fancies) and that to
break the Mufti's would not make our Bishops Heads ach, or his black and blue
be seen in their Faces. Those worthy great Men, who are the honor of both our
Church and Nation, have little reason to thank him for endeavoring to ally 'em
to those, that must of necessity, putting the mildest construction upon their
actions, be either gross Fools or rank Knaves; Fools if they believe, and
Knaves if they help on the cheat and imposture of Mahomet without believing.
Thus Mr Collier puts a grosser affront upon our Religion and Clergy, than any
Mr Dryden has done, and his reproof deserves a severer correction, than
to others fault. This perhaps is a liberty too great to be indulged in any one
but Mr Collier's dear self, and therefore to chastize Mr Dryden's Presumption
and Insolence for but seeming to invade his fancied Property, he falls most
outrageously upon his Don Sebastian.

The Subject of this Play bears a very Religious Moral, Don Sebastian a
Religious Play.
and consonant to the Tenor of the 2d Commandment shows, that the Punishment
of Men's crimes, shall extend not only to their own persons, but if unrepented
shall reach their Posterity likewise. In this Fable Muley Moloch, a Tyrant and
an Usurper, Benducar a crafty Villain and a Traitor, the Mufti a rascally
Hypocrite and a Traitor. These three therefore are justly rewarded for their
own proper Demerits. The Tyrant falls by Treachery, the treacherous Minister by
public Justice, and the Hypocrite is unmaskt, deposed, and his Estate
confiscated. Sebastian and Almeyda are Characters of extraordinary Virtue,
Sebastian appears just and brave, and Almeyda chaste and constant to an Heroic
Pitch. Their offense was involuntary, and a Sin of Ignorance, the unhappy
consequence of the transgression of their Parents, and their Punishment is
proportioned very well to the nature of their Trespass. For tho Incest be a Sin
of a very black Dye, yet their Ignorance of the nearness of their Blood washes
away their Guilt, and makes it their misfortune, not their Crime. In this case
a bare Separation would be a sufficient Justification of their Innocence. But a
Judgment hanging over their heads for the sin of their Parents, to divert that
something more mortifying was necessary, and therefore a voluntary abdication,
exile, and a recluse religious Life are thrown in by way of Penance to make
weight, and give the atonement its due complement. But lest the true Moral
should escape the Audience, the Poet has taken care to fix, and sum it up in
the four concluding Lines Let Sebastian and Almeyda's Fate
This dreadful Sentence to the World relate,
That unrepented crimes of Parents dead,
Are justly punished on their Childrens heads.


This Moral needs no defense, and would plead successfully for its Author, and
excuse many little Slips before any Judge less partially severe than Mr Collier.

The Cleomenes of the same Author stands indicted upon the same score, Reason
of Mr Collier's ^ua^rel to the Cleomenes.
that is, for being to free with the Priests of Apis. For tho that been't the
only Allegation against this Play, it is apparently the sole ground. Thus Mr
Collier as well as Mr Dryden, sets Priests of all Religions upon the same Foot.
So they be but Priests, it is no matter to whom, he expects they should be
respected and reverenced; the compliment must be paid to their Livery, whether
it be Christ's or the Devils. Else why are the Mufti, and the Priests of Apis so
much his Concern? Why all this heat in the cause of Infidels and Idolaters, and
those none of the simple deluded Rout, but the Arch Jugglers, and Managers of
the Cheat.

In this Play he has forgot, Mor^l wanting to the Cleomenes.
or overlooked his greatest advantage, which is the want of Moral. His Passion
had got the upperhand of his Judgment, and pushed him headlong on to the
attack, no matter where. In this Play Poetic Justice is altogether neglected,
Virtue is every where deprested, and calamitous, and falls at last unrevenged
in the ruin of Cleomenes, Pantheus, Cleanthes, Cleonidas, Cratisiclea, and
Cleora. Vice revels all along, and triumps at length in the persons of Ptolomy,
Casandra, and Sosybins. The Fidelity of Cleomenes to his Nuptial Vows is the
destruction of himself and all his Friends, while the Luxury of Ptolomy, the
Wantonness and Infidelity of Casandra, and the Treachery of Sosybius, insult in
security unfortunate Virtue.

It Is true, M^^al^^ ference.
Sosybius in the close seems to become a Convert, and pretends to pay
extraordinary honors to the Body of the dead Hero. From whence we may draw
this inference, That Virtue has its altars tho neglected, even in the most
profligate Breasts, and that the most inveterate of its Enemies will confess
its Charms, when they no longer dread its power.

Mr Dryden has confined himself a little too near the Story, The Poet too
faithful to the History.
had he ass^rted his right, and taken the Liberty of a Poet, he might have
improved the Moral very much by sending Sosybius, Casandra, and Ptolomy to
attend Cleomenes to the other World. For (with Submission to Mr Dryden's better
Judgment) I see no necessity for letting the Curtain fall so immediately upon
the Death of Cleomenes. The fall of his Hero ought to have drawn after it a
train of Consequence fatal to the Contrivers of it; the ruins of a Hero of his
size and weight ought to have crushed those feeble Egyptians. Had the rage and
despair, that might naturally be supposed in a Woman of Cassandra's furious
temper, upon the disappointment of her licentious ungovernable Flame, been
wrought up to the destruction of Sosybius and herself, Magas might have made
his appearance in Person, to have finished the business, and dispatched
Ptolomy. All this might have been done without unnaturally stretching, or
making the action double. By this means Treachery, Lust, Infidelity, Luxury,
Cowardice, and Cruelty, had all met their due reward. But the Poet by tracking
too closely the Steps of the Historian has lost the Moral, which, had he been
guided by, and depended absolutely upon his own Judgment, we had no doubt been
indebted to him for.

The next and last Tragedy I shall instance in is the Mourning Bride. Mourning
Bride.
I have had occasion already to say something of the Observation of Poetic
Justice in this Play, but this being the proper place, I shall take it a little
more particularly into consideration.

The Fable of this Play is one of the most just, Fable very just and regular.
and regular that the Stage, either Ancient or Modern, can boast of. I mean,
for the distribution of Rewards, and Punishments. For no virtuous person misses
his Recompense, and no vicious one escapes Vengeance. Manuel in the prosecution
and exercise of his Cruelty and Tyranny, is taken in a Trap of his own laying,
and falls himself a Sacrifice in the room of him, whom he in his rage had
devoted. Gonsalez villainous cunning returns upon his own head, and makes him by
mistake kill the King his Master, and in that cut off, not only all his hopes,
but his only Prop and Support, and make sure of his own Destruction. Alonzo,
his Creature and Instrument, acts by his instructions, and shares his Fate.
Zara's furious Temper and impetuous ungovernable Passion, urge her to frequent
violences, and conclude at last in a fatal mistake. Thus every one's own
Wickedness or Miscarriage determines his Fate, without shedding any Malignity
upon the Persons and Fortunes of others. Alphonso in reward of his Virtue
receives the Crowns of Valentia and Granada, and is happy in his Love; all
which he acknowledges to be the Gift of Providence, which protects the
Innocent, and rewards the Virtuous. Almeria, whose Virtues are much of the same
kind, and who Sympathiz'd with him in his afflictions, becomes a joint Partner
of his Happiness. And Garcia, tho a Servant of the Tyrant, and Son of the
treacherous, ambitious Statesman, yet executing only his Sovereigns lawful
Commands, and being untainted with his Fathers guilt, and his Principles
undebauch'd, is received into Alphonso's favor.

All this as well as the Moral is summed up so fully, Moral excellent.
and so concisely in Alphonso's last speech, that 'twere injustice not to give
it in the Poets own words.

(To Alm.) Thy Father fell, where he designed my Death.
Gonsalez and Alonzo, both of Wounds
Expiring, have with their last Breath Confessed
The just Decrees of Heaven, in turning on
Themselves their own most bloody Purposes,
To Garcia -- O Garcia
See thou, how just the hand of Heaven has been?
Let us, that through our Innocence survive,
Still in the Paths of Honor persevere,
And not for past, or present ills despair:
For Blessings ever wait on virtuous deeds;
And tho a late, a sure Reward succeeds.
These I think are all the English Tragedies, which Mr Collier has by name
excepted against. Taking therefore our View of the Modern Tragedy from that
quarter, which he has allotted to draw a Prospect of it in, I shall leave it to
the Reader to judge, whether have raised the more beautiful structures. But if
we can with these Forces, which our Enemies have raised for us, make head, and
maintain our ground against the united strength of all Antiquity, what might
have been done, had we had the lasting, and sizing 'em our selves.

I shall only take notice of two or Advantages of the Moderns over the Ancients
in the Morals of their Fables. Providence not employed to promote Villainy.
three things which are apparently the indisputable advantage of the Moderns
over the Ancients, in respect of the General Moral of their Fables.

1st, That they never are at the expense of a Machine to bring about a wicked
Design, and by consequence don't interest Providence in promoting Villainy; as
the Ancients have notoriously done in many of their Plays; of which number are
the Electra of Sophocles; the Electra, Orestes, Hippolytus, Ion, and others of
Euripides, and the Thyestes of Seneca.

2dly, Nor to oppress Virtue.
That they never engage Providence to afflict and oppress Virtue, by
distressing it by supernatural means, as the Ancients have manifestly done, by
making their Gods the immediate Actors in or directors of the misfortunes of
virtuous persons, as in the Prometheus in Chains of Aeschylus, the Oedipus of
Sophocles, the Hippolytus and Hercules furens of Euripides, the Oedipus and
Hercules furens of Seneca, and diverse others of Antiquity.

3dly, Nor to protect Malefactors.
That their Malefactors are generally punished, which those of the Ancients
seldom were; but if they escape the Moderns don't provide 'em with a miraculous
delivery, or have recourse to such extraordinary Methods as exceed the reach of
Humane Force or Cunning, so as to entitle Providence to the Protection of 'em,
which was the frequent Practice of the Ancients; as in the Electra of
Sophocles; the Medea, the Orestes, the Electra, and others of Euripides; Modern
Poets more Religious than the Ancients.
the Medea of Seneca, etc.

From this short review of the different conduct of the Ancient and Modern
Tragedians, we may see with how much more respect to Providence, and the Divine
administration, our Poets have behaved themselves, than they; and how far the
Balance of Religion inclines to our side. I suppose no one can be so silly, as
to think, that I argue here for the truth of their Faith, but the measure of it
in their respective persuasions, in which the advantage is infinitely on the
side of the English Stage.

The Fable of every Play is undoubtedly the Authors own, The Fable of the Poets
disposal. Characters and Expressions not so.
whencesoever he takes the Story, and he may model it as he pleases. The
Characters are not so; the Poet is obliged to take 'em from Nature, and to copy
as close after her, as he is able. The (...) be said for the Thoughts and
Expressions, they must be suited to the Mouth and Character of the Person that
speaks 'em, not the Poet's. It is not what is right or wrong in the Poet's
Judgment, but what is natural, or unnatural for a Person of such a Character
upon such an occasion to say, which he is to consider, and for which he is
accountable only, as well by the rules of Moral as Poetical Justice. When
therefore we find any thing in Plays that sounds amiss, we must examine whether
it be proper to the Character or not, before we condemn the Poet, whom we may
otherwise arraign as Mal a propos, as a Judge would the Kings Evidence, if he
should prefer an Indictment against 'em for speaking Treason in their
Depositions.

The Fable therefore being the main spring of the Machine in Tragedy, The Fable
if any, the Evidence of the Poets ^^nion.
and the Poet's own proper Workmanship^ it is by the temper and disposition of
that, that we are to feel the Poets Pulse, and find out his secret affections.
Not but that we may err sometimes in our Judgments of the Poet's Morals o^
other hand. For it is possible, that the Poet's Morals may be very good, yet the
Man's stark naught, that is, that a man may be a good Moral Poet, yet a bad
Man. So on the other hand we may falsely measure his Manners by his management,
and impute to Malice and Design those faults, which flow from want of Judgment
or Indiscretion. This is hard measure, but such as Mr Collier has been very
liberal of to the Poets. It would be a very uncharitable Error, should we at
any time hear the sacred mysteries of our Faith poorly explained, or weakly
defended out of the Pulpit, if we should conclude, that the Preacher played
booty and betrayed the cause he pretended to plead for: And I doubt it would
fall heavy upon many, that now pass for honest and good Christians, I hope with
justice, if their Faith were to be measured by their Performance, and their
Integrity by their parts. But it would be much more unjust to Mr Collier's a
false, and perverse Measure.
rate all the rest of their order by the deficient Standard of a few. Yet thus
Mr Collier proceeds against those, to whom he thinks fit to oppose himself. And
yet even thus they would not have much occasion to fear his malice, if he would
proceed against 'em the proper way, and not charge as their private and real
sense, the Sentiments, which they are obliged sometimes to furnish Villains and
Extravagants with in conformity to their Characters, while he denies 'em the
benefit of those many excellent and pious Reflections abounding in their works.

Certainly had our Poets any such lewd Design of confounding the Distinctions
between Truth and Fiction, The Fable the Engine of greatest and most secret
Execution upon the Audience. P. 95.
between Majesty and a Pageant; of treating God like an Idol, and bantering,
the Scriptures like Homer's Elysium and Hesiod's Theogonia, it would appear in
the Fable, which is the part, as we have observed, that discovers most of the
Poets proper Opinion, and gives him the fairest opportunity of stealing it
artificially in, and poys'ning the Audience most effectually with least
Suspicion. For tho the Fable, if skilfully contrived, be the Part which
operates most powerfully, yet it works after a manner least sensible. We feel
the effects without suspecting the cause, and are prejudiced without looking
after a reason. If the Poets have any such villainous Plot against Virtue and
Religion, they are certainly the most negligent Fellows, or the most
unexperienced in the world to overlook the only place of advantage upon the
whole Stage for their mischievous purpose, where they might work their Mines
unmolested, and spring 'em undiscovered to most, and do the greatest execution
with the least alarm to the Enemy. But they make War like Dutchmen, and sell
their Enemies Ammunition to spend upon themselves. For all their Fables are
contrived and modeled for the service of Virtue and Religion, and levelled
against themselves, if they be such great Enemies, and so remarkably
disaffected, as Mr Collier says they are. But perhaps he may, either through
mistake or malice, misrepresent the matter; and what was scoffingly said by the
Turks to the Poles, may be seriously applied to the case before us by both
Parties, that they did not know of any War betwixt 'em.

From the management of the Fables of our Poets, Not abused to any ill end by
our Poets.
which, being the Principal, and most Efficacious part of their Plays,
undoubtedly employed most their care, it is plain that Mr Collier has given the
World a false alarm, and endeavors to set 'em upon those as Subverters of
Religion and Morality, that have with abundance of art and pains labored in
their service, and racked their Inventions to weave 'em into the most Popular
diversions, and make even Luxury and Pleasure subservient and instrumental to
the establishment of Moral Principles, and the confirmation of Virtuous
Resolutions.

Before I take leave of Tragedy upon this Head, I must take notice to the
Reader, that in this Parallel betwixt the Ancient and Modern Tragedy, I have
not wrested any thing to the unjust Prejudice of one, Apology for the Ancients.
or favor of the other. Nor, tho I find most of the Ancient Fables defective in
the general Moral, do I charge 'em with any design of under^ining the Interest,
or lessening the credit and esteem of Virtue. The Moral and the Pathetic were
in their days distinct Branches of Tragedy (as we have already observed from
Aristotle) of which their Poets in all probability made choice, according to
the encouragement they observed 'em to meet with. If therefore we find few
Moral Plays amongst the remains of those extraordinary Persons the Greek
Tragedians, Moral Plays not esteemed at Athens.
we may fairly presume, that they did not take at Athens, otherwise they would
have been more cultivated. For this reason probably it was, that Aristotle took
so slender notice of Moral Tragedy, as not thinking it worth while to lay down
rules for the practice of that, which was no longer in use, or esteem amongst
his Countrymen in his Time. Nor did this dis-esteem of Moral Plays proceed from
any propensity to, or Habit of Vice peculiar to that Age, which might give 'em
a disrelish for Virtuous Entertainments. The contrary of this is evident from
several of those Tragedies, which succeeded at Athens, the Discourse in which
is frequently Moral and Instructive, tho the Fable it self be not. But Moral
Tragedy not admitting such Incidents as were proper to move Terror or
Compassion, the Springs of Passion were wanting, and consequently the Audience
were but weakly affected with such sort of representations. Moral and Pathetick
reconciled, and united by the Moderns.


The Moderns, who were sensible of the use of one, and the power of the other
sort of Tragedy, have taken a happy Liberty of compounding 'em, and throwing
the simple Tragedy quite aside, stick altogether to an Implex kind, which is at
once both Moral and Pathetick. Wherein they must to their honor be
acknowledged, to have made a considerable improvement of Tragedy, and to have
had a singular regard to Probity and Virtue; which (without injustice to
Antiquity, I may venture to affirm) had very little Interest in the Fable
before. Nor can the most partial Admirer of the Ancients, Poetic Justice
neglected by the Ancients in general.
with any color of Justice deny this advantage to the Moderns; since neither
Aristotle, nor Horace, amongst all their excellent Rules, and Observations for
Dramatick Writing, have taken the least notice of Poetic Justice, which is now
become the Principal Article of the Drama; which questionless they would never
have forgotten, had the Practice of the Stage in their own, or preceding Ages,
or even their own thoughts suggested the necessity of it. Nay so far is
Aristotle from thinking it a requisite condition, that he recommends (...).
the misfortunes of a Person unhappy through his mistake, not his Fault, as the
most proper Subject for Tragedy; which is directly opposite to this Rule, which
requires, that the fortune of every one should be adjusted to his Merit,
whether good or bad. It Is true, Aristotle thinks, that it is inconsistent with
the regard that is due to Mankind, to represent such revolutions in the
Fortunes of Men, as shall make Persons eminently Virtuous unhappy, or
notoriously wicked successful and prosperous. But I don't find that he made
their proper Demerits the Standard, or immediate Rule for Squaring their future
Fortune. And if we consider the examples he produces to his own Rule, we shall
perhaps be induced to believe, that he did not insist upon a very rigorous
observation of it. For of his two instances, Oedipus was (as we have already
observed) a very virtuous Person, and Thyestes, according to the traditions
remaining concerning him, a very wicked One. So that even while he is laying
down his Rule, he seems to indulge a latitude in the observance, and to
justify any Liberties, that may be taken with it, by the Precedent of the best
Play, not only of Sophocles, but of all Antiquity.

Monsieur Dacier (who, Monsi^ur Dacier's exception ^^o Monsi^ur Corneille
answered.
according the humor of most Commentators, will allow no slips in his Author)
strains hard to reconcile the examples to the Rule. He charges Monsieur
Corneille with making an unjust exception, for want of understanding rightly,
the words (...). I shall not undertake to Arbitrate the point of Monsieur
Corneille's Learning, but I think his observation just, and yet in full Force,
and Monsieur Dacier's answer, however Learned, no better than an Evasion. In
ennumerating the good qualities, and summing up the Character of Oedipus, Mr
Dacier omits his Piety toward his Country, and places the service of
destroying the Sphinx to the account of his ambition, and the reward of the
Crown tacked to it. His Piety I have already taken sufficient notice of
elsewhere, and for his ambition let Sophocles answer, who tells us otherwise in
the concluding Lines; (...).
Who affected not base Popularity, nor courted Fortune.


This may suffice to clear him from the imputation of Vanity and Ambition, with
which Monsieur Dacier loads his Character, and added to the rest, prove him an
excellent Person; one that, according to Aristotle, was too good to suffer in
so extraordinary a manner.

To digress no farther, Po^t^ck Justice a ^^odern ^^vention.
I think we are obliged to the Modern Tragic Poets for the introduction of
Poetic Justice upon the Stage, and must own, that they were the first that
made it their constant aim to instruct, as well as please by the Fable. The
Ancients brought indifferently all sorts of subjects upon the Stage, which they
took from History or Tradition, and were therefore more solicitous to make
their stories conform to the relation, or to the public Opinion, than to
Poetic Justice, or the Propriety of Tragic Action. By this means all hopes of
a Moral was cut off, or if by chance the story afforded any, we are more
obliged to the Poets luck for it, than to his Skill or Care. Thus the Moral,
the highest, and most serviceable improvement that ever was, or ever can be
made of the Drama, is of Modern Extraction, and may very well be pleaded in bar
to all claim laid in behalf of the Ancients, to preference in point of
Morality, and service to Virtue, as likewise in answer to all Objections made
to the Manners and Conduct of the Modern Stage in general.

Thus the Modern Stage, Modern Stage on this account pr^f-rable of the Ancient.
against which Mr Collier maliciously declaims with so much bitterness, is upon
this account infinitely preferable to the Athenians, which he commends and
admires, and that which he rails at as the bane of Sobriety, and the Pest of
Good Manners, is proved the most commodious instrument to propagate Morality,
and the easiest, and most palatable Vehicle to make Instruction go down with
effect. But the Violence and Partiality of some observe no bounds of Justice,
and admit of no check from Modesty or Reason. But I shall take leave here, and
pass on to the Fable of Comedy, against which Mr Collier's spite is more
particularly levelled.

The Fable of Comedy will give us very little trouble, Fable of Comedy (...)
if we consider rightly the Nature and Business of this part of the Drama.
Comedy deals altogether in Ridicule, and its Subject consequently must be such
as affords matter of ridiculous Mirth. All its Machinations tend to the
exciting that ill natured titillation, which carries scorn and contempt along
with it. Its business is to correct, and hinder the spreading of Folly and
Knavery, by making 'em ridiculous, and to reform Rascals and Coxcombs by
exposing 'em. Aristotle therefore has has very judiciously defined Comedy
(...). The Imitation of the baser sort of People, not in all kinds of Villainy,
but in the ridiculous part, which is one sort of Turpitude.

The Action of Comedy must be suited to the Actors, In Comedy the Action and
Persons l^w.
who are the baser sort of People, and consequently cannot be of any great
importance either in its nature or effects, and therefore can afford no
extraordinary Moral. By the baser sort of People, Persons of low Extraction or
Fortune are not heremeant, but Persons who by their practices and Conduct have
exposed themselves to Scandal and Contempt. From the Nature therefore, and
quality of the Actors nothing great or generous can be expected from Comedy.
The Duping of an old Knave, the cullying of a Coxcomb, the stealing of an
Heiress from a Mercenary Guardian, are the usual exploits of Comedy; wherein
tho Gentlemen are sometimes concerned, yet they are, or ought always to be
such, as have some blemish, or other upon 'em, otherwise they are not fit for
the business they are engaged in. Comedy seems to be designed to teach Men
Civil Prudence, and a convenient Management in respect of one another, rather
than any thing of Morality; and their private duty. There their misfortunes and
disgraces are all the immediate result of their own Folly and Mismanagement,
and may therefore very well cause men to reflect upon that want of Wit and
Caution, which caused themselves or others to miscarry, and teach 'em to be
more wary for the future; but it would hardly confer any Grace, or mend their
Principles.

The business of Comedy being ridicule, those Vices only fall under its
correction, The correction of Folly the proper business of Comedy
that are capable of being made ridiculous, and those only after such a manner
as may raise Scorn and Contempt. For this reason Comedy seems to be more
naturally disposed for the cure of Men's Follies, than their Vices, those
running more naturally into ridicule than these, which are more apt to raise
Indignation and Aversion, and are the proper instruments of Tragedy. Not but
that Vice too may sometimes be seasonably corrected in Comedy, but then it must
be joined with, and wear the Livery of Folly, to help to make it ridiculous,
and the object of Scorn, rather than Indignation.

Hence it will appear, Perfect Virtue excluded the Comic Stage.
what sort of Persons are most proper to be employed in Comedy, which dealing
altogether in Stratagem and Intrigue, requires Persons of Trick and Cunning on
one hand, and easy credulous Folks on the other, otherwise the Plot will but
go heavily forward. By this means all Characters absolutely perfect are
excluded the Comic Stage. For what has a Man of pure Integrity to do with
Intrigues of any kind? He cannot assist in the execution of any design of
Circumvention without forfeiting his Character; and to bring such a Character
upon the Stage to be practiced upon, is such an outrage to Virtue, that the
most licentious of our Poets have not dared to venture upon it.

I grant that it is neither necessary, Some Infirmity required to qualify a
Character for Comedy.
nor convenient, that all the Characters in Comedy should be vicious, that were
to abuse mankind, with a scandalous representation. But I maintain, that they
ought all to have some failing or Infirmity, to qualify 'em for the business
of the Place. Men of Honor may be made use of to punish Knaves, as Knaves to
cure Fools, but their honor ought not to be too straitlaced, too squeamish and
scrupulous. They must be Persons of some Liberty, that out of an over-niceness
will not balk a well laid design, and spoil a Project with too much honesty.
Men of Hononr may be men of Pleasure; nay, and must be so too, or we do 'em
wrong to make 'em appear in such Company, as Comedy must bring 'em into.

What other natural occasion can be assigned for embroiling a Gentleman of
Quality, Ne Gentlemen but men of pleasure sit for Comedy.
with Usurers, Pimps, Sharpers, Jilts and Bullies, but the extravagance of his
Pleasures? which they may all serve in their several capacities. The Usurer
with his Wife, his Daughter, or his Money; the Pimp in his Intrigues; the Jilt,
the Sharper, and the Bully in their respective Offices may assist his Revenges,
and be useful Engines in those designs, where it is not proper for himself to
appear. That no Gentlemen but of this sort should be brought upon the Comic
Stage, I think, is so plain, as well from Aristotle's Definition, as from the
Nature and Business of the Place; that he that disputes it forfeits all
Pretense to Judgment in these matters. I mean no Gentlemen of Wit and Sense,
but such as these. For Fools of what Quality soever are the proper Goods and
Chattels of the Stage; they are the wrecks of understanding, which Poets, as
Lords of the Manor of Wit from immemorial Prescription, have an uncontested
Title to, and may dispose of, as they see fit.

A true Comic Poet like a good Droll Painter, Comic Poetry and Droll Painting
compared.
ought not to make his whole Piece ridiculous, and consequently ought not to
draw any Face that is so regular, as not to have something amiss either in
Feature or Complextion. To put a Gentleman of sound Sense and perfect Morals
into Comedy, would be as unnatural, as to draw Cato dancing amongst the Boors
at a Dutch Wedding. It does not therefore follow, that none but Rakes and
Scoundrels must pass for Gentlemen in Comedy. A Gentleman of Wit and Honor may
be judiciously introduced into it, but he must be a man of wild unreclaim'd
honor, whose Appetites are strong and irregular enough, to hurry him beyond
his discretion, and make him act against the Conviction of his Judgment on the
return of his Reason. Such a Character as this no more is unnatural, than to
see a drunken Gentleman frolicking with the Mob, or kissing a Link-Boy.

Nothing is more frequent than to meet in our common Conversation, Such
Characters real and common.
and affairs of Life, with Gentlemen of this sort, who, tho they may be Men of
excellent Parts, Temper, and Principles, yet in the heat of their Blood, and
Pride of their Fortunes, are apt to be biased a little toward Extravagance,
and not to consult the severity of Reason, or the exactness of Justice on many
occasions especially in matters relating to their Pleasures.

What therefore is so common and obvious in the World, cannot be unnatural upon
the Stage, but by using it improperly. To put a Gentleman upon the Office of a
Villain or a Scoundrel, or to make a Man of Sense a Bubble or a Cully in the
Conclusion, is an abuse to the Character, and a trespass against the Laws of
the Drama. If therefore the Poet employs any of this Character, he is obliged
to give him Success, notwithstanding the blemishes of his Character. For, with
all his Faults, he is the best, as well as the most considerable Person, that
it is lawful for him to make bold with. And if he is at last brought to a Sense
of his Extravagance and Errors, and a resolution of amendment, the Poet has
exerted his Authority to the utmost extent of his Commission; and the Laws of
Comedy exact no more.

Had Mr Collier known and considered sufficiently the nature of Comedy, Mr
Collier's mistake concerning the Nature of Comedy.
I am apt to think, that we had never seen his whole fourth Chapter, which runs
altogether upon this mistake, That no Liberties are to be indulged in Comedy,
and that the principal Characters ought to be in all respects exemplary, and
without Blemish. That this a mistake I hope is very plain from what has been
already said. But because Mr Collier has taken the pains to back, and assert
this erroneous Opinion with a tedious Harangue, and some seemingly plausible
Arguments, it may not be amiss to abstract one from the other, and consider the
latter distinctly, without amusing our selves about his Pompous expressions,
Heads of Mr Collier's charge against English Cody.
and Formal Rhetoric.

The whole Sum of Mr Collier's long extravagant charge against the English
Poets, especially the present Comic Poets, against whom this Chapter seems to
be particularly levelled, may be reduced to these two heads.

1st. That by making their Protagonists, or chief Persons Licentious or
debauched they encourage Vice, and Irreligion, and discourage Virtue.

2dly. That the rich Citizens are often represented as Misers and Cuckolds; and
the Universities as Schools of Pedantry; and thereby Learning, Industry and
Frugality ridiculed.

Mr Collier, whose business all through his Book is Invective, not Argument, lays
himself forth with all the Pomp of Formal Eloquence, and vehemence of
Expression, that he is able, to aggravate the crime, and amplify the guilt of
the Poets not to prove it. He is more sollicitous to possess his Reader, than
convince him, and for that reason lets slip the circumstance of proof as not
very material, because he found it would tie him up to strict Argument, and
close Reasoinng, which is not for his purpose, and insists upon the General
charge of Debauchery and Impiety; which allowing him all the Liberties of
Declamation and Harangue, give him ample Field-room to publish, and display his
Parts, and his Malice together; which he does most egregigiously, and
Flourishes most triumphantly. Never did learned Recorder insult poor Culprit in
more formidable Oratory, than he does the Poets.

It Is true, he offers several instances in confirmation of his Assertion, which
he draws from diverse of our English Comedies, which, with the untoward gloss he
puts upon 'em, seem to favor his malicious purpose. These I shall consider in
their proper places, as far as is absolutely requisite to our purpose, and
leave the farther justification of 'em to the Gentlemen more immediately
concerned, who I suppose will not be wanting to their own necessary defense.

We shall therefore proceed to the His first Article examined.
examination of the main Branch of his accusation, contained in the first
Article, which is the neglect of Poetic Justice, the encouraging of Vice with
Success, and the Discouraging of Virtue.

The whole weight of this Objection turns upon this hinge, that the
Protagonists, or chief Persons in Comedy are generally vicious and successful,
which he pretends to be against the Law of Comedy, which is to reward Virtue
and punish Vice. This objection, as he observes, was started by Mr Dryden
against himself in his preface to his Mock-Astrologer. But he objects against
the answer, which Mr Dryden there makes to it. That he knows no such Law
constantly observed in Comedy, either by the Ancients or Moderns.

This Mr Collier calls a lame Defense, This Rule repugnant to the Nature of
Comedy.
and I agree with him, tho we go upon different grounds. For I think Mr Dryden
has clogged his answer with an unnecessary restriction, and by the over Modesty
of it weakened the sufficiency of it. I grant, that the neglect, or contempt of
a Law, does by no means destroy the Authority of it. But I shall carry it
something farther, and say that no such Law ever was at all observed, or so
much as prescribed to Comedy. Nor do I herein trust to the Strength of my own
Memory, or presume upon the extraordinary reach and extent of my Enquiries. But
I draw this Conclusion from the nature of Comedy itself, which will admit of no
such Rule in the latitude Mr Dryden proposes, and Mr Collier maintains it.

Comedy, Reason why.
which deals altogether in ridicule, can take no cognizance of, and give no
correction to those Vices and Immoralities which it cannot expose on that side.
For this reason, the Sallies of Youth, and the Licentiousness of men of Sense
and Fortune, uniess they be such as bring their understandings into question,
and make 'em ridiculous, how ever unjustifiable, immortal, and offensive they
may be to sober people, escape the censure of Comedy, because they cannot be
tried in her way.

This Consideration it was, Indulgence of Plautus and Terence to vicious young
People misplaced by Mr Collier. P. 149.
that induced Terence and Plautus to indulge their Young Men so far as they
did, and afford so many instance of Favor to vicious young people, as Mr
Collier allows they did. He is mistaken, when he fancies, that because those
Poets had a greater compass of Liberty in their Religion, and that Debauchery
did not lie under those discouragements of Penalty and Scandal with them, as it
does with us; therefore their Poets indulged themselves in those Liberties,
which otherwise they durst not have taken. Plautus and Terence, especially the
latter, were nice Observers of Mankind, and greater Masters of their own Art,
than to take an Improper Liberty, only because 'twas not dangerous. But their
Religion, false as it was, and the Laws of their Country, which were very
severe at Rome in this case, required strict Morality, and Regularity of Life.
If therefore they had suspected, that these Indulgences had tended any ways to
the Debauching of their Youth, and the Corrupting of their Manners, they durst
not have ventured 'em into public view. Nor would their Magistrates, to whose
Censure they were particularly submitted, have suffered examples of such ill
consequence to have been produced openly. Besides, Cato, whose Virtue was as
sour and austere, and perhaps as great as Mr Collier's, was a great encourager
of 'em, which it is non probahe would have been, had he smelt any such dangerous
Plot in 'em. So that the Authority of these Precedents may stand, and be of
service, notwithstanding the wide difference betwixt Heathenism, and
Christianity, and Mr Collier's Opinion to the contrary.

But Plautus and Terence have taken no such unjustifiable liberties, Plautus
and Terence faithful Copyers from Nature.
as he imagines. They have copyed faithfully from Nature, and their Draughts
come incomparably near the Life. No outrage is done to the Original, by
enlarging or contracting the Features, in order to entertain the Audience with
Monsters of Dwarfs, but Humane Life is depicted in its true and just
Proportion. If therefore the Images, which their Plays reflect, displease any
froward Cynic, the Fault is in the Face, not the Glass which gives a true
representation; and he quarrels with Providence, whose Creature Mankind is, if
he dislikes the fight. Any liberties therefore, which these Poets have taken,
wherein Nature is not wronged, descend undoubtedly to all those that succeed
'em upon the Comic Stage, who have a right to all the Privileges of their
Predecessors upon the same terms.

But Plautus and Terence made their young fellows, as Nature frequently does,
wild and extravagant; at which Mr Collier is scandalized, and appeals from
their Judgment to

Horace, Opinion of Horace inquired into. P. 149.
who ( he says) was as good a Judge of the Stage, as either of those Comedians,
yet seems to be of another opinion. Let us see how far the Precept of Horace
for the drawing of youth in general differs from the Practice of those
Comedians. Horace tells us, that the young Squire, as soon as he has shaken off
the yoke of a Tutor, is for Dogs and Horses, ( and Whores too, as appears by
the sequel of his Character) that he is Cereus in vitium flecti, Art. Poet.
monitoribus asper
Vtilium tardus Provisor, prodigus aeris,
Sublimis, cupidusque, and amata relinquere pernix.
Prone to Vice, Impatient of Reproof,
Careless of things necessary, Prodigal,
Proud, Eager, and Inconstant in his Desires.


This is not a bare character, This not a bare Character but a Rule.
a simple description of the humors of young people; but it is a Precept, a
Rule for Artists to draw 'em by. And therefore ought to include nothing
contingent, or unnecessary; but every thing contained in it ought to be the
inseparable Adjunct of the Species, such as a true Idea of the Generality
cannot be given without, tho perhaps some Individuals may be met with, that
want it. Upon this rule let Mr Collier arraign these Authors if he can. For tho
they wrote before Horace, and consequently cannot plead his Precept in their
defense, yet the observation of Nature was common to them with him, and the
reason of the rule as well known to 'em. I suppose therefore, if Horace be made
their Judge in this case, they must be acquitted, otherwise he will condemn
himself.

But Mr Collier tells you, P. 149.
that Horace condemns the obscenities of Plautus, and tells you that Men of
Fortune and Quality, in his time, would not endure immodest Satire.

This I believe is a discovery of Mr Collier' s own, Sense of Horace in this
place mistaken or perverted by Mr Collier.
for I don't find any such accusation in Horace; he tells us, that he did by no
means admire the Versification and Raillery of Plautus, as their Ancestors had
injudiciously done, that his Numbers were not true, nor his Wit Gentile.

An nostri Proavi Plautinos, and numeros, and
Laudavere Sales; nimium patienter utrumque,
(Ne dicam Stulte) mirati: si modo ego, and vos
Scimus inurbanum, lepido seponere dicto,
Legitimumque sonum digitis callemus, and art.
Here he excepts against the Numbers, and Raillery of Plautus, and arraigns the
Taste, and Judgment of their Ancestors, that approved 'em. But I don't find
that he lays Immodesty, or Obscenity to his charge.

But this seems to be a strain in emulation of his famous Predecessor Mr
Prynne, Parity of reasoning betwixt Mr Prynn and Mr Collier.
whose Arguments and way of Reasoning Mr Collier inherits as well as quarrel,
with a double portion of his Spirit. Mr Prynne was offended at the appearance
of Actresses upon the Stage, and in the Fervor of his Zeal finds it forbidden
in Scripture; Because, says he, St Paul expressly prohibits Women from speaking
publicly in the Church. Mr Collier in a fit of Criticism something like this,
takes occasion from this Passage of Horace, to show how apt a Scholar he is;
and not to be behind hand with Mr Prynne, for a Reason, has recourse to his
usual method of construction, (in which we have already seen he has a singular
dexterity) and converts Horace's charge of inharmonious Verse and Clownish
Jests, to Obscenity and Immodest Satyr.

To cover this piece of Legerdemain, Another outrage to Horace.
he confounds this Passage with another as little to his purpose. Horace from
talking of Tragedy proceeds to lay down some Maxims for the better regulation
of the Satyrae, then in use upon the Roman Stage. These Satyrae were a sort of
Interludes introduced betwixt the Acts in Tragedy to refresh, and divert the
Audience. The Persons represented were the Satyri or Fauni, or train of Bacchus
or Pan; Persons supposed to be of very loose and virulent Tongues, and Rustic
Behavior. And accordingly the matter of these Poems was generally scandal, and
Clownish raillery, in which to gain the applause of the Mob, they often took
such saucy Liberties in point of Scandal and Undecency, that they People of
better Quality were offended at 'em. And Horace assures us, that the Quality
and Mob could never agree in their Verdict about 'em.

Sylvis deducti caveant (me Judice) Fauni, Art. P^^t.

Ne, velut innati triviis, ac pene forenses,
Aut nimium teneris juvenenter versibus unquam,
Aut immunda crepent, ignominiosaque dicta
Offenduntur enim, quibus est Equus, and Pater, and res:
Nec, siquid fricti ciceris probat, and nucis emptor,
AEquis accipiunt animis, donantve corona.
But what is all this to Plautus and Comedy, who never had any Dealings with
these Satyrae.

After this notable exploit, he launches out into the wide Sea of Poetry, and
flourishes with the Character that Horace gives of the first Poets, Orpheus,
Amphion, etc, whom he celebrates as the civilizers of Mankind; but as that
affords little matter either of Honor or Reproach to these, that came so long
after them, when the Muses, tho they might have kept their Virtue, yet had lost
very much of their Power, and instead of commanding the Passions of their
Auditors, were forced on many occasions to comply with and submit to their
Whimsies, and humor their capri^ious Appetites: It will be impertinent
(whatever license Mr Collier may assume) to insist any longer upon a case no
way Parallel. For this Character, which Horace bestows upon those Poets, was
intended as a complement of Poetry in general, but not to reflect any honor
upon the Drama in particular, (much less Comedy, the more recent branch of it)
which was not invented till long after the time of Orpheus and Amphion.

His next use that he makes of the Authority of Horace, Use of a Chorus
according to Horace.
he draws from his Instructions about the Office of the Chorus. The Chorus
(Horace tells us after Aristotle) ought to bear the part of an Actor, and take
care to say nothing incoherent, or incongruous to the main design, but to make
his Song of a piece with the whole. From hence ( Mr Collier infers that) it is
plain, that Horace would have no immoral Character have either Countenance or
good Fortune upon the Stage.

But here he foresees an Objection, Objection.
that the Chorus was left off in Comedy before Horace's time, and that these
directions must needs therefore be intended for Tragedy. To which

He answers, Mr Collier's answer.
that the Consequence is not good. For the use of the Chorus is not
inconsistent with Comedy. The Ancient Comedians had it. Aristophanes is an
Instance. I know it is said the Chorus was left out, in that which they call New
Comedy.

Had Mr Collier considered who 'twas that said this, Reply to Mr Collier's
answer.
he ought to have acquiesc'd in his Authority; but since he is so unwilling to
confess, he must be convicted, and therefore we shall endeavor to prove the
validity of the consequence upon him. I shall trouble the Reader with the
Depositions of but one Evidence, but he shall be, like Conscience in this case,
Mill Testes. Horace tells us, that the Old Comedy grew so intolerably abusive
and scandalous, that a Law was made to curb it, and that from that time the
Chorus was silenced.

Successit vetus his Comaedia, Art. Poet.
nonsine multa
Laud, sed in vitium libertas excidit, and vim
Dignam lege regi. Lex est accepta, Chorusque
Turpiter obticuit, sublato jure nocendi.
This testimony of Horace is full against Mr Collier, Chorus in Old Comedy.
and a plain argument that he never intended his directions for a Chorus for
the use of Comedy. The Chorus in the Old Comedy had the greatest freedom of
Speech, and took the boldest liberties of any part of the Play, and
consequently gave the greatest offense, and stood most in need of Correction.
And Horace seems to insinuate, that the Chorus was not only scandalously
offensive, but that it was expressly filenc'd by Law, when he says, -- Lex est
accepta, Chorusque
Turpiter obticuit, sublato jure nocendi.


As if the whole Business of the Chorus in Comedy had been Scandal, and the Law
levelled against the Chorus only. The event justifies this Exposition; For
after the Publication of the Laws against the Liberty of Scandal, which was
grown so rampant in the Old Comedy, the Chorus vanished and appeared no more
upon the Athenian Stage in Comedy, that we know of.

This Mr Collier denies, Plutus of Aristophanes. p. 150.
and fortifies himself and his Assertion with matter of Fact. For Aristophanes
his Plutus is New Comedy with a Chorus in it.

In this Assertion there are two mistakes, Double mistake of Mr Collier.
which being Critical ones, I don't much wonder at, because they contribute
toward making the Book Uniform, and preserve the Integrity of the Piece. Yet
he building with so much assurance upon 'em, 'twill be but Charity to let him
see, that his Foundation is too weak to support the weight of the
superstructure he has laid upon it.

The first of these is, that the Plutus of Aristphanes is not New Comedy.

2dly. That in the Plutus, there is no Chorus.

The Learned (whom I suppose Mr Collier means by they) divided the Greek Comedy
into the three Classes, the Old, the Middle, and the New; not to mention that
the Old Comedy it self is subdivided into two Ages; the latter of which
commences with Cratinus, who first distinguished the Parts, disposed the Acts,
and fixed the number of Actors; and comprehends Eupolis, Aristophaenes, and the
rest of the Comic Poets till the conclusion of the Popular Authority, and the
beginning of the Oligarehy, from which time to the time of Alexander, that
which is now called the Middle Comedy flourished, till Menander, and the Poets
of his time, Philemon, Diphilus, Apollodorus, and others, quite altered the
Face of the Comic Stage, and introduced that which is now called the New
Comedy.

By this Divifion, which is both just, By this the Plutus Old Comedy.
and accurate, the Plutus falls to the share of the Old Comedy; to which,
notwithstanding the deviations therein from the former Practice of
Aristophanes, it does most properly belong. But if Mr Collier will have the
Plutus of Aristophanes to be the first step toward the Reformation of Comedy
at Athens, I shall not much dispute the matter with him. Because he has in that
abridged himself of much of that Liberty, which he has used in his former
Plays. But granting even this, Aristophanes can at most but lead up the Van of
the Middle Comedy; and is very far distanc'd by the New.

For tho Aristophanes has in some measure altered his Conduct in his Plutus,
Fable of Old Comedy of what kind.
yet he retains absolutely the Form and stamp of the Old Comedy, and retrenches
only some offensive Liberties. The Fable of the old Comedy was altogether
Chimerical, and the Characters Romantic and Whimsical, neither of 'em drawn
from the Observation of Nature, or the business of Humane Life, but pumpt out
of the extravagance of the Poets Brain. The Spirit of these Entertainments
consisted in the Piquancy of the Raillery and Jests, and the boldness of the
Scandal, in which they took excessive Liberties with particular Persons,
especially the Chorus, and to which the success of 'em was wholly owing.
Characters of Cratinus, Eupolis, and Aristophanes how differenced.
Cratinus is said to have been very bold, and to have taxed people freely by
their names, without miucing the matter, (I had almost said without Fear or
Wit) and charged them with all sorts of Crimes, without respect to Persons.
Eupolis was somewhat more discreet, couching real Crimes and Persons under sham
Names, and lashing his Fellow Citizens on the backs of feigned Offenders.
Aristophanes was frequently no less plain than Cratinus in respect to Names,
but his Wit was of another sort, less Sullen and Chagrine. He turned all into
Jest, and bantered those things, which the others reprehended after a manner
more serious and severe.

Menander and the New Comedians formed their Models after a very different
manner. New Comedy how differing from the Old.
For having particularly Scandal, which had given so much Offense in the Old
Comedy, they began to furnish themselves from Observation and Experience,
rather than Invention, and to employ their Judgments more than their Fancies.
They raised the structure of their Plays upon the Foundations of Nature, and
made the Intrigues of the World, and the common Affairs of Life the Subjects of
'em, and the different orders of Mankind. A hard Father, a difficult Master, a
wild Son, a crafty Servant, an impudent Pandar, a Mercenary Courtezan, and a
Captive Virgin, were the most usual Characters; which being opposite to, and
concerned with one another, set the Plot naturally to work, and give occasion
to set all the Wheels of the Machine a going.

This may suffice to give us an Idea of the difference between the Old Comedy
and the New, Plutus not New Comedy.
and to convince us that the Plutus of Aristophanes, which deals altogether in
unaccountable Designs and surprising Events, and works by Unnatural Machines to
a Chimerical, Romantic end, is not New Comedy; tho the Poet contrary to his
Custom makes use of Feigned Names, and lays aside the Chorus. For tho these
Innovations be here made in Comedy, yet both the matter and the Form (wherein
consisted the main difference between the Old Comedy and the New) remaining
still the same with the rest of his Plays, it can by no means be admitted into
the New, both matter and form of which were different, if not directly opposite
to the former. Satire of the Old Comedy particular. Of the New general.
For in the Old Comedy they proceeded from Generals that were Chimerical and
false, to argue particulars that were real and true. In the New from
Particulars that were imaginary and false, they reprehended Generals that were
real. The Old Comic Poets generally devised some extravagant and unnatural, or
at least improbable tale, into which they took occasion to thrust particular
Facts and Persons that were real, and well known. The New made use of such
Intrigues and Persons as were frequent and familiar amongst Mankind, and
thereby corrected the common Faults, such as Avarice, Fraud, etc. but copyed
neither the Actions, nor Manners of Individuals; and so reflected not
particularly upon any One. The first resembled a Limner, that could copy the
Features of a Face, but could only draw Individuals like, ye could not design;
the latter a true Historical Painter, that aimed rather at expressing the
Manners, and Passions of Mankind than the countenances. In whose pieces you
should not amongst a Thousand meet one Face, that you distinctly knew, yet none
but what were natural and significant, and such as you must acknowledge you saw
every day. The difference therefore betwixt the Old Comedy and the New is as
great and evident, as betwixt the Paintings of Raphael Vrbin, or Michael
Angelo, and those of Sir Anthony Vandike, or Sir Peter Lely. I shall not
therefore insist upon those lesser differences of Phrase and Meter, those
already given, being sufficient to inform a very indifferent Judge.

However, Arisstophanes the Bginner of the Middle Comedy.
as Aristophanes has in this Play varied his Conduct in some things from the
Practice of the rest of the Old Comedians, and of himself in his former Pieces,
he seems to challenge the first place in the Middle Comedy, which the Learned
have found it necessary to distinguish both from the Old and the New. Because
several alterations were made in Comedy, of which perhaps the Omission of the
Chorus was none of the least considerable, yet neither the Model or Design were
totally changed till the time of Menander, and his Cotemporaries.

Mr Collier's second mistake in relation to the Plutus of Aristophanes is, No
Chorus in the Plutus.
that it has a Chorus in it. If he means that there is a part in this Play,
which is sustained by a Person or Persons under the name of Chorus, Matter of
Fact is directly for him: But if he thinks that there is any such thing as a
true Chorus in it, it is as plain against him. This matter will easily be
decided, if we consider the Nature, and Office of a Chorus in the Old Comedy.

The Chorus in Comedy, Office of the Chorus in Comedy.
was a Person consisting of diverse, either Men or Women, or both, and assisted
in two Capacities. One as an Actor, or Party concerned to promote and carry on
the main design, and help forward the Action of the Play, which is common to
the Chorus with the other Actors, and does not distinguish it from 'em. The
other, as the Poet's Representative, to make the Parabases, or Transitions from
the Actors, (with whom only as an Actor the Chorus is concerned) to the Gods,
or to the Audience. To the Gods, to invoke their Aid, or celebrate their
Praises, as the occasion suggested. To the Audience, to inform 'em of what was
supposed to pass extra Scenam behind the Scenes, to make the Action of the Play
entire, or to make reflections on what passed upon the Stage for the
Instruction of the Audience, and to tax the evil Practices of such Citizens, as
were obnoxious to the Poet, and the Public. This was the part by which it at
least gave offense, by the disorderly liberties which it took; and sometimes to
acquaint the Audience with the Poet's hopes and fears, his acknowledgments and
complaints, which last part of the business of the Chorus is answered by the
Prologue among the Romans.

I shall not trouble the Reader with the Grammatical division of the parts of
the Chorus, The parts Essential to a Chorus omitted in the flutus.
( viz.) Ode, Antode, Strophe, and Antistrophe, etc. which signify nothing to
the point before us. But I shall desire the Reader to take notice that in the
Plutus of Aristophanes, this part which alone constitutes the Office, and
Business of a Chorus, and which only distinguishes it from a common Actor is
entirely omitted. The Chorus in this Play appears but as an ordinary Actor, and
addresses itself to the other Actors only, comes on, and goes off without once
singing or speaking apart from the rest. The Chorus therefore, as it is called,
in this Play might more properly have been personated by a single man, and
called by any other name, since it performs nothing of the Office.

The Observation of this defect of the Essential part of the Chorus, made the
Learned Etiam in ^jusdem Pluto Chori desiderantur, quod and alibi monebamus:
ita tamen ut non omissus, sed exemptus videatur. Poetic. lib. 1. cap. viii.
Julius Scaliger think, that this Play had been castrated, and that the Chorus
(which he confesses to be wanting) was not omitted, but taken away since the
writing of it. But whether it were, as Scaliger suspects, taken out after it
was finished, or omitted in the writing, is not very material; it is plain we
have it not, and it is very probable that 'twas the Author's own fear of
offending, that deprived us of it; the want of which caution in his (...) cost
Cratinus his Life. For had the Chorus of the Plutus ever been made public, I
see no reason why that, as well as the rest of his Chori, should not have been
transmitted to us. I would advise Mr Collier in the next Greek Play he cites,
to read farther than the List of the Persons of the Drama. For it is apparently
negligence, that has led him into this Error, and made him think, that because
he found a Chorus there, it must needs be in the Play, which he would not have
allowed to be a legitimate Chorus, had he read the Play, and known the business
of a Chorus. It Is yet in his Election which excuse shall stand for him.

Mr Collier's Instances therefore signifies nothing to his Argument, because it
does not prove a Chorus consistent with the New Comedy.

1st, Because the Plutus in which he instances is not New Comedy.

2dly, Because (tho it were New Comedy) it has no Chorus.

So that, I suppose, we may lay the Authority of Aristophanes aside in this
case.

We shall not trouble the Reader with a particular of the Fables of
Aristophanes, which are so extravagantly Romantic, that it is impossible they
should be edifying. And therefore I suppose Mr Collier will not play the
Morality of the Greek Comedy upon us from that Quarter.

But he proceeds to prove the continuance of the Chorus in Comedy by an oblique
Inference from Aristotle, Unconc^^^^ Inf^r^nce from Aristotle.
who lived after this Revolution of the Stage, (yet) mentions nothing of the
omission of the Chorus. P. 150.
But in Mr Collier' s opinion, rather supposes the continuance of it, by saying
the Chorus was added by the Government long after the Invention of Comedy.

Here the Silence of Aristotle concerning the omission of the Chorus in Comedy,
Silence of Aristotle no argument in this Case
is made an Argument of the Continuance of it; and by an odd sort of Sophistry,
he concludes, that because he has taken notice of the first Institution of it,
he must needs do the same for the disuse of it, had he been acquainted with it.

By the same way of arguing he might have proved, that Aristophanes was the the
last of the Comic Poets before Aristotle, because he has made no mention of any
that succeeded him; and yet we are sufficiently informed, that there were
diverse between Aristotle and Aristophanes.

But if at this distance we must needs be conjecturing at reasons, Reason of
Aristotle's silence in this point.
for that which passed so long ago, a much more natural account may be given of
this Silence, than that which Mr Collier strains so hard for. Aristotle was a
man of extraordinary Capacity and Judgment, and did not talk so impertinently
as Mr Collier supposes he would have done, if he had had opportunity.
Aristotle, in this Treatise of Tragedy, gives a very brief account of the Rise
and Progress of the Drama, His account of the Rise of the Drama.
and as his subject obliged him, tells us, that the two Branches, Tragedy and
Comedy, arose both from the same Spring, viz. the Hymns to Bacchus, the former
from the Dithyrambi, which contained his Praises and Exploits, Cap. 4.
the latter from the (...), (...). Progress of Comedy (...).
a sort of obscene Songs composed of the same Deity, which in conformity to the
Law were still continued his time in the Villages.

In the next Chapter he proceeds to the Definition of Comedy, in order to
illustrate the difference betwixt that and Tragedy; and then informs us, that
the first steps toward the reducing Comedy to Form and Order, were made in the
dark, and the marks of 'em too far obliterated to be traced backwards, through
public neglect, that 'twas long e're it came to be Acted at the Expense of the
Public. For that is the meaning in this place, of the Magistrates giving the
Chorus, that is paying the Actors. For he immediately subjoyns, that all before
that time were Volunteers in this Service, that is, acted gratis.

In this account of the growth of Comedy, Brevity of Aristotle.
Aristotle according to his usual Method, is very concise, and does not make
one step out of his way to gratify any Curiosity, which he foresaw that some
of his Readers might have. But Mr Collier, who reasons after a manner very
different from the Philosopher, would lead him a Wild Goose Chase quite out of
his road, to tell when the Chorus in Comedy was silenced, tho 'twas nothing to
his purpose, and a long way from his Text; or force him to confess against his
Conscience that he knows nothing of the matter. But Aristotle, who was a better
Judge than Mr Collier of what was proper and necessary to his subject, reserves
this point to another occasion, and in the preceding Chapter reprimands the
unseasonable Curiosity and Impatience of those, Cap. 4.
that require decisions out of Time and Order. Which had Mr Collier carefully
read, this Argument probably had been suppressed.

However, A particular Treatise of Comedy written by Aristotle, but lost.
to oblige him with a little scratching where it itches, I must desire him to
take notice, that at that time Aristotle had actually written, or designed at
least to write another Book concerning Comedy in particular, and therefore
prudently forbore to use those Materials here, which he knew would be more
serviceable in another place. This Book has been long lost, and therefore there
lies no Appeal to it on this occasion. Yet because he has such a mind to make
Aristophanes the Father of the New Comedy, we'll stretch a point farther than
we are bound by the Laws of Polemicks; and to show that we are fair
Adversaries, point him out a Play, that may perhaps serve his turn somewhat
better than the Plutus. The Cocalus, one of the last Plays of Aristophanes,
which is lost, is said by some learned men to have been the Model, which
Menander copyed exactly, and took his design of the New Comedy from. If this be
true, Aristophanes may in some sense claim the New Comedy as his Issue. But
then Mr Collier must not say a word more of the Chorus. For it is certain that
Menander used none, and very probable, that the Cocalus had none neither, if
that were his Model.

By this it may appear, Chorus not used in the New Comedy.
that whether a Chorus be consistent with New Comedy or not, it was not used in
it by the Ancients. Nor was it indeed fit to be used according to the liberties
of Aristophanes. And we may conclude from the practice of all Ages and Nations
ever since, that they thought those Freedoms essential to the Chorus of Comedy,
when they chose rather to lay it wholly aside than to reform it. If Moliere
has, after two thousand years discontinuance, ventured to bring a Chorus again
upon the Comic Stage, I don't find that his performances of that kind have any
extraordinary effect, or that they stir up many Imitators to follow his
Example. Moliere was arrived at the second Infancy of his Poetry, and might
want these helps to keep his Plays upon their Legs, which by the first Comic
Poets were made use of to teach theirs to go upright. His more vigorous
productions scorned those Crutches, which the Issue of his old Age, that brings
the Infirmities of its Parent along with it into the world, is forced to have
recourse to for its support.

But to what end would Mr Collier introduce the Chorus into the English Comedy?
Chorus altogether improper for the Comic Stage in England.
We have no Hymns, no Anthems to be sung upon the Stage; nor no Music, or
Dancing, but what it as well or better performed by the ordinary Method now in
use, than it could be by a Chorus. The main business of a Chorus is cut off by
our Religion, and the rest rendered useless and unnecessary, by the method and
disposition of our Comedies. Something like it we have still in use, tho not in
our Theaters, yet at our Puppet Shows; Used at Puppet Shows.
where Chorus stands before the Scenes, and explains to the Spectators what
they see, and informs 'em what shall happen afterward, makes his Wise
reflections on what is past, and sometimes enters into Dialogue with his little
Actors, as a Party concerned, and talks to the purpose like one of them. This
is exactly the Office of a Chorus, and therefore I don't see why the fellow
that discharges it may not wear the Title; except it be, that the Authors of
that sort of Drama, are generally too illiterate to know from whence they
originally fetched their Precedent. Here is nothing of the duty of a Chorus
omitted, except the Singing, Dancing, and Idolatrous Part, which, as we have
already observed, are all either better supplied otherwise, or absolutely
inconsistent with our Religion and Stage.

Mr Collier indeed seems to assign the Chorus another Office. Function assigned
the Chorus by Mr Collier.
He would have it to be a sort of Monitor, or Chaplain to the Play, to preach
to the Audience, and correct the Disorders of the Stage. This is a new
Function, for which I doubt he can produce no warrant from Aristophanes, or
Precedent from Moliere. It Is an Office of his own creating, and therefore he
would do well to execute it a while himself, to instruct the Players, and teach
'em the knack of Preaching, in which they are yet unexercis'd.

But all this Torrent of Misreasoning and false Rhetoric flows from one
Spring, Original Error of Mr Collier.
one Original Error has branched itself out thus amply. Mr Collier knows, that
the business of Comedy is to instruct by example; and he mistakenly imagines,
that these ought to be Examples for Imitation. Whereas, if he considers the
nature of Comedy, he will find just the reverse of this fancy to be true. For,
as we have already taken notice, it can employ no perfectly upright Characters,
and consequently can afford no Examples, but for Caution.

Nor is Comedy therefore to be thought imperfect, Loose Characters in Comedy no
Encouragement to Debauchery.
any more than the Law, which makes no other provision for the encouragement of
Virtue and good Actions, than by punishing Vice and Villainy. What Mr Collier
objects in this case is groundless, that the Poets, by dressing up an
imperfect, or debauched Character, with the embellishments of Wit and Sense,
and other good Qualities, and crowning it with Success at last, pave the way to
Licentiousness and Debauchery. For, whether the Poet brings such a Character to
a sol^mn Resolution of Reforming at last, or not, which yet they generally do,
it is evident, that the success which attends it, is not given to the
Licentiousness, but to the Wit and Sense, or other good Qualities, which are
predominant in the Character. He therefore that can take Success so bestowed,
and circumstantiated as it is usually in Comedy, for an encouragement to
Debauchery must have a very depraved Apprehension.

But Mr Collier is implacably enraged at the Poets, Ridiculous Fear if Mr
Collier.
for mixing such Beauties and such Blemishes in one Piece; and is in a Pannick
Fear, lest the Beauty of the whole should tempt Folks to ape the Deformities of
it. This is as ridiculous an Apprehension, as if any awkard Fellow should see a
Beau in all his Glory with dirty Shoes, and should fancy that he made that
splendid Figure purely by virtue of the dirt upon his Shoes, and resolve never
to have his own cleaned again. A fine Face, with a cast of the Eyes, may move
the Beau's and the Ladies to wish for such Features, and such a Complexion, yet
it would scarce win 'em to endeavor to squint like it. Whatever Mr Collier may
think, the Understanding of our Youth is not so very depressed and low, but
they can very readily distinguish between the obvious Beauties, and Defects of
a Character, and are not to be fooled like Dottrels into a vicious Imitation.
If a Man should know a Pickpocket that was an excellent Accountant, or a Forger
of false Notes that was an incomparable Writing-master, it were very easy, and
very commendable, for any one to imitate their good Qualities, without
receiving any taint or impression from their Rogueries.

However, Mr Collier observes abundance of Licentiousness and Impurity in the
world, Theaters wrongfully accused by him.
and is resolved to lay it all at the doors of the Theaters. He sees up and
down a great number of figures like those that are exposed upon the Stage, and
he wisely concludes, that the Models must needs be taken from thence, and that
these men are but the Players apes, which is directly contrary to the Truth.
For these are the Originals, of which those upon the Stage are but the Copies,
the Images, which that, like a Glass, reflects back upon 'em

Chorus, Sense of Horace again perverted.
or non Chorus, Mr Collier pushes still forward upon the mistaken, Authority of
Horace; and maintains that Horace having expressly mentioned the Beginning and
Progress of Comedy, discovers himself more fully. He advises a Poet to form his
work upon the Precepts of Socrates and Plato, P. 151
and the Models of Moral Philosophy. This was the way to preserve Decency, and
to assign a proper Fate and Behavior to every Character. Now if Horace would
have his Poet governed by the Maxims of Morality, he must oblige him to
Sobriety of Conduct, and a just Destribution of Rewards and Punishments.

To try the validity of this Argument, we must have recourse to the Original,
which will show us some misapplication, and some mistake of Horace's meaning in
this short Paragraph. Mr Collier links this advice of Horace immediately to his
account of the Rise and Progress of Comedy; and that he may appropriate it
solely to Comedy, skips over a transition of twenty lines, by which the Poet
artificially passes from the particular of Comedy to Poetry in general; and
takes occasion to say, that a good Poet ought to be a wise Man, and acquainted
with the Writings of the Philosophers. For Socrates appears in this place as
the Representative of the whole Body of Moral Philosophers, and not for himself
and Plato only, as Mr Collier Imagines.

Scribendi recte sapere est Principium and
^ons. Hor. Art. Poet.

Rem tibi Socraticae poterunt ostendere chartae.
The reason of this he immediately subjoyns, which will also make the
application for us. For, says he, The man that knows what is due to his
Country, and his Friends, his obligations to Parents and Kindred, the Laws of
Hospitality, and the duty of a Senator, a Judge, and a General, knows enough to
enable him to do Justice to every Character.

Qui didicit Patriae quid debeat, Ibid.
and quid amicis:
Quo sit amore Parens, quo Frater amandus and Hospes,
Quod sit Conscripti, quod Iudicis officium, quae
Parts in bellum missi ducis: ille profecto
Reddere personae scit convenientia cuique.
This List of Qualifications seems prepared only for Tragic and Epick Poetry.
Comedy, which concerns none but the lesser Intrigues of Mankind, and the
private Affairs of particular Families, or Persons, has no dealings with the
Public, or its Magistrates; and therefore does not seem to be comprehended in
the aim of these directions.

Yet, This Advice Political, not Moral.
if Mr Collier will have it included, he ought to have shown how far it was
affected in particular upon a fair exposition. But that method would not serve
his turn. For Horace in this passage, does not advise the Study of Morality,
but Politics, which could best satisfy demands of this nature. He did not
expect that the Poets should tie their Characters up to severe duty, and make
every one act up to the strict Rules of Morality, and be guided by the dictates
of right Reason and Justice, or otherwise to punish 'em always in proportion to
the Deviations they made from 'em, as Mr Collier insinuates. All that he
required was, that a Poet should know how it became the several orders of men
to behave themselves in civil Societies, according to their respective Ranks,
Degrees, and Qualities; that they might thereby be qualified to give distinct
Images of every kind, whether good or bad, without mixing of Characters, or
confounding Ideas. Rectum est Index sui, and obliqui, was his Rule in this
case, and it is a true one, a right notion of things will certainly discover a
false one. For this he advised his Poet, to consult the Philosophers, and to
dive into the political Reasons of these matters, without which their view of
'em would be but superficial and confused.

Yet after all he gave him very large Privileges, and extended his Charter, as
far as the observation of Humane Nature, he allowed him the liberty of saying
any thing that Providence laid before him, provided he kept close to the
Original. To this end he bids him look upon the Examples that men set him in
their Lives and Manners, and thence learn to draw true pictures of Mankind.

Respicere exemplar vitae, morumque jubebo.
Doctum Imitatorem, and veras hinc ducere voces.
The Mores, Manners here signified Poetical not Mor^^
or Manners here mentioned by Horace, are the Poetical, not Moral, the
distinction betwixt which Mr Collier very well knows, as appears by his making
use of it, when it is for his turn, tho he wilfully over-looks it in many other
places, where the notice of it would be more natural, but less for his
malicious purpose. However, since he has given a sort of definition, tho an
imperfect one, of Poetical Manners, I shall give it the Reader in his own
words. And because it is the only Statute Law of Parnassus, by which the Poets
can fairly be tried for any misdemeanour, either of Character or Expression, I
shall supply the Defects or Mr Collier's report of it from Aristotle, who is
more full and clear.

Manners, Mr Collier's description of Poetical Manners
in the Language of Poetry, is a propriety of Actions and Persons. To succeed
in this business there must be a regard had to Age, P. 165.
Sex, and Condition: And nothing put into the mouths of Persons, which
disagrees with any of these circumstances. It Is not enough to say a witty
thing, unless it be spoken by a likely Person, and upon a proper occasion.

In this account I observe many things deficient, Def^ctive and Esiv^cal.
something equivocal, which I shall first take notice of, and then proceed to
supply the Defects. The three things, Mr Collier recommends to a Poet's, or
Reader's careful observation, and regard, are Age, Sex, and Condition. Of
these, the first and the last, Age and Condition, are equivocal terms. The
Author has not taken care to explain, whether he means by Age, the Age of a
Person, or the Age of the World, which he is supposed to live in. For to both
these great regard is to be had, because they difference the Characters
equally. A noble Roman of four and twenty in the first Ages of the
Commonwealth, was no more like one of the same Age under the Emperors, in
humor and inclinations, than either of 'em was like his Grandfather of
Fourscore. As great, or greater is the Ambiguity of the word Condition, whereby
he has not signified whether he means Condition, as to Estate, Quality,
Understanding, or Circumstances, as to the Action of the Play, at the juncture
when the person does or says any thing. Yet these have all an equal share in
the propriety both of Words and Actions, and ought to be considered, otherwise
the Manners can never be preserved in their Propriety and Integrity. But by
supplying the Defects of this Account, we shall remedy the danger of mistakes
from the equivocal Expressions contained in it.

Aristotle requires four conditions to the perfection of Poetic Manners.
Aristotle's description.


1st, That they be good.

By the Goodness of Manners the Philosopher does not here understand any Moral
Goodness; for he declares in this very Article, that he means only (...).
that they should be expressive of the Character, and carry both in words and
actions, the distinguishing marks of the Humor and Inclinations of the person,
whether they be morally Good or Bad. So that if the Humor or natural
Inclinations of the persons be sufficiently marked in the words and actions, the
Manners are good, according to Aristotle, let 'em be never so vicious. Horace
understands Manners the same way, when he tells us, that sometimes Plays of
little Elegance, without Ornament, or Art, yet wherein the Manners were well
expressed, took better than others, wherein they were neglected for Tinsel and
Bombast.

Interdum speciosa locis, Hor. Art. Poet.
morataque recte
Fabula, nullius Veneris sine pondere and Art
Valdius oblectat Populum, meliusque moratur,
Quam versus inopes rerum, Nugaeque canorae.
2 dly, (...).
That they be proper.

Wherein this propriety consists Aristotle has not told us, except in one
Negative Instance, Propriety of Manners required
that Courage is a Quality improper, or unbecoming a Woman. Mr Collier's
account of Poetical Manners above cited, relates to this particular Condition
only, yet is both defective and equivocal in that. Horace has been very full
upon this, and takes care to describe at large the different humors of man in
the several Stages of his Life. The same he does to the several orders and
degrees of men, according to their respective Capacities, either Natural or
Political, and gives the Poets a great Charge not to confound 'em. To repeat
his words upon this occasion would be tedious, upon the score of length.
However, I shall endeavor to give the Reader as good an Idea of this Poetical
Propriety, Wherein it consists.
as the narrow compass I am obliged to will permit. The propriety of Manners
consists in an exact conformity both of words and actions to the supposed Age
both of the person and the world, to the Humor, Fortune, Quality,
Understanding, and present Condition, as to the business of the Play, of the
person acting or speaking. Horace as well as Aristotle, has expressed all this
in one word, Convenientia, both which I have rendered Proper. This place does
not afford me room for instances for each particular, and therefore I shall
desire the Reader's patience, till the Subject calls for 'em in their proper
places.

3 dly, That they be like.

This Condition relates only to Characters taken from Histories, Similitude of
Manners
or Poetical Traditions very well known. When the Poet makes use of Names, or
Stories with which the Audience is well acquainted, he must be sure to make 'em
conform to the received opinion. Otherwise the Audience, who will not endure to
have their own Notions contradicted, will never acknowledge 'em to be the
Persons they would be taken for. For this reason Horace bids his Poet, Follow
common Fame, Famam Sequere. And if he meddled with known Names, to keep to the
known Characters, and Accounts of 'em.

-- Honoratum si forte reponis Achillem: Hor. Art. Poet.

Impiger, iracundus, inexorabilis, acer:
Iura neget sibi nata, nihil non arroget armis.
Sit Medea ferox, invictaque flebilis Ino,
Perfidus Ixion, Io vaga, tristis Orestes.
The likeness here designed, is not a Natural, but a Historical likeness.
However monstrous a Character were, if it was formed upon, and adjusted to
common Fame, the Poet was justified.

4 thly, Equality of Manners what.
That they should be equal.

Here likewise Aristotle puts in his Caveat, lest any one by Equality of
Manners should understand such a steadiness of Temper and Resolution, as would
exclude from the Stage the uncertainty of Fickle Humors, which he very well
knew to be the case of a very great part of mankind. All that he required was,
that they should be all of a piece, that there might be no dismembring of
Characters, no repugnancy to themselves in any part of 'em. Horace, his best
Interpreter, says, Let the character be maintained, and let the person appear
the same at his exit, that he did at his entrance, and be consistent with
himself.

-- Servetur ad imum
Qualis ab incepto processerit, Art. Poet.
and sibi cons^et.
The Philosopher did by no means intend to cut off so considerable a Branch
from the revenue of Comedy as Levity; than which nothing deserves her
Correction more, nothing fits her purpose better. But he cautions the Poets,
whenever they make use of any of these Unequal, or Uncertain Tempers, to
represent 'em (...).
equally, or alike unequal through the whole Piece; and not to make 'em Fickle and
Inconstant in one Act, and Resolved and Steady in another.

Upon these Rules we may proceed to try the Characters, and Expressions of our
Poets, either in conjunction with the Ancients, Faults of Characters what.
or separately by themselves.

The Characters and Expressions have such a natural dependence upon one
another, that they cannot be examined apart, each being justifiable or
condemnable upon the Evidence of the other only. The Character may offend two
ways; first, by being unnatural, and consequently Monstrous; 2 dly, by being
Inconsistent with itself, and not all of a Piece. These Faults, when committed,
are likewise two ways discoverable, by the Actions, and by the Expressions,
when any thing is done, or said unnatural, or improper, a Fault is committed
against Character, which is thereby broken, and becomes double.

The Faults of Expression are as various as the circumstances against which it
may offend, Faults of Expression manifold.
which are already summed up under the head of Propriety, which may again be
every one subdivided into so many Branches, that it would be endless to
particularize the several ways of trespassing in this kind. I shall therefore
content my self to take notice of 'em severally, as occasion shall present it
self, and wave* any further notice of those which shall not be found to my
present purpose.

Mr Collier might unquestionably have found our Poets remiss enough in the
observation of these Rules, and consequently guilty of faults deserving his or
any one's correction. But he chose rather to brand 'em with crimes of a blacker
dye, tho with less Justice and Truth, and like an Irish. Evidence, by his
forwardness to charge, and the monstrousness of his allegations, destroys the
credit of his depositions.

His charge against our Stage for the mismanagement of their Characters
consists of three general heads. Some heads of Mr Collier's Charge.


1. Misrepresentation of Women. 2. Abuse of the Clergy. 3. Rude treatment of
the Nobility.
To all these I shall say something general, with regard to the Argument,
without entering into a discussion of the Merits of those particular Instances
which he brings to back his Assertions. Not but I think many of 'em easily to
be Apologiz'd for, or rather to be justified; but because it would spin out
this discourse to an unreasonable length, and likewise because there are those
whose Abilities in this dispute are as much greater than mine, as their
Interest in it, to whom I leave it.

The Poets (says Mr Collier) make Women speak smuttily. P. 8, 9, 12.
They bring 'em under such misbehaviour, as is violence to their Native
Modesty, and a misrepresention of their Sex. For Modesty, as Mr Rapin observes,
is the Character of Women. They represent their single Ladies, and persons of
Condition, under these disorders of Liberty. This makes the Irregularity still
more monstrous, and a greater Contradiction to Nature and Probability.

Here again, This point mistaken.
according to his usual method, Mr Collier mistakes his point, and runs away
with a wrong scent; however he opens, and cries it lustily away, that the
Music may atone for the mistake, and draw all those that are not stanch in
Partners to his Error. Mr Rapin observes that the Character of Women is
Modesty, and therefore Mr Collier thinks, that no Woman must be shown without
it. Aristotle has given Courage or Valor as the Characteristick or Mark of
distinction proper to the other Sex, which was a notion so Ancient, and so
universally received, that most Nations have given it a denomination from the
Sex, as if peculiar to it. The Greeks called it (...), we Manhood. Yet it is no
Solecism in Poetical Manners to represent Men sometimes upon the Stage as
Cowards; nor did any man ever think the whole Sex affronted by it; how near
soever it might touch some Individuals.

If the Poets set up these Women of Liberty for the Representatives of their
whole Sex, Faults of particular no reflection upon the Sex in General.
or pretended to make them the Standards to measure all the rest by, the Sex
would have just reason to complain of so abusive a Misrepresentation. But it is
just the contrary, the Sex has no Interest in the Virtues or Vices of any
Individual, either on the Stage, or off of it; they reflect no honor or
disgrace on the Collective Body, any more than the Neatness and good Breeding
of the Court affect the Nastiness and ill Manners of Billingsgate, or are
affected by 'em.

In Plays the Characters are neither Universal nor General. Universals and
Individuals improper Characters.
Marks so comprehensive are the Impresses and Signatures of Nature, which are
not to be corrected, or improved by us, and therefore not to be meddled with.
Besides, they give us no Idea of the person uncharacterized, but what is common
to the rest of the species, and do not sufficiently distinguish him. Neither
are they so Singular, as to extend no farther than single Individuals.
Characters of so narrow a Compass would be of very little use, or diversion.
Because they would not appear natural, the Originals being probably unknown to
the greatest part, if not the whole Audience; nor could any of the Audience
sind any thing to correct in themselves by seeing the Infirmity peculiar to a
particular man exposed. This was indeed the method of the Old Greek Comedy; but
then they picked out public persons, whom they dressed in Fools Coats and
exposed upon the Stage, not in their own own Shapes, but those of the Poet's
Fancy; an Insolence, that never would* have been endured in any, but a Popular
Government, where the best of Men are sometimes sacrificed to the Humors and
Caprices of a giddy multitude. Yet even by them it was at last suppressed.

The Characters therefore must neither be too general, What Characters proper
nor too singular, one loses the distinction, the other makes it monstrous, we
are too familiar with that to take notice of it, and too unacquainted with this
to acknowledge it to be real. But betwixt these there is an almost* infinite
variety; some natural and approaching to Generals, as the several Ages of the
World, and of Life, Sexes and Tempers; some Artificial, and more particular, as
the vast Varieties and Shapes of Villainy, Knavery, Folly, Affectation and
Humor, etc. All these are within the Poet's Royalty* and he may summon 'em to
attend him, whenever he has occasion for their service. Yet tho these make up
perhaps the greatest part of Mankind, he is not fondly to imagine, that he has
any Authority over the whole, or to expect homage from any of 'em, as the
Public Representatives of their Sex.

Yet even granting to the Poets such an unlimited Authority (which I shall not
do) Mr Collier's Argument falls to the Ground nevertheless. Two sorts of
Resemblances in Poetry.
For as in Painting, so in Poetry, it is a Maxim as true as common, that there
are two sorts of Resemblances, one handsome, the other homely. Now Comedy, whose
Duty it is not to flatter, like Droll Painting. gives the Features true, tho the
Air be ridiculous. The Sex has its Characteristick Blemishes as well as
Ornaments; and those are to be copied, when a Defective Character is intended,
as the others are for a perfect one. And yet, for the reasons already given,
when the Virtues or Vices of any particular Women are represented, the Sex in
general have no share either in the Complimeut or the Affront. Because any
particular Instances to the contrary notwithstanding, the Sex may be in the
main either good or bad. So that Mr Collier's charge of misrepresenting the Sex
in general is groundless.

But he pursues his Argument to particulars, and takes notice, that even
Quality it self is not excepted from these Mismanagements.

If Dignities conferred true Merit, Quality no just reason for exemption.
and Titles took away all Blemishes, the Poets were certainly very much in the
wrong to represent any Person of Quality with failings about her. But if Birth
or Preferment be no sufficient Guard to a weakly Virtue or Understanding. If
Title be no security against the usual Humane Infirmities; I see no reason, why
they may not as well appear together upon the lesser Stage of the Theater, as
upon the grand one of the World. But this will be more properly considered in
another place.

From these more general exceptions, Mr Collier's collect in from the Ancients
very loosely made.
he descends to particular Expressions. Which, that he may render the more
inexcusable, he flies out into extravagant Commendations of the Ancients upon
the score of their Modesty, and the Cleanness of their Expressions. In this
employment he bestirs himself notably, and pretends not to leave one
exceptionable Passage unremarked. But either he has had a Prodigious Crop, or
is a very ill Husband; for he leaves very large gleanings behind him. We shall
make bold to walk over the same ground, and pick up some of his leavings, (for
all would be too bulky to find room in this place) and restore 'em to their
Owners, whether left by him out of negligence or design.

One thing I must desire the Reader to take notice of, which is, that I don't
charge these passages as faults, or immoralities upon the Ancients, but only
instance in 'em, to show the partiality of Mr Collier, who violently wrests the
Words and Sense of the Moderns, only to make that monstrous and unsufferable in
them, which he either excuses or defends in the others. Nor do I here pretend
to present the Reader with a complete Collection of the kind. I assure him,
that I shall leave untouched some hundreds of those instances which I have
actually observed amongst the Greek and Latin Dramatists, and only give him so
many, as are indispensably necessary to show how unjustly Mr Collier has drawn
his parallel. For since both Ancients and Moderns, as Poets are submitted to,
and ought to be governed by the same Laws, it is but reason, that one as well as
the other, should be allowed the benefit of 'em.

Shakespeare's Ophelia comes first under his Lash, Objection to Ophelia.
for not keeping her mouth clean under her distraction. He is so very nice,
that her breath, which for so many years has stood the test of the most
critical Noses, smells rank to him. It may therefore be worth while to enquire,
whether the fault lies in her Mouth, or his Nose.

Ophelia was a modest young Virgin, Character of Ophelia.
beloved by Humlet, and in Love with him. Her Passion was approved, and
directed by her Father, and her Pretensions to a match with Hamlet, the heir
apparent to the Crown of Denmark, encouraged, and supported by the Countenance
and Assistance of the King and Queen. A warrantable Love, so naturally planted
in so tender a Breast, so carefully nursed, so artfully manured, and so
strongly forced up, must needs take very deep Root, and bear a very great Head.
Love, even in the most difficult Circumstances, is the Passion naturally most
predominant in young Breasts but when it is encouraged and cherished by those
of whom they stand in awe, it grows Masterly and Tyrannical, and will admit of
no Check. This was poor Ophelia's case. Hamlet had sworn, her Father had
approved, the King and Queen consented to, nay, desired the Consummation of her
Wishes. Her hopes were full blown, when they were miserably blasted. Hamlet by
mistake kills her Father, and runs mad; or, which is all one to her,
counterfeits madness so well, that she is cheated into a belief of the reality
of it. Here Piety and Love concur to make her Affliction piercing, and to
impress her Sorrow more deep and lasting. To tear up two such passions
violently by the roots, must needs make horrible Convulsions in a Mind so
tender, and a Sex so weak. These Calamities distract her, and she talks
incoherently; at which Mr Collier is amazed, he is downright stupefied, and
thinks the Woman's mad to run out of her wits. But tho she talks a little
lightheaded* and seems to want sleep, I don't find she needed any Cashew in
her Mouth to correct her Breath. That Is a discovery of Mr Collier's, (like some
other of his) who perhaps is of Opinion, that the Breath and the Understanding
have the same Lodging, and must needs be vitiated together. However, Shakespeare
has drowned her at last, and Mr Collier is angry that he did it no sooner. He
is for having Execution done upon her seriously, and in sober sadness, without
the excuse of madness for Selfmurther. To kill her is not sufficient with him,
unless she be damned into the bargain. Objection groundless and friv. ^o^. ^.
Allowing the Cause of her madness to be Party per Pale, the death of her
Father, and the loss of her Love, which is the utmost we can give to the
latter, yet her passion is as innocent, and inoffensive in her distraction as
before, tho not so reasonable and well governed. Mr Collier has not told us,
what he grounds his hard censure upon, but we may guess, that if he be really
so angry as he pretends, it is at the mad Song, which Ophelia sings to the
Queen, which I shall venture to transcribe without fear of offending the
modesty of the most chaste Ear.

To morrow is St Valentine's day, Mad Song.
all in the morn betimes,
And I a Maid at your Window to be your Valentine.
Then up he, he arose, and don'd his
Clothes, and dupt the Chamber door,
Let in a Maid that out a Maid
Never departed more.
By Gis, and by St Charity:
Alack, and fie for shame!
Young men will do it, if they come to it,
By Cock they are to blame.
Quoth she, before you tumbled me,
You promised me to wed:
So had I done, by yonder Sun,
And thou had not come to bed.
It Is strange this stuff should wamble so in Mr Collier's Stomach, ^oolish but
^^ffensive.
and put him into such an Uproar. It Is silly indeed, but very harmless and
inoffensive; and it is no great Miracle, that a Woman out of her Wits should
talk Nonsense, who at the soundest of her Intellects had no extraordinary
Talent at Speechmaking. Sure Mr Collier's concoctive Faculty's extremely
depraved, that mere Water-Pap turns to such virulent Corruption with him.

But Children and Mad Folks tell truth, Ancients more faulty then this.
they say, and he seems to discover through her Frenzy what she would be at. She
was troubled for the loss of a Sweetheart, and the breaking off her Match,
Poor Soul. Not unlikely. Yet this was no Novelty in the days of our
Forefathers; if he pleases to consult the Records, he will find even in the
days of Sophocles, Maids had an itching the same way, and longed to know, what
was what, before they died.

Antigone, Instance in the Antigone of Sophocles.
whom he has produced as an instance of the Temperance, and Decency of the
Ancients in this respect, may upon the Parallel serve us as an example of the
contrary. The distinguishing Parts of this Ladies Character, are Piety and
Resolution, and she makes both sufficiently appear, she buries her Brother, tho
she knew she must die for it. And when she receives her Sentence from Creon,
which was immediately to be put in execution, she makes light of Death, and
insults the Tyrant. But as she is led to Execution, she is unexpectedly
concerned about the Toy her Maidenhead; it is her great Affliction, that she
must go out of the world with that great Burden about her. Upon this occasion
she is very clamorous, and that it may be taken notice of as her main
grievance, she repeats it diverse times over, and chews the Cud upon it
liberally.

-- (...)
(...)
(...),
(...) --
Poor Girl, she does not relish her Sentence half so well as an Epithalamium.
She thinks a soft Bed, and a warm Bedfellow more comfortable by abundance,
than a cold Grave. And who can blame her? But Matrimony runs strangely in her
head. For a little after she is at it again, complaining of her want of a
Husband, and is very sorry that she must cross the Styx, and visit her Parents
with her Maidenhead about her.

(...)
(...).
And immediately after she is at it again.

-- (...) Unmarried is still the burden of the Song. Nay, she is so full of
it, that she cannot forbear talking of a second Husband, in case she were a
Widow.

(...). This thought of a second Husband is such a Refreshment to her, that she
cannot forbear dilating upon it. One would think by the odd Frolicksomeness of
her complaints, and the whimsical Comforts she finds out, that she was only
going to dance barefoot at a Sisters Wedding. But within a few lines, she
relapses again into her agonies of despair, and is more afraid of leading Apes
in Hell, than e're a hopeless Antiquated Damsel within our Bills of Mortality.
She is not so much concerned at dying, but to go out of the world, (...)
(...).
and not to have one Honey Moon, not so much as a merey Bout before she went,
was a hardship she could not bear with any temper.

We may find by this Lady's complaint, that she was very desirous to dispose
of her Maidenhead; but for any thing that appears from her complaint or
behavior, she was very indifferent to whom. 'Twas a Burden she longed to be
rid of, and seemed not to care who eased her; for she does not mention her
Contract with Haemon, which she decently might, but laments her want of a
Husband in general terms, without giving the least hint of an Honorable Love
for any particular person.

These are extraordinary Speculations for a dying Person. However, Mr Collier
admires the Poets conduct in this case, and were he Ordinary no doubt but we
should have these Flowers transplanted in great plenty to the last Speeches of
his dying Females. He thinks it is out of pure regard to Modesty and Decency,
that Antigone takes no notice of Haemon in her complaints. I shall not dispute,
whether 'twere the fashion in the days of Sophocles or not; but I am sure it is
accounted but an ill Symptom of Modesty in our Age, when a young Lady shows an
impatience to be married, before she has made a Settlement of her Affection
upon any Individual Man.

However, Instance in Electra of the same Author.
Antigone's Carriage is not singular; Electra, another Lady of much the same
Quality and Character, (tho not under those immediate apprehensions of Death)
declares her self of the same Opinion. She Is in great distress too for want of
a Husband, and complains very heavily upon that score.

-- (...),
(...)
(...).
Nor is Euripides a whit more tender in this point. The Royal Polyxena, just
before she was to be led away as a Victim to the Manes of Achilles, harps upon
the same string. It lies very heavy upon her Spirits, that she must go out of
the World in ignorance.

-- (...)
(...).
This Princess's complaint is yet more unreasonable than either of the former,
and more unbecoming the Modesty of her Sex, and the greatness of her Birth and
Courage, as it is both before and afterward show. Shown as a Captive, a part of
the Plunder of the sacked City, one that besides her own unhappy Destiny, which
hung immediately over her head, had the Ruin and Miseries of her Country and
Family fresh in view, to put all wanton thoughts out of her head. Besides, she
could not expect to ascend the insolent Conquerors Bed any otherwise than as
his Vassal, the Slave of his Lust and Pleasure, which, as it was below her to
comply with, but upon Force, so it must be a Slavish Baseness, as well as
Wantonness and Incontinence, to desire it under her Circumstances.

It were easy to bring many Instances more of this kind, but I think. it would
be tedious and unnecessary to multiply instances in a plain case. I think it
likewise a labor altogether as superfluous to spend more words to show the
vast disproportion between the innocent Extravagance of Ophelia's Frenzy, and
the sober Rants of Antigone, Electra, and Polyxena. To suppose the Reader could
overlook that, were to affront his Understanding.

But before I part with Antigone, I shall beg leave to make one observation
more. P. 35.
Mr Collier takes notice, that Cassandra, in reporting the misfortunes of the
Greeks, stops at the Adulteries of Clytemnestra and Aegiale. And gives this
handsome reason for making a halt.

(...).
Foul things are best unsaid.
From whence he observes, that Some things are dangerous in report, as well as
practice, and many times a Disease in the Description. This Euripides was aware
of, and managed accordingly, and was remarkably regular both in Style and
Manners.

This was indeed an extraordinary piece of niceness in Euripides, more I think
by a great deal, than he was obliged to, and I am sure more than he has shown
upon other occasions. Cassandra might have foretold the Discovery of the
Adulteries of Clytemnestra and Aegiale, without any Indecencies of Language, or
shocking the most tender Ear, had the Poet so pleased.

Sophoclcs, Antigone in Sophocles not so nice.
who was as good a Judge and as careful an observer of decency as Euripides,
gives his Antigone more liberty; tho had he thought it indecent, he might with
better reason have excused her. 1st, Because what Antigone says is no way
necessary, being neither provoked by any thing that preceeded, nor of use to
the promoting of the Action, or the Information of the Audience. 2dly, Because
she thereby revives the Infamy of her Parents, and refreshes the scandalous
impressions, which her own Incestuous Birth must needs have made upon the
Audience to her disadvantage.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
If Antigone might be thus free with her own Family without breach of Modesty,
I cannot see why Cassandra should be so tender of an Enemy, whom she was just
going to supplant in her Bed; and in the divulging of whose Faults, as well as
Misfortunes, she might be allowed to take some Pleasure, Casandra not so nice
as Mr Collier pretends.
as a sort of anticipation of the satisfaction, which she took in the Revenge
of the Destruction of her Family, which she foresaw was to come. But Casandra
loved doing better than talking. For in the Speech foregoing to this, which Mr
Collier commends so much for the Modesty of it, Casandra runs almost mad for
Joy, that Agamemnon would take her to his Bed, and calls in an Enthusiastic
manner upon Hymen, upon Hecate, and Apollo to grace the Ceremony. She desires
her Mother, and the miserable Phrygians about her to adorn themselves, be
merry, and dance, and sing, as if her Father were in the height of his
prosperity. The Chorus hereupon desires Hecuba to curb her, and keep her from
running voluntarily to the Grecian Camp. Her Mother accordingly reprimands her,
and tells her she thought their Calamities might have made her more modest,
that Tears better became their Fortune, than Nuptial Songs or Torches.

-- (...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
This Reproof has a strange Operation upon Casandra. E^travagance of Casandra.
For instead of reclaiming and reducing her to reason, it makes her ten times
madder. She falls to cross purposes with her Mother, and as if she had been
Pandress in the case, calls upon her to crown her victorious head, and wish her
Joy of her Royal Match. She bids her lead her, and if she does not make have
enough, she would have her push violently on.

(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
Is this the Modest, the bashful Casandra, so demure, that she cannot name
adultery, tho in an Enemy, and yet so forward to act it, that no restraints of
Shame or Misery can keep her within bounds.

It may perhaps be objected in Defense of Casandra, that her Joy and Transport
springs not from any Pleasure or Satisfaction, that she should take in this
Match, but from the Prospect she had of revenging the Quarrel of her Family,
and the Ruin and Destruction which she foresaw should thence come upon the
House of Atreus her mortal Enemies.

Admit this to be true. Indecency against Character.
Yet Casandra pushes her Resentments too far, when she sacrifices her Virtue
and Modesty to her Revenge. Had Casandra been represented as a Woman of a
furious vindicative Spirit, she might in a sudden fit of Rage have rashly
sacrificed all Considerations to the Violence of her present Fury. But then if
the Character be virtuous in the main, such Outrages are not offered to
Modesty, till after prodigious struggles, and racking Convulsions of Mind.
Passion must not triumph over Reason and Honor, but with vast labor and
difficulty, and in those Breasts only, where it is the ruling, uncontrollable
Power, and where the prospect of its success is great, and immediate, and is in
Women provoked as well by Appetite as Inclination.

But this is none of Casandra's case. She shared indeed amongst the rest the
common Fate, and became a Slave, and a Prey to the victors Lust and Avarice.
This might naturally make her wish the utter confusion of the Destroyers of her
Country and Family; but not at the expense of her Fame and Virtue. 'Twas all
she had left to comfort her; and as Andromache in the same Play could inform
her, of infinitely more worth, than the wretched remainder of a servile Life.
This therefore should not have been parted with at any rate, much less upon a
slender consideration. Had she submitted to necessity only, and complied as a
Slave with reluctance to the desires of Agamemnon, as Andromache does to
Pyrrhus, she had saved hes Modesty, and secured her Revenge every whit as well.
The Disasters of Agamemnon and his House, interpreted as a Punishment of here is,
and her Family's wrongs, tho they were only Prophetically fore-known by her,
had given a sullen s^rt of Comfort, and afforded a reason for her resignation
of her self to the Conquerors Pleasure. But if the Poet designed her for so
implacable a Character, as to take such great satisfaction in, and purchase at
so dear a rate a Prospect only of Revenge at such a distance, by which she
herself must be crushed, and all her Friends either dead, or so dispersed as to
have no interest in the accomplishment of it: he ought to have prepared the
Audience for so unaccountable an extravagance, by some notice of the Violence
of her Temper, either by something from her own mouth or Conduct previous to
this, or from the mouth of some Friend of here is, that might have abated the
surprise of such a resolution. Especially since he was resolved she should
appear no more by her future modest behavior to qualify the Scandal of this
Misdemeanour.

This Lady being set up by Mr Collier as the Standard of Modesty, I have
examined her Conduct the more at large; and am very willing to leave it to the
decision of the Reader, whether Casandra or Ophelia would best become the
Cloister, or most needs the Discipline of the Nunnery in Moorfields.

We have seen how this Lady can behave her self upon occasion. Misbehaviour of
Hecuba.
Let us examine her Mother, that corrected her wantonness so seasonably upon
this occasion. She as older should have more wit, and yet she forgets herself
extremely too sometimes. In the Play that bears her name, Hecuba comes to
Agamemnon, complains of the murder of her Son Polydorus by Polymestor, and to
move him to Compassion begins a wanton Discourse of the Pleasures of Love to
him, tho she thinks at the same time, that it is impertinent, yet she is resolved
it shall out.

(...),
(...).
As an old Woman she had the privilege of tattling. But as a Prudent Woman,
she ought to have handled her Daughters disgrace a little more tenderly. The
good old Lady never minces the matter, but outs with all roundly, and is
concerned, that any thing should abate of the satisfaction Casandra might have
in so good a Bedfellow.

(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
This is plain dealing, but something below the Dignity of the Queen of Asia,
at the lowest ebb of her Fortune. What follows is fit only for the Mouth of a
Drunken Midwife at a Christening in Wapping.

(...),
(...).
After these remarkable Instances of the regularity of Euripides, Love and
T^nderness used by the Moderns. Lust and Violence by the Ancients.
both in Style and Manners, I suppose our Poets may venture to show their Faces
in his Company, without danger of putting him to the blush with their want of
Modesty. But the Ancients, it seems, had very little Love or Courtship in their
Plays. Perhaps so. But they had Lust and Violence, which Mr Collier thinks more
eligible. The fault of the Modern Lovers, it seems, is too much tenderness and
fooling away their time in idle Talk. The vigorous Ancients went more roundly
to work, their's were like Spanish Intrigues, two words struck the bargain
betwixt 'em.

'Twere easy to multiply instances of this nature from Euripides, Numerous
instances of this kind to be found in Euripides.
were that my Design. But I love not to rake into the Ashes of the Dead for
that which is not worth finding. Yet that the Reader, if he has the curiosity,
may have the satisfaction, I shall refer him to the Places where they are to be
found; where he that has a mind to a more ample Collection, may be abundantly
furnished.

Hermione rails at Andromache in terms very misbecoming her Sex, Some referred
to.
Quality, and Years. Andromache reproves her for it in terms yet less beseeming
a sober Matron, and casts a scandalous aspersion upon her whole Sex. Creusa
makes a foul relation of her rape by Apollo, and descends nauseously to
particulars with her Servant. Ion her Son civilly questions his Mother, whether
she had not played the Whore with some base Groom, and to cover her disgrace
laid her Bastard (himself) falsely to Apollo's charge. Electra's manners are
much of the same size and complexion; when she is urging her Brother Orestes to
the murder of Aegisthus; she bids him ring in his Ears the whoring of her
Mother, and tell him, that since he had a Whore of her he must expect sharers
in her, and be the Cuckold of other Men, as her Father had been his. That he
was notorious for her Cully all the Town over. This sort of stuff she lets run
over without regard to Decency, and rambles as wantonly through the Infamy of her
Family, as is if 'twere only Scandal picked up at a Gossipping, in which they
had no particular Concern.

Whoever consults these and diverse Passages, as well in Sophocles as Euripides,
will find the most exceptionable Passages in our Poets, whether Comic or
Tragic very excusable, upon a fair Construction, let it be never so severe
within the Bounds of Justice.

Seneca has received Absolution, Seneca examined upon this Article.
and is pronounced clear of the sin of Uncleanness. Yet with Mr Collier's
leave, since he is introduced to vilify and depreciate the Moderns, he is bound
to confront 'em, and answer for his own Conduct, before he takes upon him
magisterially to censure and correct others. But since it is not so much his act
as Mr Collier's, who has ventured to be his Godfather, and answer for him, a
slight Inquisition shall excuse him. We shall not require so severe a Proof of
his Chastity as the Ordeal Trial. It shall be sufficient for him to enter his
Protestation against what has been done in his Name.

In his Hippolytus, Miscarriage of Phaedra.
Phaedra is possessed with a scandalous, incestuous Passion, and she indulges
it at as loose, a scandalous rate. She enters first with her Resolution, as
strong as her Desires. She is not concerned at the Nature or Consequences of so
vile a Passion, but at the difficulty of satisfying it. She appears at first
sight full grown and confirmed in Wickedness, and instead of condemning and
endeavoring to stifle so lewd, a licentious Flame, she animates her self to
the accomplishment of her design by a recrimination upon her Husband, and rips
up, amongst others, even those of his Faults, to which herself had been
accessory, and the sole occasion of his Guilt. But what is more strange and
unnatural, she draws matter of Comfort and Encouragement from the monstrous
Lewdness of her Mother, and the Infamy of her House. But what is most wonderful
of all, she is come to this height of Impudence, before she well knows what
ails her; she is but just arrived at the Discovery of her Malady. She can
neither Eat, Sleep, Work, nor Pray; but she burns, and boils inwardly like
Aetna it self, and is all agog on the sudden for hunting and handling the
Boarspear: She knows not why, till at length she finds, that she is her Mother's
own Daughter, and so the Mystery comes out.

Quo tendis anime? quid furens saltus amas?
Fatale miserae matris agnosco malum,
Peccare noster novit in Sylvis amor.
Genetrix, tui me miseret, infando malo
Correpta pecoris efferi saevum ducem
Audax amasti. Torvus impatiens guge
Adulter ille, ductor indomiti gregis.
Sed amabat aliquid: Quis meas miserae Deus,
Aut quis juvare Daedalus flammas queat?
Non si ille remee^ art mopsopia potens,
Qui nostra caeca monstra concluset domo,
Promittat ullam casibus nostris opem.
-- Nulla Minois levi
Defuncta amore est: jungitur semper nefas.
'Twas the fate of her Family, it seems, and she was by no means for contending
with her destiny, and therefore surrenders upon the first Summons of her
passion. Her Mother, she thinks, was much obliged to Daedalus, whose ingenuity
brought her and her horned Lover together. But alas! Poor Soul, She Is hard put
to it. Her Mother's Bull was a gentle tenderhearted Gallant, to her Savage
obdurate Son-in-law; and she, good woman, had no such necessary helps for her
Consolation. What must she do? He Nurse advises her to strangle this Incestuous
Brat, her Passion, in the Birth. But she bravely resolves to push on, whatever
comes on it.

Quemcunque dederit exitum casus, feram. Is this the modest Phaedra, whose
Language is under such discipline? Can she be so free with the Infamy of her
House, make such fulsome descriptions, and envy her Mother the caresses of a
Bull? But the Nurse mends the matter, and reproves her severely. Here therefore
we may expect a sample of strict and exemplary modesty, and chaste expression.

Sed ut secundus Numinum abscondat favor
Coitus nefandos -- and immediately after
-- Metue concubitus novos.
Miscere thalamos Patris, and Nati apparas,
Vteroque prolem capere confusam impio.
Is this the disciplined Language Mr Collier boasts of? Such we have indeed
sometimes under the discipline of Bridewel and Bedlam, but seldom elsewhere.
The most accomplished Disciple that ever came out of the late famous Academy of
the virtuous Mrs Meggs of notable Memory, could not have been more free in her
Language, as well as Thoughts. The Ancients, good Men, did not puzzle their
Heads about double entendre's to screen a foul thought, or labor for
Allegories and Allusions, but honestly called a Spade, a Spade, whenever they
had occasion. I believe these Ladies would be better company for Joan of
Naples, than Mr Dryden's Leonora, if fulsome Descriptions be so toothsome to
her.

But Mr Collier is mightily pleased, Modesty of Lycus consider.
that there is no courting, except in the Hercules Furens, where the Tyrant
Lycus addresses Megara very briefly, and in modest remote Language. Here he has
pointed us a Specimen of what he calls modest and remote. The Tyrant had
courted Megara, the Wife of Hercules, to no purpose, she obstinately repulsed
him; and therefore he turns him about, and modestly (as Mr Collier thinks) thus
addresses himself to Amphitruo. You have Pimpt for Jupiter to your Wife, and
shall do as much for me to your Daughter-in-Law, having so expert a Master it
can be no novelty either to her, or her Husband, to be civil to their Betters.
But if she obstinately refuses to comply, I Will force her, and beget a generous
Race.

Jovi dedisti conjugem, Regi dabis.
Et te magistro non novum hoc discet Nurus,
Etiam viro probante, meliorem sequi,
Sin copulari pertinax taedis negat,
Vel ex coacta nobilem partum feram.
This, according to Mr Collier, is Distance and Modesty, Old Style. If he will
make these allowances to our Poets, I Will engage to prove there never was an
immodest thing said upon the English Stage; a task I should be loath to
undertake upon any other terms, as much as I am persuaded of their comparative
Innocence.

But it is not in his Judgment only, References to other instances.
that Mr Collier can be partial; his Memory can be favorable too upon
occasion. For tho he does non omnibus dormire, yet he can wink at the Faults of
his old Friends, while he sees every slip of the Moderns double. He says, that
Seneca has no courting but this of Lycus; but I suppose, he wilfully forgets
the shameful solicitations which Phaedra uses to corrupt her Son-in-Law
Hippolitus, against the Charter of her Sex, and the rules of Decency. They,
whose curiosity invites 'em to a further enquiry, may find matter in abundance
for their speculations, in the Agamemnon, particularly in the Scenes between
Clytemnestra and her Nurse, Aegisthus and Clytemnestra, Electra and
Clytemnestra; and in diverse others places of the rest of the Plays of that
Collection.

If we should examine the Ancient Comedy These Faults less pardonable in
Tragedy, than Comedy.
with the severity that Mr Collier uses to the Moderns, we should let in such a
torrent of Citations, as would almost over-whelm us. But for the reasons
already given, there are grains of allowance to be made to Comedy, to which
Tragedy can lay no claim. Tragedy deals with persons of the highest Condition,
by and before whom the strictest severity of Manners and Decorum is to be
observed. The business is of great importance, and requires serious
consideration, and gives no opportunity for wantonness, or light indecencies.
Whenever therefore the Poet suffers snch persons to talk such Fooleries
themselves, or others to talk 'em to 'em, he stoops 'em below their Characters
and Business. But in Comedy the case is quite different, both the persons and
business are little, and exact neither State nor Ceremony. Most of the persons
are such, as either don't ^now, or don't regard Forms and Punctilio's of good
Breeding. This we have a plain Proof of in all the Comedies of Antiquity,
whether of the old or new Cut. Slaves the top Charact^rs of the Roman Comedy.
The Slaves ate so familiar with their Masters, that by the freedoms they take,
it is hard to distinguish one from the other, except that the Slave bears the
Character of Advantage, and appears generally to have more wit than his Master,
whom he is to assist if he be young, and cheat if he be old. Accordingly we
find 'em almost always bantering, quibbling, drolling, and jesting upon their
Masters, when they are together. Their employment is usually to purchase their
young Master a Mistress, with the Hunks their Old Masters money. By this means
the Slaves become the Principal Character in the Ancient Comedy, and are the
main Spring, by which the whole Machine of the Fable is set a going. The rest,
which are usually in the new Comedy, a covetous old Fellow, an extravagant
young one, a Bawd, a Whore, a stolen Virgin, are but the under Wheels, whose
motions are regulated altogether by those of the Slave, who is the Man of
Intrigue, and carries all the Brains the Poet can spare about him. The old Man
is froward, suspicious, severe, and closefisted; and sometimes he is
represented easy and indulgent, but has a scolding, turbulent, griping Wife, a
churlish, parsimonious Brother, or Relation, or conceited Wise Friend, that
takes upon himself to correct and govern him. The young Fellow is in Love,
extravagant, and in want of Money. The Bawd, whether Male, or Female, is
faithless, imposing, and acted only by present profit. The Whore, if an
experienced one, is altogether Mercenary, if raw in her Trade, she is dotingly
fond and loving, but under the care of the Bawd. The stolen Virgin is always
next to a Mute.

Their Plots are confined to as narrow a compass, Very little variety In th^^^r
Plots.
as their Characters. The young Man is in Love with a Slave, and wants money to
purchase her of the Bawd, who is about to sell, or prostitute her to another.
The young Man in this exigent has recourse to a crafty Servant, who helps by
some Stratagem to squeeze the money out of the old Sponge his Father, or to
cheat some other Body. A discovery at length is made to his Father, who is
vehemently provoked at his Sons folly and extravagance, and threatens to
difinherit him. Young Master and Man are at their wits end, to reconcile
themselves to the old Man, and no fetch, no contrivance left to bring
themselves off, when in comes some Merchant or Stranger, who discovers that
this Maiden is a Citizen, and well born; which pacifies the Old Fellow, the
young Man thrives in his amors, a match is struck up by consent of all
Parties, and all is well again.

It Is true, Greater Liberty taken by Aristophanes.
Aristophanes took a much greater compass, and brought not only Mankind, but
Gods, Brute Animals, and even inanimate Bodies within the Pale of the Stage.
This, as it enlarged his walk, increased his Liberty, which he sometimes abuses
at a scandalous unjustifyable rate. Mr Collier, to obviate all objections that
might be raised from the practice of Aristophanes, whose Comedies are the only
pieces of that kind remaining of the Greek Stage, by way of prevention excepts
against his Credit, and endeavors to invalidate his Evidence by accusing him
of Atheism.

But tho I think Mr Collier's Arguments to prove him an Atheist to be of no
validity, Aristophanes whether an Atheist or not (...) to the purpose.
as I could easily show, were it not an impertinent digression in this place;
yet I shall wave the particular refutation of 'em, because I think it not
material to the point in hand, whether he were so or not. For tho we should
grant, that the Poet himself was an Athiest, yet Mr Collier himself will not
pretend that his Audience, the people of Athens were so too. On the contrary it
appears that they were as arrant Bigots, as Mr Collier himself could wish to
trade with. They put Socrates to death, only because he would not be cullied
out of his reason, and be the Priest's Fool, to countenance and encourage a
senseless extravagant superstition. This made some Christian Fathers reckon him
among the Martyrs for the Unity of the Deity.

But Mr Collier, who has a much better hand at supposing than proving, takes a
very odd method to clear the reputation of that great man from the suggestions
of Aristophanes, and the censure of his Country, by whom he was condemned for
Atheism.

That Socrates was no Atheist is clear from Instances enough. To mention but one.
The confidence he had in his Demon or Genius, by which he governed his
Affairs, puts it beyond dispute.

That Socrates held, This Argument considered.
and believed the existence of Demons or Genii, may be an argument, that he
was no Atheist. But that he pretended to have any Familiarity, or hold any
Correspondence with such a Demon or Genius, gives me but a very indifferent
notion of his Faith and Integrity. It smells rank of Imposture, and must needs
make but a bad Impression upon men of Integrity, and Understanding of those
Principles, which want the support of such dishonest shifts. But this was
Plato's report of him, and perhaps was neither the real practice nor opinion of
Socrates, whom therefore we shall dismiss, as having been brought in only to
show how unluckily Mr Collier is gifted for Argument.

But if the Athenians could proceed Rigor of the Athenians to Socrates a sort
of Acqui^ment of Aristophanes.
with such Rigou^^ against a man so much revered for his Virtue and Wisdom, and
supported by the favor of their best and greatest men only, for holding
Opinions contrary to their Notions of Religion, it is not to be imagined, that
they who were so very tender in this case, so extremely sensible of any affront
to the Common Faith, would with so little concern, or rather so much
satisfaction, have heard it publicly insulted by Aristophanes. They showed in
the case of Socrates, that their Blood could rise and ferment upon such
occasions as high as any people's. How comes it then, that they who were so
outrageous and impatient with Socrates, are so tame, and passive as to bear
much greater Provocations of the same Nature from Aristophanes without the
least sign of Resentment? Was the interest of the Poet so much superior to the
Philosophers, that what was capital in one should deserve no manner of
correction, or notice in the other? No such matter, for he was called in
question, and took his Trial for a thing of much less moment, viz. For assuming
the Liberties of a Citizen of Athens being a Foreigner. Now there is (...)
doubt, but his Enemies who had the malice and the power to get him thus
arraigned, would have strengthened their Charge, with an Article so
considerable as Atheism, and Blasphemy against their Gods, before such
superstious bigoted Judges as the Athenians, had there been any ground or
color of suspicion. The Power and Malice of Cleon would have reached, him, had
there been any plausible pretense, to have fixed the guilt of a Crime so
unpopular upon him.

Mr Collier pretends to maintain his assertion by diverse instances of
irreverent passages in relation to their Gods, Mr Collier's ^o proof of (...)
assertion.
to be found in the Plays of Aristophanes. I grant there are such passages,
even more than Mr Collier has cited, tho many of those which he has selected to
prove his Allegation by, will by no means bear the weight of such a Charge. But
the people of Athens, who were in these matters much more delicate, The Opinion
of the Man not measured by the Expressions of the Poet at Athens
than Mr Collier seems to be, had the niceness to distinguish justly between
the Private Sentiments of the Man, and the Public one's of the Poet. In this
latter capacity almost all sorts of Characters belong' (...) to him, and he
must of consequence be frequently necessitated to make use of Thoughts and
Expressions very contrary to his own proper opinion. The Athenians therefore
did not lay these Liberties of the Stage, which they knew the nature of those
Characters which he represented must of course oblige him to, as blemishes
either in his Faith or Morals, to his Charge. Had Mr Collier been Master of as
much Understanding and Justice, as these Heathens, not only Aristophanes, but
our English Poets too had met with a fairer Adversary, and found civiller and
honester treatment. 'Twere easy to enlarge in the Justification of
Aristophanes; but Mr Collier gives him up, and therefore we need no parallel
between him, and the English Comic Poets, to prove the comparative modesty of
the latter; for which reason we shall proceed directly to Plautus whom he
justifies upon the comparison.

Plautus, Liberties of Plautus greater than those of the English Stage. P. 15.
by reason of the narrow Circle that he moves in, affords no great variety, yet
there is plenty enough in him, to make Mr Collier blush for his defense, if it
were all produced at large. For what he calls very moderate, and says, that our
single Plays shall far outdo all this put together, would in his Microscopical
way of observing appear monstrous, and infinitely exceed the most malicious
collection he can make out of the English Poets. But he presumes upon the
ignorance of his Readers, and imposes arbitrarily and magisterially what sense
he pleases upon every thing, and despotically coins Citations, which he forces
upon 'em for genuine, upon no better warrant than his own Will and Pleasure.
But to proceed to instance.

In the Amphitruo, Mercury, Instances from the Amphi^^io.
after a long scene of gross Drollery upon Amphitruo, bids him be gone, and not
disturb his Master's pleasure with his Wife.

Abscede moneo, molestus ne sies, dum Amphitruo,
Cum uxore modo ex hostibus adveniens, voluptatem capit.
Upon this Amphitruo asks, What Wife? and is answered Alcumena. This does not
satisfy his curiosity, but he must know whether he lies with her or not; and is
not contented till he has doubled the Question, and must be informed, whether
they lie in the same room both or not. Hereupon Mercury, to cut the debate
short, gives him this plain answer.

Corpore corpus incubat. Upon this Amphitruo bewails his misery, and Mercury in
mockery says, Lucri'st, quod hic miseriam deputat. Nam uxorem usurariam
Perinde est praebere, ac si agrum sterilem fodiendum loces.


The man's a gainer by what he calls his misery. For it is as profitable to have
ones Wife, as ones Field tilled by another.

At this rate Mercury drolls on; Remarkable Circumstances of this Passage.
wherein there is this remarkable, besides the quality of the persons, one a
God, the other a Hero, that the words last cited are supposed to be spoken aside
out of the hearing of Amphitruo; and consequently are immediately addressed and
peculiarly recommended to the Audience, The Disguise under which Mercury
appears no excuse for his misbehaviour.
as containing something very edifying or very entertaining.

I defy Mr Collier to prove any such licentious freedoms upon the English
Amphitruo, as angry as he is with it. But perhaps Mr Collier thinks the
disguise of Sosia, may excuse the ribaldry of Mercury. But this excuse will not
serve his turn. For Mercury is under no disguise to the Audience, to whom this
last Speech is particularly addressed.

But lest he should think Mercury a Mad God, Jupiter not more modest.
and allow him the liberty of Ribaldry, let us hear how cleanly Jupiter will
express himself. It the last Scene this Sovereign of the Gods appears in state,
owns his Quality and Intrigue, and bids Amphitruo receive his Wife. For, says
he, Mea vi subacta'st.

Mr Collier knows the meaning of the word Subigo in this case, and must strain
as hard in this place, as he thinks Lambin has done in another, if he will
defend it.

The Asinaria, Instances from the Asinaria.
the next Play in order, affords besides the Scene betwixt Cleareta the Bawd,
and Argyrippus, (which Mr Collier confesses to border upon rudeness, and I
think downright Bawdy in several places) two more, one betwixt Argyrippus,
Philenium, Leonida, and Libanus, which is very loose, and another, which is
singularly instructive, between Argyrippus and Demaenetus his Father. Instance
of singular Morality.
The old man, like a good Father, purchases a Whore for his Son, upon condition
that himself may come in for snacks, and withal tells him, that it becomes a
young man to be modest, and let his Betters go before him, that he had provided
a Mistress for him to solace himself with all the year, if he could but be
content, to let his Father be his Taster. This is wholesome Doctrine, and
seasoned with such grave Morality, no doubt very edifying. This Mr Collier
finds no fault with, and therefore we may very well pass it by; since, if it
will bear the Test of his Hypothesis, it will unquestionably of ours. Tho, had
this been of English growth, it had found no favor, but had smarted
unmercifully under his discipline.

One thing it is necessary to take notice of before we go any further, Plautus's
Lovers more active than talkative.
and that is, that whether Plautus's Lovers talk Love, or not, they act it very
plainly and vigorously before Folks, wherever they come together. Instanced
from the Curtulio.
An instance of this kind we have in the Curculio at the meeting of Phaedromus,
and Planesium, (who by the by is supposed to be a modest Virgin). At their
purchased opportunity of coming together, they are so active and boisterous,
that Palinurus the Slave stands amazed, and cries out, -- uterque insaniunt.
Viden' ut misere moliuntur, nequen nt complecti satis.


These words are more expressive of Action than Passion, though indeed they
imply both. Planesium, to mend the matter, expresses her discontent, that the
Servant did not withdraw, but staid to be a check upon 'em.

Iam huic voluptati hoc adjunctum odium est. The Servant replies with
indignation, and reprimands his Master for behaving himself so immodestly, --
Ut immodestis hic te moderere moribus

I mention this only to show how Comparative Modesty of the Virgins of the
Ancient Stage hence to be observed.
much even the modest Virgins of the Ancient Stage valued an opportunity. This,
according to Mr Collier's Hypothesis, would have been a Capital misdemeanour
upon the English Stage, whatever it was upon the Roman. Many more instances of
this kind, and more plain ones might be produced, but I have not room for 'em
here. However, this may serve to show what sort of Nun's Flesh Mr Collier would
be at, when he makes Vestals of such Lasses as this.

Mr Collier is so very fond of the Sobriety of Plautus's Plays, Mr Collier's
own exceptions taken notice of.
that he defends even then Conduct of the Pandars and Slaves, and maintains,
that they don't misbehave themselves before Women. He is sure at least, that
there are but four instances to the contrary, P. 17.
as he remembers, Olympio, Palaestrio, Stratilax and Dordalus are the persons.
And the Women they discourse with, are two of them Slaves, and the third a
Wench.

I Am sorry Mr Collier's memory is so bad, His instance in Olympio grossly
mistaken or misrepresented.
when he has so much occasion for a better. He takes notice of but three Women
thus freely dealt with, two whereof, as he tells us by way of mitigation of
damages, were Slaves, and the third a Wench. From whence he seems to infer,
that before Women of Modesty and Condition, these Slaves and Pandars were more
cautious and reserved in their Language. But Olympio, whom he has subpaena'd as
an Evidence for himself, will tell him otherwise. The persons he plays his
Gambols before, are Cleostrata and Murrhina, two principal Citizens Wives,
Matrons of as great Quality and Virtue as any, that e're trod the Roman Stage
in Comedy; Alcumena excepted. These Matrons had shamm'd him with a man in
woman's Clothes for a Bride, and big with the expectation of the Issue of their
jest, fell to catechizing him about the business. The Clown, without regard to
their Quality, which was the more considerable in Cleostrata, because she was
his proper Mistress, and might severely chastise any rudeness, yet the Clown, I
say, makes a very rank description, and what is worse, the women were pleased
with it, and urge and prompt him forward.

Ol. -- illa haud verbum facit, Casina Act 5 Scen. 2.
and sepit vest, id qui estis,
Ubi illum saltum video obseptum, rogo, ut altero sinat adire.
Enim jam magis jam appropero, magis jam lubet in Casinam irruere. --
This, instead of rebating the edge of his Mistresses Appetite, inflames her
curiosity yet more; she is impatient till he proceeds.

Cl. Perdis, quin pergis.
Cl. -- continuo stricto gladio: atat babae papae. Cl. Quid papae.
Ol. -- Gladium ne haberet metui, id quaerere occaepi
Dum gladium ne habeat quaero, arripio capulum,
Sed quem cogito non habuit gladium, nam id esset Frigidius.
Here the Booby began to mince the matter; and his Mistress, that loved
plain-dealing, corrects him for it, and bids him speak out, but he is ashamed,
he says,

Cl. Eloquere. Ol. At pudet. The Slave however has some grace. His Mistress
cannot be satisfied so, she is for every thing in as proper terms, as if he was
giving evidence in a Court of Record. But not prevailing that way, she prompts
and pumps him with Interrogatories as loosely as a waggish Council at a Bawdy
Trial.

Cl. Nam radix fuit? Number cucumis? The Woman, it is plain, had a true
apprehension of the matter, but she did not like his clownish Bashfulness.
Still the fellow boggles at naked Imagery; however he improves, and comes on
apace.

Ol. Profecto non fuit quicquam olerum
Nisi quicquid erat, calamitas profecto attigerat nunquam:
Ita quicquid erat, grande erat.
Volo, ut obvortat cubitissim,
Verbum ullum mutit,
Surgo ut ineam.
If we measure the Conversation of Plautus's Ladies of Quality by this
Standard, the Ladies of our Stage, taking even the loosest, need not be ashamed
of their Breeding. Nay, they would blush for their company if they were brought
together.

But Cleostrata and Murrhina are not singular. In^^ance from the As^naria.
In the Asinaria, Artemona, upon the discovery of her Husbands intrigue,
reflects upon his Failings toward her, and makes a very odd discovery of her
own wants.

Art. -- Ego censeo
Eum etiam hominem Senatui dare operam, aut Clientibus
Ibi labor delassatum noctem totam stertere.
Ille opere foris faciundo lassus noctu advenit.
Fundum alienum arat, incultum familiarem deserit.
He was ( says she) so taken up with tilling another's ground, that he let his
own lie fallow.

This frankness of the Lady's complaint gave the Slave her Informer the
boldness to put a very homely question to her.

Possis si forte accubantem tuum virum conspecteris
Cum corona amplexum amicam, si videas cognoscere?
Could you know your Husband, if you should see him and his Mistress in a
posture that would not show his Face.

This passage (to use a Phrase of Mr Collier's) I have translated softly, but
very fairly. Yet even thus the Image, which in the Original is expressed in the
proper vulgar terms, appears too gross and plain, and is such as would not be
endured upon our Stage, as lewd as Mr Collier thinks that and the Age.

However, Slaves not the only Off^nders of this kind in Plautus.
The Men who talk intemperately are generally Slaves, says Mr Collier; and he
cannot find any Gentleman guilty of an indecent expression, except Lusiteles,
who is once over airy. I shall help him to another, out of a great number, that
are ready upon demand, which is the more authentic, because it comes from a
grave old Gentleman in no very airy mood, but while he is correcting another
for his Lewd ness and Debauchery. In the Miles Gloriosus, Periplectomenes asks
Pyrgopolinices the Soldier, Cur es ausus subagitare alienam uxorem, Miles
Glo^iosus.
impudens?

The Gravity of the man here makes the grossness of the Expression the more
remarkable. After these instances I hope Mr Collier may upon second thoughts
have a better opinion of the Gentlemen and Ladies of our Stage, than
heretofore, at least that he will do 'em more Justice in his next Parallel.

But Mr Collier has one hold to retreat to yet, (...) logues and ^pilogues no^
always ^noff^ns^^.
from whence he must be driven before we part. Plautus his Prologues and
Epilogues are inoffensive. If this can be maintained, he has gained a great
point; P 17.
but here, as in other places, he triumphs before Victory. The Prologue and
Epilogue are properly the Speeches of the Poet, and it is in them, if any where,
that we discover the Morals of a Comic Poet. Lambin finds a double entendre in
the Prologue to the Paenulus; Mr Collier thinks there is a strain in the
construction. I must own my self of Lambin's opinion; but, since Mr Collier
does not here deliver himself after his usual dogmatical way, I shall not
insist upon this passage, but proceed to instances, which no violence of
Construction can wrest to a wrong sense.

Here let us return to the Casina, This proved from the Epilogue to the Casina.
to which the Poet gives a very smutty conclusion, and a more smutty Epilogue.
Grex, that speaks the Epilogue, advises the Audience to clap lustily and give
the Poet his due, and to those that did it, he wishes as many Whores as they
pleased, unknown to their Wives; but to those that did not clap, he wishes a
He-Goat besmeared with the Filth of a Ship for a Concubine.

Nunc nos aequum est, manibus meritis meritam mercedem daffre,
Qui faxit, clam uxorem ducat scortum semper quod volet.
Verum qui non manibus clare, quantum poterit, pluserit,
Ei pro scorto suppon^tur hircus unctus nautea.
Here we have a Sample of the Poet's Morals, Epilogue to the Asinaria an
Encouragement to Lewdness.
which Mr Collier has warranted, as we have already seen. In the Epilogue to
the Asinaria, if we may take Plautus's word, we may have a Taste of the Manners
of his Age and Country, which Mr Collier is likewise very fond of. From both
which put together, we may give a reasonable guess at Mr Collier's own Palate
in such matters. Demaenetus his Wife had caught him in a Bawdy House, whoring
in his Son's company, and rated him home, which concludes the Action of the
Play. Hereupon Grex by way of application thus accosts the Audience.

Hic senex siquid clam uxorem suo animo fecit volupe,
Neque novum, neque mirum fecit, nec secus quam alii solent,
Nec quisqua st tam ingenio duro, nec tam firmo pectore
Quin ubi quicquam occasionis sit, sibi faciat been.
Here the Poet justifies Whoring, even in an old married man, and pleads the
common practice in defense of it. He thinks no man can withstand a fair
temptation to do himself good. For with that Phrase, he sweetens the business
and qualifies the offense.

Let Mr Collier compare these two Epilogues with those English ones to which he
refers, and then condemn them, and absolve these if he can. Nay, even the Play
of which Plautus himself makes his boast, Captivi.
That 'twas written up to the strictest rules of Chastity; that few such
Comedies were to be found, by which those that were already good, might be made
better, has a very broad touch of Smut in the Epilogue, even at the time he is
valuing himself upon his Modesty, Spectatores, Epilogue to the Captivi.
ad pudicos mores facta haec fabula est.
Neque in hac subagitationes sunt --
Hujusmodi paucas Poetae reperiunt Comaedias,
Vbi boni meliores fiant --


Such Instances as these crowd themselves so upon us almost every where in
Plautus, that it is hard to pass 'em over, and endless to take notice of 'em.
But having already far transgressed the intended limits of this discourse, I
shall trespass no farther upon the Reader's patience on this head.

His next complaint is the abuse of the Clergy. Complaint of the Abuse of the
Clergy not well grounded.
Were this complaint justly grounded, it would merit not only his, but all
honest men's Indignation, and Resentments. But this Charge does not seem to be
sufficiently made out. For it is raised upon a very weak foundation, a mistaken
Notion, that Priests above all the rest of Mankind, are by privilege exempted
from having their faults taken notice of this way; His reason for this shall be
considered by and by. I suppose, if Mr Collier's Band hung awry, or his Face
was dirty, he would use the assistance of a Glass to make all right and clean.
Why then does he reject the use of that which might do the same office for his
mind, and help him to correct the follies and management of his Life? The case
is plain, he is blind to his own Faults, and mad that any one else should see
'em. This makes him call the showing any of their failings, exposing the
Clergy, as if thereby only they became public, not considering that the Glass
shows our Faults to our selves only; other people can see 'em as plainly and as
readily without its help. But Mr Collier, who takes every thing by the wrong
handle, looks upon a correction as a reproach, and had rather a Fault should
pass unmended, than be taken notice of. But because he pleads a peculiar
Charter for the exemption of the Priesthood, let us see how he makes out his
Title. The Considerations, upon which he founds it, are three.

First, Because of their Relation to the Deity.

This Relation to the Deity he swells to a monstrous size, Their Relation to
the Deity to considered.
and blows himself presumptuously up in his own conceit, to a Condition
something above mortal. He pretends to no less, than to be one of the Principal
Ministers of Gods Kingdom, P. 127. 128.
to represent his Person, to publish his Laws, Pass his Pardons, and Preside in
his Worship. Mr Collier's Pride has here hurried him into prodigious Insolence
and Folly. To raise his own Character, he has made a Pope of every individual
Priest, and given that to the meanest of 'em, which the most Orthodox part of
the Christian World deny to the pretended Successor of St Peter? Is not the
whole world God's Kingdom? What then, are its Kings, Princes, and Rulers, if
every Priest be before 'em in Authority? Mr Collier, I believe, is the first
bold Mortal, that ever pretended to represent the person of God Almighty
seriously. This to me sounds more like Blasphemy, than any thing in the most
profane Poet. The Pope indeed presumes to style himself Christ's Vicar general,
but he does not presume to be the Representative of his Person. As Mr Collier
has assumed a higher Title, so, I suppose, he expects more reverence. It Is
strange that Enthusiasm should shoot to such a height in our cold Climate,
which it scarce ever reached in Rome its Native Place. But Mr Collier keeps a
hot Bed, where he forces up violent Notions, in spite of the opposition of an
unnatural Soil and Season.

But I should be glad to know, Personal Representation of Deity absurd.
wherein this personal Representation consists. Does he pretend, like the Pope,
to possess any of the Divine Attributes? Infallibility, even of the Church
itself, has been long since justly exploded by all sober Christians, that know,
and dare to use their Reason in the guidance of their Consciences. And the Pope
himself in the height of his Pride and Usurpation, never pretended to more.
But in what does this vain Creature resemble his Creator? Can a grovelling
Mortal sustain the Majesty and Figure of Omnipotence.

If notwithstanding all these Magnificent expressions of himself, The Power of
the Church not lodged with the Priest.
and his order, Mr Collier means no more, than than that a Priest derives a
subordinate Authority from the Church, to exercise his Function in Spiritual
matters conformably to her directions, then all this insolent profane Bombast
dwindles to nothing. For tho a very great power and trust is reposed in the
Church, yet I don't find, that this Power was ever lodged entire with the
Priest, or any other single person whatsoever. And therefore Mr Collier grasps
at too much, when he claims the same respect, and deference for every Priest,
that is, or ought to be paid to the Church, and the Governors of it.

But Mr Collier finds, Mission of St. Paul, and the Apostles what and how
circumstantiated.
that St. Paul calls himself and the rest of the Apostles the Ambassadors of
Christ, and thinks himself thereby sufficiently warranted to take upon him to
represent the person of God. The word which St Paul employs, 2 Cor. 5. 20. is
(...), which signifies to come by commission from another, and consequently may
probably enough be rendered, We are the Ambassadors, tho it does not always
import so much. Mr Collier lays hold of the word Ambassador, and fancies
himself in the highest, and most honorable post that can be, under God
Almighty, that is, to represent his Person, to publish his Laws, Pass his
Pardons, and Preside in his Worship. All this indeed, except the Personal
Representation, was the Office of St Paul, and the rest of the Apostles. But
without affronting, or lessening the Authority of the Clergy, I think I may
lawfully question whether Mr Collier's Commission be of equal Extent or
Validity with theirs. They were called to the Ministry immediately by God
himself, endued with supernatural and miraculous Faculties, and Powers both of
Discerning, and Operation by Inspiration from the Holy Ghost himself. They were
to plant in the World a new Faith, which had not yet been heard of, except in a
very small part of the world. Their Doctrines were revealed immediately to
themselves, and had no other Evidence than their own Affirmation, and the Works
that they did, to back and confirm what they taught. They had occasion for a
Spirit more than naturally discerning to be assured of the sincerity of their
Converts, and for a Commission and Power extraordinary, to remit the sins of
those that they found to be true Penitents, and to support themselves and their
Proselytes against the Oppressions of the Civil Power.

These circumstances, Difference betwixt their Commission and that of the
present Ministry.
as I take it, make a very wide difference between the Ministry, and Commission
of the Apostles, and the other immediate Disciples of our Savior, and the
Christian Ministry at this time. For first, They have now no immediate call to
the Ministry, whatever some Enthusiastic or Knavish Sectaries may pretend.
Secondly, They have no natural Gifts above other men, to warrant a Pretense to
an extraordinary Mission. Thirdly, They have now no peculiar Revelation, nor
any other Rule of Faith, or Source of Doctrine, which is not common to all
mankind with them. The Scriptures lie open for all that will look into 'em, and
our Clergy pretend to no supernatural Gift of Exposition above the Laity, and
consequently can offer no new matter of Faith. Fourthly, They pretend to no
Spirit of Discerning above the condition of mere humanity to enable 'em to see
into men's hearts, and judge of the sincerity of their repentance, and
consequently must dispose of Pardons blindfold, if they exercise any such
power, otherwise than conditional, and upon the terms expressed in Scripture.
But the pronouncing an Absolution on those terms, is not passing a Pardon, any
more than allowing the benefit of the Clergy to a Malefactor in a Court of
Judicature is an act of Grace in the Bench. Lastly, Since the World became
Christian, those extraordinary Commissions, which the Apostles and Primitive
Christians had, ceased with the reasons of 'em. For when the Princes and Rulers
of the World became the Proselytes and Protectors of Christianity, there was no
further occasion to propagate the Gospel by extraordinary methods, which had
the Civil Power on its side. By this means the care of the Church devolved upon
the State, and the Priesthood became subordinate to it. For tho no State or
Prince can make any thing a Rule of Faith, which was not so before in its
Nature, or by some higher obligation, yet in matters of Practice in things
indifferent toward which the Scriptures leave us at liberty, they have in all
Countries (not under the usurpation of the Pope) asserted their Authority by
ordering and directing the Forms and Models of Church Government, and
appointing the Persons of the Governors, who are therefore undoubtedly
subordinate to those, by whose Authority they govern.

From these differences it is plain, that the Ministry at present stands upon
quite another foot, than it did in the time of the Apostles; and that Mr
Collier challenges a relation to the Deity which he has not, and in right of
that a greater Reverence and respect than is due to him.

His second consideration is, Importance of their Office no exemption.
The Importance of their Office. What that is, has been in great measure laid
down in the preceding Article. How far they are concerned in publishing Gods
Laws, and passing his Pardons has been already examined. There was indeed a
time, when the Priests had a Monopoly of Faith and Salvation, and retail'd out
Articles and Indulgences to the Laity, who repaired to the Bank of Implicit
Faith and Merit for as much as their occasions required. But the weakness of
their Fund being discovered, that Bank is broke long since in England. and the
Laity have taken their Consciences into their own Custody again, to Mr
Collier's great Disappointment. However they preside (he says) in the Worship
of God. If he means by presiding, Officiating, he presides over his
congregation, as a Clerk in Parliament presides over the House, because he
reads the Bills, Petitions, etc. to 'em. That to officiate in the House of God
is an Employment of great Importance and honor, I shall readily grant. And as
they that perform their duty in that station conscientiously and well deserve
all due respect and honor; so on the other hand, those that prostitute their
Character to base ends, and make the Cassock a Cover for Pride, Ambition,
Avarice, Hypocrisy, Knavery, or Folly, deserve to be corrected, and exposed to
the Public. The importance of the Office, which Mr Collier pleads in bar to
any Lay Censure upon 'em, is a strong Argument for it. For in proportion to the
weight of the trust, ought to be the check upon it.

There may be many Faults amongst the inferior Clergy, Some faults not
cognizable by the Ordinary.
which escape the notice, or do not fall properly under the cognizance of the
Ordinary, which it is convenient should be amended, for the reputation of the
Order, and the good of the Offenders themselves. Mr Collier thinks otherwise,
he owns that they ought not to be seen, but he would have the People's Eyes put
out, rather than the Offense removed. A Blot's no Blot till it is hit; so the
reputation of the Clergy be safe, it is no matter for their Manners; for the Sin
lies in the Scandal. Else why is he so angry with the Poets, for taking notice,
that there is such a thing now and then to be seen in the world as a Faulty
Clergyman? The Order does not pretend to be any more exempt from failings,
than other men. Then where is the Offense in showing what those Frailties are,
to which they lie most exposed? It Is true, this cannot be done in the Dramatick
way, without the appearance of the Offender by his Proxy; which stirs Mr
Collier's Blood, who would have the Laity believe 'em absolutely without Fault.
'Twere well if they were so indeed, but since they are not, I think it not just
nor reasonable, that the Laity should be cheated into such a belief. The man
that labors too much to conceal his Faults, shows that he aims rather at
Impunity than Repentance. For men seldom think of Reformation, while they can
run on in a prosperous course of undiscovered Villainy.

Upon this account Mr Collier's reasoning appears very odd and singular. For if
the concealing and covering of Men's Vices, be the means to advance and promote
their corruption, he seems to take a sort of retrograde way to Reformation. But
his fear is, that the Vices of some few thus publicly shown, should reflect
upon the whole Order, and weaken their Credit and Authority in the Ministerial
Function. This objection is already answered in the article of the
Misrepresentation of Women; what has been there said holds good here, and needs
no repetition. It can therefore be of no ill consequence; For those that are
just, and Conscientious in the exercise of their Functions will lose no Credit
or Authority; and those that are not, have too much, if they have any.

If Priests be without Fault, Priests not misrepresented unless faultless.
then to paint 'em with any is a Misrepresentation, and an abuse, a malicious
slandering of the Order. But if they be not, it is fit that the rotten Sheep
should be marked and driven from the Flock, to prevent the contagion, whether
of the Disease or the Scandal, which are equally catching. But Mr Collier has
learnt Politics of Hudibras, and would have Priests whipped by Proxy; their
Faults should be chastised on Laymens Backs. We thank him for his kindness, and
are very willing to be his Deputies, provided he can prove that the Physic
will have its effect that way. I have been told, that a Purge given to a wet
Nurse, would operate with the Child; but I never heard of a Medicine that would
work Vice versa. I grant, that they ought not to be corrected on the Stage for
Lay Follies. Their Characters must be proper, in order to which, whether they
play the Fool or the Knave, it must be seasoned with a cast of the Profession;
otherwise they are Lay Fools and Knaves in Masquerade. But as the Characters
ought not to be so general, as to represent whole Bodies of Men, so neither
ought they to be so particular, as to stigmatize Individuals, as they did in
the Old Comedy. If this C^ution be observed, not only the Coll^ctive Body of
the Clergy, but every individual Man amongst 'em is safe from scandal from that
Quarter. If the Poets have not observed it, Mr Collier in vindication of the
Clergy has a just Provocation to lash 'em severely. But if they have, then Mr
Collier does 'em wrong, and the Poets ought to resume the Whipcerd, and return
the Compliment.

His last, His Plea from Prescription examined.
and, as it appears by his dilating so largely upon it, his strongest
Consideration is, that They have Prescription for their Privilege. Their
Profession has been in possession of esteem in all Ages and Countries. That it
has been in Esteem, and that it ought still to be so, more than it is, I
believe the Poets themselves will allow. But that it has always been esteemed
so sacred, that the Ancient Poets durst never suffer any of their Persons of
the Drama to make bold with it, I deny; and I think I shall demonstrate the
contrary.

I shall confine my self to the Dramatick Poets, Instance to the contrary from
Sophocles.
and only observe, that so the Priest be well treated it is no matter how his
God is served. For Homer is caressed at a high rate, for putting a Crown upon
Chryses's head, tho he uses the whole Tribe of the Gods like Scoundrels. The
first Poet, that I shall produce is Sophocles. In the close of his Ajax the
Chorus gives us the Moral of the Play in these words; Experience teaches us
much, but before the Event is seen, never a Prophet of 'em all can tell what
things will come to.

X. (...) Ajax Flagellifer.

(...)
(...).
This is a plain reflection upon the Profession, and so remarkably
circumstantiated, that there is no doubt, but 'twas the Poets real sense. For
it is spoken by the Chorus, and made the Moral of the Play.

I shall pass by the reproaches which Oedipus makes Tiresias, because Mr
Collier says they relate only to his Person, tho he himself in his Defense will
allow no distinction betwixt the Man and the Priest. If you make the Man a
Knave, the Priest must suffer under the Imputation. However in the same Play^
Jocasta says, She would not give a Rush for Divination.

(...) Oedipus Tyrannus.

(...) --
In the next Play Creon amongst other reproaches tells Tiresias, that They were
all a Pack of Mercenary Corrupt Fellows.

(...). Antigone.
We have not room to multiply instances so far, as we might, but these may
suffice to show, that Sophocles was not so much afraid of a Priest as Mr
Collier pretends.

Euripides is not a whit more tender of 'em, Eurip^des not mo^e tender of
Priests.
Agamemnon calls the whole tribe of 'em a vainglorious rascally Race.

(...). Iphigenia in Aulid*.
Achilles in the same Play (the Sobriety of whose Character Mr Collier is much
in love with) threatens Calohas the Prophet before spoken of, and breaks out
into this exclamation; What are Prophets? Fellows that by guess sometimes tell
truth, but generally Lies.

-- (...).
(...), Ibidem.

(...).
Pentheus in the Bacchae uses Tiresias very ruggedly. He charges him with being
Mercenary, and an Impostor, with seducing the People, and introducing a new
false superstitious Worship, and orders the Seats from whence he took his
Augural Observation to be pulled down, with abundance of other Menaces, and
hard words. These may suffice for Euripides at this time.

Seneca makes little use of the Prophets, or Priests; S^neca meddles little
with (...).
Tiresias appears twice in his Oedipus, and Calchas once only to deliver an
Oracle. Oedipus charges Tiresias with confederating with Creon, and charging a
false crime upon him, and traitorously endeavoring to supplant him in his
Throne. These Instances sufficiently demonstrate, that the Ancients were not
afraid to make their Persons of the Drama speak pertinently to their Character,
tho they should thereby happen to bear hard upon their Priests. Nay, they
thought it no offense to make 'em speak things inconsistent with Piety, and the
Religion of their Country.

The Instances of this are innumerable. Ajex An^igone and Ph^^octetes.
The Rants of Ajax, Creon, and Philoctetes in Sophocles are extravagant. This
Tragedian affords abundance, but to make a collection of scattered expressions,
would require more room than we can at present spare; Euripides and Seneca full
of profane expressions.
however, Euripides and Seneca afford diverse so very remarkable, that I cannot
pass 'em over absolutely without notice. In the Hecuba, Talthybius exclaims at
a strange rate upon the Consideration of the turn of Hecuba's fortune. O
Jupiter! what shall I say? should mankind address themselves to you: Or have we
been cheated with a sham Story of Gods, and Providence, while Chance governs
all things?

(...). Hecuba.

(...)
(...),
(...).
Polymestor is much such another sort of a Comforter, he cries out in the same
Play, and upon the same occasion, Oh what a slippery thing is Human Grandeur,
which is never secure. The Gods perplex and harrass Mankind, that our Ignorance
may support their Altars, and Worship.

(...), Ibidem.

(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
Electra, for a short one has a very pithy Ejaculation. O Nature, what a curse
art thou upon Mortals.

(...). Orestes.
Her Brother Orestes is allied to her in Principles as near as in Blood; he
cannot tell what to make of the Gods, any more than the two Gentlemen before.
Yet he serves 'em whatever they be.

(...) Ibidem.
All that he knows of 'em is, that they are naturally dilatory.

(...). Ibidem.
Hecuba is much of his mind; Troades.
she thinks the Gods but bad Friends, (...). The Cyclops tell Ulysses, That
Riches were the wise man's only God, and that he did not care a fart for
Jupiter; but thought himself as great a God as he.

(...). Cyclops.

(...).
(...).
In the Ion, which is pretended to be a Moral Play, Creusa addresses herself
directly to Apollo, Ion.
and calls him (...), lewd Whoremaster. Her Servant afterward calls him Rascal,
and advises her to set fire to his Temple. With such Flowers as these Euripides
abounds, which I leave for others to gather.

Seneca is as full of 'em as he, but I shall refer the Reader only to the
Chorus of the second Act of his Troas, which being spoken by the Chorus looks
more like the Poet's own Opinion, than if it had come from any other Person of
the Drama.

Post mortem nihil est, Troas.
ipsaque mors nihil,
Velocis spatij meta novissima.
Spem ponant avidi, soliciti metum.
Quaeris quo jaceas post obitum loco?
Quo non nata jacent.
Tempus nos avidum devorat, and chaos.
Mors individua est noxia corpori,
Nec parcens animae. Taenara, and aspero
Regnum sub Domino, limen and obsidens
Custos non facili Cerberus ostio,
Rumores vacui, verbaque inania,
Et par solicito fabula somnio.
Which is thus translated by the Earl of Rochester.

After Death nothing is, and nothing Death,
The utmost Limits of a Gasp of Breath.
Let the Ambitious Zealot lay aside
His Hopes of Heaven (whose Faith is but his Pride)
Let slavish Souls lay by their Fear,
Nor be concerned which way, or where,
After this Life they shall be hurled,
Dead they become the lumber of the World.
And to that Mass of Matter shall be swept,
Where things destroyed with things unborn are kept.
Devouring Time swallows us whole,
Impartial Death confounds Body and Soul.
For H^^, and the foul Fiend that rules
The everlasting fiery Goals,
Devised by Rog^^s, dreaded by Fools,
With his grim griezly Dog that keeps the Door,
Are senseless Stories, idle Tales,
Dreams, Whimseys, and no more.
Another exception, Rude treatment of the Nobility a false charge.
which Mr Collier makes to the Stage is, that they treat the Nobility rudely. I
must confess it is no complement to make a Fool of a Lord. But if Birth or any
other Chance should make a Lord of a Fool, I suppose the rest of that Noble
Order would not think themselves accountable for his Follies, or abused in his
Picture. Should the Poets presume to make such a one the Representative of his
Order, and propose him as a common Standard, by which the Endowments of Quality
in general were to be measured, their Insolence would deserve the severest
chastisement that could be given. Or should any one of 'em dare to characterize
too nearly and particularly any of those Noble Persons, no doubt but he would
soon feel the weight of his Resentments, and smart sorely for his saucy
Liberty. But while the Poet contents himself with feigned Persons, and copies
closely after Nature, without pressing upon her in her private recesses, and
singling out Individuals from the herd, if any Man, of what Quality or
Employment soever, fancies himself concerned in the representation, let him
spoil the Picture by mending the Original. For he only is to be blamed for the
Resemblance. If Men of Honor and Abilities could entail their Wisdom and
Virtues upon their Posterity, then a Title would be a pretty sure sign of
Personal Worth, and the Respect and Reverence that was paid to the Founders of
honorable Families ought to follow the Estate, and the heir of one should be
heir of the other. But since Entails of this kind are of all kinds the most
liable to be cut off, it is not absolutely impossible but there may be such a
thing in the world, as a Fop of Quality. Now if there be such a thing, it does
not appear to me, that because the Persons are great, and elevated by their
Dignity above the rest of Mankind, and draw the Eyes of the People upon 'em,
more than other men do, that therefore their Faults or Imperfections will be
less visible, or less taken notice of, or that the Splendor of their Figure is
an infallible Antidote against the Infection of their Examples. Unless it be
so, it is convenient that some reasonable Expedient should be allowed to
prevent the Mischief of Imitation, and that those who are too big to be awed
out of their Follies, may be shamed out of 'em. But this is only Hypothetically
offered. Mr Collier perhaps will tell us, that there are no such Persons, that
a Fool of Quality is a mere Poetical Animal, and ought to be ranked amongst the
Harpyes, Hippogryphs, Centaurs, and Chimaera's of Antiquity. If he proves this,
my Hypothesis in this point falls to the ground, otherwise I think it may stand
in opposition to any thing that has yet been said.

If these and abundance of other Passages in the Ancient Poets were compared
with those which Mr Collier produces out of the Moderns, the comparative
Rudeness and Profaneness of the latter would vanish. But he presumes upon the
laziness, or ignorance of the Majority of his Readers, and does not expect that
any of 'em should be at the pains to confront his arbitrary, and unfair
accounts, with genuine quotations. But it is time to have compassion upon the
Reader, who has run the Gauntlet through a tedious Refutation; in which if his
satisfaction equals his Patience, the Author thinks his pains sufficiently
recompensed.

FINIS.

