A Physical Nosonomy: OR, A New and True DESCRIPTION OF The Law of GOD (called
NATURE) IN The BODY of MAN:

Confuting by many and undeniable Experiences of many Men the Rules and Methods
concerning Sicknesses or Changes in Man's Body, delivered by the Ancient
Physicians, and Moderns that followed them: And demonstrated by Experience (not
only of the Author, but many other Learned Men) as well what the Order and
Method of Nature is, as what it is not: With a Non-affected, Unprejudiced and
full Examination of the Sicknesses, and their Diversity, their Causes, Outward
and Inward, detected by Diffections; their Prognostics, or Signs of Good or
Bad Event: The Method and Medicines clearly manifested by large and reiterated
Experience.

SET FORTH
I. In a Monitory Proaemium to the Reader. II. In a Tractate of the Diseases of
the Head. III. In a Tractate of the Diseases of the Lungs. IV. In a Tractate of
Dropsies.
ALSO, In the Second Part of this Book is a Practice of Physic, drawn from the
best of the Moderns, and completely treating of those Diseases specified in the
Table formerly writ by the Author, though added to these new Scrutinies, as if
they were a latter WORK.

By William Drage D. P. at Hitchin in the County of Hartford.

LONDON: Printed by J. Dover, for the Author. 1664.

WILLIAM DRAGE D. P. HIS Monitory Proaemium To the Candid Readers.
MAny when they shall read in Riverius, Sennertus, Primrose, Rondeletius,
Stocherus, Johnstonus, and others, that there are no more Diseases treated of
in such a Part or Bowel, will presently imagine that there are no more or other
Distempers of that Part or Bowel, than what they have writ in their Practices
of Physic, especially writing so numerously one after another of the same, and
often of all the same, and no more than the same Diseases; also the Reader will
imagine that all the Causes, and no more than they that Authors set down, are
in all Bodies that have such a Disease, and that all that have that Disease
must be just in such an Order, or so handled, as Practical Authors have
delivered: Moreover, the Reader reading such and such Prognostic signs to be
good, and such to be tokens of death, by the description of Practices of
Physic, will imagine that it should always (if he be a young Practitioner) so
fall out: Moreover, for Diagnostick signs, the Reader will imagine a Disease,
as the Inflammation of the Liver, or Obstruction of the Spleen, etc. should have
all and only those Diagnostick signs that practical Authors have delivered,
and that the Inflammation or Obstruction must be just so and such a one as they
have delivered.

Also for the Cure: When the young Practitioner reads such a Medicine will
cure, or such a Receipt never fails, or by this or that method 20 have been
cured, he imagines he can cure all, and that such Medicines are certain Cures,
and such a method is a like successful in all Bodies, and that a Jaundice,
Dropsy, Cough, Gout, etc. is just one and the same in all Persons, and
therefore as he expects all persons to have such, all such, no more nor no
other signs, causes, nor prognostics of their sickness, or such a particular
Disease, than what Authors have one after another set down in their Practices
of Physic; so also the Cure he expects to be the same in all: as for Example:
He may read in Jo. Hartman his Practica Chymiatrica, and in the Chapter of the
Cholick; Ponater in Colica magnes super umbilicum and statim cessabit dolor:
Let the Loadstone be put upon the Navil of one that has the Cholick, and the
pain will instantly cease. Riverius in his Practice of Physic, and Chapter of
the Epilepsie, has this; Radix Valerianae-Sylvestris a Fabio Columna tantopere
celebratur, ut semel aut bis exhibita ab Epilepsia liberare affirmat, refertque
se hanc multis amicis dono dedisse, qui deinde divino prius numine and fautore
glorificato, pulvere hujus Radicis sibi restitutam sanitatem affirmarunt; dosis
autem est Cochleare semis cum Vino, Aqua, Lacte, aut quovis liquore
appropriato, pueris vero in minori dose cum Lacte datur: In English, The Root
of wild Valerian is exceedingly praised by Fabius Columna, so that once or
twice given, he affirms it will cure them of the falling sickness; and he
says, That he has given this to many Friends, who did restore Health to
themselves, glorifying God: its Dose is half a spoonful with Wine, Water, Milk,
or any appropriated liquor; to Children it is given in less quantity, in Milk.
Jacobus Sylvius in his Methodus Curandi, and Chapter of the Jaundice, has
this; Prassii item decocti ex vino albo tenui unciae quatuor Saccharatae
matutinis aliquot, potae, omnem icterum sanant: That is, Four ounces of the
Decoction of Horehouud given in white Wine sugared, for several Mornings, cures
every Jaundice. We mention only these for Example, for a thousand such may be
seen in Authors; and when the young Practitioner reads them, he does presently
conceive he must, as these write, cure all such Diseases by such Medicines or
Methods; but he shall be deceived: yet often such Cures have been; but Authors
have deceived, by not telling how often such a Medicine has failed, as well as
how often it has cured: for there is no Medicine in use, but has cured some,
and there is none so excellent as to cure all; nor are all Diseases, though
never so slight, curable; nor are all diseases, though never so dangerous and
grievous, always and in all incurable.

Can did Reader, It is my zealous desire to Truth that thou should really
and truly understand all these things, and when thou read any Author know
thereby how to judge of them: For the Moderns, who come nigher to Truth in
their Practices of Physic, than the Ancients, or Galen or Hippocrates, are
very much misled. I chiefly commend Felix Platerus in his Practice of Physic,
who followed his own Experience and Observations, though his own Experience was
insufficient to demonstrate the Truth, all the Truth, and nothing but the
Truth, in all Diseases. I have been much troubled to see how superstitiously
Physicians have been led by the Traditition of Galen, Hippocrates, Etius,
Aegineta, and Others.

1. For their Names given to Diseases, therein was much disorder: Some they
called from the Cause, others from the Effects or Symptoms; some they called
Obstructions or Scirrhs, or Inflammations of the Liver, Spleen or Lungs, those
were denominated from the Cause; some they called Swounding, Panting of the
Heart, Epilepsie, Convulsion, etc. these were so called from the apparent
affliction or outward appearance, whenas the cause of each of these Symptoms or
Effects was various, Physicians having reckoned so many Diseases of the Lungs,
as a Cough, Phthisick, Pleurisy, spitting of Blood, Empyema, or spitting of
Matter, Peripneumonia and Asthma; diverse Physicians reading them, will think,
as formerly they have, (for so it is best judging what will be, by what has
been) that every Disease of the Lungs is one of these, and that the Lungs can
be affected in no other manner than in one of these Diseases; and in that
Disease, so for Order and Measure as Authors have in their Practices of Physic
described: How great an Error and Mistake is it in the generality of Practical
Physicians coming to a Patient, if they find it a Disease of the Lungs
presently to conclude it one of those Physicians have writ Chapters of? As, If
it be not an Empyema, it must be a Phthysick; if it be not the Phthysick or
Consumption of the Lungs, it is an Asthma; if it be not reckonable as an
Asthma, it must be proceeded against in cure, by the directions in the Chapters
of Coughs; if none of these, then it must be Haemoptoe, and cured just as the
Practical Chapters of Haemoptoe direct: Nature runs not in these Orders, Nature
is not bound up to such Rules, we shall hardly find two in any one Disease
exactly alike; yet those that have exquisite Pleurisies do the most concur in
Symptoms of any Diseases I know, nor are the Causes of an Empyema, Haemoptoe,
Ph^hisis, Tussis, Asthma, etc. such and so many, no more, nor no others than
what Practical Physicians have writ; but there be many Causes, and diverse from
those the Ancients especially took notice of, to produce the Diseases they
write; and consequently the Signs, Prognostics and Cure must vary, where the
Causes do so vary, Nature not running in that Method as the Ancients, and also
the Moderns, dancing after their Pipes, have imagined.

2. As to the Definition of Diseases: In some Bodies and in some Diseases
accidentally they may prove exactly true, but for the most part they do not:
for where there are such difference of Diseases that they can neither properly
be called one or another that are writ down in Practices, and where the Causes
in each Disease may be so contrary and manifold, it will necessarily follow,
the Signs much vary, and there is the Definition chiefly grounded on the cause
and signs, the Fonndation of any thing being infirm or corrupted, the
Superstructure must needs be infirm and instable: but I say accidentally, in
some Diseases, in some Bodies at some times, we may meet with an exact
coherence of the definition of that Disease with the Parties case, which being
the suming up of the Disease, and the most general and chief causes and signs
that happen to most in that Disease, it is much (if Nature did go to a Rule,
and was bound up to a Method) so few should be found (amongst many sick persons
that have Diseases) correspondent exactly to the Definitions in Practices of
Physic.

3. For the Causes of Diseases: Physicians went huge conjecturally to work, and
guessed by outward appearances what must be inward, and by the Effect they did
judge the Cause, the contrary to which, is the way to find out Truth; they did
not use to anatomize and see the wonderful variety there is in dead Bodies, and
how Nature follows no Method in Diseases: As for instance, In Diseases of the
Heart, the Ancients, and so recent Authors, have set down two, viz. Swounding
and Palpitation, now Experience has found thorough Diffection, that
Side-pains, Bastard-Pleurisies, Gripings, Aguish distempers, Symptoms of Worms,
Symptoms of ill Digestion, and Singultus, etc. do arise often from the Heart,
as well as Vicine parts; and Experience has fully shown that the Heart is not
affected as the Ancients thought commonly and most often; yet this we shall
allow the Ancients and Moderns that have followed unquestioned Tradition, that
the Heart is sometimes affected with one or more of those causes they attribute
to it, and the more in casual and intermitting Distempers of it, but in
confirmed Distempers of the Heart, or the same will hold of all the other
Bowels, only we instance in one; the causes were Ulcers, or Worms, or Stones,
or Bones, or clottered Blood, or mutation of the Situation, or Consumption of
the Parenchyma, or swiming in serous matter in the Pericardion, or absence of
the Pericardion, wasted through Diseases, or the growing amiss of the Heart,
either for magnitude or figure, or other adnascences of fangous Flesh, or
Scirrhs, or growing to the Lungs, etc. this is intended for all Bowels, in
which the Ancients were as much mistaken as in the Heart; all Bowels, as Liver,
Spleen, Mi^^riff, Lungs, Gall, Pancreas, Mesenters, Uterus and Testes, have
variety of Diseases, found by opening of diseased Bodies after their deaths,
which the Ancients did not know, nor could find by conjecture, nor in any of
these is Nature bound up to a Rule and Method; for in one the Liver is full of
little stones, in another one great stone hangs appendent to it, in another is
an Aposthumation, in another is an Aposthumation of another kind, in a third
may be also an Aposthumation of the Liver, yet differing from either of the
former, in one it suppurates, in another it turns a Schirr, or hard Boil, in
another it turns stony, and in others Glandules, such wonderful variety there
is in the progress and changes of Diseases, even as the outward Signs in many
sick Persons do demonstrate by their frequent changes; in some the Liver is
burnt up as it were, and parched, in others it is found quite wasted, in others
it is found thrice as big as usually, specially in consumption of the Lungs,
where the Liver grows out to fill up the void space, the Diaphragma yiedling:
Sometimes the Liver is enfissured or cloven, and in it are many Bladders of
Water, sometimes it is corrupted, and has many small Aposthumes or Abscesses
of black Corruption or Sanies, sometimes it looks pale, sometimes is grown to
some Vicine Part, sometimes one part of it is quite fangous, or quite consumed,
the other part being entire; and thus for other Bowels, they have the like.

Object. These are found so sometimes, and looked upon as singular Cases, and
where strange Symptoms have been in a Body, Physicians have opened such, and
not so commonly others, that died in ordinary manners; and also many have
sicknesses, pains and affects that come and go often in their Lifetime, and
there is likely no such Transmutation, Corruption or Consumption of the Bowels,
and for these the causes assigned by the Ancients, as Galen, Hippocrates,
Celsus, Aegineta, Rhasis, Avicen, Etius ^^d Others, might hold good: For those
things that cause Death, might not cause curable Diseases, for they are not
fixed likely in the Parenchyma of the Bowels.

Answ. I think there is nothing else that can be alleged for the Ancients, and
the Moderns that have followed them:

1. It is not some time and as a wonder that they are found so, but commonly
and in most; and to satisfy my Reader, let him open the, twenty next Patients
that die under his hands, and he will see in all of them singular things, as to
what the Ancients writ, and will also find that Nature is not bound up to a
Method, or such an Order as some will have; the more any man desires to be
satisfied of the Causes or Signs that happen in Hydropicks, and the part or
parts affected, and how, the more he shall admire, seeing still strange and
wonderful variety; and if so much in one Disease, what Method does Nature go in
for different Diseases? Beyond Sea they open such as they can get leave for,
even as it happens, and strange things to the Sons of Superstition and
Tradition, are familiar, and most commonly seen by the Sons of Experience.

2. For the most part those things that in an extreme degree cause death, in a
mean or middle degree cause a Disease; so do Worms, Stones, Aposthumes,
Hydropick Bladders, Glandula's, Adhaesion, Corruption, Consumption,
Excrescence, etc. of the inward Bowels, all these in a remiss degree cause a
Sickness or a Disease, and the self-same in an higher degree cause Death: Yet I
confess windy Inflations, Indigestion, corruption of the Faeces, and
intermittent Evils, do often come from Humors in the first Ways, and Vapors,
and Putrefaction, and too swift Excretion, or strong Retention, nor in many
that die of malignant Diseases may alteration in their Bowels be seen, because
it was a venomous Quality that killed them, and sometimes so suddenly that no
Bowel can be so soon labifactated.

3. The Ancients were apparently out; to write only of the Disease of the
Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder, and so for the place and kinds of Worms;
there is no peculiarity in the Kidneys or Bladder to have the Stone, they are
frequently found in the Gall, Stomach, Lungs, Head, Liver, Uterus, and Joints,
and outward parts: and those things that are generated in the outward Flesh, as
Spots, Tubercles, Boils, Carnous Excrescences, Struma's, Glandula's, Worms,
Stones, Phlyctenae, Bladders of Water, etc. are also frequently found in the
inward Bowels. As for the Stone, as to the place, and kinds, and causes of it,
so for Worms were the Ancients out, and all the Moderns that have pinned their
Faith on their Sleeves; commonly we confess the ordinary Worms incident to
Children are found in the Body, and commonly they are in the Guts or Stomach,
and Ascarades or Bots are often in the Body, yet nothing so frequent as the
ordinary Worms Children void; twenty have the ordinary Worms, to one that has
Ascarades or Maggot-Worms; the Ancients did some of them mention the Taenia or
Lumbri^us latus, or broad Worm, fifteen or sixteen Else long, the length of all
the Guts, and these were all: Now by Anatomizing the Dead, and by other
Excretions of Creatures, it is found that Worms of all sorts are in all parts
of the Body, and some are referable to Terrestrial Creatures; but because they
have no seed from any Creature, for the most part they have no coherence of
form; some are footed like Quadrupedes, some Bi-pedes, some crawling Worms,
some hairy, some like Newts, some exact Maggots, some like Milli-pedes, or
Wood-lice, some large like Serpents, etc. There is a wonderful variety in these
things, and we have heard of Serpents in two or three, found in Englishmen of
late years, of the Lumbricus latus, Cray-fish in similitude, vomited by a
child, Worms in the Face, etc. by which we justify Authors: But we have
written a Chapter of these Creatures in our Physiology and Jatrosophy, a Work
that can never be too much read, or studied.

What shall we say? does Nature proceed in no Method, or Order, or Coherence in
causing Diseases? Yes, there is some, but not as former Ages have generally
supposed; it is the spirit and quality of that spirit in every living, moving,
and growing Being, that is the Cause, and wherein is the Method; and the Stars,
principally the Planets and Moon, by the Air, alter the quality of the Humors
in our Body, and thence comes such variety in our Bodies: but yet if the Inward
Cause in our Bodies comply not with the Outward, there is nothing done; the
quality of the Air by its seeds sown in our Humors or Blood, transmutes or
changes them into the nature of the Seeds, the Blood finds a matter in it
whose Spirit is of a quality Heterogenious and Heteropa thetical to the Blood,
and so works to throw off its Enemy; and in the Pox, Measles, Plague, and
Purples, it throws off that Heterogenious matter by the Skin, Pores, or Habit
of the Body; but where the matter in the Blood is not so venomous, or exceeding
adverse qualited to our Nature, the Veins throw it off on some part: for in the
Body like draws like to it, as in the Earth, and Terrene Things, and puts off
or separates any matter that is of a quality adverse or contrary to the Blood
and Nature of the Spirits constituting our vitality: Now we see Water in the
Blood, sometimes thicker, sometimes thinner, sometimes limpid, sometimes
oleaginous, sometimes yellow, sometimes black, etc. and yet because this Humor
has not a quality Heterogenious to the Blood, it rests very well in the Blood,
and is not endeavored by Nature to be cast off, nor causes any Disease, for a
thing that looks exactly as another, may be nothing like it in nature, so
Sperma Humanum, and some glutinous and thick Phlegm we raise from our Lungs or
Palate of our Mouth, look exactly alike, and are in consistence the same; and
yet there is a Spirit of an enlivening nature in the Sperma Humanum, and only
a cold stupifying quality in the pituitous matter; so Stibium, and the red
Glass of Church-Windows, may in taste, smell, look and consistence of Body be
the same, and yet there is a purgative Virtue or Quality in Stibium that the
Glass has not: So for Alabaster and some pieces of Arsenick, how much do they
differ in quality, and how little in bodily appearance? So in the Body of Man,
if we could see the Humors and affected Parts, and the current of the Blood,
we could not tell whether People would live or die of those Distempers, or how
they would change, or what they would become for the most part: for an Humor
looking like another in an abscess of the Liver, Spleen, Reins, or Lungs, shall
not raise Symptoms alike, nor work alike, because the quality that is in it,
alters it and works it; in one abscess there is a petrifying quality, and that
turns all the matter in a little time into perfect stone, one or many; in
another Abscess, Ulcer, Aposthume or Tubercle of any of these Bowels, the
matter looking the same with the former, is a vivifying spirit, and that matter
takes some or other strange and commonly different form, and enlivens and
increases; another Abscess has a matter like the former, but in this is an
Earthy Gummy Spirit, and insipid, and this turns all the matter into a Caruncle
or Fungus, or if it be a little otherwise qualified, a Glandule, or many
Kernels; in another Abscess is a fermenting qualitied spirit, and that makes
them Aguish, and this differs hugely in quality inter se; for some fermentative
matter is colder and duller, because it wants the sharp and hot spirit that is
in other Humors, and this causes colder Agues; the sharper and hotter the
spirit in this matter is, the hotter is the Ague: therefore many times they
that drink much strong-Water make a cold Ague all hot Fits. Again, this matter
differs in the peculiarity of the quality, some fermenting twice in one day,
some once in twenty four hours, some once in two days, and some but once in
three or four days: In another Excrementitious Matter is an Ossifick quality,
and then a Bone is generated of the bigness and shape with the Excrementitious
Matter, for the Ossifick Spirit transmutes it as it lies; even as our Wells in
England, and Earth about Shefford, turns the Wood into perfect Stone in the
same figure it was; and so a few Grains of Ens Auri, or Essence of Gold,
transmutes much Lead or Q^icksilver into perfect Gold; we see m^ltitude of
Examples from Seeds thrown into the G^ound, or Animals Semen, either injected
into Uterusses, or laid in Flesh, Mud or Earth, or Fruits, which works upon the
fit matter it is in, and turns it into the form of the Creature from whom this
Seed came, and it enlivens. And the Stars do very much qualify and alter the
Seeds in our Humors: Hence it is that often Coughs, malignant Pleurisies,
Q^inzies, malignant Tertians, and diverse strange confused kinds of Agues, are
Epidemical; and I have observed the mutations in diverse Diseases to be from the
Moon, and the other Planets, especially that Planet that was Lord of the First
and Sixth House, at the Decumbiture of the Sick: and a Practitioner of Physic
in this Town told me, when he had a long sickness, he could always tell when
his Paroxisms, or times of greater illness would be, when the Sun was afflicted
by the Body or Aspect of Saturn, or his Significator afflicted; and did not
Venus stand his Friend in many such evil Aspects, he thought he should have
died.

Now such a Method does Nature observe, that it is the casual influence of the
Planets (simply, or conjoined with fixed Stars of the greater Magnitudes, that
are mild or gentle-natured) upon our Blood and Humors, and as the quantity
and quality of our Blood and Humors vary, so the Stars act variously: for the
Agent can do nothing, if the Patient is not fit; and one Planet does not so
powerfully alter one man's Body as another, because in one it was his
Significator at his Nativity, in the other a Significator of his Fortune, in
another a Significator of his Religion at his Na^ivity; and so though our
Humors and Constitutions are much alike, yet in this respect the Planets vary.
There is naturally in some matter, a greater proneness and aptitude to petrify;
in other, to ossify; in other, to vivify or animate; in other, to carnify; in
other, to sanguify; in other, to lactify; in other, to spermafy and crinify:
and though the greater number of Planets that are stongest at such a time, do
dispose the Humors to putrify or vermify, (for at sometimes both old Folks and
Children have Worms more than in other seasons) yet in all Bodies there be not
those Humors; and in all Bodies that those Humors be, yet there is not in
them a like putrefying quality: At such a time Venus is Lady of the Ascendant,
commands Jupiter, Mars, the Moon, etc. in her House, is strongest of any in the
Scheam, and yet all men at this time are not Veneriously inclined, for some are
never libidinous; yet at this time they may be more libidinous than others; and
at such a time an evil-minded men is the likelier to accomplish his incestuous
Desires. We see huge mutations and changes daily and hourly, sometimes in some
sick persons, and how do these come, but from the motion of the Morbifick
Cause? and how is that changed and moved so strangely, but by the Attoms in the
Air, drawn into our Body in our Breath, which are qualified from the Planets?

We have in our Physiology, Jatrosophy and Pneumatography, sufficiently
demonstrated the force of the Heavens on all sublunary Beings; but we will here
add some more: Whence is it in Moon-Ey'd Horses their Eye or Eyes grow full at
full Moon, and then they are bind; and as the Moon decreases, they decrease,
and then they see better? Many Countrey-mens Experience attests this.

2. Concerning the alteration of Diseases, changing of Symptoms, and of all
diseased Parts, dying and growing sick, it is apparently seen in some Diseases
by the alteration of the Moon, and diverse have told me, That when the Plague
did rage in this Town of Hitchin, most fell sick or died at change of the Moon,
or full Moon, and four or five were buried then together, and when the Moon was
at her full state, was the sickness in ^any in its Crisis or Exaltation; and it
is apparent to many intelligent Physicians, that our Bodies are fuller of
moisture at full Moon, than other times; and Experience shows us, the
Epileptick and Convulsive have fits at full Moon commonly, and the Reason may
be, because water in the Brain is often found by Diffection to cause Epilepsies,
and other Diseases, which the Practical Physicians hither to did not imagine:
Now we know the Moon rules over Moisture much, witness the Ebbing and Flowing
of the Sea; does it not in diverse places of this Land increase and swell higher
at full Moon, and in the declination of the Moon fall, and sink lower?

Moreover the monthly Fluxes of Women, or Menstrues, are caused partly by the
Moons influence, and partly by a created aptitude or natural faculty in them;
we see often they are, when stopped, easilier provoked at full Moon, than in its
declination; the Moon rules principally in Moisture, and principally in the
Moisture of Feminines, for she is a Feminine Planet; yet in Men the
Haemorrhoids are periodical sometimes and monthly, and some have (but rarely) a
Fluxus Sanguinis per Penem monthly.

Farmers did observe in these late years of Infection amongst Horses, that
their Horses sickened or died familiarly at New or Full Moon: is not the
Disease Lunatic so called from the Moon, for that at full Moon they are
afflicted monthly? and Physicians have observed Catarrhs and Defluxions to rise
or fall from the Moon, and to be governed much thereby. Guainerius did observe
one spoke a strange Tongue he never learned, in New Moons; and other melancholy
persons have at such changes of the Moon alone spoke a strange Language they
never learned: If any think we speak slightly or conjecturally of many of these
things, let them search in their proper Chapters Examples in our Physiology,
and they shall see them confirmed. It is written of the Clupaea Fish in Sagona,
a River of France, that in the increase of the Moon it is white, and in its
decrease black: So the Piscis Lunaris, or Luna-fish, is so appellated from the
strange alteration the changes of the Moon makes in her, and her figure: We
might be numerous in Examples.

Pliny lib. 2. cap. 41. writes, That at Full Moon, Oysters, Shellfish, and
Periwinckles increase, but decrease at decrease of the Moon.

Kekerman, 1. c. says, The Skins of Sea-Calves and Sobles are stiff with the
standing upright of the Hair, when the Moon increases; but in the Moon
decreasing, they grow ^eak and fall down.

Dropsical People are often most molested at Full Moons, and therefore at that
time, says Johannes Johnston^s, they commonly die; and then it took away that
Reverend Man, D. Martin Gratianus, Superintendent of the Reformed Churches in
Greater Poland.

Libavius, Epist. 15. to Sch^itzer, says, It is better to give Medicines
against Epilepsies the day after, than in the Opposition of the Luminaries; for
in the hour of o the Moon is quiet, but afterward she works and begins to
aug^e^t the Humors.

We shall not give Examples here of the force and quality of the Moon in
Nativities to dispose men's Bodies and Minds; nor of the Vulgars observation in
cutting of Cocks, nor shall we insist on its force upon inanimate things, to
cause fullness and flaccing, juyciness and dryness, as that increases or wanes;
as, in Vines, Onyons, Palm Trees, Basil, L^pis Selenites. Keckerman, Disp.
Phys. 3. Coroll. 11. says, Lillies and Roses open their Buttons or Heads in
the night alone, as loving the Moon; and Marigolds, Tulips, etc. open only to
the Sun, and shut up against the Moon: Nor shall we here dispute (as we might
find matter and occasion largely to do) of the peculiar Government of Plants
by such and such Planets, and how they are fuller of Virtue pulled up at such a
time, whenas the Planet governing them is Essentially fortified, than at
another time: Nor yet shall we here speak much of Sigils and Telesms insculpt
in Wax or other impressible matter, the Seal made at a fit time, according to
the Position of the Heavens, and the Engraving or Impress of that Seal must be
at a due time, as the Planet governing the Disease, and Lord of the Hour, are
Essentially fortified, aspected by Others, and seated in significant Houses,
and accordingly hung about the sick party. In our Philosophical Book called
Physiology, Jatrosophy and Pneumatography, and in the last of these have we
treated of Sigils and Telesms; whither the Reader may have recourse.

The Moon indeed is most generally significant in all Distempers, of all the
Planets; and in every Scheme we take of sickness, the Moon and her Dignity, and
House, and Sign she is in, and to whom she applies, is very considerable, next
to the Lord of the Ascendant, Signifier of the sick Person, and Lord of the
sixth House, Significator of his Sickness, and Lord of the Eighth, Significator
of Death; yet the Sun in the next place, of all the Planets, has most
influence upon our Bodies; and by his heat and warmth more than other Planers,
he enlivens and afters most Animate and Vegetative Bodies; as also by Light:
Now if the Sun, having in it the seed of Light, can enlighten the Stars and
Moon, as they approach him; and when the Moon is gone a good distance and while
from the Sun, the seminary Principle of Light it received from the Sun, dies by
degrees, until it comes to the Sun again, and then the Moon receives fresh
Seeds of Light, which grow (as the Seeds of Infection taken into our Bodies) to
maturity, which is when she is run half her course, and just opposite to the
Sun, then is the Moon at the Full, and the Seeds of Light like our Life, and
the maturity of our Age; and other Animals and Vegetables are as long a
declining or dying, as increasing and growing to maturity; and no question this
of the Sun and Moon is a great cause of the maturation and corruption of
Bodies, and gives great insight into the method of working, increasing and
dying in other Seeds: And if the Sun thus alter the Moon, why not other less
and inferior things?

I going one day in Summer in the hot Sun without Gloves, did so strangely burn
my hands, that they felt sore to the touch, and looked of a red color, as if
netled; and I have heard the like of others, whose hands have been nigh
blistered with the Sun, but in a far different manner from fire, for that
scorches and burns us long sensibly, and then the the fire remains not so in
our flesh, and so long as the Sun's quality, for from the Sun it rather looks
as if venemed; yet to touch fire will make a soreness longer.

Many mad People do chiefly rage when the Sun is in the Tropical point Cancer;
and about the Summer Solstice, par^ly the heat, and partly the quality of the
Air, makes diverse mad in Summer, that are pretty well all the year beside:
Herbs of the Sun are strongest when they are gathered in the Hour and
Exal^ation of the Sun, or when the Sun is in Leo; and we have observed several
such things. We have mentioned three Observations of the greater force of Herbs
gathered when the Planets governing them are strongest, in our Book of
Physiology and Jatrosophy, and particularly in our Nosology; but Astronomical
Physicians have gone upon slight grounds in giving such an Herb to such a Star,
and another to such a one, many times; and the Reasons of their grounds would
be sifted: for if the Foundation be false, we can never make a true
Superstructure.

We see the Sun's heat drives away Agues and cold Distempers, it raises
Headache to those that fit too long therein, specially bare-headed, and in the
Spring, and that are subject to Headache; also those that fit in February or
March in the Sun for warmth, do often catch Agues: and I when I was a Boy,
catched an Ague by sitting shivering in the Sun to warm me: It is also so
pleasant at its return: The absence of Things makes them the welcomer to us at
their return: By Sundew, Heliotrope, Marigolds, Hinca, etc. is the Sun's
particular Domination over Planets seen.

But we will not insist only on these two Planets, the other Five, Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, Dragons Head, Dragons Tail, and some of the
fixed Stars of the greater Magnitudes have great Influence upon our Bodies, and
alter and move our Humors, and by consequence our Minds, as they are most
prompt to be wrought upon.

The Scorpion stings most dangerously when the Dog Star is up, and men used to
observe the rising of the Dog Star for cutting of Frankinsence-Trees, as then
fittest for Use, and fullest of Juice: and in the Tercerae Islands the Winds
called Etesia are mild Winds, that rise every year two days after the rising
of the Dog Star; and the Disease Syriasis is so caused from Syrius the
Dog Star, and called so, because diverse did observe that at the rising of that
Star Infants were inflamed in their Heads; so that we see those Stars have
Influence upon Animate and Inanimate bodies; and if the Dog Stars Syrius and
Procion can raise winds, they can in the Air in all likelihood communicate
their quality to our blood; but we do not observe the force and influence of
the Dog Stars in our Climate or Country, as in other parts; for in the
Dogdayes they give no Physic, and Wounds and Ulcers heal badly, Hippocrates
Aphorisms, Sect. 4. aph. 5. (...), about the rising of the Dog Star, and
before its rising, purging by Medicines is very molestuous; but we say, Canis
non mordet in Anglia, the Dogs bite not in England: It is certain, some Stars
have a greater power over some Countries then over others.

Cardanus and Casper Wolphius, Did observe Headache to arise in some persons
with the Sun, it was chiefly in the Forehead; every day the Headache arose in
these, as the Sun arose in the morning, and at noon, when the Sun was nearest,
it grew most vehement; but as the Sun went farther off, the Headache did
decline; and at evening when the Sun did wholly hide himself, the Headache was
absolutely gone, and began the next morning when the Sun arose, and increased
as that grew higher; but in one of these parties it was a pain rather of the
eye, sometime above one eye, and sometime above another.

Joachimus, Comm. ad 9. lib. Rhasis, cap. 4. observed another that had Headache
about noon, but as the Sun went down it declined; signs of Choler were in him,
which the Sun moved to his head; he was cured with purging of Choler, and
strengthening his head.

Salias cap. 12. Annotat. ad Altomar, Gract. Observed Megrims to be raised and
mitigated according to the course of the Moon, in some persons, and to have
continued so for three years.

It would be too tedious to write of many new Diseases, Epidemical, and some of
them Contagious, that do happen in all Ages and Countries, sometimes more,
sometimes less, sometimes in one place, sometimes in another; they certainly
come from the Air, and the Air is qualified by the Stars, and Seeds and Attoms
swim and fluctuate in the Air, as Wood and heavier matter does in the Water,
that is a more sollid, and less penetrable body than Air.

We should too much stay the Reader here to give an account only of the
experience we have had of the Progress, Changes and Crises of Diseases
according to the alteration and motion of the Planets, but who so is well
skilled in Astrology and Physic, and shall at the decumbiture, or chief time
of the sickening of his Patient, draw a Scheam of the Heavens, and observe all
along the mutations of the Planets, and his sick Patients distemper, he shall
in most Diseases find great satisfaction, and say, It is far more certain
Prognosticating by the Heavens, then symptoms in Diseases: Yet in confused
Distempers, and such as we cannot well refer to any name in Riverius his
Practice, Astrology is most illuminative.

There are diverse observations extant of the operation of the Planets on men's
Bodies, but few, in regard of the use there would be of them, and excellency
thereof; but these would require much time and pains to describe to purpose,
therefore we shall omit them.

We see also there is a strange Antipathetick quality in Lightning to bereave
us suddenly of Life, and a blast of Air blasts many; some in the field, some
standing at their door; some are bereaved of sense, some of motion; some in the
whole body, some only in one particular part; some in one manner, some in
another; some in one degree, some in another.

We will speak a little here in the Vindication of Astrology, it may satisfy
some, it need hurt none; Truth alone must please God, and fraus pia be
condemned.

1. The various motions of the Planets, argue an intention of Providence, more
in making them then other fixed Stars; five especially have no other reason of
their wandering to and from, backward and forward; sometime in one Sign,
sometimes in another; sometimes swifter, sometimes slower; sometimes in
Conjunction, sometimes in Opposition one to another; nothing was made in vain,
no not the least part in the least Creature, nor nothing to be idle.

2. God does all by natural causes, and what shall we say are the causes of
such and such things, but what we experience? if one thing here does sympathize
and antipathize with another, and one depends upon another, and one governs
another; Why may not the Stars more pure, high and great bodies influence upon,
and alter these lesser, grosser and low compositions, every Agent being more
noble than the Patient? and the Air is the mediate cause.

3. There may as well be quallifications of peculiarity in the Sun, Moon, and
five other Planets in the Macrocosm, as in the Heart and Brain in the
Microcosm, and Liver, Spleen, Gall, Lungs and Reins; and if God has planted
Originally in all such bowels peculiar qualities, and these operate accordingly
upon the rest of man's body, inferior in dignity to them; why may not the
bodies of the Stars have also peculiar natures and qualities implanted
Originally into them, and according to these they operate? for it is certain
all things were made for an use, and why they should observe such strange
motions and orders, no other reason can be given, than what man has found by
experience; and that for which every thing is most fit, for that it was made,
and that is the right use of it: It would be tedious to relate the wonderful
qualities, and Spirits of strange and stupendous Natures, that are placed in
many bodies, slight and sorry to look on, as the attractive force in the
Loadstone; in Herb Moonwort, the chastity of Emeralds and Sobriety, the
shivering of Quicksilver in fire or hot water, and its flying to Gold; the
fighting of Spirit of Tartar and Vitriol, the quality of moving Love in some
Plants, of dissolving strife in others; of releasing the bewitched, and driving
away Spirits; of causing madness, and inducing sleeping to death: See these in
one place or other of our Physiology and Jatrosophy, with many more strange and
prodigious qualifications of the Spirits of Plants and Minerals. We do not deny
but things affect one another by the Attoms and Exhalations that arise from
their bodies; but what account can any give, why the Attoms of one is of such a
quality to cause Sobriety, and the Attoms breathing from another to cause Love,
and the Attoms breathing from another to cause madness? every body, as it is a
body and earth is not active, or moveable; does neither taste, nor small, nor
has a color for the most part, but the Spirit that is in it, moves and acts
it, makes it grow, taste and smell; and as soon as this Spirit or Soul is
evaporated from it, it looks oftentimes pale, but constantly loses its scent
and taste; so when our Souls are gone, we look pale, and corrupt presently,
even as Plants as soon as their Spirit or Soul is gone: bodies were only made
for Receptacles of Spirits or Souls, and these Souls or Spirits do act and move
these bodies; and according to the peculiar nature or quality of these Original
implanted Spirits, so they act diversely; now why may not the peculiar qualitied
Spirits of the Stars operate and alter the Spirits placed in the bodies of
terrene and gross things, according as they are fit and changeable, especially
seeing every minute we must draw in Air? and if the laying of Plants about us,
and Minerals and Animals, do so alter the Air, that sometimes we are sick,
sometimes comforted by them; the Stars may as well do it: What influence has
the Sun for heat upon this world, more then a thousand Cities set on fire? and
yet the Sun is at a vast distance so to heat the Air all about. The exactly
demonstrating these things, would require a larger discourse than we are
willing here to spend thereupon. What is our Brain? what does it look like? a
Gelly, or knotty Phlegm; yet in this matter is a choice quality implanted, our
sensation and motion; what is the Heart to look upon, or to feel, or touch, or
taste, or smell? merely flesh: and yet see how it differs in dignity of
quality; and there are nobler Spirits placed in it, than in other parts of the
body; it has the Seed of Blood, and is able to change all nourishment into red
hot Spirituous Blood, specially as Nature shall have need thereof; and hereby
does it influence upon all the body, as the Brain by motion and sensation
operates and alters all the body; GOD could as well have placed the Seminary
Principle of Blood, or Sanguification in the Spleen, and the Soul in the Liver,
for the flesh does nothing; he could have made any flesh capable of the highest
qualities and faculties.

4. Allowing this force to the Planets, and some fixed Stars as they happen to
be joined with them, vindicates GOD from injustice; for certain it is, that the
humors alter our minds, and our constitutions change our judgments, and lead
us to diverse appetites: and the Organs are not alike fitted in all to be wise
or foolish, ingenuous or froward alike.

If he that is born a natural Fool, shall repine and say, Why was I not born
capable of knowledge as other men? what had I done in the Womb to make my
Creator more partial to me, than the rest of mankind? It may be Answered, It
was his lot to be begotten, conceived and born at such an unfortunate time,
when the Planets operating upon the propitious matter in utero so disposed him.

Another may Object, Why was I made of such a melancholy temper, to be dejected
at every small business, and to swoon at every light grief, and to be
discontented with my life? Some must be melancholy, as some are merry; there
must be variety; and it fell according to their nativity to be such, without
any partiality, or ill respects in GOD toward them: so for the passionate,
that suffer for their Tongues, and cannot help it, they wish they were of
another temper, and could forbear; and are apt to be angry that they are so apt
to be angry: but some must be angry, else there would be none patient if all
were alike; and it fell casually to their lot to be so: if God did immediately,
without contingent causes, ordain or make them so, they might have somewhat
more to say and to repine at; but now God is blameless, for where the cause
accidentally falls, the effects follow: but the causes are so wisely from all
eternity ordered, that they shall keep in a mean, and not much transgress; as
those causes that dispose men to be natural fools, or Atheists, shall not come
so often by one to a hundred, as those causes that cause Wisdom and Worship;
nor shall they come altogether, but shall happen now and then, that Nature may
have some variety.

Perhaps a good man's Barn is burnt by Lightning, and his Neighbors, a wicked
man's, is unhurt; God is no respecter of Persons nor partial, it fell out
according to natural causes, that the Lightning did direct to this man's Barn in
a contingent manner; and it is the nature of Lightning, where the Beams and
Attoms are conglomerated, and so made stronger, to burn; if God had with
material hands took a Torch and set it on fire, as Enthusiasts seem to think
him to act, surely then the just man had had somewhat to have said: it is a
dignity to God to act by causes, and one cause under another; the outward cause
operates upon the inward cause, and the remote upon the vicine, the primary
upon the instrumentary: If a King would have any thing done, and must do it
himself, it would not be such honor to him, as to do it by subservient means,
and messengers; so God is the more dignified and honored by Nature, then if,
as Enthusiasts would have him, he did all immediately by material Hands, Feet
and Mouth, without the intervene of natural causes.

Sometimes it Rains twice as much in one Land or Soil as needs, and in another
Land or Soil at the same time is not half Rain enough, so that both are
spoiled, one by a flood, the other by drought; and if God did this immediately
by immediate counsel, and with material hands, as if he should pour down
buckets, without the contingency of natural causes, how might men complain, and
say, God dealt hardly with them.

Many times upon the Sea a Wind arises and drowns a good man's Ship, wherein
are far better persons than in another Ship, that at that time arrives safe.

Many times a good man is wounded of Thieves going abroad, is killed by a fall,
or taken with the Plague, or killed with Lightning, when many far worse at the
same time, and in that place may escape; and were it not that all things here
happen alike to all in a contingent manner to us, though predestined and
pre-ordained by GOD, we might repine; the Sun shines on the good and bad, and
rain falls on the just and unjust: And Man is ordained as Astronomers will show
by calculating a Man's Nativity, to this or that good or mischief that he will
hardly avoid; and because we do not foreknow or foresee, we must act warily
and wisely; for we do not know, though it is predestined to us to be poor or
miserable, or evil, but by our endeavor we may avoid it; for we do not know
our Endeavors will be bootless, till we see the event; so we act as if nothing
was predestined: All our labors and endeavors, if it be not ordained, shall
not make as rich, or eminent, or favored, or lucky.

Yet GOD commonly ordains a Thing by ordaining the Cause; as such a man is
ordained to thrive; why? because he is made of a cunning industrious and
parsimonious temper; yet many a great Drinker, sloathful and unskilful fellow,
in comparison of such, shall thrive and grow richer: Nature is full of variety,
and degrees and kinds in every kind.

Did not things also in States and Kingdoms fall out according to a fortuitous
and accidental hap, and the fortune of Men's happy Nativities, why did Mahomet
that Great Impostor, arise to that credit and honor in the World? Why did not
God make him an untimely birth, or cause his days to be short, that he should
not corrupt the World with his Doctrine? or raise other causes to have deterred
his Followers from crediting him? Is he not CHRIST's Opposite? and did he not
take upon him to be Mediator betwixt GOD and Man? And how miraculously has he
prospered through many Nations and Ages?

To this add the remarkable Affairs of this World, to wit, The expunging and
debellating of Christianity by the Turk, and the setting up of Mahometism in
all those parts where Christianity did at first with much difficulty and blood
shed, and persecution gain rise; but I will not say that they upon whom the
Tower of Siloam fell, were greater sinners than others, not he that was born
blind had sinned in or by his parents more than others that were born seeing,
but according to Natures course, which when God contradicts, it is a Miracle,
and Miracles rarely happen: What is become of the seven Churches of Asia their
founded Christian Religion? Has not the Turkish Power overcome? and is not
MAHOMET advanced in Throne above CHRIST in all those Quarters? Yet I say,

Exitus acta probat, careat successibus opto
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putet.
I wish that they may never speed
Who by Events ever judge the Deed.
Non aliena putes homini quae obtingere possint;
Sors hodierna mihi, cras erit illa tibi.
Think nothing strange that Man cannot decline,
For what is to day my Lot, to morrow's thine.
And so we all undergo vicissitudes and variety, Cappadocia, Asia the less,
with Phrygia, Ionia, Pamphylia, Licaonia, Pontus, Bithynia, Galatia, Greece,
Syria, Ephesus, Smyrna, Thiatira, Philadelphia, Pergamos, Judea, Jerusalem and
Palestine; are not all these under the Turk, and subject to the Doctrine of
Mahomet, where the Doctrine of JESUS did so spring forth and arise, and
flourish for the time?

The Jews were thought a peculiar People to GOD, beloved by their Creator above
all Nations and Languages of the World, and yet what Nation has suffered more?
how often has Jerusalem been won, and ransacked, and sometimes quite demolished,
and rebuilt? How often have they changed their Governments? The King of Assyria
conquered Israel, and captivated them, and the King of Chaldea the Jews; since
they have been conquered and enslaved to the Persian, the Grecian, the Arabian,
the Roman; the Turk now governs all, and the Jews and Christians live by
permission, and pay Tribute. What became of those hundred thousands of men that
went to redeem Jerusalem, and CHRIST's Sepulcher from the Turk, in the
appellate Holy War? Surely Enthusiasms are not regarded by GOD: Many think they
are holier than other Men, and that GOD must prosper them, or that GOD is
engaged to make them successful over the wicked, as they imagine: I say, No:
GOD will not alter the course of Nature, unless upon weighty grounds, and those
Miracles are ordained to come seldom.

Yet whoever thou art, do not think I think it good to sin, or that it is
bootless to be good; thou will hereafter repent, a thousand times repent the
wilful commission of every evil Action, but thou must not think GOD is obliged
to defend thee in Fire or Water, in Battle or Tempests more then others thou
imaginest far worse than thy self: for GOD is impartial, and Effects must
follow the Cause, and the Causes must go on as GOD set them Originally to go.

And let none mistake me concerning Predestination, I do not meddle with
Predestination to Salvation or Damnation in any; that is only in GOD's
Cabinet-counsel, nor can any tell any thing thereof: nay, though Spirits have
told several Secrets of the future Being, they durst never divulge any thing of
moment to Mankind, concerning how we shall live-hereafter, or who shall be
happy, and who unhappy, or how many, or how and in what manner.

Now seeing we see apparently the universal order, gradation, progress and
event of things, is after this manner of contingency; what evil or absurdity is
it to allow it a cause? and why may we not as honestly and lawfully say, The
Stars, under GOD, are the natural cause of all these Contingents and casual
Events (casual, merely, as to our foreknowledge) as any other things?

Furthermore, the Planets operate upon our Minds, not only by moving,
increasing and altering the quality of our Humors (which we have largely shown
in several places of our Physiology and Jatrosophy, but chiefly in our Chapter
of the place of the Soul) but by raising Contingents and intervening Accidents:

Est aliquid quod nos animos mutando gubernat
Mores res contingentesque sequuntur humores,
Proxima namque Deo sunt horum causa planetae:
That that does change our Minds, does surely guide
Our Actions, and our Manners do depend
Upon Contingents; our Humors beside
Alter our Wills, these the Planets do bend.
One man is minded to go a Journey, a shower of Rain falls, and alter his mind.

Another intends to revenge himself upon his Adversary; he falls sick, and that
changes his mind, which before he resolved should not be changed.

Another intends to do much work on his Trade, and that he will not be drawn
away by company to bezel and drink; but company come and persuade him, and his
mind is changed, and he goes with them with delight.

One resolves he will never be a Quaker; but out of Curiosity and Novelty he
will hear the Quakers, with hearing them his mind is changed, so that he
becomes a Quaker.

One resolves to kill or undo such a Person, and he resolves his mind shall
not change, nor none shall intercede for him; yet when that person comes and
asks forgiveness, acknowledges his fault, and promises and supplicates, his
mind is changed, and he has rather (a mind now quite contrary to his former
mind) to do him good.

Another intends to live bravely, and spend freely, and build fine Houses; but
he sustains a great loss in his Estate, and then his intentions alter.

But abundance more may be heaped up unnecessarily, which the common capacity
of Men, if they would but consider, may see clearlie.

And no man I believe, but at diverse times is in diverse minds, and of
different Intentions and Inclinations, though there be nothing interposes, nor
no differing or fresh Contingents: and this sudden and often variation of our
Minds, Intentions, Desires, Appetites and Affections, must have a Cause; and
what wickedness or absurdness is it to attribute it to the Planets? for
Experience shows it, and in Reason their various and differing motions answer
to the various and differing motions of our Humors and Affections.

I know by my self, and have heard others say, They were most melancholy, when
they had least cause; and Lovers are sometimes wonderfully inflagrated toward
one another; and at another time, no occasion given, quite off from desiring
one another. But we might be infinite in these things: And Sennertus, in
Epitom. Scientiae Not. says, Experience shows the Humors are altered by the
Stars, and the Mind by the Humors: Mores sequuntur temperamentum corporis;
Experientiae contradicere nefas: The Manners follow the temperament of the
Body; and it is unlawful to gainsay true and manifold Experience.

5. All Mankind was made Upright, with the Countenance upwards, and all Beasts
look downwards to the Earth; that was somewhat in Providential Intention that
Man might look up to the Stars, and weigh the Majesty of the Heavens; and
Beasts were made only to feed and grovel on the Earth, therefore they had not
their looks made upwards, to view the Glory, and Power, and Wisdom of their
CREATOR, in the Heavens and Starry Globe. It was a good Observation of Ovid,

Pronaque cum spectant animalia caetera terram,
Os hominis sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad Sidera tollere vultus.
6. The multitude of Astronomers that have been in some Countries, and in many
Ages, have had experience of the force of the Stars; but the Rules of the
Ancients, as our Physical Rules, are many, infirm, and true but sometimes, and
were ill grounded; and God has so wisely ordered it, that man shall not be
certain always therein, for then he would be presumptuous: In many Scheams an
Astronomer draws, there are as many Arguments against as for the thing, so that
he knows not which to judge; in most Scheams there are some Planets that by
the Sign they are in, or House, or Degree, or Aspect, deny, according to
Astrological Rules, that, that others affirm; and in such Cases we must take
the strongest, and conclude from the position of the greater number; as in an
Assembly most Voices carry it.

7. Let us consider the Air: What causes Rains, Thunder, Wind, Mists, Snow,
Frosts, muddy and bright Weather? do not the Planets, and fixed Stars as they
are conjoined with them? and how does the Air change our Bodies? I my self
having weak Eyes, have found them far more misty and aching against Rain and in
moist Weather; others against Frost and in frosty VVeather, have Itching, and
Pustules break forth, some almost always; some against Rain have their Corns
ache; diverse do prognosticate change of VVeather by their Corns: some will say
in dark foggy weather they are far more melancholy, dull and drowsy; and some
then have their Heads ache: we know some Bodies are huge sensible of cold, and
every small thing casts them down; some will in VVinter go bare-legged, and in
Snow, and catch no harm: the Constitution and Custom are both to be considered:
some that have had Bruises will feel pains there upon alteration of weather,
and no time else, after the Bruise is healed: diverse when the weather begins to
be open at Spring, and warmer, have Pustules, VVheals and Itch break forth; and
so in some at fall of the Leas: some have a matter breaks forth always at
Spring and Fall; and we see Tertian Agues are most rife at Spring, Quartains at
the Fall or Autumn. To enumerate no more, Hippocrates writ of these things, and
of the qualities of the VVindes, and he will be believed, and in such things
his experience may be taken, though we must not look to find things so as he
writ in each other Body, concerning the change of the Air and Weather; if they
hold true in every tenth Person, it is somewhat: for we shall find ten whose
Bodies are not sensibly altered by Rain, or VVinde, or Thunder, to one that is:
so Bruits and Plants foreshew change of VVeather.

Because we would fairly and fully satisfy our Readers concerning the
Influence of the Planets, we shall proceed to take off a few Objections made by
the contrary-minded and opinioned; theirs is only Opinion, which comes from
Opinor, I think; ours Experience, which comes from Experior, to have tried, or
made proof of.

Object. 1. Twins are born both at once, and yet often not alike, nor have
fortune alike, nor die at a time.

Answ. Often Twins are so alike, that they are fain to tie Threads or Ribbands
about them, if both of one Sex, to distinguish; but in the birth of diverse
Twins is a quarter, or half an hour, or more distance, and then they may have
two Significators, and the Signs may be gone off those Houses: and also if the
birth of the Twins was very exact, as to time, it is probable they were not
conceived at once, and that is very material, and may change their
Dispositions: What is the Reason the Children of one man and woman should
often times so exceedingly differ in Complexion, Conditions, and Fortunes, were
there not somewhat to alter?

Object. 2. Those that are killed in Armies in Fights, were not born all at
once, but had several Nativities, and a Death alike at one time.

Answ. A man may be born in January, February, March, April, or any other Month
or day of the Month, and have an unlucky Nativity; some are killed by the
Combustion of their Significator, or Lord of the Ascendant; some by his Aspect
with Saturn or Mars, or Conjunction with the Lord of the Eighth House, the
House of Death; and some were killed in the 18, some the 19, some the 20, 21,
22, 23, 24th (and so onwards) Year of their Age, nor were they all born in one
place.

Object. 3. It Is an uncertain and fallible Art.

Answ. The Vulgar say, if a thing comes to pass that Astronomers or Astrologers
predict, They are Witches, and do it by the Devil; if it fails, they say, It is
a Delusion, and there is nothing in it; even as they judge in other respects:
for if a Medicine cure one, they think it must cure others, though of another
Disease; and if they they knew one die of the Jaundice, they will pronounce
Death to all: One Swallow makes not a Summer: One Experiment is too slight, or
two, or three, to ground our belief upon in some matters. If it had never
failed, men would have been presumptuous, most would have gone to have known
their Fortunes; and that would have been an inconvenience in all Government,
Trading and Actions Men do undergo: GOD made all things upon grave Counsel, and
well-weighed Considerations, that they should hold together; assist, and not
confound one another; each to keep its place, and no^ to do another office.

Moreover, If Astrology was certain, Men would say it was of the Devil: If we
condemn it for incertainty, better may we condemn the Practice of Physic, for
that is more uncertain; it is termed, Ars Conjecturalis. Let any Physician by
the Signs he finds in ten persons judge their Distempers thus and thus; and
when these come to be opened, more by much are false than true, that he did
imagine; yea, where diverse of the most learned Physicians have been called to
give their advice and an account of one sick person; one has said the Disease
was this, and thus; another, that, and so; every one differing; but when the
party has been opened, another cause has been found in their Body, of Death,
differing from each of these: So in Prognostics; what Sign or Signs hold for
Life or Death in all? The Tokens in the Plague are held the most infallible
sign of Death, and so indeed they be, and yet Physicians have observed diverse
having the Tokens, to have escaped: nor are the Crises of truth, nor the Cure:
What Medicine are we sure will cure two in one Disease? no Medicine cures all,
and each Medicine has cured some: I dare confidently affirm that there is not
one Drug or Medicine in an Apothecaries Shop, but at one time or other by one
or other is used for an Ague; and the use of nothing would be upheld, did not
some think themselves thereby eased or helped.

Object. 4. Scripture speaks against it.

Answ. The Scripture speaks against the abuse of it: for in those times and
Countries when and where Scripture was writ by the Jews, the Astrologers
trusted too much to it, and disowned the Supreme Creator and Rector, and
presumed much upon it, and assumed all the honor to themselves, and called the
Months and Days by Planets Names, and worshipped such Planets on such Days, and
diverted men from patient submission to a superior Hand of Providence,
thinking these the alone and Supreme Deities, because changes fell upon Earth
as they had observed them to change. Of all the relations ever I read of the
Commerce betwixt Witches and evil Spirits, or also heard, I never could find
the Devils told them any thing of the Stars, nor do they know any thereof, or
practice any thing thereby; they are GOD's Creatures made for our Books, to
read such Destinies as it pleases GOD man should foreknow.

The Scripture does extol the Science, admire the frame of the Heavens,
demonstrate the Influence the Planets have, and show what they were made for:
But, if because of the abuse, nothing must be in use, every thing must be laid
aside; the best things are most apt to be corrupted: and, Optim^rum corruption
est pessima, as Philosphers say: See Genesis 1. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Judge. 5. 20.
Job 25. 5, 6. Chap. 38. 7. and 29. 30, 31, 32, 33. Psalm. 136. 7, 8, 9. Job 9.
9, 10. Psalm. 8. 3, 4. and 19. 1. and diverse other places of Scripture assent
hereto, Astra regunt Homines, sed regit Astra DEUS.

Object. 5. It makes men Atheistical and Heathenish.

Answ. It may be abused, and many without it may be Atheistical and Heathenish,
and most with it are sincere Adorers of a Deity; really the Stars and Planets,
and the Poles, and the Clouds, and their Offices and Actions are clear
demonstrations of a GOD, as diverse of the forecited places of Scripture hint
forth. There are abundance of people that hear what others say, and believe
with the most, and never question or trouble their heads about a GOD, or his
Attributes; as the Ignorant is related to give an account of his Faith: I
believe as Mr. Vicar believes, and I believe he knows, for he is Book-learned,
and I am not Book-learned. All the works of GOD dignifie and exalt him, and the
more we know, the more we must see the Power, Wisdom, and Love of GOD: we see
such and such things come to pass, and what wickedness is it to attribute them
to a cause? If we made GOD to do them with material hands, and to be bodily
present, and to use Instruments as we do, to effect them, it would hugely
degrade and vilify his Majesty.

Object. 6. It may wrong diverse.

Answ. That is in the Men, the Art does not constrain them; there are Knaves in
all Societies, that are a scandal to the rest, and vituperate the Profession:
but the better and higher things be, so much the more they endamage when abused.

Object. 7. If they go too far, they may have to do with Devils.

Answ. By a Retort: If they have to do with Devils they may go too far; but it
is possible some men may be instigated by their Curiosity to contract with the
Devil, to make them capable of telling Fortunes, and fore-knowing things,
seeing Astrology is often so uncertain; but of such we must judge what may be, by
what has been; they have seldom been Astrologers: and few Witches have any
judgment in Astrology, if any; nor does the Devil will them to learn any thing
thereof, or teach them therein; and without Astrology men may have as much
desire as with it to foreknow: that way that is really good, the farther men go
in it the better, and lazy men and unlearned, and void of scrutiny spoil all
professions, and are a scandal to what ever they profess; and so is Wisdom
without a good practice. We shall conclude with the Dogmaticks of the Assyrians
and Chaldeans, (...), Things below do sympathize with things above.

Yet the Stars do not so far alter and govern, but there are many things fixed,
and always the same as to their Nature and Basis, as Plants, Animals,
Minerals, Man, etc. Also in man are fixed Principles of Blood, Bone, Flesh and
Marrow; and in his Mind Universally is, first, An apprehension of a Deity:
Secondly, A propensity to worship this conceived Deity; in Prosperity to thank
him, and in Adversity to pray: Thirdly, Almost all mankind believe they shall
live after this Life; or that their Souls be immortal: Fourthly, All mankind
do believe that GOD is able to do all things, be Omnipresent, in all places, be
Omnivident, knowing all secrets, and to be Eternal and Immortal: Fifthly, All
mankind do think, this Being Eternal, Omnipotent and Omnivident, must make them
happy after this life, and punish them for their Evil Deeds: Sixthly, All men
hold Love, Chastity, Patience, Meekness, Charity, Humility, Affability, and
Honesty, good; and Cruelty, Persecution, Lying, Fraud, Murder, Theft, Adultery,
Reviling, and Cursing, evil: And these are stamps of the Divine Essence in Man,
which are Universal, and the Stars only alter, not take away: Yet there are
Athiests, it is true, and others to conrradict what we have said, but the
universality of men of our Form and Parts in the World, of all Nations are
possessed of these six things, and they are true: For GOD would not give to the
Universal Nature of Man to believe that that is false: Yea, the very Bruits
seem to have a Conscience, so that when they have done a fault, they shrink or
hide themselves, or run away; and when they have done well, and go upon
warrantable grounds, how bold, cheerful and confident are they?

4. Next will follow to be spoken of the Signs of Diseases: and in these is an
high misunderstanding, both in those that write, and those that read Practices
of Physic, chiefly the last: for if the Ancients, and most of the Moderns or
Neotericks were out in the Causes, they must needs be in the Signs that they
appropriated to such Causes: if there be any dispute about this, let my
Antagonists observe the twenty next Patients that come under their hands, (for
in so many the Rules of Nature may be discovered) and see if their Diseases and
Signs will hold and run parallel with those of the Diseases they read in
Barrow, Rondeletius, Etius, Aegineta, Primrosius, Riverius, etc. Truly so far
as I have observed many Patients, (having writ about 1400 Observations for my
own private use hitherto) and read Observations of many other men, I cannot
find Nature is confined to a method, or runs in that road Authors have
delivered; and who so opens many, shall find that the Liver, Spleen, Reins,
Gall, Stomach, Lungs, etc. are otherwise affected than as the Ancients thought;
and that they do only casually and accidentally light to be so affected as the
Ancients have deciphered; the affection of the Bowels in the diffected, agrees
chiefly in disagreeing: The Truth is, where we have one Patient that by*
concurrence of Signs seems to have any one Disease named in Practices of
Physic, we have three that are referrable to none of those Diseases; and in
many Patients sometimes together, we find such rare Cases that never before we
saw or read of. Also the Change in Diseases is very considerable; to day, or in
this hour, the Sick most complains of Headache; to morrow, or the next hour, the
Headache is gone, or with it remaining is a Stomachpain; the next day it is
changed into vomiting and purging, and then perhaps that stops, and the Party
is Heart-burned: and a multitude of such various Changes are sometime in some
sick People, that lie long; and what shall we call this Disease? sometimes many
Bowels are weak or diseased together, and by the Signs, where shall the Disease
be?

For Example sake, we will show by one how the Course and Order of Nature may
be guessed at in many.

Here died lately a Gentlewoman of Hitchin, she lay six weeks sick; had a fall
out of a Coach, being with child; she was very well, her condition of
childbearing considered, for a fortnight after, she was a little bruised
betwixt the shoulders, all seems to be well; a fortnight after the fall she
grows ill, as formerly in childbearing she had been, of windy pains and
stitches; it took her with a little Cough and raising, and the pain did remit,
and go into her Shoulder and Back, her Urine high, and Pulse pretty swift, some
signs of a windy, some of a legitimate Pleurifie: after a week she grew better
for a day or two, then worse; her spitting and excretion increased, and pain
fixed in her right side; she could hardly swallow, that showed the Oesophagus
hurt, and upwards on high, any hard thing hurt her; she took Lohocks, and
raised much ordinary Phlegm, like an Empyema: then a week after her raising
continuing now and then, she spat Blood, her Coughing frequent, and one morning
she vomited much Blood by Coughing and Excretion; but after that the new
symptom Haemoptoe ceased, she was partitis vicibus let Blood: after a month or
three weeks she grew finely well, her stomach to meat was recruited, her sleep
greater, her coughing not so much, and the purulency less; then a week being
passed, she grew worse, she complained no more of the Oesophagus, her Expuition
and Cough urge, and her Legs swell, and she grows Asthmatical, she raifeth much
faetid Phlegm, but now void of Blood; sometimes a fit of raising eases her
sidepain, which the last weeks did not much trouble her, and sometimes not; and
sometimes her Asthma fits were eased by coughing, and sometimes not; her Asthma
sometimes left her, and then she was hugely provoked to cough and raise; she
wanted sleep and an appetite to any food; her Asthmatical fits being but three
or four, though she was always at last shortwinded, left her before her death,
and she raised, as if matter did flow into the Lungs from some vicine part
exceeding; and two hours before death she felt her self oppressed with this
matter, and raised nigh half a pint, coughing and spitting it forth; and after
this great fit of raising, fainted, and her Head shook, and she died with
rattling of the matter in her Chest: she desired to rise before she died, and
talked cheerfully, and much, the night before she died; and these in many are
tokens of death, but not in the generality. Here were diverse other symptoms and
changes of less note, that came on, and went off again: she was delivered very
easily, and during two or three days of purging, after her delivery, her
Coughing was easy, she raised less, and her pain and Asthma very little, but
her Lochyes stopping, the Asthma and Purulent Matter increased, and she died
three or four days after. Most Physicians thought her delivery would have
freed her; the Child was very lively in Vtero, notwithstanding her sickness,
and born well, but died a week after, having principles of Corruption in it
from the Mother; one thought it a true Pleurisy, another a bastard one at
first; then it seemed an inflammation of the mouth of the Stomach; then some
Signs showed it in the Stomach; for in Childbearing she used to vomit, and
this was restrained after she sickened: some signs were for Adhaesion of the
Lungs, some for an Empyema; some that the Lungs did swim in purulency, some of
stopped Blood; some Signs argued it inwardly, as hurt in swallowing, some
outwardly as her soreness in her side to touch; some argued VVind, for when it
went into her shoulder and back, it abated in the side.

A month after she sickened (but she was let blood before) her blood looked
like yellow fat Broth when it was cold, and in it were several congealed
fleeces, like bits of corrupted flesh.

Who would think in those that have pissed purulent matter, that it came from
the Heart, as appeared by dissection; in vivo omnia sunt pervia.

5. Let us consider the Prognostics; He is a wise Physician that is not rash
herein: I know a Physician of mean parts, and great practice, that I have
admired he should happen to judge Life or Death so falsely, insomuch that other
Physicians have made it a rule to go by, that such a party will live, because
such a Physician says, She will die, and so on the contrary: what can be found
in the Pulse and Urines?

They talk of a Serratile or Saw-Pulse, Vermiculating or Crawling Pulse, and
Intermitting Pulse. I could never find any thing herein worth taking notice of;
in well people the Pulse will intermit as well as in sick, and in dying people
it is seldom found; and it is often the fancy of the Physician that must make all
things, so as he reads: the chief difference in Pulses is, the swiftness, and
slownesse, strength and faintness of the beating; and what may be judged
hereby, is this; in sickness, (for in health with working or running, the Pulse
will beat faster, and in some persons naturally stronglier than in others, and
than at other times) The swiftness of the Pulse argues an Enemy in the Blood,
or an Humor of an Heterogenious quality to it, that the Heart, as the Blood
passes through it, tastes and feels; and therefore lets it out as soon as ever
it is in, and being out by Fuga Vacui, dilating it self, draws in more, and so
sends it swiftly about the whole Body; if there be an high Heterogeneity the
Heart expels it the Blood by the Pores and Habit of the body, or some
particular part, if the Heart is strongest, and there be Principles of
Fermentation in the humor so qualified: now if with this swiftness there is
strength of the Pulse, it argues Nature is strong, and the Spirits are not
extinct; if with this swiftness the Pulse is faint and weak, the Spirits are
sunk, and there is feebleness and fainting; for in Syncope and Deliquiums
scarce any Pulse is found, or very little and small.

Urines are looked upon by the Vulgar, as the greatest Prophetical matter about
the Body of Man; how familiar is it, and as ridiculous and absurd as familiar,
to carry waters to Physicians, to know parties distempers, not telling a word
of their Symptoms to the Physician; judging him filly and unlearned in all
other things, that cannot tell all their Ails by their Water? and this they do
frequently, not intending to take Physic, but to bestow a Groat to know what
their Disease is, (which they understand as much as Geese) and how and when
they may recover, and whether they shall live or die by their Water; the which,
if a Physician knows all the Symptoms about the sick, and his Constitution, and
could see into his Body, he could not oftentimes truly determine of: in dying
people frequently the Water grows better, and in well people it will change
strangely, be sometimes paler, sometimes redder; sometimes thicker, sometimes
thinner: the Nights Water is often unlike to the Days; and some well persons
make thick crude Water, and in others, when it is cold, it is thick and
sedementary like the sick; the very food we eat, and liquor we drink, alter our
Urine. I have read of a Fruit in the new World, a kind to Coecus Baphicus, that
when our Contrymen ate of it, it so colored their Urine, that they thought
they had pissed blood, and were afraid to eat any more: so I have heard of
other things, some that use to drink much Wine, piss the same for smell and
color.

Furthermore, when the Urine passes only by and through a few parts, I see not
how it should show the Constitution of all parts; it does show chiefly
distempers of the Kidneys and Bladder, but that being the Sink and Channel,
Nature strives to wash off, and throw much filth that way by the Kidneys and
Bladder, and Urine, as Water is good to wash off and make Faeculency and
Sordity swim away; that is some reason therefore, that both in Cronical and
Critical distempers, thick muddy sedementary Urine is good, when the Disease is
breaking away, especially, if before the Urine was clear and limpid, and as if
it was strained from all foul matter.

Indeed I have often, to satisfy people, guessed at their Distempers by their
Urines, and one may often please them; if it was an high red Water, I judged a
Feverish temper, and then I guessed that they had Headache, Back-pains,
Thirst, want of Appetite, Heat, want of Rest, Faintness, one day worse than
another, etc. with variation; if the Urine was pale and thin, I guessed at
Obstructions, that it was strained; and in Obstructions usually are these
symptoms, Windiness, pain at Stomach, and stoppage, and loading there with
inappetence and Bradupepsia, or ill digestion; short-windedness, Aches in Knees
and Shoulders; and by fits in the Head, paleness of Countenance, dullness to
Action and Weariness, heaviness of the Mind, etc. but in Men and Women is great
variation; indeed we shall rarely find two exactly alike in all things; but
these things thus conjectured, have often pleased; Populus qui vult decipi
decipiatur, That people that will be deceived, let them be deceived. Some will
undertake to tell them, whether it is a Man's or Woman's Water, their Disease,
and whether they will die or live.

Indeed in Hair-pissing, VVorm-pissing, (which Rondeletius says, He would not
believe, till he had once seen them) Stones, Gravel, Blood, yellow Urine, mucus
or pus and such like; somewhat is shown of the very thing that causes the
disease, but how it is seated in the Body, in what degree, and in what part, we
are often to seek notwithstanding.

Hippocrates his Aphorisms of Prognostics were pretty good, so much as he
wrote thereof, and founded upon what he had experienced; yet because we meet
with such variety, we must not expect them to hold good (as to the plurality of
them) in each other person that they concern; it is well if in one in three they
hold good; and some of them will rarely be found true, because Hippocrates writ
them from the Observation of some one singular case we shall seldom see again,
or especially to terminate so.

We will here write a few Prognostic Signs, that the Reader in reading other
books may not be deceived in his understanding, or expect more then he shall
find.

APHORISMS.
I. Every Disease how dangerous and truculent soever, is not in all and at all
times Mortal; nor is any Disease so slight and trivial, but at sometimes in
some it may lead to death.

II. Rarely in any one sick person shall we find all Signs Mortal, except nigh
death; nor rarely in any considerable sickness shall we find all signs of
health; but we judge from the major number, and most considerable ones.

III. That Disease that is slight and small at first, may be mortal at last,
for that that in a remiss degree causes sickness, in an extreme may cause
death, a minimis maxima, from the least beginnings are often great events; but
we are in all cases to be sparing in Praediction for Life or Death, for that is
only in the foreknowledge of God.

IV. Some sicken one day and die the next; some have many Crises, and do hold
out diverse years; and some after a tedious sickness die, others live; if we
would praedict herein, the chief thing is, to tell whether any of the principal
Bowels are wasted, changed or corrupted, in all this while.

V. All intermitting distempers (quoad intermissionem) are safer than confirmed
and continued, because these show Wind or Water, or some Fluxible matter, and
that the parenchyma of no part, or mass of blood is much affected; and also in
the Intervals, Nature gets strength and relief, and the greater they be, the
more. Furthermore it shows, that there are some Seeds in the Blood and Humors,
that grow to maturity in such a time, and trasmute so much matter; and then the
spirits of another nature to it, fight with it, raise a fermentation, and throw
it off; and then Nature is quiet, till the remaining Seeds grow to maturity,
and have infected as much more matter.

VI. Nature does not observe that order or method of proceeding in Crises, as
has most generally been thought: but to some a Crisis is the 1st, to some the
second, to others the third, fourth, fifth or sixth day; and then, three, or
four, or five, or six days after: nor do most that die, die in a fit, but for
the most part after diverse fits, which do not come at set times, nor are just
of an equality, and of one manner; the sick die in calmness and setledness of
mind, and as the Vulgar observe, do often lighten before death: And that is a
bad sign, when the sick shall say, They are well, and feel no pain or ail,
suddenly, and on no apparent cause, that were very sick and weak a little
before. Indeed we see Fevers observe Crises or Paroxismes, and therefore call
them intermitting Fea^ers and Agues; and if there be any set fits or Crises in
Fevers, they are of Nature to the ^ormer, though less apparent, which I think
they call continual Tertians, Quartans, or Quotidians, and some have
axacerbations every seventh day, else I cannot find it verity any more than by
accident, that they should have Crises on the third, seventh, eleventh and one
and twentieth days of Acute Diseases, or in one of these: for the Crises are
only from the alteration of the Planets governing the Disease, and Moon, and
those happen not so, or at any set times; therefore some People twice in twenty
four hours, grow extreme sick like to to die, and have perhaps no more Critical
fits of five or six days after.

VII. In all Diseases observe what was wonted to the Sick in health, those
things are not so bad in sickness: every Disease so far as it differs from
Nature, the worse; any thing that wont not to be in health is bad, or if it be
in either extreme.

VIII. If those things that should refresh, as sleep, ease, nourishment, etc.
make the worse after them, it is bad; and joined with other ill Symptoms may
give suspicion of death.

IX. There is no Disease but one time or another, in one or other, is cureable;
and there is no Disease so slight and momentless, but in some or other, at one
time or other, it is incureable: yet though from Practices of Physic we reckon
of only so many and just such Diseases, yet there are many grand Alterations,
Transmutations, Corruptions, Enfissures, Animification, Petrification,
Apostemation, Adhaesion and Absumption of Parts and Bowels, that are
commonliest in the beginning and lowest degree incureable:

1. They are hard to be known by signs, and then fit Medicines are not
prescribed.

2. The Medicines taken, come not nigh those parts.

3. The Medicines are not long enough, or largely enough taken, though very
proper.

X. All Diseases of Malignity, wherein there is a separation of the infected
matter in the Blood, from the Blood, if that recoils and sinks into the Blood
again, it shows death, and rarely otherwise, if the matter have an high
Heterogeneity to the quality of our Spirits constituting our Vitality;
therefore few that have the Plague-Sores or Carbuncles that go in and fall
flat, or in the Pox, but they die; but in Flea-Spots, Red Gum, Spots of
Children, Ring-Worms, Tetters, Impetigo, etc. because the matter is not so
contrary to our Blood and Humors; if it fall back, or sink into the Blood, it
kills not commonly: Yet Physicians have gone on hugely blinded in these things;
for whatsoever matter by Fever and Fermentation is cast forth of the Blood by
the Skin and Habitum Corpois, if it lie outwardly a few days, and the Party
sweat and be hot, the Spirits of that Humor that contain the quality inimical
to our nature, fly forth and exhale; and then if the insipid and mild Blood or
Humor be soaked up again, it does no harm; for Nature finding it purged of
those high Antipathetick Spirits, receives it as a similar matter: Every thing,
yea, Inanimate things, apply to, and draw to them things not agreeing in figure
but quality, and things of contrary qualified Spirits put off and withdraw from
one another: and lest any should think this opinional only, (as most received
Principles are) we have related many sound Experiments and Observations in our
Book called Physiology, Jatrosophy and Pneumatography, which none denying, all
must confess,

Silentia non negat. XI. In every Disease, Acute or Cronical, if a Dyspnaea or
Asthma supervene, it is an Evil Sign; because we live by breathing, and because
the Heart, the Fountain of Life, wants fanning and blowing up, to keep the
natural fire of our Bodies from dying or going out.

XII. In all sicknesses, though there be no pains, no apparent ill symptoms,
and though all the Bowels seem firm, and the Party is pretty strong, yet if the
Heart, the Fountain of Life, sink, and faint, and languish, without
intermissions, and the Spirits are depressed, be not too secure; for the evil
qualities of the malevolent Planets, raise the sickness, and destroy our Life
in a Confused Disease, without any known Cause.

XIII. In all Diseases wherein Deliriums, Fluxes of Blood, Vomiting, Looseness,
Singultus, or great Appetite, do supervene, sometimes Death, sometimes Recovery
suddenly terminates and ends that Disease; yet there is probability why Fluxes
in some may cure, and lead to Death in others: for the same Signs and Accidents
are not likely to signify so bad in some Cases and Constitutions, as in others.

XIV. If any one is inwardly afflicted, and seemingly in Noble Parts, and
afterward he is outwardly afflicted, and in the Extremities or Superficies,
usually it is looked upon as a good sign, and so indeed it is, unless it be an
Expatiation of the Morbifick Matter, and not a Translation; for if withal the
Inward and Nobler Parts are as much afflicted as before, when the Superficies
and Extremities of the Body were not swollen, it is an Argument of Death, and
weakness of Nature to repel.

XV. In prognosticating concerning any outward Humor, Abscess, or Phlegm, we
must consider whether is most in fault, the part affected, that being naturally
or casually weakened, cannot repel; or being stimulated, does violently draw;
or the foulness and fullness of the Body, that sends Matter and Humors to a
part weaker than others: if the fault lies principally in a remote part that
cannot repel, or else attracts, commonly it is not so bad as when the Blood is
loaded with faeculent Humors, and does there on heaps disgorge them, and makes
it its Channel, thither to send its off-purgings; yet when both are together,
the worse: therefore swelling of the Legs after Agues are often of troublesome
consequence.

XVI. In all Diseases the more the Spittle, Urine, Excrements and Sweat break
forth in quantity or manner, contrary to Nature, and what those people used to
have in health, so much the worse; and the more Wind, Phlegm, and Water we see
in the sick, the worse, because they show defect in the Concoction, Heat, and
free passage in the Bowels and Body.

XVII. In all Diseases, where there are signs of no Bowel to be altered, or
wasted, or corrupted, and that the mass of Blood is not affected, there is
great hope of cure, and that by vomiting, purging and opening: for Diseases
that come from corruption of the Food, putrefaction of Humors, and
Obstructions in the first ways, lie liable to have their Cause easily removed,
and then the Effects cease: Toll Causam, and cessat Effectus. It is a great
piece of Art to distinguish inter similia; betwixt unlikes every stupid man may
discern: Windiness, gripings, intermitting pains, vomiting, looseness, unsavory
belchings, breaking wind downwards, pursiness, clogging and short windedness,
the color, smell, and consistence of things cast out, and what is retained,
show Diseases in the first Ways, or Stomach, small Guts and great Ones, or
Urinary passage.

XVIII. Where in a sick Person we find many Symptoms, some seeming to show a
Disease in one Part, some in another, some Symptoms of long lasting, others of
a sudden termination of the Disease; we must judge from the most and strongest,
what and where the Disease is, and how and when it will cease; also those
Symptoms that last longest, and without intermission, and that came first, are
most significant.

XIX. Most Diseases that come from an outward, procatarctick and known Cause,
commonly are most void of Danger, and sometimes by forbearing what they knew
gave occasion to the rise of the Disease, are cured by Nature: In others, the
knowing of what caused a Disease, gives good grounds for the appropriation of
Medicines to cure it: As the Vulgar use to say, A Disease well known, is half
cured.

XX. We are to consider the nature of the Bowels: for a Humor in such a part
familiar thereto, is not so dangerous as in another part; witness Phlegm in the
Lungs, Wind in the Intestines: Stones, Iron, Bones, hard Things, Bullets, etc.
in the Stomach, being things swallowed, and accustomed to the Stomach, are not
so dangerous as in other Parts not accustomed thereto, and not having a
capacity for, and ways to avoid, and the faculty to digest them; in the Brain
and Heart, because they are the Nobler Parts and Seats of the Heat, Spirits,
Motion and Sensation in us, those Humors that both for quantity and quality
may not hurt in other parts, may in these kill; and in all Diseases of the
Bowels, Blood, or Humors, we are chiefly to consider whether the quantity or
quality most offend; for accordingly we must presage and methodize our Cure.

These things are good for a Physician to know, and do hold true for the most
part: but it is very frequent that we find those that seemingly will not dye,
to dye; and diverse that seem by all Symptoms likely to dye, recover; yea, and
some that are thought departing, and have their passing Bell rung, recover:
thence is the Vulgar Proverb, So long as life, there is hope.

We will here give the Reader one Example, whereby he may judge of others, and
of the Cause and Current of many Diseases, after this manner; but the Stars
show more in Acute than Cronical Distempers.

A Kinsman of mine, one Mr. Norton, a Minister of a Neighbor Town called
Barton, falling sick about the beginning of August 1662, died August 15. in the
morning, I drew a Scheam of his sickness, but had not the time of his
Decumbiture, but found his sickness correspond exactly with the Scheam,
according to the common Rules of Astrology: Cancer was upon the Cusp of the
sixth House, the House of Sickness, a Sign that governs the Breast, and is
Watery; and he was chiefly afflicted in his Breast, and much troubled with
moisture and wind, and vomited: the Moon Lady of the Sixth being weak, and
afflicted by Mars, made him troubled with Choler; Mercury was his Significator,
Lord of the Third, being a Kisman, he was Retrogade in the sixth House, and
nigh Combustion, going to it in his Retrograde Motion; that argued him very
weak, faint, and oppressed with heat, and so he was, yet not clearly a Fever,
as diverse have; his Urine moderately high, he was given to fighting; when
Mercury came to Cazimi with the Sun, he died not, but when the Moon, Lady of
the House of Sickness, came to a perfect Quartile Aspect with Mars, Lord of the
House of Death, then died that Good Man: The night before he died, the Moon
applied to a Sextile with Jupiter, and Trine with Mercury, and then he had
Refreshment, and they were in hopes of his Recovery; but leaving those Aspects,
she drew to an Aspect of Enmity with Mars, Lord of the Eighth, and then he
suddenly changed. There were several Signs of his death; Mercury his
Significator, in the sixth House, Retrograde, under Combustion; Mars Lord of
the Eighth House, and Saturn therein, and the Moon weak; Cancer upon the Sixth,
being a moveable Sign, and Mars afflicting the Moon: There were some Tokens of
the Jaundice sometimes, and he vomited Choleric matter, and waterish; and
though he took a vomit, it still lay at his Chest.

6. Let us take notice of the Judicatations and Cure, both for Method and
Medicine, that the Ancients and Neotericks that follow them have set down: In
Cacochymy, we must alter; in Phlethory, purge, and bleed, and sweat; in Cold,
we must heat; and in Heat, cool; we must moisten the Dry, and dry the Moist:
These are approved Philosophical Rules, and are certainly true and good, quoad
modum and gradum: Consideratis considerandis.

In the cure of all Diseases, we shall chiefly meet with two differences, 1.
Diseases of Quality, 2. of Quantity.

Diseases of Quality are cured with, 1. Antidotes, 2. Specificals.

Diseases of Quantity are cured with Vomiting, Purging, Bleeding, Sweating, and
Diureticals; wherein are introduced Driers, Moistners, Heaters, Coolers,
Openers and Stypticks.

First. Concerning the cure of Diseases of Quality, these things are most
considerable; That every peculiar quality must be opposed by a peculiar quality
opposite to it: in our Bodies, in one or other, at one time or other, are most,
if not all the qualities that are in the Earth, in Animals, Plants and
Minerals; and we find such a Plant agrees with scarce any man, and another
agrees with this man, and not that; it is because in the first Plant was a
qualified Spirit Heterogenious to the common Nature of Mankind; in the second a
quality there was Heterogenious only to the peculiar qualification of the
Humors in some Bodies: those that are used to take Poisons, take them
harmlesly, because their Blood is by the frequent use of those things changed
into their nature, and so not being contraries do not fight: One thing is an
Antidote for the Plague, because in it the Spirits are of an heterogenious and
adverse quality to the quality that ferments our Blood; another thing is an
Antidote for the Pox, and kills the the venom or quality thereof, that is not
so peculiarly opposite to the Pestilence; another kills the quality of the
Blood and Juyces in the French Pox, that has no adverse Spirit to the Small
Pox: One thing is good in a malignant Pleurisy, Angina, or Peripneumonia, that
does no good in ordinary Quinzies or Pleurisies: Riverius did well observe that
bleeding People of a malignant Disease, in one City all died; in another, where
the Disease seemed the same, all lived that were let blood: See Riverius his
Account of Malignant and Pestilent Diseases, their Causes from the Stars, in
Capite de Febre Pestilenti.

What is the Reason in things Inanimate one kills and deads another, one draws
one to it, and expels or draws back from another? is it not the adverse and
inimical qualities in them? They that please to search our Physiology of
Qualities, Sympathies and Antipathies, may find many Examples and large
Experiences thereof: So that it is a weakness in those that know not Nature or
its variety, to conjecture such Effects come about from the form or figure of
things, and correspodent pores in things that receive the Attoms of such a
figure.

We read of two Thebane Princes, Eteocles and Polynices, two Brothers, who bore
one another a deadly hatred in their Lifetime, and fighting a Duel they killed
one another; and according to the manner of the Grecians, were to be burnt to
Ashes, to keep their Ashes Monumentally in a Pot, and so never bury them in the
ground as we do; their Bodies being both laid in one fire together, the flame
divided, and went up in two tops, so that their dead and senceless Bodies
seemed discontented to lie together, who in life had so hated one another.

Without doubt many acute, malign, and confused sicknesses, would be best,
easiliest and certainliest cured by Plants of that Planet that are
antipathetical to the Planet that is found to cause the Disease; also by
Sympathy, that way Plants may cure; as, take an Herb of Venus to cure a Disease
caused by Mars.

I wish Physicians would take notice how many ordinary illiterate People cure
Diseases frequently with one Trifle or small Simple, when they with their
Methods and many Compositions, Intrinsicks and Extrinsicks, fail to do it:
often they give but one Medicine or two, the virtue of it, and that a Simple
for the most part; witness the cure of many Gripings, Pains and Stitches, which
they cure commonly and presently with Acorns, or Stich-Holly, or Powder of
refined Rosin; Jaundice they cure easily and often with Specificals, as, Lice,
Saffron, or Turnerick, Earthworms, or Chelidone-Roots: Dropsies they cure
without such Methods and several Intentions without compositions, and
multiplication of them, with Horse-Radish-Roots, Eldern or Danewort,
Flower-de-luce-Roots, or Guaiacum: Agues they cure easilier and speedilier with
Camphir hung about their Necks, than with all the Methods and Compositions
Physicians use commonly: So with decoction of Five-leav'd-Grass, or decoction
of Herbigrass, Feaverfuge, and Centuary, or any one of them, do the Vulgar,
thrice given before their fits, often drive away Agues; or with Yarrow, Plantain
and Nettles bruised, and laid to their Wrists, or Garlic and Gunpowder,
because these are Specificals. Almost in all Diseases of quantity, is a
peculiar nature and qualification of the morbid Humor: What variety is there
in the Method of Physicians? and how in one Distemper let seven or eight
unknown to one another, be set to prescribe, and they will variously direct,
not only for Medicines but Method; one will think purging requisite, another
not; he may rather approve of vomiting; this may be against it, and hold
bleeding most requisite; another is against all evacuation, and holds only
alteration good: another he is for Astrological Cure, and sees what Planet gave
the distemper, and uses an Herb of an Enemy Planet to cure by Antipathy, or of
an Amical Planet to cure by Sympathy; yet we may find some Herbs under the
dominion of such a Planet, very improper; but a wise Physician will take those
that are proper for the Disease, sua Natura: One or two Specificals that sure
and tried Experience manifest, do more than large Compositions hodge-podge, and
mish-mash, and Chaos's of Simples.

I wonder, not only the common People, but Physicians, and in other respects
wise ones, that they should idolize Mithridate, Venice Treacle, and Mathiolus
his Antidote, etc. large Miscelanies of all together, that were intended to be
good for every thing, and special for nothing.

I ask whether Compositions have Virtues that none of the Simples have? If they
receive their Virtue from the Simples, then he that knows the nature of the
Simples, may best judge the force, and nature, and dose of the Composition. I
ask whether every Simple does not retain its virtue and force? if not, why were
they put in? if they do, then are there contradictions, to insist only on
Mithridate, by which all others may be judged after that manner. If any give it
for the Head, it must be because some of the Simples, or most, are good
therefore, and thence the composition receives its virtue; Fennel Seed, Oil of
Nutmegs, and Castorium are appropriated thereto, and what are these to forty
other things improper, in a dram of Mithridate? very few, if any grains of
these are therein, and were they not the stronger given alone in due quantity?
Beside if we intend to help a stupid distemper of the Brain by Mithridate,
because in it are Peppers, Staechas, Castorium, Fennel Seeds, Ol. Nucistae,
etc. do we not do more hurt by the Opium that is in Mithridate? What Disease
may not some of the Simples be proper for? and what Disease is the whole
Compound fit for? be not Agarick, Opopanax, Ornis and Asarabacca-Roots purging?
Hypochystis, Acatia, red Rose Leaves, Frankincense and Storax binding?
Turpentine, Cassia Lignea, Scordium, Fennel Seeds, Acorus, Saint John's Wort,
Valerian, are somewhat opening; and Cinnamon, Spicknard, and Celtica, Gum
Arabic, red Rose Leaves, Opium, Acatia, Hypocistis, etc. stop up and bind,
hinder all Fluxes, and stop and indurate the Humors; some are violently hot,
as the sorts of Peppers, Acorus, Mirth, Saffron, Ginger, and Mustard Seed,
Castorium, Cardamoms, Cubebs, Opopanax, etc. and Opium withstands them all; so
that if they are given in a cold Disease, because most are hot, Opium adds to
the Disease; if an hot Disease, because Opium stops motion the producer of
heat, the other will inflame; so that it can be given no way to do good, but
another way it may do harm: some things are proper in any Disease, and some
improper in any Disease: in Contraries must needs be contradiction: besides,
some are proper for one part, some for another, so that the Composition is
peculiar to none: Some are Arthritical, as Costus, Fennel Seeds, Castor,
Ginger, Staechas, Acorus; some Pectoral, as Styrax, Gum Arabic, Saffron,
Myrrh, and red Rose Leaves; some Hysterical, as Galbanum, Opopanax, Sagapen,
Opium and Castorium; some are Hepatical, as Gentian, Asarabacca, Orris and
Cassia Lignea; some are breaking Wind, or Carminative, as Cubebs, Cardamoms,
Peppers, Castorium, Acorus, Anise and Fennel Seed, etc. and Opium contradicts
all; for that, besides other things, makes the Medicine unfit in Windy
Distempers. This clearly confutes those that make one Medicine to be proper for
all Diseases, when each quality does only oppose its contrary.

I ask whether one ounce of Castor, or of Galbanum, or of Valerian Roots, given
alone, would not do more, then to mix either of them with four times so much of
that that is improper, and then give but one ounce for a dose?

I know diverse may fly to that false Asylum or refuge, Experience in this case
touching Mithridate: I have observed it, and nothing is done by it, but such as
in all likelihood Nature would have effected, or else it makes no mutation at
all commonly, or people grow worse: Tradition is the only plea, not experience;
for experience, not phantastically and conceitedly taken, will not vindicate
it; but abundance of Compositions have we generally received in several
Dispensatories, only messes of altogether; and how rediculously are they
composed and multiplied? We should read to judge, not to learn of Tradition in
such cases, when we think our selves fit to practice; for Tradition does many
times consent only in dissenting; he that only reads, and remembers what he
has read, to go by, and to justify his practice, is not fit to be a
Physician; but he that can demonstrate all his proceedings upon grounds and
accounts of his own; for what he remembers he has read, is another man's wit,
none of his; and he shall hardly find three Patients in ten that he can tell
how to compare to Practical Chapters of Physic touching Diseases; and if he
has no ground of his own to regulate Authors, he may go to a wrong Chapter, as
well as a right. I have used to charge Compositions well with the Specificals I
trusted to, and to have a great care they were in their full force and virtue;
for other things that are but sweetners and Vehicles, it is no great matter
what virtue they have: I have chiefly trusted to Simples commended by Gerrards
and other Herbals, for they were experienced good in such Distempers they are
praised; also I drew out all the choice Remedies for Simples I could find in
those Authors I had, and such I did affect to use for Compositions: he that
knows good Simples, may make good Compositions. Yet even in Diseases of
Contagion and epidemical, we must take away Impediments, else our
Alexipharmicalls will not take place. In some vomiting is good to clear the
Stomach, which may hinder our Cure; so the foulness, stoppages, and putrified
Matter in the small or great Guts, must be took away by Lenitives in Malignant
Diseases, else such Impediments will hinder the taking place of other things;
So it is apparent in Chyrurgery, that the Chyrurgions Office is only to take
away Natures Impediments; he cannot heal, Nature does that: the Similar and
Homogenious parts in Ulcers and Wounds desire to unite, were the Impediments
took away, as is Foulness, Sanies, Apostemation, Sarcosis or Excrescent Flesh,
Pain, Swelling, Heat, Inflammation, and Afflux of Humors. There are some
Medicines indeed glewing and glutinative, but these cannot heal, but draw
together the Lips of Wounds, and so united parts grow together; yet also they
glutinate and draw up Orifices of corrupted sores, and so the bottom being
foul, a worse is made, and an hollow Ulcer; so that nothing properly can be
termed an Healer, only they all do their Office, some one way, some another, to
take away Natures Impediments: all the best Medicines in the world shall not
cure some Ulcers, especially, not till such a time, and then perhaps a trivial
thing, or Nature on her own accord will do it; for if we strive when Nature is
not disposed, in all Diseases we do nothing, Nature alone will do more: the
Stars are a principal cause; for if any one be wounded or bruised at such or
such a time, he will not be healed of a long time, and till that time come all
our Arts and Remedies never so choice shall not avail; and when the time is
come, an old Woman's Plaster, or some petty thing chances to cure it. In some
tumors no suppurating Plaster or Ointment will make them ripen that are not
naturally, specially at that time, disposed to ripen and suppurate; and in
others, no discussing or dissolving Topicalls will hinder them from ripening;
so that if we chance not to light of the right time, and to assist Nature in
that way she is disposed and inclined; yet in many tumors, specially if we
wait, in some longer, in some a shorter time, Discussion is made by
Discutients, and Suppuration by Maturaters; because Nature was thereto suapte,
inclined or disposed, or else did stand neuter; and so by outward force, as by
a weight put into Scales that were even, the Balance was turned.

In Exanthemata and most Eruptions and Tumors, the proper way next to sweating
is, to use Topicalls, (...), to open the Pores, and let out the evil Quality or
Heterogenious Spirit of the Diseased Matter, specially in malign Pustules and
Tumors; for the malign Quality being evaporated by insensible Transpiration,
the Mass left is insipid and void of Heterogeneity, and so is sucked up again
by the Veins, and received by the Blood; for inimicalls love not to be joined
together.

I have observed in the use of Dialthea Ointment, Oil of Lillies, of sweet
Almonds, and some like hereto, that swellings anointed herewith, make their
dimensions and extensions the larger, specially if we do anoint farther then
the swelling reaches, and before the matter is fixed, while it is fluxible and
thin,; for though these Diaphoreticalls and Emollients are very proper to let
out the fiery sharp or Inimical Spirits of the humor that caused the Blood to
separate it, and throw it off upon a part weakest, and that could not repel,
and nighest; yet they loosen the subjected flesh, and make the capacity larger
for the humor to swim in, and the skin to be distended; yet we must not look
any thing should happen alike in all; we are sure the Medicines have always
such virtues, and connatural operations; but the difference is in the Body, and
there is agreement only as to disagreement; yet we may properly say,
(denominatio sumitur a majori) that such is the ordinary course of Nature, that
happens most frequently amongst so many varieties and diversities.

Reader, what ever I deliver, that I do not prefix or annex to it, I think, I
think, It is probable, or the like, thou may take for a sure and sound
Truth; for I have not given my self to believe Tradition or any Opinions of
men, but have judged them, and brought them to the Bar of sure Experience; and
where I could not find two or three good and infallible witnesses in Nature for
them, I rejected them, especially if the course of Nature in other things did
not harmonize and hold therewith.

I do not desire any man should believe any thing because I believe it; let him
believe the Experiences, Examples and Histories that men have in diverse Ages
and Countries consentaneously writ; no projects of their own Brain, nor
Imaginations; for that has spoiled all Learning every where, because men will
not contemplate the works of GOD, and know all the Secrets and Varieties in the
wonderful course of Nature, the real effects of a GOD. How would men agree in
all Points of Religion, and of Opinion concerning GOD, and how He is to be
worshipped, what He is, and wherefore He made this World, and the Office of
Man, did they truly and really (void of all fond Conceptions and Imaginations)
adhere to the course of Nature, and search her? Doubtless God did not give a
Rational Faculty to Man, to deceive and entrap him; and we see what one Eye
apprehends black or white, another does; and what one Palate tastes sweet,
another does; and what one Ear hears sound shrill or loud, another does; and
what one Nose smells unsavory, another does; and what one Hand touches hard or
soft, the Hand of another feels it so; I mean purely according to Nature: Then
let us conclude these things are all true, and really so, that the universal
Nature of Man consents to own and approve of; and that other things are
questionable, and must be brought to the Bar of sure Experience, to be tried:
for GOD gave us not our Senses, Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Feeling, and
Tasting, to deceive, and entrap, and confound us: All mankind might be
satisfied in one Religion, as well as in unanimity in Philosophy, were things
cleared, that one man's Eye might see them as well as another; no man surely
would deny Experience, that he could both see, hear, feel, taste, or smell
himself: So the Doctrine of Spirits is writ by the experience of many men; and
did not the self-same things happen in our Age and Country, we might distrust
Tradition: When we hear men say they saw such things themselves, and they were
addicted to no fond belief, and in all other things staid and prudent, we may
have reason to believe them.

2. Concerning the cure of Diseases of Quantity, we might say somewhat, whereof
has partly been spoken before; and touching Vomiting, Purging, Bleeding,
Sweating, and Ureticks, we have spoke in our Book of Nosology, in our
Physiology and Jatrosophy, whither we refer the Reader: yet because we did not
there describe the Humors to be purged, and their diversity and nature, so
that the Reader might sincerely and thoroughly apprehend the Truth of those four
Humors, Phlegm, Choler, Water and Melancholy, we shall discourse a little
thereof here.

I do allow, with the Ancients and Neotericks, that the Humors of the Body may
be called properly, (...), Phlegm, (...), Choler, (...), Water, (...), from
(...), black, and (...), Choler, Melancholy, or black Choler: But that the
Reader may know the truth, we shall give these Exceptions:

First, That the Names are only Figments and Phancies of Men.

Secondly, That Nature observes no Method or Order herein, as, that that Humor
that is not Phlegm, must be Melancholy; or that that is not truly Melancholy,
according to Physicians Description thereof, must be Water; and that Humor
that corresponds not with either of these, according to Ancient Rules and
Authorities, must be Choler: There is no such thing in Nature. As for Example:
Melancholy by its Name signifies black Choler; by their Attributes it must be
black, and a kind of Choler, it must be fluid and thin; by the taste, say they,
tart; by nature of mutation, Scirrhous, and apt to grow faeculent: I answer, We
may find an Humor that is black, and very bitter; in the one it accords with
Melancholy, in the other with Choler; what then shall we call it? Another
Humor is found black, thin like Water, not coagulative; what shall we call
this? also sweet in taste, so that the taste agrees with Phlegm, the consistence
with Water, the color with Melancholy. So in the generality.

Thirdly, Why should we give Names to Humors, and those naturally to be so
qualified, when we find not so in the course of Nature, not as a Rule, only
as a Contingent and Accident? For suppose any Physician should open a Man's
Head, or other Part, and find therein the cause of his Death to be a gellied
Water, black, stinking, and insipid; must we therefore write of all mankind,
there is an Humor in all Bodies which we thus call, which is gellied, black,
stinking and insipid, when we may never find exactly the same again? For in
another that is diffected, we may find the blackness of an humor, but not the
absence of taste; or the gelliedness of an humor, and not the blackness; or
the stinking of an humor, and not the gelliedness: and so it is as purely
accidental that we meet with Phlegm, Choler, Water and Melancholy in the Bowels,
especially Choler and Melancholy, just as they describe: Water in the bellies
of Hydropicks agrees the most together, and in all may properly be called
Water; yet in some it is thicker, in others thinner; in some clear, in others
yellow, in others blackish; in some stinking, in others sweet, in some bloody;
so that it is hard to say whether it is waterish Blood, or bloody Water: and in
other parts of the Body, Water (if it be good to use such a general name to
express our selves) differs more, so that it is hard to say whether it be
waterish Choler, or a choleric Water; or a waterish Phlegm, or a phlegmatic
Water; or a waterish Melancholy, or melancholy Water: They that intend to be
saisfied in Truth alone, and to acquiesce therein, had best build their Faith
on sure Foundations, and read Observations, Anatomies and Diffections, and
consider all from what they can experience, or what many others have
experienced, not conjectured.

I think it the best way to teach any, to let them read only Observations, and
Experiences, and Similitudes, and therefrom, with their own consideration, and
comparing one thing with another, make general Rules and Tenants in Philosophy.
What man can imagine (that did never experience himself, or read, or hear it to
have been experienced) that there is such variety in fire? that some fire will
burn and not be seen; and some look like flame, and yet not burn; that some
should be quenched with Oil, and kindled with Water; that some should burn in
the depth of the Earth, and in the Sea, and in Lakes; that Wood rubbed together
should burn; that Fire should be procured from a Glass of Water set in the Sun,
Toe laid betwixt, and many such things: It is not fit men should write of a
thing, that know little thereof, only conjecturally; for therein men lose
their time and pains, and cannot assert any thing but from such a man's ita
dixit, or ipse dixit, or so many men are of that mind, when by experience the
thing might be put out of all dispute.

Of the New Method, or Astrologo-Physical Way of Studying and Practicing
Physic.
IN all sick Parties, more notice is not to be taken of the sick Parties
Information, than of the Position of the Heavens at the time of the Parties
falling sick, or when his Decumbiture and first lying down was, or when
grievous Symptoms did arise: if this time cannot be taken, then the Physician
must draw a Scheam of the Hour and Minute he was first sent for in, and wherein
the Parties Urine was brought, and the Question made from the Sick, and Advice
taken first.

The Physician in this Scheam must consider the Lord of the Ascendant, or first
House, to be Significator of the Sick; and the Lord of the sixth House, to be
Significator of the Sickness; the Lord of the Seventh personates the Physician,
and Lord of the Tenth the Medicine or Physic.

Yet if the sick Party enquire not himself, the Lord of the Ascendant shall
signify the Enquirer or Querent; and if it be a Brother that is sick, the Lord
of the third House shall be his Significator, or for a Neighbor; if a Father
be sick, the Lord of the Fourth; if a Wife, the Lord or Lady of the Seventh; if
a Child, the Lord or Lady of the fifth House; and so as to other Relations,
according to Astrological Rules, too tedious here to go through; yet I always
thought the Lord of the Ascendant to have in all figures a great signification.

The Moon in all Figures, especially of Diseases, has great signification,
though she be neither Lady of the Ascendant, Sixth, Eighth, or Tenth House.

In Scheams for the Sick, the principal Significators of the Sick, and his
Disease, and the Moon, if they be in the first House, or first Sign Aries,
afflicted, they signify the Sick is afflicted in the Head, or some part
thereof, as Eyes, Ears, Nose, Mouth, Face, etc.

If in the second House, or in the second Sign Taurus, they show Diseases in
the Neck and Throat, as, Struma's, Kings Evils, and melancholy sicknesses; but
the Lord of the Sixth, the Sign thereof, and the Moon, must chiefly show what
the sickness is.

The principal Significators in the third Sign and House, chiefly show ails in
the Arms, Shoulders or Hands; and Gemini shows distempers of blood, in what
House soever.

In the fourth Sign and House, the Stomach, Breast and Lungs are affected;
Cancer gives scabbedness and waterishness.

In the fifth House, and in Leo, the Party is afflicted in the Back and Loins,
or Heart, or about the Ribs; and Leo shows Choler, or too much high Blood.

The sixth House, and Sign Virgo, shows distempers in the Mesentery and
Abdomen-Guts, and first Ways; Virgo is melancholic, and gives Fluxes and
Windiness.

The Lord of the Ascendant, of the sixth House, and Moon, in the seventh House,
and seventh Sign Libra, show the Disease is in the Kidneys or Loins, in the
Buttocks or Groin and Privities; Libra gives heats and surfeits, and venerious
distempers.

In the eighth House and eighth Sign Scorpio, show affects in the Privities,
Anus, and Share, in the Huckle-bones and Buttocks; Scorpio sometimes shows
Piles, Stone in the Bladder and Tenasmus.

The ninth House and Sign Sagitary, the Hips, and Hams, and Buttocks are
affected: Sagitary gives Itchy fistulous corruption, and Sciatica's.

In the tenth House and tenth Sign Capricorn, the Knees and Hams, and upper Leg
is affected: Capricorn often gives outward blemishes, and those from Melancholy.

In the eleventh House and eleventh Sign Aquaris, the Skin, Legs and Anckles
are amiss.

In the twelfth House and Sign Pisces, the Anckles, and Feet, and Toes are
afflicted. Judge by other Signs the nature of the Disease.

It cannot be expected that in all or in many figures we should find the first
Sign Aries, on the Cusp of the Ascendant, or Taurus on the Second, or Gemini on
the Third; therefore we must judge from the greater probability; for there will
be great alteration in all Scheams: nor must we expect to find often the Lord
of the Ascendant, or Significator of the diseased man, the Lord of the sixth
House or of his Sickness, and the Moon, all in one Sign or House; but we must
judge from the greater probabilities; two are greater than one, and the Lord of
the Sixth is most significant, as to the part afflicted; the Sign he is in, and
the Sign that descends on the sixth House, and the Degrees of those, chiefly
show the part or parts afflicted; compare the Sign the Moon is in with these.

In the next place (having found out the part affected) we must see how it is
affected, or what the cause is; and therein we must consider, First, the nature
of the Sign that is upon the Cusp of the sixth House, the House of Sickness,
and also the nature of the Sign that ascends, which is somewhat, though less
considerable than the Sign of the sixth.

If Aries descend on the sixth, it shows the Sickness fiery and hot and
choleric: Aries shows Pushes, Wheals, smarting Pimples, Toothach, Headache,
Noli me tangere, Ring-worms, etc.

Taurus is an earthy cold dry melancholy Sign; and that shows, Kings-Evils,
Wenns, Fluxes of Rheum, Quinzies bastard, Apostems.

Gemini is an airy, hot, moist and sanguine Sign; it shows Putrescence of the
Blood, Windiness, distemper of the Judgment and Phantasy.

Cancer is a Tropical Sign, the only House of the Moon, waterish, cold, moist
and Phlegmatic; it shows upon the sixth in a Disease, a cold Stomach, abounding
of Phlegm, Pthysicks and Catarrhs, Coughs, Dropsies, waterish Apostemations,
Cancers in the Dugs or Paps, and other Infirmities of those parts it governs.

Leo is the only House of the Sun, its nature is hot, dry, choleric, and
accordingly signifies Inflammations, specially in those parts it governs,
Pleurisies and Side Pains, Back Pains and Oppression of the Heart and Spirits
by heat, Heart-panting and Burning Fevers, and Malignant Affects, Feverish
Jaundices, etc.

Virgo is an earthy, cold, melancholy Sign; it signifies Wind, cold Cholicks,
Stoppages, Worms, Engendring of Stones, Obstructions of the Meseraick Veins,
etc.

Libra is an airy hot moist and sanguine Sign; it signifies Stones in the Reins
and Bladder, Heat and Putresence of a retained Matter in the Back, Loins, and
Groin, Infirmities of the Ureters and Urinary Passage, exulceratious pissing of
Blood.

Scorpio is a cold watery and phlegmatic Sign, and accordingly shows Diseases,
as Fistula's, Dropsies, Gonorrhaeas, cold Apostems, and moist Exulcerations,
Phlegmatic Swellings, and Obstructions therefrom in the lowest parts of the
Belly, Diseases also specially of phlegm and moisture in Utero et Pudendis: yet
it is a token also of Childbearing and fruitfulness.

Sagitary is of the fiery Triplicity, hot dry and choleric; it shows
Putrescence of the Blood in those parts it governs, whence may be sharp
Exanthemata, and fiery Swellings, Itches, Inflammations and Apostemations, from
a separation or corrupted and hot Blood thrown off upon those parts, which
according to the degree and nature of it, and the qualification and strength
and disposition of that part to receive, is sometimes this, sometimes that,
sometimes more, sometimes less.

Capricorn upon the sixth, shows a Disease cold dry earthy and melancholy;
from hence may be judged, that the party is diseased much about his Knees, and
that there is some swelling pain or breaking out from some earthy cold and
melancholy humor, or else it does concrete: But we cannot stand so long as to
describe the tenth part requisite for the Physician to know, he must first
study Astrology, and therein he may be informed of many other things; adjoining
thereto the knowledge of the Humors, and their various Motions, Mutations,
increase and decrease, also the Vessels and the Parts, and their natural
Offices and Use, and which way aptest to be spoiled, or most capable of
Corruption.

Aquaris is an airy, sanguine, hot and moist sign, governing the Legs and
Ancles. Hence may be guessed, if upon the sixth House, or the Lord of the sixth
or Moon be therein, that the party is there (however in other parts besides)
afflicted, and that there are varices or goutish windy Pains or Swellings, or
Lameness, or Cramps, etc. of that nature; but it requires abundance of
curiosity, more certainly and accurately to describe particulars.

Pisces, is cold, moist and phlegmatic, showing Gouts, Lameness, Phlegmatic
Swellings, Dropsies of the Feet, Chilblanes, Phlyctenae aquosae, Phlegmatic
Apostemations, etc. of like nature.

Now for the Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna.

Saturn, characterized, Lord of the Ascendant, in a Scheme that is drawn at the
decumbiture of the Sick; denotes the Person of the Sick, and that he is of a
cold earthy dry melancholy Constitution, or inclined more or less thereto; Lord
of the sixth House, the House of Sickness, it argues the Disease to be in that
part, that the Sign he is in principally governs, compared with the Sign
descending upon the Cusp of the sixth; and observe the Degrees he is in in that
Sign, for accordingly the chief Grief is higher or lower in that part; also by
natural sympathy he principally rules the Spleen: These things considered, and
that he is Cronical, portending Diseases of long time, Astrologers have
observed, that all Impediments in the right Ear, and Teeth, that Quartane
Argues, all dry and melancholy Distempers, Lepra and Elephantiasis, P^lsies,
Tremblings, loss of Hearing, Carus and Coma, Sopor and Stupor, Gouts, vain
Fears, Ruptures that grow Scirrhous, Dog Hunger, Haemorrhoids, etc. of like
nature proceed from Saturn.

Jupiter, signifies, when he personates the sick party, that he is moderately
hot constitutioned, abounding with blood, and if well dignified, that is, of
very good inclinations of mind, affable and grateful: When he is Lord of the
sixth House, and personates the Disease according to the Sign he is in that
principally governs such a part, and the Sign upon the sixth, there chiefly the
Sickness lies, and the Sign that the Moon is in; yet Jupiter peculiarly governs
the Liver, and the venal Blood in that part may be inflamed, or apostemated, or
break forth: he is observed to cause most Diseases that arise from Putrefaction
of the Blood, Pleurisies, Inflammation of the Lungs and Liver, heart-beating
from Blood offending in quantity or quality, Quinzies, Pains in the back,
because he governs Leo, Putrid Fevers, etc. of like quality.

Mars, characterized, Lord of the Ascendent, or that House that shows the
person of the sick; shows his temperament to be hot and dry, choleric, and of
a fiery angry mind.

When he signifies the Disease, he shows the Jaundise; he chiefly by
Homogeneity of Nature, governs the Gall: Also Astrologians ascribe to him these
Diseases, Evils of the left Ear, Tertian Fevers, Megrims, Carbuncles and
Pestilent Agues, Malign and Epidemical Fevers, Fistula's, Ringworms, St
Anthonies Fire, sharp and choleric Eruptions, Boiles and Exanthemata, Wounds,
Cuts, Burnings, Scalds, Passions of the Mind, as Anger, Fury, Frenzies,
Deliriums, and others consonant and deducing their cause from Choler.

Sol, or the Sun, the Fire and Light of this World, is characterized thus,, he
sympathises by Homogeneity of Nature with the Heart, the Microcosmical Sun; and
as the greater of like nature by sympathy or similiar attraction, influences
upon the less, so the Sun upon the Heart of Man. The Solar Man is hot and dry,
but more temperate than Mars; he shows fault in the Arterious Blood and Heart,
as Palpitation and Syncope, vitiated or defective Sanguification: If the Sun be
Lord of the sixth and very weak, and afflicted by Saturn, judge the Seeds of
Sanguification are almost extinguished. Man's right Eye is given to the Sun, and
Women's left: therefore in Infirmities of the Eyes, the Sun is to be considered:
The Sun shows in all Figures, but more where he is a significator, Strength or
Weakness of the Vital Spirits; and though a Man has many and great Enemies,
yet so long as he is strong to keep them out or overpower them, it is nothing;
but where Nature is weak, and can make no resistance, a little thing dejects
her.

Venus is thus characterized,: The Ancients called her, Cytherea, Aphrodite,
Vesperugo, Phosphorus, Ericina; she chiefly signifies Diseases of the Matrice
and Privities; in scroto et testiculis, the Lues Venerea, Gonorrh^a,
Priapismus, Tengio, Satyriasis, Coitionis Munera, belong to her, specially if
her Sign Libra is on the sixth House; If Taurus, because that shows Diseases
in the Neck, descends on the sixth, she shows watery or phlegmatic
Apostemations in the Neck or Throat, bastard Quinzies, Rheumatick Swellings,
Phlegmatic Kernels, or Venereal Exulcerations; Lady of the Ascendant, she shows
the Temperance of the Sick or Querent to be moist, phlegmatic, and something
inclined to Sanguine; if well dignified, she shows good Conditions, Mirth, a
loving and pitiful Nature.

Mercury follows next, the least of all the Planets, who always accompanies
the Sun; the furthest distance is 27 Degrees: he of all the Planets is only a
Neuter, neither Masculine or Feminine, but as he is joined to a Male or Female;
he chiefly rules the Tongue and Language, Wit and Eloquence: when he is ill
dignified, if a material significator, the Sick is in danger to be
lightheaded, but more or less as it may be, Madness, Lethargies, Phrensies,
Dull memory, Giddiness, Hoarsness, Coughs, Imaginary Sicknesses, Dumbness,
Stammering, Numbness, etc. are given to him as the Causer and Signifier.

the Moon is chiefly considerable concerning Sicknesses, though she is neither
Lady of the Ascendant, or sixth House, or Significatrix of the person of the
Sick, nor Lady of the eighth, the House of Death; she shows much how the
Disease will change; and it is much to be considered who she applies to, and
from whom she separates, her Dignity, and the Nature of the Sign, and House she
is in; she signifies Water in the Head, that may cause Stupor Tremor, Palsies,
Apoplexes, Vertigo's, Epilepsies, Lunasie, Convulsions, Madness and Dullness,
as the Water is milder or sharper, hotter or colder, more vellicating or
narcotical qualitied; she by her Sign Cancer governs the Breast, she causes
Dropsies, Water-bladders, Rheumatismus, Catarrhs and Coriza, Rheums of the
Eyes, in the left of Men, and right of Women; when she represents the sick
Person, she shows his Temper, cold moist and phlegmatic; she signifies
Diseases changeable; Mercury Diseases fixed, Saturn Diseases most cronical,
Mars acute Distempers, the Sun and Jupiter acute, but less acute than Mars;
Venus shows Diseases cronical and more mild, but these alter and vary as they
are dignified and posited, and in conjunction with such or such, and as they
are in fixed moveable or common Signs.

Concerning Crises in Diseases, Hippocratists and Galenists, set the third or
fourth day, the seventh, the ninth, the twelfth and fourteenth, doubling three
or four, and so to twenty one, for critical days; but experience finds truth
in somewhat else: indeed in many Sicknesses, which therefrom we call Agues, or
intermittent Fevers (every Ague is a Fever, but every Fever is not an Ague;)
the Crises come once a day, that we call a Quotidian, or twice in 24 hours,
that we call a double Quotidian, or when one Crisis or Fit is off, strait
succeeds another; another has a double tertian, viz. a Crisis twice in three
days, that at first had it but once in that term. A Paroxysme truly
considered, is nothing but a Crisis; and there are no other certain legitimate
and methodical Crises; another has a fit but once in four days, that we call
a Quartane, or two days sick, one well; which therefore the vulgar call A
third days Ague; another every fifth or seventh day is sick; and now in these I
allow, the Galenical Crises, but not in common acute and not feverish
Distempers, as continual Tertians, Quotidians and Quartanes; for the Quality of
the morbifick Humor may be such, that it may make one sick every day, and yet
a fit comes but once in three or four, wherein is Exacerbation; and here
continual Fevers differ from intermitting, because in the Crises or Paroxysms
of continual Fevers, the infected Matter is not thoroughly expelled; in pure
intermittings it is, only the Seed of such a nature, lies in the Blood that
transmutes in two or three days as much more morbid Matter, which the Blood
perceives, and ferments to separate, and does effectually by Sweat, Urine,
Vomit, or Exanthemata do it. The word (...) comes from (...), to judge: And
Avicen says, Crisis est velox motus morbi ad salutem, vel ad mortem; so that
we gather that is truly a Crisis in the meaning of the Ancients, that is a
sudden change, so that Death or Life may be judged apparently.

To which I answer; How many, as the vulgar say, do lighten before death, are
very well rid of their pains and miseries, and seem past all of a sudden, and
die within few hours after? how many are there that have many sharp Crises
before death? at least two or three frequently, and the Sick escapes them, and
grows better after each, and yet dies at last, sooner or later: in such a
Crisis, or after the Crisis is over, the Sick die quietly and easily.

(...), a Fit comes from (...), to stir up; and I know not what great
difference can be made twixt Crisis and Paroxysmus, for the Crisis is a
Paroxysme, but every Paroxysme they mean is not a Crisis; and why? because
Crisis portends a sudden change; and we can thereby judge of the death or
sudden recovery of the Sick.

I answer; there is no such thing in the bounds of truth, only accidentally
some may guess death or life, and as easily speak the contrary; nor are Crises
alike in sick persons for number, greatness, or conformity of kind or invasion.
The truth is this, the Motion of the Moon, of the Lord of the Ascendant, Lord
of the House of Sickness, and of the House of Death, only and truly show the
motion Paroxysmes, Exacerbations and Crises or Decretory Days, in such
confused and acute Diseases as they attributed Crises to; and if that appears,
Crises must not happen every third, or fourth, or seventh, or twelfth, or
fourteenth, or seventeenth, or twenty one day, and no other, as they did
falsely conceit: When the Moon applies to a Qartile or Aspect of enmity to the
Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the sixth, then is like to be a sick fit;
when she applies to a Sextile or Trine Aspect, to either of them, then is
likely to be an interlude or refreshment, other Aspects and Planets motion not
causing the contrary; the Moon in opposition to the significator of the Sick,
or his sickness causes extraordinary illness; also when the Lord of the House
of Sickness (the more if he is a malevolent Planet, as Saturn or Mars) comes to
a Quartile Aspect, or Opposition to the Lord of the Ascendant, there is raised
in the Sick a Paroxysme or Crisis, the Lord of the Ascendant being weak, and by
nature an enemy to the Lord of the sixth, so much the worse, the more the Sick
is cast down, the Lord of me eighth being the House of Death, if he be strong
and malevolent, and come to a Quartile Aspect with the Lord of the sixth (any
Aspect with him is bad) and the Lord of the sixth, and also of the first House
be weak, and otherwise afflicted, we may suspect death; but if the Sick through
strength or friendly Aspects of Jupiter or Venus, or Lord of the seventh or
tenth, the House of Physic or Physicians, do pass that fit, it is likely they
will recover: but the true Significators of the Sick and his Sickness should be
taken at his Decumbiture, and so considered all along in their places, Signs,
Houses, Dignities, Motions and Aspects with other Planets; yet if we draw a
Schem at the Decumbiture or first falling sick, and Mars be Lord of the
Ascendant, and Mercury of the sixth, and we draw another a day, two or three
after, there may be another Planet Lord of the Ascendant, and another Lord of
the sixth House, but the course of the first are to be considered most; and
seeing there is such great change in most, both Critical and Cronical Ailds,
the present Lord of the Ascendant, sixth and eighth House, are to be weighed in
every Scheme we draw upon changes of the Sick; but in all things consider the
Moon, though Lady of none of the aforesaid Houses, also Jupiter and Venus,
though by government of houses no Significators or consignificators, yet if
joined by body, or friendly Aspect applying to the Lord of the Ascendant or
sixth House, specially if strong, they bring great refreshments, ease and
alleviation to the Sick; so the malevolent Planets, Mars and Saturn, though
they be Lords of Houses unconcerned in the Sickness, which shows their ill will
and power the less, and the less to respect or tend toward the Sick, yet
joined by body or by Quartile Aspect or Opposition reflecting upon the Lord of
the Ascendent or sixth, or Moon, they do deject the Sick, and increase his
Griefs; indeed any Aspect, though Trine or Sextile, of the Significators with
them, is bad; that part is most afflicted according to the Sign they cast an
inimical Aspect to, and are in: but in most Schemes and Figures that we draw;
we shall find much and many contradictions, in some it is hard to say one or
other, there are as many reasons or arguments for a thing, as against it; and
we know not whether of them are most or greatest: And even so we find things in
the universal course of Nature here below, to be answering to the diverse
Motions, Statious, Fortitudes, Aspects, and Retrogradations of the Planets; for
in one man's happiness is this or that unhappiness, so that we can hardly say,
he is more happy in his wealth, than he is unhappy in his sickness. I have well
considered it; and he that knows these things, and does well consider, and
compare, shall assuredly, find that the contingents and things on earth, that
happen to, and are in and about Man, come and fall out just according to the
method and order of the Heavenly Bodies; and what detraction can it be from
God, or Heterodoxity to say, The one is governed or guided by the other, being
we see assuredly they do so fall out, and have their current and ordinary
natural motion so and in that manner? for every thing has its cause; and if
good comes immediately from God without the intervene of contingent and natural
Causes, so then would Evil be made immediately wilfully and partially to arise
from God, if it did not accidentally according to the Order of Nature so fall
out; which Order in Nature God has committed to the course of the wandering
Stars, so far as our reason and knowledge, experience and capability can reach;
which course of the Planets God at first made, and that is the wonder they have
ever since continued it; and he knew how they would change and vary, and what
and when, and how things would be changed and effected.

There may be many exceptions made which in one place or other of our Writing,
or Scripture, we have endeavored to give satisfaction in.

In all Schemes we must compare one thing with another; sor as in the Heavens
are good and bad and indifferent Signs, so in one sick Body, some Signs show
Shortness, some protraction of the Disease, some show Death, some Recovery, and
some are neither.

Moreover, in all Changes we must see what Planets afflict the Moon, and Lord
of the Ascendant and sixth House, and judge of the Humor accordingly: Saturn
governs the Petrifying, Scirrifying, gross and earthy Spirit in Man: Mars
governs the fiery sharp thin Evaporative and caustic Quality in Man: the Sun
and Jupiter chiefly govern the Sanguifick Quality in Man, the Sun more properly
the Sanguifick Principle, or Heart; the Liver and Venal Blood are given to
Jupiter, and animifick Qualities.

The Moon gives Waterishness and Moisture, specially increasing; decreasing she
decreases it: Venus chiefly governs the Spermatifick Quality; and Mercury the
Sense or Rationality of the Brain; but Venus gives Phlegm chiefly; Mercury
inclines the Way, or that, as he is conjoined with others.

We shall next proceed to the Astrological Cure of all Diseases, and treat as
briefly thereof as we may conveniently.

If the Disease is caused by Saturn, we may cure by Sympathy with a Plant of
Jupiter, the Sun or Mercury, for they are friends to Saturn; or we may cure a
Disease caused by Saturn, by Antipathy, by a Plant of Mars or Venus, his
enemies.

If Jupiter cause the Disease, or be Lord of the sixth, or afflict the Lord of
the Ascendant at Decumbiture, all Medicines cure by Sympathy; all the Planets
being by Astrologians reckoned friends to Jupiter, but Mars, and a Plant of
Mars may cure by Antipathy.

If Mars cause the Disease, or be Lord of the Sickness, that is cured by
Sympathy by a Venerial Plant; by Antipathy by Medicines governed by any of the
other Planets; yet in this case, the Sympathy with Venus is of greater force
than the Antipathy of Mars, with the rest of the Planets.

A Disease of the Sun is best cured by a Plant of Saturn antipathetically, for
Saturn alone is his enemy; but by Sympathy by a Plant of any of the other
Planets, indifferent friends with him.

A Sickness caused or governed by Venus, is best cured by Antipathy, by a Plant
of Saturn, Contraria contrarijs curantur; but the Plants of all other Planets
being friends, if they cure it is by Sympathy.

A Sickness caused by Mercury, is cured sympathetically by a Plant of Jupiter,
Venus and Saturn, being his friends; antipathetically, by Plants or Drugs or
Minerals of Sol, Mars and Luna, being Mercuries enemies.

A Sickness caused by the Moon, is cured antipathetically by a Plant of Mercury
or Mars; sympathetically by Medicaments under the government of Venus.

Secondly, This is to be considered, that we drawing a Scheme at the sick man's
desire, or at his Decumbiture, or first visit, or water sent, or the like, we
must consider the Lord of the tenth House, signifying the Medicine, and Lord of
the seventh, signifying the Physician: if the Lord of the tenth be a Fortune
and strong, give a Plant that is governed by him, or Plants, elected as we
shall show in the following note or observation; but if the Lord of the tenth
House, or the House of Physic, be weak, afflicted, or in a Quartile Aspect, or
opposite to the Lord of the Ascendant or sixth house, and be also an Infortune,
which makes it the worse, give not a Medicine that is governed by him, for that
is likely to do harm; no nor give any thing at that time, not until the Lord of
the tenth is well dignified, or a new and friendly Lord of the tenth arise by
mutation of Signs, and also a well-dignified and qualified Lord of the seventh,
and that are in good Aspect, and nigh as may be with the Lord of the Ascendant
and sixth House; give no Medicine governed by the Lord of the eighth, or house
of Death: every Artist must look to find huge variation in the heavenly Bodies;
and rarely all these good Signs or Aspects can be found together, these are not
enough to give direction, unless men have studied the Grounds and Rudiments of
Astrology.

Thirdly, In the Astrological Cure of Sickness, we must not only give a Plant,
Mineral, Gum, Stone, or Animal governed by such a Planet that is at sympathy
with the Planet causing or governing chiefly the Sickness, or a Plant of
another Planet, Antipathetical to the Planet ruling the Disease, nor yet a
Plant of either of the aforesaid Planets sympathetick or antipathetick, though
it be strong and Lord of the tenth house, unless it be somewhat proper to
remove the cause, or oppugn the sharpness, grosness, waterishness, stoniness,
vermifying, etc. of the Humor.

As for Example; Mercury is Lord of the sixth House; a Vertigo, Lethargy, or
depraved Ratiocination is the Disease; we would cure it by sympathy or
antipathy; see the Lord of the tenth, or House of Medicine, he is Mars, he is
strong and well aspected to Mercury; well then, give a Plant, Stone, Mineral,
Animal, or other kind of Medicine that is under the dominion of Mars, but not
any Plant, Stone, Mineral or Animal, but such as experience shows proper, and
reason demonstrates to be opposite qualitied to the Quality of the Humor,
Matter or Vapor causing the Disease: observe Physical Experiences, what
Medicines have been found to cure in such cases, and then look which of these
are under the dominion of Mars, or which of those Plants under the government
of Mars are found available in such cases, for Plants of other Planets have
also been used, and have done good sometimes in those cases, that will not help
another; and that is a great reason, why one is cured by this, another not
eased by that, yet is by another thing, as nigh to the formers Man's condition
as may be.

Other Books must direct what Plants, Stones, Minerals, Animals are governed by
such and such Planets: yet herein I must needs condemn Astrology; for
Astrologians have not questioned these things on good Grounds, and certain and
manifold Experience, and do differ in judgment therein: Indeed for many Drugs
it is hard to learn by any Rimating Experience, what Planets they are
peculiarly ruled by; all such ought to be gathered when the Planets ruling
them, are essentially fortified, as nigh as may be, and given when the Planet
governing it, is strong, and well aspected by the Moon, and Lord of the sixth
and first Houses.

Moreover, if any Planet be Lord of the sixth, strong, and well aspected, a
Plant of his own may help that Sickness by sympathy.

As for example; the Sun, the heat of the world, sympathizes with the Heart,
the Sun and heat of Man's Microcosm, the Sun may cause swounding, Heart panting
and lypothimy; then observe what Plants the Sun governs, and choose out such as
have been found good not only in general for the Heart, but in particular for
such Distempers of it; and those Medicines may be, Balm, Saffron, Rhue,
Marigolds, Piony, Ros Solis, Rosemary, and Wine.

Cum tua non edis carpis mea crimina Leli,
Carpere vel noli nostra vel ede tua.
A TRACTATE OF THE DISEASES OF THE HEAD.
WE shall divide Diseases of the Brain into two parts:

1. Diseases of Sense.

2. Diseases of Motion.

The first we shall divide into two parts:

1. Diseases of Stupidity and Astonishment.

2. Diseases of aggravated Sense or Madness.

The second we shall also divide into two parts:

1. Diseases of Motion lessened or abolished.

2. Into Diseases of Motion depraved: So that under these two, Diminution,
Depravation, or Abolition of Sense and of Motion, we shall comprehend a
Discourse of all the Diseases of the Brain.

I. For Diseases of Stupidity or Astonishment: The Ancients were pleased to
call them Coma, or Carus, Catalepsis, or Cataphora, Apoplexia, and Lethargus,
Subeth Araborum, etc. And now seeing they ordained Nature a course to go in
which she does not observe, we shall find somewhat to examine:

Tradition ought not quite to be rejected, nor superstitiously protected.

The Ancients, and Moderns that danced after their Pipes, did distinguish and
ordain the differences, and kinds, and degrees of Narcotical Diseases, to be
thus and these.

1. An Apoplexy, that is, a privation of sense and motion in the whole body,
from a thick flegmatrck humor in the brain, difficult breathing, and stertor;
the two chief inseparable symptoms.

2. Catalepsis, or Catoche, said the Ancients, were another kind of sopor, or
stupor, wherein of a sudden all the faculties of the Soul, and motions of the
Body perished, the Sick lying in that very state wherein he was first taken,
neither speaking nor hearing, arising from a cold and dry distemper, not of the
substance, but hinder ventricles of the brain for the most part.

3. A Coma, or Cataphora, (some of the Ancients differed in the names, and
which two should be put together, as nigh related) a propensity to sleep so
earnestly, that the sick cannot open their eyes: they distinguished betwixt
Coma vigilans and Somnolentum, thus; in the vigilans Coma they cannot hold open
their eyes, but are awake; in the Somnolentum they both shut their eyes and
sleep: the cause, they said, was a strong refrigeration of the brain, from a
phlegmatic humor.

4. Carus: This, said the Ancients, is a sudden immobility and insensibleness
of the whole body, the breathing being free, whereby it differs from an
Apoplexy, from a Lethargy by absence of a Fever, and because in this the sick
answer not, but in Lethargies commonly have that reason and power; the cause,
they said, was Phlegm, or a cold humor obstructing the fore ventricles of the
brain.

5. A Lethargy: In which Reason and Memory were impaired, if not absolutely
defunct, an irresistible necessity of sleeping, a Fever from putrified phlegm
in the substance not ventricles of the brain. We might add a sixth, and that
is, lost Memory, from a cold distemper and phlegm.

Indeed Johannes Johnstonus in his Idea Medicinae Practicae, has many choice
distinctions of all Diseases, whereby Truth is exceedingly demonstrated, and
the Reader the better understood of these things; yet he did follow Tradition,
as Sennertus chiefly, who is a far better Pattern and President for Truth, than
Galen, Hippocrates, Celsus, Aetius, Aegineta, Rhasis, Avicen, and other
Ancients.

If any man will object against me that the Diseases of the brain are such and
only such, and in that degree and manner, and in no other than what the
Ancients and Moderns have delivered in their practices of Physic, I shall wish
him to observe twenty or thirty of the next Patients he meets with, and see if
their cases correspond with the Chapters of the Disease he thinks these have:
so also for the Cause, let any man open twenty or thirty (for in so many, if
there be any Method and Order in Nature, it may be found out) and let him see
if the causes were such or so many, and only such and so many, in that place
and degree the Practicks have delivered: It is sure Nature observes some
Orders, but it is not as to the Bodies of things, but their Spirits; a
Narcotick quality in any matter, as Water, or Blood, or Choleric looked
corruption, will cause a Coma, Carus, lost Memory or Lethargy, and in what part
soever, if it may be communicated to the brain, it will astonish sense: Whence
is the force of the Torpedo or Crampfish communicated at such a distance? how
does the Lie of the Salt of Wormwood astonish the hands? bitter Opium is
Narcotical, and nautious Henbane; the fume of Charcoal in a close Room makes
sleepy, hot Spirit of Wine makes drunk like dead for several days: Platerus
has a notable History of one dead drunk with being in a Wine Cellar, that
working, and he closed up: by Thunder, Air, and some Baths, are men made
stupid: Whatsoever has a Narcotick quality, it opposes the Brain, because the
Brain alone of all the Body contains its contrary; it is a quality opposite to
sense and motion, which the Brain contains.

These procatarctick and outward causes do nothing, unless they work upon the
inward; for all are not alike made to sleep with Opium, or astonished with
Spirit of Wine; all are not made Apoplectick with a box of the Ear, or sudden
fright, and yet some have: Nature abounds with variety, and in every sick
person almost we find somewhat singular; and almost every other or third case
is a rarity.

Secondly, If we consider the inward causes of stupid, and torpid, and sleepy
Diseases, they arise not all from one cause, or one matter, it is the Narcotick
quality in the humor or matter that benumeth and dulleth; yet I must needs say
this, there is as much variety in the kinds and degrees of astonishment, as in
the cause: in some there is only a sleepy temper and dullness. Marcellus
Donatus brings two examples of those that slept many years together, and had no
illness or Disease: every thing has its extreme of little, and extreme of
much, and Medium or Mediocrity.

Some when they have been opened, have had a ball of viscous phlegm in the
Brain, that did dull and somnify the Brain; others opened have had their Brains
loose and waterish, and scattered as it were; others opened have had an abscess
and purulency found in the fore part of their Brain, that did die
Lethargically; others about the Ophthick Nerve have had a purulent abscess and
slimy water, others from Worms; and we see Children that have Worms, or rather
a sweet mild humor putrified, are sleepy; so in fits of the Mother, some lie 2
or 3 days stone dead as it were: In two dissected were found water; in one
reddish, in the orher paler, in both in the hinder part of the head; and the
Veins that ran from the fore to the hinder part of the head, full of black
blood: In Apoplecticks the head being opened, blood has flowed forth like Ink;
in another Apoplectick, a thick and viscous humor is found nigh the Context
retiform in the head: In the heads of other stupid persons have much glutinous
but clear water been found in the brain; so that however it looks, if a
Narcotick quality is in it, it makes stupid and senseless; or in what part
soever a Narcotick quality is, it opposes it self to the brain; for Opium lies
in th Stomach or Guts, when it raises sleepiness.

Yet this we will allow the Ancients, that where an humor looks black or red,
commonly there is not a Narcotick quality in it, as in phlegm or glutinous
water, not that the color impedes the quality, but the quality the color; for
a fiery Spirit in an humor, makes it high colored, and sharp tasted, and
strong scented.

I ask what makes the astonishment? if they say the coldness and waterishness
of the humor; I answer, Blood and visibly Choler caused it: if they say such a
thing; I ask why it is not found in all? for astonishment was in all these, and
that that caused the Astonishment was in all these; but neither thinness or
thickness of the humor, aquosity or viscosity, redness or paleness, taste or
odor was in them alike; therefore they did conduce nothing thereto, only to
be fit Bodies for a Narcotical qualified Spirit to be seated in: Indeed often
in Apoplexies, blood by blows or falls, stopping up all the passages of the
animal Spirits, and compressing the Brain, causes stupidity, but not commonly
in stupidity and drowsiness.

Possibly abundance more might be found in Authors, that have been opened,
dying of stupid and somnorous Diseases; but in these what shall we conclude (to
go on in the Rules of the Ancients) is the Cause? if we say Phlegm, some were
found to have clear water; if we say water, some were found to have black
blood; if we say black blood, some were found to have viscous purulency or
mature; if we say viscous purulency or sanies, some were found to have pure
uncorrupted gelly transparant; if we say pure transparant gellied water is the
cause, some were found, as in the comunicated Observations to Riverius, to have
a black stinking humor like Ink, that caused sottishness and foolishness; in
others it seems balls of Phlegm have been in the substance of the Brain, and the
Brain has been waterish, and dissolved, and loose in others.

Secondly, To particularize on any one of these, how shall we hold with Galen
and Hippocrates, touching the four humors? for if we say Phlegm is white, thick
and sweet; Choler yellow, thin and bitter; Melancholy black, faeculent and
sour; Water clear, thin and insipid; where or when shall we find Phlegm, Choler,
Water, or Melancholy the cause of Diseases? It is by as great an accident that
we find Humors just thus qualified and principled, as any other thing: and
why should the Ancients make Posterity believe that most commonly, for that
shows a thing most natural, Phlegm, Choler, Water, and Melancholy, or Blood, as
some will have, are the cause of all Diseases? for where once we shall find an
humor pure Phlegm, or pure Choler, or pure Melancholy, or pure Water, as the
Ancients described, we shall find them ten times contrary; so that it will be
hard to say, whether they come nighest the nature of Choler, or Blood, or
Water, or Melancholy; for if they have the taste of one, they want the color;
if the color, they want the consistence; if the consistence, they want the
smell; if the smell they have, they want the Virtue, Nature, Quality or
Properties of that Humor.

We shall not here show all the diversity of signs and differences in Stupid
and Somnolent Sicknesses: The Ancients should have done well to have called all
Stupid or Somnolent Sickness, and so have made distinction according to
observation; but describing only five kinds, as, Lethargy, Apoplexy,
Catalepsis, Coma and Carus, and they to be so as we have described, the Reader
is much deceived: for, for any to be sick of any Torpid or Somnolent Disease
just as they have described, is very rare; and why should they deliver that as
a common Rule and Method in Nature, that is as accidentary and casual as any
thing? for to which can we refer many Soporous Sicknesses? neither Lethargies,
because they arise from another cause than what the Ancients did set; and not
Apoplexies, because they hold them in a different manner: so that neither in
the Cause or Symptoms are they exactly referrable to any of their Names, nor
perhaps Natures.

II. We shall treat of the Sickness of the Brain, wherein is an aggravation of
Sense, and exaltation of the Spirits, contrary to the other of Stupidity and
Drowsiness.

The Ancients, and also Moderns, call them Phrenitis, Mania, and Melancholia.

Phrenitis, say they, is a continual raging, with a sharp Fever, wherein the
Imagination alone, sometimes the Reason is hurt, from an Inflammation of the
Membranes, or the Brain it self; therein is, say they, a stoppage of Urine,
breathing small and frequent.

Mania, say they, is a fury tiuturne with boldness and fierceness, from the
fire of the Spirits moved, or yellow Choler burnt; as Etius says, from
putrified blood: there is no Fever in this, some say, because there is no
putrefaction.

Melancholia, say they, is a raging without a Fever, with Fear and Sadness;
without a Fever from a melancholy humor, which they said was either in the
Head it self, or did in vapor steem up thither, as from the Hypoconders and
Spleen. This short description I take, as most generally received by the
Moderns from the Ancients; but to go to search how all differed, might find an
industrious and wise man sufficient tediousness; in many things indeed they
agreed only in disagreeing; and sometimes both were right, and sometimes
neither: for there is such wonderful variety, that if they all differed, as it
might be, they might all write true.

Now we will examine all the kinds of aggravated Sense, and see if they be
only so many and such as the Practical Physicians have writ Chapters of; and
we will see if that Delirium or raving that is not consentaneous to the
description of Mania, be Phrenitis; and if that distraction that is not a
Phrenitis, be Melancholia; and we will observe whether Nature observes any such
Method, that if a distraction or raging be not in the Symptoms, Cause, Manner,
and Measure of a Mania, it must be a Frenzy; if it be not correspondent with
the Signs and Causes of a Frenzy, it must be a Melancholy: Also we will
observe, if it be a Madness, whether commonly it is exactly so, or
accidentally; or whether in one sick Person most familiarly, which is most
natural, and should have been writ of accordingly there: Are not Symptoms some
of Mania, or Madness; some of Phrenitis, or Frenzy; some of Melancholia, or
Melancholy? or at least, some Symptoms argue one, one time; and change of
Symptoms argue another Disease, another time. Whosoever distrusts the Truth of
our Experiments, and Examples, and Anatomies, may be satisfied from Skenkius,
to go no further; he has collected abundance of men's observations: But to
these we have added the Observations collected from many men, by Marcell^;
Do^atus; diverse collected by Johannes Johnstonus; diverse by Thomas B^^holi^^s,
and his own; as the others also did adjoyn their own with collections; also
Felix Platerus, Petrus Pawus, Laz. River. T^lpius Ren^almus, Horstius, Antonius
Benivenius, and our own, by which we can judge the truth of others, and confirm
what we write, did not the universal consent and harmony of Observators,
univocally testify it: but we were loath to write from our own Observations
alone, because one man is not always a sufficient witness; one may mistake,
one may be superstitiously addicted, and phantastically principled: I think I
have about 13 or 1400 Observations of my own writing by me, but most of them
trivial, and such as most practical Physicians meet withal; and therefore are
of the smaller concernment, for I think it bootless to tell men only what
commonly they knew before.

Platerus in his Practice of Physic, went a method by himself, indeed from his
own Observations and Experience, and wrote the Genera or Kinds caused by such a
Quality, not the Signs, as others did, of such a particular Disease: And
Johnstonus in his Idea Med. Pract. altered the road and method of Practices, by
making distinction of the Causes, and distinction of Signs upon those Causes;
for we need no other Signe^ than the particular Signs of such and such Causes,
after we have described the Genera or Kinds, for there is no other certainty of
Signs; for if to day possibly in any one we find all (and alone they) Signs
of a Mania, as the Ancients described, to morrow the Sick may have Signs of
Melancholy dotage, and the next day a Phrensy, the fourth day different from
any of these, or some Signs of each.

First, Kinds of Madness or heightened and moved Sense.

One is quarrelsome, laments and rages, speaks indecently and much, sleeps not.
Horst. Obs. p. 106.

A Woman did rage by fits, and with that raging did sometimes laugh, she had no
Fever, spoke obscenely, and often, endeavored to strangle her self. Horst. p.
110.

A Man runs mad by fits, sometimes outrageous, sometimes absurd, from
jealousy, he plays diverse tricks, carries his child into the field and hides
him, Plat. Obs. p. 57. Two more also, page 60. from jealousy fell one into
melancholy trouble of mind, and desperateness to kill; the other into fu^y, who
killed his wife.

Another, because of sadness, ran mad; he was more tame, and did dote and pull
straws, and cut his clothes in pieces. Plat. Obs. 86. and page 87. Another
deprived of her Love, delired, and talked often, and called him; and the same
page another was forty years mad with great fury, he used to pull all ^pieces,
and after this term, he came well to himself.

Another, page 88. of Plat. Obs. had womb-fury, and was very mad, and did call
to passengers to lie and copulate with her, and did vehehemently desire
coition, and speak very obscenely and immodestly, and died ere long.

Another being maddish, was stark mad with drinking Wine, he did fear, and went
with his Sword, and said snares were laid for him; and one striving to hold
him, he killed him: Another ran mad, and did cry and bark like a Dog, being bit
by a mad Dog. Another fell mad that was bit by a Wolf that was mad; he feared
water, and howled. Another, page 90. feared water, not bit of a Dog; he had
some Convulsions, and molestation of mind, from a fright he died.

Two, in page 92, and 93. did constantly dance, and leap, and laugh, and called
others to do the same, they could not stand still; but one was tired to death,
the other recovered.

A Woman after delivery has an high Fever, rages chiefly at those she used to
love most, yet sometimes talks religiously, her face and eyes looked very red.
One with short breathing and deflux of Rheum, a raging supervened with great
heat, and he died. Plat. Obs. 170.

Dodonaeus in his Observations, quotes one that grew foolish on nights,
clamoured, jumped up and down, and ran about, twisted his arms about.

Valleriola Obs. lib. 2. Obs. 2. From love one did rage, and was furious
sometimes; again another time most loving and complemental and merry.

Orthaeus observed a madness adjoined with leaping, so much, that for weariness
he fell down, he had melancholy Phantasms.

Diverse talk in other tongues they never learned, and do foretell; others laugh
extremely, and then are sad extremely.

Fernel, lib. 5. chap. 2. of Pathology, says, One troubled in mind and
melancholy, did not sleep in Fourteen Months.

(...), insania species; see in Skenk. page 129. also Enthusiastic Insanio,
page 135. which he calls thus, Mira apud medicos veteres Insania, quam
Enthusiasmum nominarunt annotata, saltandifurore, Musica, Pharmaciaque et
diaeta coercita.

But why should we insist on these things, where there is a multitude of
variety in the kinds of all Diseases, and the more we know, the more we see we
have still to know?

Diverse are strangely handled, possessed by the Devil, that do rage and leap,
and jump from place to place, whose necks are sometimes twisted behind them,
and Convulsions draw up all their parts; in some is a Fever, in some not; some
blaspheme, and some have intermissions, wherein they come to themselves, and
speak well, and good things. Some possessed or bewitched, find somewhat rise up
in their breast as if they should be choked. And some see the Witch or her
Imp, come in form of a Spider or Beetle, and creep in at their mouths, and then
they are hoven, and rage and delire, and are convulsive; and some lie as dead
several days, and some do not sleep nor eat of diverse days, that are
bewitched or possessed of evil Spirits.

I have searched more than most men, and I cannot find the Evil Spirits in all
their Orders and Degrees, nor in their million of humbers, do know the mind or
thoughts of Man; God alone is Cardiognostes, it is his Prerogative; nor can
they change the mind of Man, but by real possession, or through Witches, or by
altering contingents and men's outward affairs.

We shall not insist much upon the outward, moving and apparent cause we have
already in part described; both the inward Cause that is moved by the outward,
and the outward Cause, being but one and the same, in two parties, have
different effects; nor is any thing much to be attributed to the color or
consistence of an Humor, but an hidden quality in it: for it is apparent that
the same Humor visibly that causes the Falling Sickness in one, causes
Apoplexies in another, and Palsies and Stupor in another, and in another they
seemed to all little in the Head, until they were opened.

The outward Cause of all exacerbated or aggravated sense, is primarily the
Stars operating upon the inward Cause, and giving it such a quality; and a
nature at such times to ferment and work, and make Fits and Crises, even
according to the motions of the Planets causing the Disease, and the Moon.

Sadness, Fears and Scars, Jealousy, Discontents betwixt Man and Wife, the
most lacerating of all Grief; bitings of Dogs, Wolves, Wines, Strong-Drinks,
and Hot-Waters, heat of the Sun, retained Semen in Mulieribus, retained
Haemorrhoids, etc. are the foregoing, exciting and procatarctick Causes; as
also loss of Love, and Disappointment in Marriage, destiny of Friends, and loss
of Estates, soaring Phantasms, and deep Excogitations, etc.

Now a little of the inward Cause of Exacerbated Sense or Distraction, whereby
the Reader may guess truly of the rest, and of other things.

Petrus Pamus Obs. 8. of Anatomies, opened a Man, that for two years did
complain of a pain of his Head in the hinder part, then took with a Phrensy and
Convulsive Motions; he suddenly oyed; the thick Membrane of the Brain was eaten
through with diverse holes, chiefly in the Bregma under the Arrow Suture; from
those holes flowed forth hard and thick blood, black and adust, very stinking
throughout that Membrane; with the like blood were the Vessels filled that ran
through the Superficies of the thick Meninx, and through the small ones of the
thin Meninx, that involvs the Brain; in the Cerebel was an Abscess of a
yellowish humor inclining to white; the Cerebel was loose and softer than the
Brain.

Yet Tho. Bartholinus, Cent. 2. Histor. 34. opened one that had been wounded in
the Forehead, and died thereof the tenth day; he had an Aposteme in the Brain,
with abundance of Purulency, which did turn the Vicine Parts to black; he died
sleepily and drowsy, nor had he any Delirium, Palsy or feverish Pulse.

Two more there he mentions that had Apostemes of the Brain, that differed both
from these, and from each other: indeed the Part it is in, as well as the
Quality of the Matter, is to be considered.

Jo. Skenkius from Neretus Nervitnes, a Florentine Physician, had this
Observation; That one was opened that died of a Phrensy 1583. in the new
Hospital of Dom. Mariae, the Ventricles of his Brain were full of a
skie-coloured Water, and the left Ventricle was eaten through; Jacobus Belga, a
Physician that stood by, tasted of it, and it was very sharp.

At Huntingdon, about the year 1653. died a Gentleman at an Inn, that was
Doctor Synipcots his Patient; after a feverish illness he fell raving and
doting, his Fever still continuing; he hid the Cause, till toward the last he
revealed it, that he and several others had drunk strongwaters for wagers, and
to outvy one another; in His fever and raging he died; after his death
abundance of Blood ran from him out of his Head. See now what varieties there
be in the Causes of one Distemper, and see how one Cause has diverse effects,
commonly drinking much Strong Water, or the Spirits of Wine astonish Men, so
that they are many times buried alive: and Apoplexies quite contrary to
Phrensies, are apparently caused by much and hot Blood, compressing the Brain;
and Blood in Apoplecticks has flowen forth as in this Phrenitick.

Colter in his Anatomical and Chyrurgical Observations, opened a Woman's Head
that died of a burning Fever, she had loss of Reason, and did laugh, jest and
sing; Blood that was drawn out of a vein, did look phlegmatic, raw and wheyish,
her Head aked much; after her Head was opened, in the Sawing of the Skull,
there did flow out a great deal of Water like the washing of raw flesh, the
thin Membrane and Plexus Choroidis, were full of thin and pituitous Water, both
Ventricles full of Water, no inflammation of the Brain or Involucrums; from the
bosoms of the hard Membrane, were strings taken like Worms made of glutinous
Phlegm; and this he called a Frenzy.

Certainly the Planets put a Quality upon the Humors, that makes one ^orpid,
another garrulous; one raging, another loving; one at one time stupid, a while
after phrenitick: for visibly from one and the same Cause, come diverse Effects,
and from diverse and different Causes; as to our Senses of Seeing, Tasting,
Smelling and Feeling, come one and the same effect. God that did to all Bodies
at first give such a Soul, or a Spirit, and to that Spirit a peculiar Quality,
can give to Phlegm by the same way and causes, a caustic and sharp Quality, and
to red spirituous Blood, a Narcotick Principle, or stupifactive Quality.

Secondly, We shall proceed to Diseases of Motion, wherein we shall, 1. treat
of Motion lessened or abolished, and, 2. of motion depraved.

Motion is lessened or abolished in the former Diseases, and by those Causes,
as in Apoplexies, Lethargies, Catalepsis, Coma's and C^rus.

Here we shall more peculiarly write of the loss or depravation of Motion, the
Senses and Understanding remaining: they may be divided into two He^ds; 1.
Resolution of the Muscles or Nerves; 2. Convulsion or Rigor. Physicians have
reduced Resolution into Palsy and Trembling, and others add Stupor or Numbness.

A Palsy, said the Ancients, is not in the whole body, but in parts subjected
to the Brain, sometimes Sense, sometimes Motion, sometimes both perish, viz.
the Sense of feeling and of acting the parts: the Sense of feeling may perish,
Motion remaining in that part, and Motion may perish, feeling remaining;
because, said Galen, they have two kinds of Sinews, one for motion, one for
feeling, and which soever are hurt, the office thereof is hurt; sometimes it is
in one half of the body, all the right or left side, and parts thereof;
sometimes but in one particular member: the Cause was attributed to a cold
distemper from thick and viscid Humors, or from bruising, wounding, scirrh or
inflammation of the spinal Marrow; it is a Cronical Disease, not Acute; if the
spinal Marrow be cut or luxated, the Disease is uncurable.

Trembling, ^^id they, is a voluntary Motion depraved, the weight of the Member
tending downwards, and the faculty of the Muscles lifting it upwards; arising
from a cold temper and weakness of the Sinews, from drunkenness, use of cold
things, that make thick and cold juice.

Now let us examine* whether the Ancients set down all the Kinds of Numbness
and lessened Motion, or whether. Nature errs always just thus, if she errs in
Motion; or whether other ails, and quite other, and more Causes than the
Ancients described, do not as naturally and more frequently come.

Alexander Trallianus, lib. 1. cap. 16. says, One had a Palsy or Resolution
from sadness and much solicitude and fasting, he taking Hiera Picra, was in
the whole body immovable like to dye; he with Moisteners, Nourishers and
Baths, was restored.

Gregor. Horstius Obs. Med. lib. 1. page 24. relates of a Maid fourteen years
old, that loved clay, chalk and earth, fell into a Fever with suspicion of
Pox, they then reigning; the Pox come out slowly, but a Palsy mixed with
Convulsive Motions, supervened; the Palsy was but in some parts, and the
Convulsion followed; she was soon cured.

A Woman in the 210. page of his fourth Book, had her Menstrues stopped,
Cholical Pains of the nether Parts, desire of food, but ill concoction,
vomiting and nausea sometimes troubled her; then followed pains in the outward
parts, weakness of the hands and feet, with dagging pains, so that they were
almost immovable, all the Functions of her Brain still right and firm.

Tulpius Obs. Med. lib. 1. cap. 23. shows a relation of trembling of the Thumb
after letting of Blood, or of the Hand always in an Iron Smith, Which should
teach Physicians, says he, to search the peculiarity of men's Tempers.

The same Nicholaus Tulpius, cap. 12. of the first Book, observes Periodick
Trembling in Margaret Brentia of a phlegmatic temper; it held three years, it
began in all her Members, but continued only in her Arms and Thighs; a fit
lasted almost two hours, with hoarse, and suppressed speaking under the Dog
Stars she was worse; the order of her fits did agree with the Moon, and rise of
the Sun, and were moved by the Moon as the Sea, sometimes oftener, sometimes
seldomer; sometimes greater, sometimes less; but under the Dog Star Sirius, she
had so many fits as there were hours, in winter fewer. She was helped at last.

Platerus Obs. 167. did observe trembling of the whole body in some, and of
diverse parts in others, in sleep preceding death.

He did observe a particular benumbedness of one Arm, with heaviness of the
Head; and in another the same numbness of the Arm from binding.

So many men, so many rarities, every case has somewhat fingular in it, and
Nature is bound to no such method or progress, that all diminished, abolished
or depraved motion must be just so, and in those Diseases only that Practical
Authors have set down; for what they set down to happen generally, we can
rarely find by experience.

Plat. Obs. page 96. observes another that had hurt and lessening in feeling,
and withal burning and pricking pains in the Extremities, running under the
skin, that lasted many years.

He observed one from a wound in the Spina Dorsi, to have a Palsy of all the
nether parts, from the middle downwards. Another after a general Palsy, had a
Palsy of the tongue.

Skenk. page 85. brings Experience to show that the Tongues of those that have
Palsies, have a slower motion at New Moons, than at Full Moons; and yet diverse
Physicians will not believe the Stars have any influence upon our Bodies; nor
will they study to know so.

Caetius writes from Avicen, that one could make a Palsy of his whole body when
he would.

Another had all parts resolved but his Face. Another had all his Extremities
and lower parts resolved, but his Hands, from a fall; another only his Thigh,
another his Lip.

Benedict. lib. 1. cap. 39. de morbis curandus, Marcus Bassadonius, from an
acute Fever and Phrensy, was weakened in his right Arm, so that he lost all
sensation, and power of motion therein. And after this manner, to ennumerate no
more, runs the common course of Nature. And if any Physician will be diligent
to write Observations of all he sees, he may see the same from his own
Experience, which the common rational Faculty God has placed in all Men,
blusheth to deny.

Now let us see what is the internal Cause of Numbness, trembling and deadness
of Parts, or the whole Body: for we would chiefly inform Physicians, specially
young Learners, in those things they shall ever retain, being multifariously
built upon the sure Basis of Experience; also those things that are of greatest
dignity, and which being known, the rational faculty of man leads him to
discover Appurtenances, and Circumstances thereto adhering, nor are they ever
to be unlearned again, as the Fantasies and Chimaeras of Mens-Brains are, nor
shall the Reader often meet with such in other Books, and therefore have we
chiefly written in this manner, and these things.

Of Procatarctick, open, or outward Causes in the Kinds of Resolution, we have
spoken somewhat, and much needs not be spoken: it sometimes follows Cholicks,
and Cholicks that; an Air men know not how blasts and withers, sometimes one
part, sometimes half the Body, and sometimes all, the Body more or less
suffering impair of motion; and so has lightening done, loosing all the
Joints, and melting the Bones. After that manner did it to a Patient of mine, a
Minister of Cambridgshire: And after the former, an Air suddenly surprised a
Kinsman; all differ, and the outward Cause differs; some tremble from fear,
some from vehement cold; some in old age, some before death. Quicksilver in
those that are anointed, gathering together, not well killed, leaps in the
Veins; so it does in hot Liquor; or a Loaf, and so causes a Palsy.

Tho. Barth. Cent. 1. Hist. 93. A Convulsion and Palsy dissolved a Fever.

Fernelius observed that a Fever turned into a Palsy, he thought the Choler
ran into the spinal Marrow.

We might infinitely insist on these, but by a penny we may guess how a
shilling is coined.

Johannes Bauhinus Obs. Med. relates a melancholy young man had a Palsy of the
left, and Convulsions on the right side, had sits often, sometimes resembling
the Falling Sickness, with a great Fever, the Veins of the thin Meninx on the
right side, did swell, aperto cadavere, with much black blood, and hardened,
and nigh was a collection of apostemated matter in the Brain, black in color.

Brassavolus Comment. ad Aphor. 9. lib. 7. Hippocr. says, One was numbed, and
insensibly in his whole body, and died, bleeding much from nose, and no
Medicines learned Physicians used, helped him.

Benedictus, lib. 1. cap. 33. curand. morb. says, One by a staff did receive a
blow on the Shoulder, the Fingers of that hand were resolved or benumed,
nothing helped until he was plaistered in the Neck. This shows the Place, the
former the Cause.

Platerus, page 136. observed the giving of Opium in a Clyster, caused a
Resolution of the Tongue, hindering speech, and the party stammered.

Another he relates there, paralitick in both Sides, struck in the Neck with a
stick, losing both speaking and hearing, but he eat and slept; but lived so
year or two, and died.

Two others from blows on their Heads, could not speak; one had a loss of
going, the other Convulsions of his Eyes; one saw things double, the other
died. Blows or cuts of the Back-Marrow also has caused the like, though not
so frequently; for many times nothing is to be seen in the Brain, the Sinews,
and only some pairs being particularly resolved.

But secondly, We will show somewhat of Convulsions, contrary motions to
Resolution and Numbness, and the Kinds of Epilepsies joined with the Kinds of
Convulsions; there cannot a competent difference be gathered: for where we
shall see these things clear and fully, and distinct: as Authors have
deciphered in Practices, we shall ten times see diversity and different cases;
yet Epilepticks hold a manner as conformable one to another, as almost any
Disease: in the Genera or kinds, we shall also show diverse degrees, and
diverse moving and outward causes of convulsive motions.

When I was a Youth, I took white Hellibore for my Quartain Ague, and I had a
Convulsion of my Gullet; so that it seemed to cleave together to my
apprehension, and to rise as if somewhat was in my throat.

We read of Sardis or Apium risus, as Herb that brings convulsions of the Face,
Eyes and Cheeks, and men dye as if it were laughing, therefore that is called
Risus Sardonius.

Toadstools, or Fungi arborei, bring convulsives, and strangling Symptoms to
some. Forest, Obs. 116. lib. 10. observed a Woman that had her Eyes pulled up,
her mouth distorted, her Cheeks drawn aside, her tongue immovable to speak,
vehement contractions of her hands and feet, but without stiffness, from
Toadstools.

Quicksilver in its fumes and evaporations, received into the Brain, is very
bad; the same Forestus, besides others, relates thereof: A Gilder therefrom
could not sleep or rest, but turned him this way and that, did tremble in all
his whole Body, his Face grew pale, and for two months was grievously held; but
he used much Quicksilver, for that Goldsmiths, Peuterers, and Gilders must use.

Fernelius relates of a Painter that, unadvised, took Vermilion; he fell into
Palsies and Convulsions; at first he perceived all his parts more torpid and
immovable, then they began to be contracted, and to be drawn cold, and fixed,
and rigid, his going was taken away, his Arms and hands were most free of pain,
but about his Stomach, Guts, and Hypoconders, were most intolerable pains,
which the crushing of his Belly gave some mittigation to; he had Intervals and
Fits, and sometimes the matter did work most in one part, then in another, and
in another manner: He was after a fortnight restored.

Jo. Johnstonus in Thaumatographia, a man exceedingly deserving in Physic,
writes from Mathiolus, that Napellus, a Plant, was given to a Thief; he said it
tasted like Pepper; he first felt a Palsy and stiffness in his left Arm and
Leg; then it seized upon his right, leaving the former; then he was cold, and
had Convulsions of his Eyes and Mouth; he vomited like Leeks, and thought he
had a Ball at his Navil; he was sometimes rational, and again doted; blind,
and saw again thrice; and wept, and was cheared; he thought he must instantly
dye, and presently the poison leaves and intermits; he thrice was blind, and
saw again, and thrice in an Agony of Death; his Tongue of all his parts
harmless; he had huge beating of his Temples, and after a long conflict Nature
overcame, and he recovered.

I could produce many more such relations of the nature of Plants and Minerals,
and Creatures, to raise Convulsions, and the varieties of vitiated motion, as
also all other ails man is subject to, but these may suffice here. We have
showed in our Book called Physiology, Jatrosophy and Pneumatography, how man is
taken from, and made of the Earth, and how most of those Principles are found
in his Body; and therefore is it that one Plant sympathizes with him, and
another antipathizes; one sympathizes with such a part of his body, and not
another, because in that part is a quality of Homogeneity to the quality of the
Plant; so some Medicines spoil one part and not another, because in that part
peculiarly is a matter of an antipathetick spirit to the spirit of the Plant,
and so they fight: Were there nothing in the body of man of contrary quality to
the blood, and spirits, and natural Juyces, there would be no Diseases; for
Friends and Consimilars do not sight; that is the reason that a poison in one
man works thus, in another so, because the constitution and quality of the
humors are not the same; and as Plants do operate, or Minerals, or Animals on
the Body of man variously, according to the various nature of them, and the
variety of the subject, so do humors: for what qualities are in Plants or
Minerals heterogenious to the quality of our spirits that constitutes our
vitality, sense, and motion, such may also be in the humors, and the humors
of themselves inimically qualified by the air, aliment, or otherwise, may raise
the same, and such diversity of Convulsions, or other Ails whatsoever, as
Plants and Minerals, and Animals do.

There is a strange kind of depraved motion, called Viti saltus, of constant
leaping and dancing, in some with contractions, in others with Delirium: Some
superstitiously believed that praying to St. Vitus would help them.

Tulp. Obs. 14. lib. 1. observed a Maid fifteen year old to have Convulsions or
drawing up of her Nerves, always sitting, but when she stood or walked, she had
none: and Obs. 15. he observed a contraction of the Nerves periodically, or by
fits; it arose first from Euphorbium taken, the which an inordinate horror did
follow, and then Spasms, the fits were very bad, and shook all his Body, and
his mind and speech was took way. And Obs. 17. a Campensis woman had a
peculiar depraved motion; she struck her Knee first with one hand, then the
other, long together very violently, nor could she be dissuaded therefrom;
imitating with distinction of blows Black-Smiths beating upon the Anvil; the
Household could not help her, but laid a Cushion upon her knees, so that her
continued and hard striking hurt her the less.

In others is a striking Knee against Knee constantly and hard, from a depraved
motion in the Nerves, occasioned by a secret qualification of the humors and
Astral Influence.

Any matter, as it is a matter, is dead, but the Spirit in it is active and
communicable; and eve Spirit, according to the quality GOD gave it, different
from others, acts and officiates: Into all pure terrene Bodies, GOD did at
first according to his good pleasure, implant a Spirit of a peculiar Quality;
he could have made Sulphur purging, and Scammony binding; he could have made
Rhubarb to have only a propriety for the Head, and Sage, Rosemary and Betony
to respect peculiarly the Liver; for the Bodies are nothing but the Spirits
they contain, and the peculiar qualities of these Spirits: so in man's Body, the
humors, to look and consistence, smell and taste, may be the same, and yet
have many and various qualities,

Betwixt common Falling Sickness and Convulsions and fits of the Mother, many
times is little difference; but what variety is there hereof? such an one is so
handled, it is hard to say, whether they be Uterine Convulsions, or a
Convulsive Hysteric Passion; in all these some fall, in all these some do not
fall; in all these some feel a rising up of somewhat within them, and in all
these in others there is no such apprehension: In Vertigo's they fall, turn
round, and there is such variety, and Nature is not bound to a Road or Order;
that many persons it is hard to say whether they have a Vertigo, Epilepsie,
Convulsion, or Hysteric Passion, or Swoonding: Some do affirm that men have
Hysterical fits, so like to women; and others say the Lungs are the cause
thereof: some foam at mouth, and snort; some foresee their fit, and fit down,
and so prevent their falling: In Epilepsies some turn round as in a Vertigo,
and then fall, and then have heavings of their Breast, as in Hystericks, and
then have Convulsions, and then have foamings of the mouth, as in Madness or
Drunkenness, and then snort as in Apoplexies, and then stare and talk
strangely, as in Phrensies, and then forget all for a while, as in Lethargies;
and what disease shall we call all these Symptoms? some Hystericks do fall,
they gape, and stretch, and seem choked, then have fast contractions and
convulsions, then perhaps lie stiff, and inflexible, and senseless diverse days,
as in the most exquisite Apoplexy, pinched not feeling.

Cornax. Encherid. Med. observed one stiff all over, his skin hardened like
Leather, his skin seemed as if it was stuffed, and stiff like the bark of a
Tree; his Gullet was resolved, but Brain, Stomach, Anus, and Urinary passage
well; he was stiff in all outward parts, and backbone could not be bent, nor
his Joints.

Solenander observed one with pains and contractions of her Arms, Shoulders,
and Knees; see those distant parts should be affected together.

Marcellus Donatus Hist. Med. Mirab. observed one that the great Toe of her
Foot must always be moved, even in sleep, upwards and downwards.

Salius Annot at. ad Cap. 13. Pract. Altomar. observed in one Member one while
a Palsy, another while a Convulsion raged.

Cardanus observed one after a Fever and Convulsions, to have panting and
distension, Legs immovable, and the Body leaping and tossing.

Jaechinus Com. ad cap. 13. lib. 9. Rhasis observed the Muscles and Tendons
stiff, and stretched, drawing as it were part from part, to dissolve Unity.

Fernel. lib. 5. cap. 3. Pathol. observed a flatulent Convulsion, different
from all these, that did twice or thrice a day afflict, strong contractions and
coldness.

Heurnius de Morbis Cap. observed one that had his Intestines, Abdomen, Testes
and Spermatick Vessels drawn up; another was spasmatical in the Anus: Diverse
observed the eating of Quails brought the falling Sickness and Convulsions.

Concerning the inward and obscure causes of Convulsions and Epilepsies, we
will show somewhat; the outward, apparent, movent, and procatarctick Causes,
appear in Practices of Physic, though defectively, and some false.

Neretus Nerutius a Florentine Physician, opened one that had an Headache, then
a Rheumatick Distillation, a Convulsion of the Neck, and Posteriors; dying,
three spoonfuls of water was found to be gathered betwixt the hard Meninx, and
the hinder seat of the Cerebel.

We shall think it sufficient to translate Thomas Bartholin, who to save others
the pains of disquisition, has collected many Anatomies and Diffections made
by other men, Cent. 2. Hist. 92.

A Falling Sickness by consent of the lower parts rarely leaves any footsteps
of it to be seen in the Brain after Death; for vapors are dissipated with our
Life: but if the Brain has in it self contracted any fault, it is easily seen
in the Dead. Bontius Obs. 1. med. ind. in the Brain of a Soldier that had the
Falling Sickness, found the Ventricles filled with a tough matter, and
glutinous, of a clay color, like yolks of Eggs, but stinking. Smetius in lib.
10. Miscel. found an abscess of white pus. Ballonius, lib. 1. Ephem. found
small and thin Bodies like hairs in the Ventricles, to be the cause: That thin
and limpid Water was the cause, both Volcherus, Coiter, in Obs. Hildan. in Obs.
Hevartus in Annot. ad lib. 2. Consil. Ballon. River. Cent. 1. Obs. 37. observed
by diffections: That Pus in the menings of the Brain was the cause, Fernelius,
lib. 2. abdit Cause. l. 15. Salmuth Cent. 1. Obs. 17. found: That it was caused
by a Corruption or Sphacelus of the Brain, Glandorpius, Spec. chir. Obs. 6. did
find. Sometimes the Ventricles of the Brain are so fallen down in Epilepticks,
that there is not an easy and free passage for the Spirits; even as Adrianus
Falcoburgius an Anatomist did observe, in opening publicly a Boy of sixteen
years old, that died in the very fit: there was no other visible cause of
Death, or of the Falling Sickness, than that the Ventricles of the Brain were
very much compressed, and falling one upon another, without any manifest
cavity; but in the top of the Brain, nigh the Cranium or Skul, he sound
hardened blood; and this my Brother Erasmus Bartholinus saw.

Also Cent. 3. Histor 80. relates of a Maiden, well-fleshed, and of a florid
Complexion, took with a Flux of the Belly, hardness in the right Hypochonder,
heat of the whole, thirst, watchings, pains of the Head, white Excrements; an
Epilepsy supervened, and she quickly died; opened, the whole Region of the
Back, from the nape of the Neck, to the last Vertebra of the Spina, was black;
the Stomach in the left side black, as if putrified and filled with a green
humor; Liver scirrhous, and weighed ten ounces; Gall large and filled with
Choler; but the Brain weighed five pound, filled with Water, and with Bladders
full of Water.

It were an excellent thing, if all Symptoms differing, were compared to each
differing cause, and so to find out what is the peculiarity of the cause, that
does cause that diversity in the condition of two sick Parties, seemingly by
the greater and most permanent Symptoms, to have one and the same Disease; yet
where the parts are alike affected, or humors alike corrupted, the
constitution will raise diversity.

Concerning the cure of all these Diseases specified, we will give these
general Rules and Directions; for indeed in each of those Diseases named,
Carus, Coma, Apoplexia, Subeth, Catalepsis, Memoria, Laesa, Lethargos, Mania,
Melancholia, and Phrenitis, Paralysis, Stupor, Tremor, Convulsio, Epilepsia,
etc. There is no Method general; for sometimes contrary causes produce the like
seeming effects, and one and the ^elf same cause seemingly, though of a diverse
quality, works various events; and we have sufficiently expressed by the
causes, the diversity of cure in every one of these Diseases, for that is the
best insight we can give to this credulous Age, and addicted to fond opinion,
to show the diversity of Causes, which according to the Vulgar Proverb, Once
known, the Disease is half cured: And according to Philosophy, Toll Causam and
cessabit Effectus, Take away the Cause, and the Effect cease.

APHORISMS.
I. In every Disease, as the Symptoms vary, so the Cause; and as the Cause
varies, so in every Disease our Method must vary; for in any sickness there be
scarce two hold alike in all things.

II. The Constitution especially, but also the Age, Customs and times of the
year are to be weighed in the cure of every Person, so that the method formerly
delivered by Sylvius, Rondeletius, Riverius, Heurnius, etc. is not sufficient
to learn any to practice well and faithfully, unless they have distinguishing
knowledge of their own; in some, one ounce of the Emetick infusion will work 20
times, in another ten, in another scarce once, in another it works only
downwards; in one, one scruple of Jallap is a sufficient dose, in another of
the same age, Sex and strength, one ounce will hardly work, and so in the same
manner for all other Medicines; that that excites one Lethargick will not move
another; and that that restores Palsies in one, moves no sense of feeling in
another, for the sense of feeling naturally is not alike in all.

III. Observe the Time of the Stars; for if given when Nature does not
cooperate, we do nothing; if Nature draws one way, and our Medicines pull the
other, a confusion is made.

IV. Observe what contradictions there be in all Distempers; take away the
greatest of two evils first, and that that will be longest ere it kill, may be
suffered longest ere cured: Also observe in curing one infirmity, we do not
aggravate or make another; and also observe what infirmities the sick usually
was prompt to, and judge that that was usual to him in health, is the less
dangerous in sickness, yet not without some exceptions; also observe which way
the sick used to have his blood purged of Heterogenious matter.

V. Physicians are Natures Servants, and therefore must observe her Dictates in
any of these Diseases; we may Purge, or let Blood, or Sweat, or move by Urine,
or Salivate, or Synapisate, or use Leeches as we see blood abound, and as we
find Nature oppressed, or beginning an Excretion such a way, or of such a
matter, and in such a place. For Example, If any in a Stupid and sottish
Disease bleeds much at Nose, has the Haemorrhoids or courses that used to
flow, stopped, has heat of the Body, beating of the Pulses, swelled Veins,
though it is contrary to Physicians Directions in stupid Diseases to Bleed; yet
it is convenient here in these cases to let blood, and chiefly in the Arteries;
or if Arteriotomy may not be allowed, or cannot be celebrated, a Vein of the
Forehead, Temples, or behind the Ears, or Jugulars, are to be opened, for they
draw immediately from the part; and experience will witness for it, against
those of the Circulation, that in all cases will bleed in the Arm, because of
the community of Vessels: Furthermore, if in Falling Sickness, Convulsions,
Distraction, Light-headedness, and Melancholy or the like; if any thing break
forth by the Ears, or Nostrils, or any other way; we are to judge the Morbifick
matter like to it, and we are to draw it forth by those parts Nature has begun
and showed us the way.

VI. We must endeavor, if we perceive it is a Matter or Humor that does cause
the Disease, to draw it outwardly, and from the more Noble to the less Noble
Parts; Also we must observe the Emunctories of Nature, in most Diseases of the
Head, shaving of the whole Head, and applying blistering Epispasticals were
good, particularly behind the Ears, and upon the Sutures; vehement purging will
do nothing in a confirmed Distemper, and where Humors are settled and
coagulated, and the Brain corrupted.

VII. This alone, what ever Practical Authors have writ, is convenient to all
persons in a sleepy Disease, and to all persons in a raging Disease, and to all
persons in a depravation, or abolition of feeling and motion; to give
Specificks, to oppose the quality of the Humor, that is Na^cotical, or
Maniacal, or Spasmastical, or Paralytical; in all those fits of falling, as
Vertiginous, Hysterical, Epileptical, Cataleptical, Convulfive and Syncopical,
Paeony, Castorium or its Spirit, Succinum or Oil of Amber, Elks Claw, etc. are
convenient, because in these is an occult quality, opposite to that occult
quality in the Humor that causes the falling: in all sleepy sicknesses,
Rosemary, Betony, Castorium, Juniper Berries, Sage, Marjorum, Lavender, Lillies
of the Valley, Tile-Tree, Chamepitis, Assafoetida, and Phu-Silvestre, are
Specifical, because these in all Causes, and in all Humors, endued with a
Narcotick Quality, whereby they work and change our Bodies, do by an opposite
quality in them oppose and overpower the Narcotical qualified Spirit of those
Humors.

In an agil, and hot, and spirituous qualification of Humors, which does
produce raging, madness, and fury, and dotage, and is of high Heterogeneity to
the Quality of our Spirits; and therefore several Poisons will cause Deliriums
and Madness, Rosemary, Fumitory, Betony, Couslips, Epithimum, Lapis Laznli, are
Specifical against Dotage, and loss of Ratiocination: but to stop the furious
vapors of hot Blood, and the fermenting in hot and acrimonious Humors, and to
obtund their Acrimony, and stop their Motion, Opium, Laudanum, Poppies,
Nightshade, Lettice, Violets, Mandrakes, Henbane, Stramonium and Housleeks,
have an Antipathetick Quality; for these cause rest, and are (...), of the same
Nature and Quality that the humors are of, that cause Coma, Carus, and
Lethargy; for man being deduced from the Earth, has its qualities (I think
all) naturally, or by custom, or by corruption in his Blood and humors, that
are to be found in Minerals, Plants, or other Animals: in some persons Opium
will not make sleepy; in some Tobacco will not cause Vomit, eaten; in some
Spiders will distend and swell them no more then their ordinary nourishment;
some eat Arsenick and Hemlock harmlesly. The only reason of these things is
this, By custom (or otherwise by a peculiar Temper) such things eaten, turn the
Blood and Juyces into their Nature and Quality, and so being Homogenious do not
fight, and that is the reason of Appetites; one loves one thing, another
another, because of a Juice of such a quality in his Stomach, that sympathizes
and antipathizes with such nourishment.

Let the Palsy, Convulsion and Stupor, or trembling Motions come from what
cause they will, hurting the Sinews, Earthworms, Rhue, Castorium, Sage,
Rosemary, Betony, Chamepitis, Succinum, or the Oils of these outwardly help;
why? because in all, the Sinews are hurt; now these assist and strengthen the
Sinews by a peculiar quality, implanted originally by God at their first
making, according to his good pleasure; and why Rhue should have a quality to
help the Sinews, and Henbane to hurt them, we can give no account: It pleased
GOD in such a Plant to put a Caustic Spirit, in such a Narcotick qualitied
Spirit; and in such an one a quality to respect the Brain, in another to
respect the Liver.

VIII. If two or more parts are corrupted, inflamed, obstructed, etc. we must
chiefly in cure, respect that that was first, for perhaps that caused the
other; a great deal of Water, or Ichor, or Sanies may be heaped up in such a
part, though sent from another; as in Dropsies, all the Bowels are often found
corrupted and rotted, and yet all were not the cause, but that or they that
gave occasion to the water to increase, which corrupted all: so if much Water,
or Blood, or Choler be heaped up in the Head, we must respect the part sending,
as well as the part receiving; perhaps the Uriters do not carry so much Urine
as was wont; perhaps the Gall does not separate the Choler, it used to do, and
eject it; perhaps the Gall does not separate the Choler, it used to do, and
eject it; perhaps the Blood is not let out or excerned, or sweat out or
separated, or purified as it ought or used to be.

Moreover observe in all Spasms and Resolutions, to observe the head of the
Nerves, and to a^oint the nape of the Neck or Backbone, whence the affected
Nerves do proceed, where ere they be.

IX. A great help to the curing all Diseases, is in Diet; if any know what
caused the Disease, the best way is to abstain from the cause, and to observe
their own Constitution, what hurts or helps them; for one man's meat is another
Poison: the outward often stirs up the inward, which without the motive cause
would lie still oftentimes.

X. As we said before of Specificals, so of Alterers; we must oppose cold
Medicines to an hot Disease or Constitution; hot Medicines to a cold Distemper;
moistning in a dry Distemper and Constitution; and drying must be opposed to
too great moisture: but concerning drying Medicaments, we must not imagine that
Guaiacum, Sarsaperilla, China, Sassafras, etc. dry, for nothing dries any
other way, then consequentially, expelling or absorbing the moisture; for there
is nothing wastes, but all changes; Air is concocted into Water, and Water is
rarefied into Air, and so they are in perpetual change; for if Water by
Guaiacum, Sassafras, China, etc. was annihilated, then there would be less
Water, and less in the world, and in a Million of years the Sea might be dried
up: I confess Li^harge will dry much, because it does suck up moisture into
its own body, and so do Mucilages of Gum-Arabick, specially Gum-Tragacanth, and
Spunges, but they must be either Sweaters that are drying, or Diuretics;
sweating spends in Vapor and Exhalation, per habitum Corporis, (...) or
Urine-purgers send it out by the ordained motions of the Parts, or Natures
instituted Channels in its whole Substance and Body; and those that do not
spend moisture by expelling it by sweat through the Skin, or by the Instituted
motions of Nature by the Kidneys and Bladder, do not dry.

A TRACTATE OF THE DISEASES OF THE LUNGS.
IT has been thought, that a Cough, Asthma, Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, Empyema,
Haemoptoe, and Phthisis were all the Diseases of the Lungs, and that the Lungs
had no more, nor no other, according to an ordinary Method in Nature: A Cough
is but a Symptom, and may be in all Diseases of the Lungs, and I know not why
it should be called a Disease, for in a Peripneumonia, or inflammation of the
Lungs, the cause gives the denomination, for in that may be a Cough; so
Haemoptoe also is a Symptom, and may happen in many Distempers, and from diverse
Causes.

Nor have these Diseases mentioned just such causes and no more, or no other
then what practical Authors writ.

I shall save my self the pains to write the Diagnostick and Prognostic Signs;
as also the Causes and Method of curing Diseases descrubed in Practices of
Physic, they may be compared with what we draw from Observations, nigh as well
as if they were here writ together or premised.

The Lungs are the Bellows or Fan of the Heart, the fire of our Bodies, which
they blow up, and keep from dying, falling round about the Heart, filled with
Wind, which they draw in and let out, as our artificial Bellows do; and as soon
as these Natural Bellows cease drawing and letting out of Air; the fire of our
Bodies wanting somenting and stirring up, dies, and we grow cold and pale.

The Lungs have also another Office, to receive Phlegm, and cough it forth, and
wheresoever the Lungs burdened cannot cough, we are apt to be choked.

These are the two Natural Offices of the Lungs; and we would give insight to
the Reader how many ways, and how diversely these may be diminished, vitiated
or abolished; for properly and plainly, the Ancients should have described
these two, diminished, vitiated or abolished, and have brought all the several
causes, and the signs of such particular causes, being found by Diffection; and
the degrees of each kind, and the variety of Natures Order and Progress, and
how the Lungs may be affected from other parts by community of Vessels, or
super-incumbency, or affinity of Nature; and Philosophically they should have
described the peculiarity of the nature of the Lungs, different from other
parts, that made them have Diseases different from other parts, they being of a
more phlegmatic, any and spongy Substance and Quality.

I have known many different kinds, and differing degrees in all those kinds of
short breathing, and different causes of those different kinds, viz. outward
and precedent causes; for I never saw a man opened that died of any Disease;
and sometimes large eating; the Diaphragma being crushed up, and capacity of
the Thorax straightened, has caused a Disnaea; sometimes Wind which has been
eased, as the former, when the cause removed; sometimes swift motion, specially
in Green-sicknesses, for with motion they are almost out of breath in
obstructions, as in the Jaundice and Cachexia, they are very short winded,
because cold clammy humors do sometimes abound, and the Thoracical Muscles
move heavily, and the parts are crushed up by windiness distending, which in
Dropsies is occasioned by Water; so in Apoplexies breathing is short, or where
breathing is not difficult and very short, I suppose it improper to call that
sleepy stupid sickness an Apoplexy.

Paulus Renealmus, Obs. 91. Observed an Old woman that eat much Fruit, she had
a Catarrh, she was cured with a Phlegmagoge and Stomachical powder, when an
Asthma supervened; he accounted it Wind in the Stomach, crushing up the
Midriff, and tough Phlegm sticking to the sides of the Aspera Arteria.

And Obs. 176. a Maid was exceedingly troubled with short breathing, and so
against Food, that she almost pined away for want of appetite to eat; He cured
this, and two more (Obs. 144. and Obser. 145.) with Stomachical, Chemical
purging Powders once or twice given; so that he adjuged these Asthma's caused
from distention and Wind of the the Stomach, thrusting up the Lungs, and from
Flegmatickness of the Stomach or Mid^iff.

Another are Fruit, and was so inflated at Stomach; that he breathed
difficultly, but he (in his Obs. 144.) had a dry Cough with his hard breathing;
signs of Choler, Thirst, bitterness of his Mouth, and pain of his Head.

Felix Platerus in Respirat. d^fectu. Obs. 1. One had a Cough a long while,
specially he coughed on Mornings, and in the Evening; he did spit forth raw
Matter, often Sneez; he had falling down of Rheum by his Nose sometime, and was
short winded if he went up an Hill.

And (page 170.) one had short breathing, and felt, like a girdle about him,
pain on the Region of the Stomach, and a Fever.

Another had a sudden short breathing, with a Cough and spitting forth of
Matter.

Another had a Periodick short breathing from defluxions.

Another had a great shortness of breath, like to suffocate him, with a Cough,
and a falling down of Rheum, but was cured.

Skenk. de dyspnaea. Obs. 1. Relates, one had difficult breathing, if he did
but walk once about his Parlour; most have when they lie down; standing upright
commonly they breath best; Even as Dodonaeus Obs. Medic. cap. 20. Observed a
Merchant not cured of short breathing by bleeding or other Medicines, and that
for diverse years he had never lain down, but sat and slept, else he would have
been suffocated; and at last a Gout and pain of his Kindneys troubled him, and
his Asthma that could not be cured by Art, was derived by Nature to some other
parts.

Nicholas, Ser. 4. Tract. 2. cap. 25. An Asthma or difficult breathing did
oppress one once a week, commonly on Fridays.

Another, in Horst. Epist. Med. preparing a Lee to wash Clothes, as the Lee
boiled, hung her head over it, and the steems came into her mouth, and she had
such a difficult breathing presently thereupon, which increased and continued
seven days, she thought she should be suffocated; and did die.

These are only to show the variety of of Symptoms, and difference in one
Disease amongst all persons; also to show how one and the self same effect, may
arise from sundry causes, and one and the self same thing produce diverse
effects in two persons: Also that a Catarih, Cough, Hydrops Pectoris,
Corruption or Apostemation of Blood, Empyema, Peripneumonia, Pleurit is,
Hydrops, Apoplexies, Inflatious and their likes, may in some cause difficult
breathing, in others not; may in some cause a Cough, in others not; may in some
cause a pain of the breast, in others not; in some these, one or more; and
sometimes one, sometimes another; and sometimes three or four may follow upon
short breathing together; sometimes separate, or one after another; and
sometimes one of them, sometimes another; and sometimes two or three may
concomitate an Asthma or Cough, or be complicated together: But we cannot write
all the particular Observations to prove all these, but they shall see such and
much more variety in the Lungs, and their sicknesses, that do read diverse
Physicians Observations thereof, which are not altogether singular cases, but
the common and ordinary Method of Nature also, so far as she does observe any
Type or Order.

By the diverse kinds and degrees of short breathing, and the variety of
outward and exciting Causes, and concomitant Sicknesses, already shown, may be
guessed how Coughs, spitting of Blood, of Matter, Inflammation of the Lungs,
Pleurifies, etc. do vary in kind and degree; and are sometimes simple, as a
Disease; or joined, as a Disease to another Disease; or happening as a Symptom
in other Ails, or supervening: we shall quote many Histories and Observations
of those that have been opened, and withal show the various handling of these
persons: some were alike, where the Cause seemed disalike; and some were
disagreeing in Diseases, Symptoms, and greatness thereof most, where by the
Cause one would think they might be most like. But the want of having many
Histories of all things, and seeing all the Varieties of Nature, and the want
of distinguishing betwixt likes, has hugely spoiled true Learning, or the
Learning of Truth.

We shall make thirteen or fourteen Distinctions of the Causes of Sicknesses
from the Lungs, which may be reckoned as so many Diseases, and such and such
are their Symptoms.

I. Abscesses are in the Lungs, as in other parts, and vary; of each kind are
various kinds, and of each of them several degrees: Columbus, lib. 15. found
not only Steatomatous Abscessus, ^ut Bones and large, in the Lungs of
Franciscus Capellus.

Holler. de morb. intern. cap. 23. lib. 2. opened a Monk, of whom he did
satisfy himself touching the cause of an Asthma that suddenly killed him,
finding an Apostem in the Vena Arteriosa, and sine part, the Lungs safe.

Tulp. lib. 2. cap. 6. Obs. One was let blood in a Pleurisy, but too late, it
neither eased the cough, nor pain; at last much purulency by suppuration brake
forth under the Arm-holes, and after a larger abscess arose in the Navil, or
nigh thereto, and the purulency ran forth, and the Sick presently recovered.

Pet. Pawus Obs. Anat. 9. opened a young man that was so wasted he had scarce
any flesh, both sides of the Lungs were bound to the Sides or Ribs; there were
diverse purulent abscesses in the Lungs, and Phlegm in diverse parts of the Lungs
was discerned to concrete, and in some places plain stones, for hardness, were
found; abundance of Water, though he was so dried, was found in the
Pericardium; he had fault also in his spinal Marrow, and the Vena Cava rose
from the Liver in him in that place the Porta uses to rise; but whether these
did contribute to his Tabes, or only the Lungs, is to be questioned. Also Obs.
22. he found an abscess of the Lungs in a Woman, the Lungs were tied with
innumerable ligaments in various places, to the Pleura, also to the Pericardium
and Midriff; the Liver herewith was plae, as void of Blood, but not scirrhous;
the Lungs under the left Clavicle in the left part, had a great abscess, in it
four pound of Sanies was; and besides this, thirty or forty small abscesses of
thick purulency and Scirrhs in other places.

And Obs. Anatom. 25. A Woman died of an Atrophia, a wasting different from a
Phthisick, the whole Lungs were purulent, any where white Pus did flow out; she
had scarce any flesh left, and it was hereditary to her.

Tho. Bartholinus, Cent. 2. Obs. 19. opened one that died of a slow or lingering
Fever; so wasted, that not only Fat but all Flesh seemed consurned; all parts
were corrupted, the Omentum gangrened and almost wasted, the right Kidney
putrified, the Liver, great, hard, and full of Tubercles, Spleen only
discolored, as the Intestines were, the Mesentery was wholly consumed, Stomach
and Bladder good, the Heart small and dried, but the Lungs (which is the
business in hand) were purulent, full of knots, out of which white matter did
flow; but the lower part of the Lungs were dry and hard, and a pretty deal of
water gathered in the Cavity.

We shall i^ these give the Reader as much ^atisfaction, if he will mind, as
if we should write a particular Treaise of the promiscuous affects of all the
Bowels together: The Reader may easily see the Method and Current of Nature,
that one part consents with another, and frequently in those that dye, all or
most of the Bowels are corrupted, and for the most part in different manners
and degrees; nor are the parts so affected by Vessels running from one to
another palpably always, but they do transude and transmit both vapors and
matter through their Parenchyma, or Body; in vivo omnia sunt pervia: The inward
parts have pores, and do lie one upon another, and so affect one another.

And as the Bowels are by Dissection found alike to be affected, and all to
vary in this Affection or Disease, so the outward Symptoms vary; and there are
in the current of some Sickness nine or ten Diseases, which sometimes are
looked upon as Symptoms. It is clear Physicians have writ very defectively; but
Truth and Experience are the sure Witnesses of Nature; they shall never be
controled: Nor shall I therefore ever be controled, though the Envyers of Truth
speak and write against me.

Laz. River. Cent. 1. Obs. 60. Opened one of spitting of Blood, a Cough,
Fever, short-windedness, pains of the Shoulder-blades, beating of the Heart,
and in the right Hypochonder, deceased; the Mediastinum was full of wheyish
Blood, it crushed together the Lungs and rough Artery, and caused the Asthma;
the Lungs every where had a purulent and stinking matter, the left Testicle
spongy, black, and gangrened, the Heart not hurt: Riverius supposed the
affected Testicle did hurt the Heart; and what consent is there of these parts?
and what community of Vessels have these more than other parts?

II. and III. We shall show that Bones and Stones are found in the Lungs, and
what Diseases or Symptoms they produce, how they vary, and with what they are
complicated.

Columbus, lib. 15. found great Bones there.

Of Stones. We have already related them among other Ails of the Lungs; they do
cause Coughs, spitting of Blood, Asthma's, Phthisicks, Atrophia, etc. or at the
least, they are found in such persons opened.

Alexand. Trallianus, lib. 5. cap. 4. One spat forth a Stone smooth and well
formed, no congealed matter.

Paul. Aegineta, lib. 3. cap. 31. saw one with a grievous Cough, that raised
much blood, and therewith stones, flinty; he dyed tabid.

Beniven. cap. 24. de abditis: One had a grievous side-pain, and dry Cough, he
voided from his breast a stone as big as a Chess-Nut, and was eased quite.

Gerardus Bergensis saw some in Coughs cast forth many stones together.

Cornel. Gumma lib. 1. cap. 6. saw many little white exceeding hard stones
coughed up from the Lungs; to omit the observations of Kentmannus, Wierus,
Ferrandus, Cardanus, Fernelius, Jacotius, Sebastianus, Platerus, Gabelchover,
Oetheus, etc. enough to testify the truth, that stones bigger or less, more or
fewer, rounder or flatter, are the cause, and frequent cause of the aforesaid
ails and sicknesses; these saw them coughed forth.

We shall show some Examples thereof by Dissection too, so that diverse that
have such stones in their Lungs, or Pipes, or in all other parts, there may be
no appearance.

Petrus Spehrerius, an Italian Physician, in an Epistle of his signifies that a
Roman Woman thirty five year old, for many years was troubled with inappetence,
and a dry Cough, and Asthma, she had advice of diverse Physicians in vain;
opened, her Stomach was found full of hardened Fibra's, and black; three Lobes,
of the four the Lungs have, were stony, or hardened like to stone; the Milt did
not exceed a Pullets Egg in bigness.

Platerus, Obs. de respiratione defectu. page 180. found stones in four
Asthmatical and short-winded persons, in one he found stones in the middle of
the intersepient Membranes in the Breast.

Petrus Paw. in his ninth Dissection, in one that died of a Consumption, found
Apostemations, Tubercles full of Pus, many in the Lungs, and in some parts
absolutely petrified; he was wasted and dried exceedingly, yet good store of
Water was found in the Pericardium. We could bring many more Examples, but
these may suffice.

IV. Animalia, Worms, or various kinds of living Creatures are the Cause of
many Sicknesses and Affects, not only peculiar to other parts, but coincident
to the Lungs also, and each part Extrinsick as well as Intrinsic, chiefly a
pertinacious Cough is stirred up by Worms; sometimes they are joined with
stones, and there is short breathing, and pains of the Clavicles; they are
sometimes like Worms in Wood, Maggots, Flies, and sometimes like Pine-Kernels;
more have been cast up by Cough, in phlegmatic matter, then have been found in
the Dissected: We shall not stay the Reader in the particular Histories.
Johannes Skenkins, Obs. Med. page 217. has collected Authors enough, if any
should distrust the Truth, to witness it. None could guess at Worms by the
Symptoms hardly, except they saw the like.

V. Coughs are caused by things got into the Traehaea Arteria, or Lungs; as
short and difficult breathing. Nic. Tulp. Obs. 7. of his third Book, relates of
a Citizen of Amsterdam, for seven years hugely molested with a Cough, and very
strait breathed, so that he grew lean; at last with violent Coughing he brought
up the shell of an Hazel Nut, as big as a man's Finger-Nail, and he was
thence-from delivered of his long and tedious Cough and Dyspnaea; it stuck
about the Head of the Aspera Arteria, or Windpipe.

Tho. Barth. Hist. Med. Cent. 2. Obs. 27. relates of a Woman of Patavia, that
eating Chess-Nuts laughed, and it seems some part got into the Windpipe, which
she did not know; for two months she was miserably afflicted with a Cough, with
a Fever, and wasting of the whole Body; a Phthisick was feared, diverse
Physicians were advised with; at last she took a vomitive potion, and brought
up the Kernel, and was presently restored to health.

VI. The Lungs are sometime found spongy: Tho. Barth. Hist. Med. Anatom. Cent.
3. His. 2. found them so; they were light like a Feather, yet in some parts
tied to the sides; their color outwardly was good, but inwardly they had
little Blood, but Sanies in some places issued out; his Heart great and full of
Blood, sound; he died consumptive, scarce any flesh left on his Body: his
sickness began with muteness, and a great swelling under the Chin: Let the
Reader in all these judge how it is with others, and how one part consents with
another in being afflicted together, that is more remote, and has less
Community of Vessels many times; and how all being affected in one Body, and
one Disease, they vary each perhaps in the kind of affection; so that it is
clear, Physic is Ars Conjecturalis; and to find those Diseases Ancients writ
of, so and no other, and in all things just so full, is a rarity; for I suppose
some of them writ by one case how all were, and so do the ordinary people; that
that cures one, they think must cure all; and if died so, they pronounce all
sick of that distemper (as well as they can guess) to die: In this man the Caul
was quite consumed, the Ileon-Gut looked black, the Liver looked dark, the
Bladder of Gall sull, most of the parts very sound. Hernius found the Lungs
like these.

VII. Sometimes the Lungs or Lights are found waterish, as Riverius; Cent. 2.
Obs. 78. A Woman had a short breathing for fifteen years, increasing gradually;
she had sometimes a swelling of her Cheek, and Erisypelas of her Leg, she had
sometimes a falling down of Rheum, which increased her Dyspnaea; she coughed
not at all till one day before she died, and that is the wonder, her Lungs
being full of water: for how in Dropsies do some cough with their Dyspnaea,
through the transudation of water, and soaking thereof in the Lungs? With the
waterishness and corruption of the Lungs, the Spleen is found putrified, so
that with crushing it fell in pieces; the right Ventricle of the Heart in the
interior part denudated of its Membrane, and looked putrid and exulcerated, the
right Auricle large and sound; and this was a reason of the inequality of
Pulse: for in another Riverius opened, where was the like inequality of Pulse,
the right Auricle was bigger than wont, and filled with a phlegmatic hard
concrete substance: In another he opened, an Ulcer in the middle of the Heart
caused it.

VIII. A Dropsy of the Lungs is like to this, but in the purity of the Water,
and quantity they vary; and in this the Parenchyma of the Lungs may not be
corrupted.

Tulpius, lib. 2. Obs. 16. A Boy had a moist head, and frequent distillation, a
light Fever, a Cough, and very difficult breathing, a great sleepiness, and
often fainting: opened, the Breast was full of Water, the Lungs hung flaccing,
the left Auricle of the Heart eaten with diverse Ulcers, a stinking humor
belching out, which might be the cause of the Child's often fainting.

T. Barth. Cent. 2. Hist. 7. Thomas Cartier, a sanguine man, inclined to an
atrabilarious temper, labored of a light Cough, and Feaverishness; they
increased; he grew Asthmatical, specially on Nights; his Feet swell, Pain
troubles his left Side: dissected, ten pints of putrified and stinking Water
was found in his Thorax; the Lungs, except in the left part, putrilaginous; the
Spleen putrid and stinking, in the greatest part of it; ten or twelve Clots of
thick concreted Blood were found in the Ductus of the Aorta, near the Heart.

IX. The Lungs are found in some discolored alone; not that the color causes
any thing, but that that caused the color; even as a poisonous quality
infecting the Body, changes the color of the inward Bowels.

Riverlus, Obs. 87. Cent. 1. One troubled with Cardialgia, pain of the left
Scapula and Arm, Flux of the Belly, then a Cough, with difficulty of breathing,
and after that spitting of Blood; Medicines and Bleeding availed not, she spat
Blood hugely before Death: Dissected, the Lungs were white, sticking to the
Ribs, and Midriff, and Pericardium, as if one Body; the Heart white and
exulcerated, and the matter from that caused the Cough, and spitting of Blood.

He found them livid in another, page 155.

In an observation communicated to him from Hen. Rufus, is found, how that a
Maid had a long and lingering sickness, melancholy and pale, and short winded,
but not likely to die, nor did she lie by it; when she lay down she had
sometimes a dry Cough, no thirst, she grew weakly; she died, not being thought
mortally diseased: many specks or spots, livid or red were seen; the Lungs had
whitish circumferential lines, and seemed blasted; all the bowels but the Liver
safe, that was tainted with Leeky Choler; the Pleura and intercostal Muscles
were colored green from an humor; the Pericardium void of juice and
putrified; the Heart and Brain safe; she seldom coughed; the Pericardion might
affect the vital Spirits in the Heart, and so cause unexpected death. Many the
like may be seen in Histories under the other Heads, but we are loath to write
one Observation twice, though it may witness three or four things.

X. The Lungs are very frequently found to stick to other parts, being of a
clammy Substance, and phlegmatic Nature; in all infirmities of the Breast, they
may stick, or adhere, or grow out of order, to one part or other they are nigh,
especially too as that part consents in corruption with them.

Pet. Paw. in a Tabid Person opened, found both parts of the Lungs sticking or
growing firmly to the Ribs.

Tho. Barth. Cent. 3. Hist. 2. in another Tabid or Phthisical Person, found the
Lungs, being light and spongy, to be grown to the Ribs; and in the 76 History
of his 2 Cent. a Pthisical Person was opened, the Lungs were void of Blood, and
dried, and grew firmly to the Ribs on the right side.

Riverius. Observat. Cent. 1. page 84. found in one that died of an Ulcer of
the Heart, spitting of Blood, Cough, difficulty of breathing, pain of the side,
etc. that the Lungs were firmly knit to the ribs and Diaphragma, and
Pericardium, as if united into one Body.

Columbus Lib. 15. Anatomiae, says, He has frequently found the Lungs knit to
the Pleura, sometimes in one side, sometimes in another, and sometimes in both.

Johannes Bauhinus Obs. relates one labored of a defluxion upon his Lungs and
Breast, a Diarrhaea preceeded; he had a Cough, great stretching out of the
Stomach, belching and nausea, he was disposed to goutish and Stone-Cholical
pains formerly; dying suddenly, and opened, the Lungs on the right side did
cleave to the side swelled, as if inflamed, the left part swam in bloody Water,
such as as Bauhinus nere saw before; in one Kidney was diverse smaller, and one
great Stone, the other Kidney wasted; Water was in the Belly; the Stomach that
by the symtoms seemed affected, is not mentioned to be hurt.

Hercules Saxonia did find in two, with some difference, that the cause of
their Asthma and spitting of Blood, was an inward corruption of the Lungs, and
outwardly their growing to the Pleura or side; but one of them seemingly died
of a Dropsy.

XI. The Lungs or Lights are sometimes found dried, and void of Blood, and
light, as Tho. Barth. 76. Hist. Cent. 2. testifies, recited before: to which
also comes the observation of Petrus Spehrerius before related.

Thomas Bartholinus Cent. 2. Hist. 35. says, In Phthisicks he has seen the
Lungs so hardened and dried they might be crumbled.

And the next observation but one, was a diffection of a dropsical party that
coughed, was short winded and Phthisical; his Lungs were rather dry then moist,
and void of Blood, hanging flaccing.

Most of these things make against the Moderns, especially such as Idolize the
invention of the right ways the Blood circulates in; they attribute much to
the Heart, Spirits, and too swift or slow motion of the Blood, and other
fangles about the Vessels and their community, which are but sometime, if at
any time, in any measure true: Men must imagine still, that Nature must change
and alter, as the Vertices of their Brains whirl about.

Cent. 2. Hist. 76. Tho. Barth. found in one dying of a Consumption, the Lungs
dried, void of Blood, and grown to the sides, and yet much yellow water in the
Thorax and Abdomen.

XII. The Lungs are found Scirrhous, as all other inward Bowels are; sometimes
full of hard knots, sometimes they have thick Matter in them; sometimes like
Atheroma, sometimes like Steatoma, and sometimes like Meliceris; and sometimes
they have Worms, Stones, and concrete Matter or Blood therein; and sometimes
they are Spongious, and sometimes pure Caruncles: Yet the Practical Physicians
wrote only of Scirrhs of the Liver and Spleen, as if they were peculiar to
those parts alone; they are indeed in those parts as well as others, but as
rarely so, and such as they describe, as any other; so that from one or two
Observations they chanced to see, (if they were grounded on Observation)
Experientia interdum Fallax; they laid down the Method of Nature, which
Observation might be as great a rarity and peculiar case as any, for in the
diffected two are not exactly found alike, or at least rarely by one man in all
things.

Many times a dispute is more about the sense or signification of a Word, or
the name of the thing, then any thing else; one meaning one thing by such a
word, another another; one takes the word from the Genuine signification of the
Word, or Radix, or that from whence it is derived; another from the common
acception, or what such have seemed to mean by it; that should always first be
known what they mean by such Words, or Titles, or names of things, for perhaps
thereby they might at first understand one another, and be reconciled.

But the word Scirrh was took by the Ancients and Moderns, as it purely
signifies, being a Greek word (...), from the Verb (...) to make hard; yet they
mean not only an hardness, but hard swellings thereby: Indeed many times the
common use of a word, this way or that way, makes it proper this way or that
way.

Johannes Bauhinus, as we have before related, found the Lungs hardened, but
liker a Phlegmone then Scirrh, as the Ancients described; we shall rarely see
any thing in all points exactly cohere with their description.

Petrus Spehrerius, an Italian Physician, found them hard, as before related,
but as it were turned into perfect stone.

Schenckius Filius, writes of one that had a mass of flesh weighing three
pound, that was concreted or hardened, as if the flesh was laid plate upon
plate, and outwardly was a Tumor in the side.

Johannes Hessus, in an Observation communicated by Joachim Camrarius to Jo.
Schenkius writes, That one that spat Blood with a salt distillation and Cough
was opened, and in his right side was found a Tubercle sticking to the Lungs,
it was large and like a Sponge, so that it is appertinent to the sixth head.

Nicholaus, Sermon. 4. Tract. 2. Cap. 6. One almost suffocated, coughed up a
piece of hardened flesh, large, and other pieces smaller, and was eased; a year
after the same seemed to be regenerated, and he died, choked thereby.

Benivenius, cap. 88. de abditis. A woman seemed for a good while, as if she
should be choked or suffocated, and stopped up; at last she fell into a very
troublesome Cough, and brought up a piece of hard flesh, and was eased quite.

Forestus observed an Asthmatical so, by coughing up an hard Caruncle, eased.

One voided in Skenkius a Tabid, that had a Cough diverse years, with much
matter like a fishes Bladder or Swimmer, as some; Lohoch Sanum, and de pulmone
Vulpis, etc. did no good till this came up.

We may reduce things to Heads, but in all these heads are so many varieties,
that they are scarce reduceable under any one name, they do so vary; so that it
is hard to say, whether they belong to this or that kind, or to any, or whether
they are a Genus by themselves, or a Species of some strange and different
Genus.

Skenk. page 218. has gathered two Observations,

One from Hollerius: One died of a Dropsy of the Breast, a Cough, and great
thirst, the Lungs were found wonderfully dried; but this is referable to the
eleventh head.

The other from Franciseus Michinus, of one that supposedly died of an Empyema
or Dropsy of the Breast, the Pleura, and so the Lungs, Mediastinum, and partly
the Spleen and Midriff, were thick and callous, or brawny steshed.

Who would have imagined that Mr. Francis Edwards of Alesy in this County,
troubled long with an oppressing and stuffing at his Chest, easeable by no
Pectorals, should have had an Animal like a Serpent bred there? he died at
London, about the year 1661. and was opened, the Physicians desiring to see the
cause of his stuffing and clogging that they could not help.

Nor are all these things we have writ, such strange and rare Cases as some may
imagine, but if men were opened, they would be thought the common causes of
sicknesses, the wonderful variety of Nature considered.

Jo. Bilgerus in his Epistle to Gregory Horstius, intimates how a Maid that had
a stuffing and short breathing many years, at last that increasing, she died,
was opened; the Lungs found blackish, but no other fault in them, (this is
referrable to strengthen what we said in the ninth Head) but when the Aspera
Arteria, according to its longitude, came to be cut up nigh the passages of the
Lungs, through which Air is to be brought for fanning native heat, many black
Caruncles like little knots or Pease, some bigger, some less, were found
together, filling up the passages of the Lungs; the Veins about the Heart and
Diaphragma were full of Blood; she had her Courses stopped, and so that might
add to the growth of these: so that these things do not commonly happen, not so
as the Practical Physicians thought, but many times not in those parts or
places as they did imagine.

Pet. Paw. found, besides one great Apostem in the Lungs, thirty little ones
like knots, in his Anatomical Observations annexed to Thomas Bartholinus.

XIII. Distinction of Causes is took from Consumption or absolute wasting away
of the Lungs, as all other parts of the intern Body do; and truly there is
scarce any thing we have writ of the Lungs, but is found in other parts; and
what causes are found in other parts, consideratis considerandis, may be found
in the Lungs; and therefore we have been the larger to describe all particulars.

A Gentlewomans Son, whom I knew at Huntingdon, was opened at London, dying of
a Phthisick, he had but a little bit of his Lungs left, his Liver huge large.

A Kinsman of mine in Holburn was Phthifical many years, and lived beyond
expectation; he had fix or seven children, all died, but some lived till four
or five years of Age; one they opened, thinking it to have died of a Dropsy;
but as I remember, the Mother told me it had scarce a pint of Water in its
Belly, but the Lungs were wasted, and the Liver filled up the vacuum or
yielding of the Lungs, it did so thrust the Diaphragma, but it was very knotty.

Columbus lib. 15. Anatomiae, Diffected one that had scarce any piece of his
Lungs left; there was a great deal of difference twixt him and those two,
Sylvius and Puteus write of, that had five Lobes of the Lungs, when naturally
men have but four.

Georgius Crasecchius in tract. de Pulmonum Vitiis, Diffected one that died of
a Cough, and difficult breathing Phthifical; in the left capacity of the Thorax
was much Water, purulent and faeculent, and some did affimilate to Pultis, and
a very small part of the Lungs left.

By these it is clear, man may live with a little piece of his Lungs; and he
oftener dies of their stoppages or diversity of corruption, then of their
wasting, ten to one; and after this manner Nature acts in the rest of the
intern parts.

Petrus Forestus, in Scholio ad Observat. 37. lib. 2. Relates of one from a
wound, that spat up his Lungs, as they turned into purulency, for a long time;
so that when he was opened, the Heart was left bare, without any Lungs about it.

Sometimes just half the Lungs are wasted, the other half being found.

Moreover the Reader may observe, which perhaps we shall clearly demonstrate in
our Treatise of the Dropsy, that always the affection of the Lungs do not show
a Disease by outward Symptoms.

Thomas Bartholinus Cent. 4. Obs. 17. found Pus and Sanguis sine Phthisi: An
Hectic Fever is sometime without hurt of the Lungs, (though we have shown
many Examples thereof before, indeed there is scarce any such distinct or
peculiar Fever, or rarely to be found.) Pet. Pawus, Obs. Anatom. 16. Fat in
great quantity found in the Cavity of the Thorax, without any detriment to the
Patient: T. Barth. page 170. and 266. A Phthisis from the Heart, Thom.
Bartholin. Cent. 1. Hist. 50.

River. Obs. p. 74. observed a Pleurisy from Worms, the Lungs unhurt; so in an
Empyema, the Lungs being safe, Sanies was in the side.

Marcellus Donat. page 280. The Cause of an Asthma was not found in the Lungs,
but Vena Arteriosa and sine pari: Riverius found the Cause of an Asthma in the
Diaphragma, page 286. Skenk. 237, and 222, and 217. Worms are generated of
diverse kinds and bignesses, sometimes in the Lungs, sometimes in the Aspera
Arteria, and sometimes in the Vicine parts of the Thorax. See Horst. Obs. page
456. Outward Signs not agreeing with inward Causes: See Riverius, Observe. page
306. Many parts are affected together within the Body, so that we know not
which to refer a Disease to, or which did cause, or was caused to corrupt, Tho.
Barth. Cent. 2. page 177. But he that reads all the foregoing Histories, and
observes what he reads, shall see more than these will make out.

Our Ardor and Zeal to Truth, and to reconcile all to one mind, and to make men
attain to that they may ever acquiesce in, and put to silence all Gainsayers,
has instigated us to take these pains, and make these Scrutinies into all
things.

The Readers perhaps will expect we should deliver somewhat of the Cure of all
these Distempers, or of their particular Causes.

Many of those Aphorisms concerning the cure of Head-Diseases, are so general,
they are to be consulted in each of these.

If the cure of every Disease is by taking away the Cause, than we have given a
good insight into the Cure, by showing all the Causes: But because there is
such variety and alteration of Distempers, and their Causes, the wisest
Physician in most weighty businesses, goes conjecturally to work; and thence it
is, every inferior unlearned fellow, will cure the sick Hab-Nab, and sometimes
when the Learned cannot do it; yea many an old Woman with a few odd
Specificals, cures many businesses that the Learned cannot accomplish with a
Course of Physic, not using those Specificals.

Two things are chiefly considerable in all Sicknesses: First to respect the
Cause, secondly the Symptom; that is done by Specificals, or Planetary
Medicines.

I. We noted Abscesses in the Lungs. In those we must use ripening and
emollient Drinks inwardly, with Wound-He^bs. Take this for a Formula:

Hyperici, Saniculae, Consolidae, Bugulae, an. miss. Rad Glycirirae, Hordei
Gall. Ficuum Pinguium, an. 1. fol. Malvae Al^haeae, Meliloti. an. M. S. Boil
all in four pints of Water gently, and close covered, till the third part is
wasted by evaporation; strain it, drink a quarter of a pint thrice a day; this
will serve to cleanse and break Apostematous Abscesses too: Ointments and
Cataplasms also are fit, outwardly made, after that manner as Authors
prescribe; opening the side or breast is the last, or blistering to bring out
the matter, also coughing.

II and III Heads were of Bones and Stones engendered in the Lungs. They are to
be coughed up, the Apostmes in which lie, broken, if possibly they are to be
dissolved; Juice of Chamomile, Goats Blood, and sharp Vinegar dissolve them;
the Cough is to be appeased by mild, slipery emollient Medicines; though
saccharate and sweet things are used for the Lungs, they are apt to thicken and
grow clammy, and turn to Phlegm, and aggravate many Distempers.

IV. Worms. They are to be killed, and coughed forth, the Lungs are to be
cleansed; Mercurius Dulcis is of chief use, and a pectoral Drink of Horehound,
St. John's Wort, Hyssop, Aniseeds, and Grass Roots, with Oil of Vitriol and
Brimstone, or Vinegar of Squills, with Oil of Sulphur.

V. Those great or hard Bodies that from without are got into the Windpipe or
Gullet, and so compress the Windpipe, must be coughed up, or vomited forth: or
if they may go down into the Stomach, it is good to let them go: Oil of Lillies,
sweet Almonds, etc. that dilate the Flesh and passages, are good to cause a
slipery and easy coming forth.

VI. Concerning the Sponginess of the Lungs, or their lightness, fussiness and
vacancy of Blood, there is scarce any Remedy; a Pectoral moistening and
Analeptick Diet, is likely to do most.

VII and VIII. Waterishness of the Body and Lobes of the Lungs is found the
Cause of many Griefs, and so the swiming of the Lungs in water, though perhaps
they may be dry, as they are found diverse times in a Dropsy of the Breast, else
we need not make such distinction: That that dries the Body in other cases, is
good here, sweating and provoking Urine: for the Kidneys should attract or
receive all the Water, the Guts, the Excrements and thick Food, the Liver and
Gall, the Choler; and when and where any of these are the Cause, we must look
to the part whose office it was to separate and discharge these: we must
sometimes look for centrary indications; for in a Dropsy of the Breast, drying
means are convenient; yet because the Lungs therein may be dry, they do harm
one way as they do good another: Some have handled the Cure of such particular
Dropsies, to whom I may refer you: Chyiurgery, if it be confirmed, is likeliest
to do most.

IX. In Discolorations of the Lungs alone is no need, nor no Essicacy of
Medicines, but that that gives the green color, or yellow, or black, or white,
or livid, of all which color the Lungs have been found; and sometimes not
otherwise ailing any thing: That that gives the Color is specifically to be
purged forth, but this is not foreseen.

X. The sticking, cleaving or growing of the Lungs to other parts, any that are
nigh, specially that participate in corrupting with them, is not always
discoverable, and as seldom curable; if we perceive they do adhere we cannot
tell exactly to what part, in what kind, from what cause, and in what degree,
little or much; hinderers of Putrefaction, spenders of moisture, outward
heaters and drawers forth of moisture, are medicinal, as vomiting to loosen
them, and purging to take away the antecedent cause, may be, and sneezing,
jumping, vociferation, etc. sweet things, Lohocks, Syrups, specially Gum
Arabic, Tragaganth, Starch, etc. are bad, glewing, and apt to be clungy; such
things are good to mix with Phlegm, and to bring it up, and raise Coughing,
whereby the Lungs are disburdened; also for stopping thin Rheum, and imbodying
it, that it may be coughed up or raised; or to assuage Sharpness and
Excoriation of the Windpipe or Lungs, else they often do hunt: and I am
persuaded the glutinous and phlegmatic nature of the Lungs is increased
thereby. We may judge from outward things best, many times, how inward things
be; and by things we see, those we cannot come at to see; Sugars, Syrups,
Lohochs, etc. of that nature with heat, dry, and grow tough, and birdlimy and
clungy, and so it is impossible they should act in the body, but the supply of
moisture keeps them from sudden coagulation, or inspissation.

XI. When the Lungs are dried, void of blood, and light, there is scarce any
help: for though we moisten and nourish the body, yet perhaps they are not
capable of drawing any nutriment to themselves, or at least not to convert it
to a right use, the tone and office of them being so extinguished: in such
cases we must endeavor to make Life as pleasant as we may, and abate the
Symptoms. It is a part of wisdom always those things we cannot take away, to
endeavor to mitigate them.

XII. The Lungs are found scirrhous, hard; sometimes moist Scirrhs, and
sometimes light, dry Scirrhs, as Spunges; and sometimes stony Scirrhs. To help
this, softning Ointments, and Cataplasms are suitable, if we can observe the
Cause of this Cause; that is a main matter in the cure of all things, to see
and observe all along what helped and harmed, and with what, and in what times
the evil-seemed to increase most; Lohoch and Eclegmas, and Pectoral Drinks are
convenient; but the difference of Scirrhs asks for diversity. Caruncles are to
be cured otherwise than Stones; and Spunginess another way; and hardened
Apostems another. A Lohoch made of the Syrup of Juice of Chamomile, Gum.
Ammoniacum, Resina Larirea, Liquorish, flos Sulphuris, and rad Althaeae is
medicinal: Chamomile, Lilly roots, Althea, Lin-seed, Faenigreek-seed, Oil of
sweet Almonds, Emplastrum Meliloti, Compositum pro Spleen, are outwardly
helpful; A juvantibus and nocentibus optima sumitur indicatio; by such things
as help, and such as hurt, we may find out the nature of the Distemper.

Non est in Medico semper relevetur ut aeger,
Interdum Docta plus valet Art malum.
The Doctor cannot always cure, sometime
The Sickness does above the Medicine clime.
XIII. Wasting of the Lungs, are chiefly restored by Causes contrary to those
that did cause wasting, for they differ in differing people; commonly this is
called a Consumption, though there be diverse kinds: and in some Consumptions
the Lungs are firm; yet where the Lungs are wasted, seldom but there is a
Consumption, so that we may make this distinction: Every wasting away of the
Lungs is a Consumption, but every Consumption or wasting away of Fat and Flesh,
is not a wasting of the Lungs, or proceeded therefrom. The foolish Vulgar call
all that lie long fick, and waste, Consumptives, and so indeed they be; for
Consumption does only signify a wasting or consuming; and so in all diseases,
they that lie long sick and cannot eat their food, for the most part waste, and
yet the Lungs safe; nor are an Atrophia, Phthisis and Hectic Fever all the
wasting and kinds thereof that do happen; nor does all wasting waste after one
or other of these kinds.

Those Medicines that are good against Phthisicks or Consumptions the Greeks
call (...), (...), (...), Restoratives, Nourishers, and Fatners.

Next we shall respect the Symptoms or manifest Griefs depending on these and
other unknown Causes. First, for short or difficult breathing, in any Causes
these are specifical, or have a propriety.

Conserve of the roots of Holly-Oaks or Garden-Mallows made with Honey,
experienced by Benedictus Victo, Faventinus, Empyricis.

Conserve of the flowers of Honeysuckles, Caprifolium: Experienced by N. C.

Crocus, Experienced by many; so Millipedes or Aselli, Sows: Experienced by
Platerus and others. Zedoary, rad Brioni^, Angelicae, Sulphur, sem. Anisi. I
have experienced in diverse; and Oximel of Squils, with Saffron and Aqua Anisi.

To ease Coughs from all Causes; yet they are not always to be stopped, for
Nature ordained that motion to the Lungs, to keep us from choking up.

Decoction of Juniper berries in Wine for Infants, Exper. Platerus.

The Decoction of Gourds, and Veronica, was proved by the same.

A draught of Poppy water with Sugar, is held a secret, took every night, to
stop a molestuous Cough.

Garlic, with Bears Grease anointed on the plants of the feet.

Ziziphae are praised by Hartman, Pract. Chym. macerated in Spirit of Wine, and
took every morning.

The Decoction of Thyme for Chincoughs is praised.

A Decoction of Box-wood, shaved; Rosemary, roots of Houndstongue, and
Cough-down is excellent.

To stop Coughs, Laudanum and Narcoticks are most effectual, b^t warily to be
used.

Of Side-pains, from Wind; Tobacco leaves anointed and applied; Heurnius.
Wormwood fried with Grease, and applied hot, Emp.

Acorns in powder, Decoction of Stich-Holly, and Chamomile flowers, I have
experienced.

Spirit of Wine, Camphire, and red Sanders boiled together, for bathing the
Side, is an Experiment of Plater. in Prax. Medica.

Side-pains from Inflammation, are experimentally found easable by Boars-Tush,
Bulls Pizzle given in Cardus-water; Plater. Rondeletius, River. Johnston.
Prevotius, etc.

Barrow, Quercetane, used Olibanum, to ease the Stitch. Johnstonus in ^d. Med.
Pract. praises Resina; Sperma Ceti I know very available.

Lodovicus* Septalius praises two Medicines, Honey of Roses with fresh Butter,
and Oil of sweet Almonds with Manna. Crabs Eyes, red Coral, Violet Flowers,
Cardus Benedictus, Scabiosa, Nettles, Rhubarb, Poppy-flowers, are specifical,
and give ease, and most speedy help after bleeding in Pleurisies: Let none tell
me some are hot, some cold; some binding, some loosning; some pectoral, some
hepatical; some nephritical, some carminatives; some makers of wind; they do it
assuredly; and let our Reason follow Experience, they do it by Astral
Influence, and Sympathy or Antipathy: that is the reason many ordinary learned
Fellows and Women help diverse by one peculiar odd Medicine, that Physicians
cannot without a tedious method and repetition of many Medicines: for in many
compositions sometimes there is scatce one or two Specificals, and those
perhaps in little quantity; yet we approve much of Rules and good Methods, but
they will scarce hold practiceable in two persons alike: Spitters and
Expectoraters are necessary.

Now for Spitting of Blood to cease the Symptom:

Water and Vinegar is experienced by Rondeletius.

Juice of Nettles four Ounces, with one Dram of Powder of the true Bloodstone
in Knot-Grass-Water, is praised by Jo. Schmitz.

The constant use of Germander, by Crato.

Lohoch of Purslane-Juyce, with Dragons Blood, Terra Lemnia, praised by Plater.

Syrup of Juice of Purslane, by Riverius.

Spirit of Vitriol half a Scruple, with four Ounces of Plantane-Water, is
experienced by Riverius.

Juice of Nettles above all was successful to Amatus Lusitanus.

Lapis Haematitis to Trallianus.

Hartman used the Remedy of Riverius, of Vitrioli Sc. s. Aq. Plantag. 4.

Gerrard in his Herbal praises the Juice of Periwinkles to one Ounce drunk
often, that it never fails stopping blood.

Opium, Poppy Seed, Laudanum, Hen^ane Seed, and such Narcoticals, are the last
Refuge.

Sennertus for all Fluxes of Blood wheresoever, all other things failing,
says, The red Jasppar, or true Bloodstone, applied so that it touch the Skin,
has been most efficacious. Also for Haemorrages of the Nostrils, we have known
the application of the true Bloodstone successful beyond other things.

For Phthisicks, or those whose Lungs waste away, which is only to be guessed
at by Symptoms, and leanness of the whole Body, these are best experienced by
Authors.

There is an Herb known to Sheep, Avenroar says, He saw the Ulcer of the Lungs
of a Sheep healed thereby; they know that by natural instinct, that we cannot
find out by experience: And Hermes Trismegistus thinks if man knew all the
opposite Qualities in Animals, Plants and Minerals, he might do no less things
than to be supposed Witchcraft, Jac. Sylvius in Meth. Med.

Matthias Gradi healed a Phthisical with the heat of an Oven; the dry Air drawn
often into his Mouth dried up the Ulcer. Idem, Ibidem.

An agglutinating Lohoch of Turpentine, Bole of Armenia, and Myrrh, is
wonderful: Fracastorius.

Trallianus with Lapis Aimatites cured many Phthisicks.

Quercetan with Ground Ivy, or Tunhoof, juyced and made into a Lohoch with
Honey or Sugar, Flos Sulphuris added.

The use of Conserve of Red Roses constantly, cured many. Mesue and Avicen.

Woman's Milk is moistening and nourishing, connatural to us, and the fittest to
restore man's flesh and moisture, is most easily converted into the substance of
our Body. Platerus, in Prax. Med.

The Decoction of Lignum Sanctum cured others: The Decotion of River-Crabs in
Barley-Water, others.

Schenkius, Optime humana sal^t i^ Meritu^, from diverse Authors has gathered
all these: Saccharum Rosatum, that Avicen, Mesue, Crato, Valeriola and Forestus
used successfully. Hedera Terrestris, praised by Langius; Pulmonaria, by George
Hamberger; Ros. Solis Herb, by Lobelius, and Fill. Skenk. Betrys, by Joac.
Camerar. Pseudocostus, or Ingrassia di porci of Italy, by Camerar. Balsam.
Sulphuris, by Skenkius Filius, and Georgius.

We have used this Lohoch successfully, a Compound of the former:

. Powder of Hedera Terrestris ii. Lapidis Hamatitidis, Glycirirae, Floris
Sulphuris, an i. Nucleorum pini i. s. Sir. ^ Juglaendibus, immaturis ii.
Penidiorum i. Cons. Rosarum Rubrarum i. s. misce fiat L^hoch, cum Sir.
Pectorali, q. s. ad consistentiam idon^am.

We must give our Readers this Caution, That Authors for Symptoms in Diseases,
and for Dissections in dead Bodies, did write commonly impartially and
uninterestedly, and therefore are the more to be believed in what they say they
saw: but in the Cures they did, many were hugely given to boasting, specially
the Chemical Writers, for they crack their Medicines much, thinking to get
Fame, and Vend for such things; nor have Physicians commonly dealt heartily and
fairly, in delivering how often such a Medicine has cured, and not how often it
has failed: If a Physician use a sorry Medicine many times, it is hard if more
then one or two are not helped by it. Authors must be considered, their Temper,
Sincerity, Modesty and Sobriety, and wherein they write upon their own Interest.

A TRACTATE OF DROPSIES.
IDo not intend by Dropsies only to give the insight of that Distemper to my
Readers, but to show the Course and Order of Nature in change of all the
Bowels: In these things under this Title may be seen the variety of all
Distempers, and in what little Order and Method any Distempers run. If the
Reader well considers all the Histories, and the Reasons wherefore we writ
them, he will see apparently how the inward Bowels are or may be affected in
sickness, how one suffers with or by another; how, in one sick person, one
bowel is thus affected, another so: For we see Medicines that are one and the
same, in diverse Bodies have diverse Operations; so the same humors alike
qualitied, in two bowels produce diverse effects; one bowel by the same matter
is turned scirrhous, another is resolved into purulency: both the peculiarity
of the quality of the Humor, and the apt disposition of the passive Cause, is
the cause which we cannot foresee; and when we do see it, give no reason
thereof: This may justly reprove those that statelily think to sum up all the
Ways and Works of GOD in one Rule, or general Term; His ways are past finding
out by the wise, much more by the superstitiously addicted, and such as build
to their own Reason without the Foundation of Experience; that which he has
ordained at the food for our capable, docile, and tractable Souls, to increase
in knowledge by, and grow up in true knowledge. The Indians of America, did
admire how any one could signify his mind to another in a piece of Paper, and
thought it supernatural, and done by Spirits: even so do all of us admire those
things we have no experience of, which are nevertheless in the course of
Nature, and in GOD's Ordination; and the reason why men still admire at them,
is, because they will not search for Truth, and take pains to see the
Ordination of God, and to find but the true and sincere Method, and Course, and
Variety of Nature: Men may write Books of Romances, and Imaginary Conceptions
of their own Brain, easily and readily, festinanti calamo; and so slight the
observance of the Works of GOD, and prefer a few Jingles and high-derived Words
and Philosophical Rules of Men's making, when the Course of Nature is GOD's, and
of greater Dignity: for I can make true Rules of Nature than others, and if so,
better; and if so, who should I boast or glory with theirs? I value not what
any Man has writ, for I am a Man as well as he; and to him that thinks so, my
Writing is of as great Authority: But let the Course of Nature, the Work of a
GOD be Judge betwixt Us; let the Autopsia of the thing show which guessed the
truest of it, unseen: Let no man's Opinion (if it be only the Opinion of a Man)
be much built upon, especially if its grounds be no more then its self, viz.
Opinion.

We shall first show the signification of the word Dropsy, its rise, and what
is its common acceptance, which may differ from the sincere meaning of the
Original Word; and then show the diverse kinds that according to vulgar
acceptance, or common meaning of the word, may be, or are called the Dropsy:
And herein many, many times, dispute about they know not what; one meaning one
thing by the word, another another.

The Dropsy or Hydropsie in English, comes from Hydrops in Latin, and that is
only a change of the Greek letters into Latin, those tongues being writ in
differing letters: Well then, (...) in Greek is derived from (...), water; so
that it is not proper to call any swelling a Dropsy, unless a waterish
swelling, according to the genuine signification of the word; but according to
common acceptance, other swellings are called Dropsies.

1. Ascites, the word for common Dropsies, comes from (...): a Greek word
signifying a Basin, Laver, or Pitcher, because their Bellies refer to the
Bellies of Pitchers, or Water-Vessels; so that from the fashion of the tumid
Belly, it is proper to call them Asciticks, though Water is not the Cause, but
as the word is commonly taken, improper.

2. Tympanites in Latin, and Tympany in English, according to the common
meaning, shows a windy Dropsy; but the sense of the word shows a Drum; or that
the Belly strutting forth and sounding like a Drum, may in any person be called
a Tympany, though it may be without wind; yet water without some wind will
scarce yield a noise: It comes from (...), that signifies a Drum.

3. A third kind, or name of distinction used by the Ancients, was Anasarcha,
or Leucophlegmatia, they commonly meant by the use of those words a puffing up
of the Body and Face from Phlegm, the Skin loose, Face bluffed and pale; if we
go to the meaning of the word in the Original Derivation (...), per carnem, it
signifies some humor or matter spread throughout the Flesh, or imbibed
therein, or throughout.

But people have been deceived in these, for Nature imitates no such Order or
Rule, there is no necessity for a Dropsy, if it be not according to the
description of Ascites, to be Anasarca, nor if it be not Anasarca must it be
Tympanites: To see a party just as Galen described, is as rare as those they
count strange Cases. We shall let the Reader see the Truth, as far as man
hitherto can find a method in Nature, which indeed in these cases is to want a
method; specially as to peculiar and small things: the quality in every matter,
if we could see it, or know it, would give us the truest insight how it must
work, and what it must effect.

The matter, said the Ancients, is either Water, Wind, or Phlegm; the Bowel or
Subject was the Liver; the Cause was cold, and these only: the precedent or
procatarctick causes, were too great evacution of Blood, or suppression of
Courses or Haemorrhoids, a Jaundice, Cochexy, or drinking of Water; these were
the principal, with the distinctions aforenamed, that the Ancients delivered;
the Signs and Concomitant Symptoms they delivered are not worth naming: for
those that they wrote aright in, are common; others are nothing of Rule, but
accidental, so that they might have numbered a thousand Symptoms or Ails that
many Hydropicks, one or other amongst them had had.

The Moderns, as Sennertus, Hercules Saxonia, Riverius, Platerus, etc. did
introduce diverse new things from experience, and found that heat as well as
cold, was the Cause, and that sometimes cool things that open, do good; also
they saw that the Kidneys and Spleen, as well as the Liver, might cause the
Dropsy.

We shall not stand to describe or transcribe the Causes, Signs, Prognostics
and Cures differing in Ascites, Tympanites, and Anasarca, that the Moderns have
laid down, they may be read fully in their Practices, and compared with what
follows; they are defective, and rarely found as they have described, yet are
in some or other, at one time or other, in some measure or other true: as for
example; Jo. Johnstonus, Idea Med. Pract. cap. de Tympanite, says, In a
Tympany the Skin is stretched out and glisters, it looks like a Drum Cover, and
struck, gives such a sounding; it thrusts out the Navil very much outwardly,
the Belly is puffed up, but no sense of great weight; crushed, the finger
leaves no impression, but the Skin presently rises up again; belchings and
breaking wind downwards are often and rumbling in the Belly: the cause is weak
heat, or terrifying great heat, which resolves the matter into Vapors; (which
the Ancients acknowledged not.) The place is not in the Stomach, for there the
wind would be belched forth; nor in the Guts, for then per anum it would be
cast forth; but a Tympany is generated commonly betwixt the Coats of the
Mesentery and Intestines; for in a Tympany are pains about the Navil, and pains
of the Loins, and gripings of the Mesentery tied to these parts, being
distended by wind.

Cure is by bringing forth the wind, a Carminative Wine, a great Cuppinglass
applied, Frictions, Foments, discussing wind, inwardly such as warm and correct
the distemper of the Bowel causing the wind.

Now one in a Tympany may have some wind, and most water; for they are seldom
absolutely separate, then it may be called both: Many Hydropicks are puffed up,
and windy; if it be nothing but wind, the sick may have one of these signs and
not another, but other not here mentioned; if he have all those signs, he may
not have a like inward Cause; if the inward Cause in two be exactly alike, yet
the outward or fomenting antecedent Causes might be quite contrary, that
stirred up inward Causes alike; if the inward Causes be visibly exactly alike,
yet they may have different effects or events, for death may ensue to one, life
to the other: and thus does Nature vary, whose Method in those things
Physicians wrote a Method of, is to want a Method or Rule.

We will now from our own Observations, bringing the Witnesses of many Authors,
fide dignissimi, to attest what we write by their impartial uninterested and
non-superstitious Experience, show the Course of Nature, and more particularly
the swellings of the Body from wind or water, introducing a multitude of other
things: So that this particular Tractate may be useful as a general Practice.

1. We have observed diverse Maids and Women, in stopped Menstrues, to have their
Bellies swell, and Feet, gradually, on Nights first, and then so largely, that
they were swelled on days too, largely; as full as Skin could almost hold,
pitting, or leaving the dint of the finger crushing them, in them, along while
ere they rose up again to equal height with the rest of the flesh; the surest
token that water was the swelling matter: I observed these Hydropick swellings
of the feet commonly to come with pain, redness, and then itching; the Attoms
of the Blood that did at first flow, exhaling, the swelling turned paler, less
hot and painful, and clearly waterish, and so it is in most outward Tumors,
and this is a chief Universal Method in Nature; yet no General Rule is without
Exceptions: for I have had both my hands swelled up like Bladders, and from
Cold, without any foregoing Flux of Blood; if I laid my hand against the
Mantle-piece, and my forehead upon the back of my hand, in a little time it had
so crushed the water away on either side, that I could have seated an Egg on
the back of my hand, in the presure of my forehead, very fast; and this huge
pit or hollow would by degrees rise up again to its former height and equality
with the other Skin; I found that none of my inward parts were the cause of
this; I always drank very little: so I have known some had their Legs
hydropical, standing in cold water, others with a sore, or pain in their Legs,
others after Agues, the Belly also swelling, but no harm to the inward Bowels
was in fieri. What shall we say? Maids or Women that want their Courses, their
Bellies swell, and Feet: is it an Ascites, because in the Feet apparently is
water? is it a Tympany, because in the Belly apparently is wind, or retained
blood, and wind, and Ichor in the Uterus? is it a Dropsy at all, because none
of the Bowels, no not the Liver, is cooled or hurt in some? it goes away
naturally: sometimes if their Courses come not down, some are held a long time,
and know not whether they are with Child, or in a Dropsy; for sometimes the
Symptoms of a Dropsy in one, prove the Symptoms of Gravidity in another.

Plater in Observe. Extuberantiae, about page 659, and 660, relates of three
particular Women that thought themselves (being swelled) big with Child, and
the swelling did cease in all naturally, as it arose; but a 4th woman being so
swelled, and in suspicion of being with Child, died.

In another woman in suppression of Courses be observed the Belly swelled up,
yet no Dropsy; she was restored by Remedies.

2. Another kind of Dropsies we may call an Inflation; I have both seen it, and
been informed of the like in others: these were suddenly in two or three days
swelled up, the Eyes almost closed in, the face exceedingly puffed, the Belly
turgid, Legs and Hands swelled, a good appetite, Strength and Reason remaining;
yet in these two or three I observed what I write from, there was difference,
so that in each distinction we must make distinction, if we would have clear
and sincere Truth, and punctually decide Controversies; one was helped by
Plantane-Water, or rather on Natures accord; the other by good Medicines, and
Anti-hydropicals; others are totally and suddenly inflated, different from
these, and in one thing or other from each other.

Platerus, Obs. Extuberantia, page 632. relates of a Maid swelled all over,
Face, Feet, Belly, and elsewhere, a difficult breathing; and in a few days
recovered as quickly, as she quickly fell so: Nor can these be imputed to
Poisons. As I remember Nicolaus Tulpius has an Observation like these, of a
total swelling of the Body like a Dropsy, that arose in a few days, and ceased
again spontaneously.

3. A third kind we have observed in two, but not found the like in Authors;
They were loose skinned, and full of water outwardly, the Feet did a little
swell, but no symptom of illness was therein; they had many water-blisters on
their Flesh, specially their Paps or Teats did run much, their skin was very
subject to break into blisters of pare water, void of Accrimony, except
sometime a little itching; nor were the inward parts by any outward signs at
all in fault, though in diverse symptoms they did somewhat vary, yet both had
one Cause, viz. Drinking Strong Beer or Ale constantly on mornings First of
all, which they were not used to: and I have heard a third person say, that if
he drank Ale on mornings fasting, it made his Blood waterish; but though the
outward Cause is surely one and the same, yet the variety of Constitutions is
stupendous: If in these the redundant water of the blood was excluded as
unnecessary for Natures use, and heterogenious to the blood, to the outward
parts, or Cutaneous Superfice, and there did gather in bladders, and those
broke, poured forth Serum, and then filled again; why may not Nature, being
overburdened by water, in the blood that offends, either in quality or
quantity, or both, cast off this Serum into the inward Bowels, and there raise
bladders, and those break and pour out the Serum into the capacity of the
Abdomon, and then fill again? for we know nothing will endure a superabundance;
and more Serum still ousing and pressing into these bladders, breaks them, and
they fall down flat, and by degrees gather more Serum, and are distended;
indeed there is rarely any Botch, Struma, Glandula, Callus, Apostem, Tumor,
Ulcer, Gangrene, Fistula, Cancer, Sphacelus, Discoloration, Tubercles, etc.
that happen to the outward parts, but they happen to the inward Bowels, as
Liver, Spleen, Heart, Reins, Mesentery, Lungs, U^erus, Pancreas, Gall, etc.

4. I^ the next place, occurs another kind, which Hercules Saxonia lib. 3.
pract. cap. 32. says, Is a Dropsy of Blood, if it is proper to say so; it is
quickly made, in few days kills: So Mercurialis opened one swelled with
fourteen pints of Blood in him: Another with an Hernia or Rupture fell
suddenly, swelled and died. Tulpius and Horstius in his Appendent Observations
to Marcellus Dona'us, mention the like. If we consider that in all things are
different kinds, and in all kinds differing degrees, We must allow the extreme
of bloody Water, to be pure Blood; for every thing has its two extremes of
exceeding little, exceeding great, and its mean or medriocrity: we see in
swelled Hydropical Legs, and other swellings of the outward parts, the matter,
seems ^ed hot Blood at first flowing, then by corruption, or the Atoms of the
Blood exhaling, it turns pale, wheyish or waterish oftentimes; so in the Body
of many Hydropicks Blood may first flow, and by lying, loses its color, as
heat I suppose, when it is extravasated will quickly make it do, some have
tried it they say.

To make this the more probable, Plater Obs. Extuber. page 650. found one full
of yellow Water, most stinking, in one that died Hydropical and of a Rupture;
and this might be bloody Water, or waterish Blood, or water first flown out
into the Belly, and then Blood mixed therewith, which with standing might grow
more waterish, and cause the water to stink; the Liver in this Party was
putrid, and little else in fault.

Scholiographus ad cap. 39. Lib. 1. Hollerii de Morbis internis, writes, that
yellow water like washings of Flesh, or bloody, was found in one Hydropick; it
is hard to say, whether it were waterish Blood, or bloody Water.

Thomas Bartholin. Cent. 1. Obs. 2. found the water in an Hydropicks belly,
bloody and stinking: see Tulp. lib. 2. Obs. 35. one voided much blood upwards
and downwards.

5. The most common kind of Dropsy, or that that most properly may so be
called, is after this manner of rise, though with variation in all; the feet
begin both alike to swell toward evening; the walking and heating them, makes
the Serum fall down, which in the morning by rest is gathered into the Belly;
this swelling daily increases, and the Belly in a month more or less, does more
or less swell, with short-windedness; sometimes a Cough, ^hirst, dejection of
Appetite, Laziness, Pursiness, pale Color, and Rheumatick Tempers; succeeding
for the most part to Cachexyes, Jaundices, Tertian or Quartain Agues, moist
Diet, cold Water, Haemorrhages, or other Cronical Distempers; the Liver, Reins
or Spleen, or altogether, are found either fissured, clest with bladders of
Water, or corrupted, or perforated and stony, or pale, and of extinguished
vitality; and in most common Hydropicks, all the parts are found corrupted or
wasted, or grown to one another, one in one manner, another in another, as may
afterward be shown; for one and the self same cause, or at least seemingly so
to us, produces diverse effects in diverse bowels; for though the thing acting
may be one and the same, yet the patient, or thing to be acted upon, is not
capable to be altered alike with another; therefore one part is grown to
another, another part is quite wasted, a third is full of Stones, a fourth is
grown larger then naturally, a fifth is pale and dried, void of blood; and thus
they vary in one Body, in one Disease: but we are principally to consider what
parr was first in offense, and which do consent, for the contamination did for
the most part begin in one bowel, and that made water, and the other bowels
sopped therein did corrupt, but diverse times it is hard to say which Bowel was
first in fault, for all seem alike corrupted; and indeed all perhaps are
originally, sometimes in cause, as well as caused to corrupt, for the quality
in the Blood and Juyces, and Aliment is alike operative to all: in every Body
there is a Quality or peculiar Nature, which acts moves and alters it; and the
sight or outward appearance of any Body or Matter, does not always and
exactly, if ever exactly show the quality in the Body or Matter; for sometimes
a Poison (if it is proper to call any thing so) will alter all the Bowels
strangely, and where there is no Dropsy, the parts are thus affected, which we
may show hereafter.

6. Another kind of Dropsy, as it has been taken, is from Glandules or
Apostemes, or Fat, which we will here involve in one Head.

Petrus Pawus, Dissect. Anatom. 24. when all the water was drawn out, all the
Gutts, Mesentery, Caul and Liver were found Fat.

Tulp. lib. 2. Obs. 33, and 34. In one saw two Steatoma's in the Mesentery, one
of them was not full of corruption; the other did pour out much Sanies and
water into the Belly; these did so swell her, that she was rather thought with
Child then Hydropical, but being opened, it was found the Womb was so crushed
up by these Apostemes, that Gravidity could not be; there was no water in the
hollow of the Belly, till by diffection it was let out of one of the Abscesses;
in another bladders of water were held in one in the Mesentery.

Horstius, Epist. med. Sect. 5. A Woman supposed to die of a Dropsy was
opened, it was found to be the Vterus that distended the Belly, it weighed 87
pound, it was full of an hairy and woolly matter, with fat and yellow Ichor.

P. Paw. ob. Anatom. 29. in a general Dropsy, a Woman was so big, three Else
scarce compassed her; her Uterus did stretch out exceedingly to the making that
greatness; and it was full of many schirrous knobs, or Condylomata. Platerus
found some that represented Dropsies, that had only Glandules, and in some
glandulous or knotty swellings of the Mesentery.

7. We may name another kind of Dropsy, relating to the Tympany of the
Ancients, Plater. Obs. 657. A Boy ten years old had a twisting of his Guts and
stoppage of Excrements; they came up by his mouth: he was hugely swelled, his
Belly distended with wind, according to the Practicks description of a Tympany:
he lived thus fourteen days; then dying, he was opened; the Guts were found
twisted up together, and in some of them Worms with dung in great number came
forth: in other Guts was abundance of wind, exceedingly distending them, and
breaking forth with great violence as soon as they were cut; no water was found
in him. I do not see it so proper to call this a Tympany, as an Illiack
passion; and if it had been joined with water, it had not so properly been
called a Tympany neither, so that with Water (Wind commonly being made through
Rarefaction of Water by heat into Air) it might be called a Water-Dropsie with
Inflation, without Water an Inflation, Illiack or Cholical distemper: Indeed
where there is much Water, commonly is some Phlegm; and where both these be,
commonly there is windiness, because they are made of a moist, cold, raw, and
spiritless disposition of the Blood and Bowels.

We shall discover no more kinds of Dropsies in this Order, but under the
Concommitant Symptoms we shall enumerate, much more variety may appear; but to
go curiously to discriminate of each of those seven. Heads, we may make as many
solid Divisions in each, specially in the fifth.

1. The first and chief Symptom that troubles Hydropicks is an Asthma or
difficult breathing, that is most general. Plater. page 638. A Woman with Child
had a Dropsy; breathing was so difficult, she was often nigh suffocated; she
brings forth, and having good natural purgations, is delivered of her
Dropsy. And Obs. page 64. A Nobleman drew his breath with exceeding straitness
in a Dropsy, he used to drink hot and strong Liquors; he died.

Skenk. page 417. One Ascitick, was not commonly so strait-breathed, but when
he went to eat or drink or to sleep, he was almost choked. River. Cent. 2.
Obs. 67. mentions an Asthma in a Dropsy, as an high trouble to the Hydropick
party he mentions; And

Nic. Tulp. lib. 2. obs. 34. mentions one that for diverse years was very hard
breathed, died hydropical; opened, there was a swelling of the Mesentery
weighing twenty pound, that was three years increasing, and crushed up the
parts, for the Lungs and Breast, and all other parts were sound; and Observe. 39.
an Asthma in an Hydropick was exceeding great, water ran out daily per scrotum,
but gave no ease.

Jo. Bilgerus, Epist. ad Gregor. Horstium, mentions a Dropsy of the Breast,
four years increasing, with hard breathing, which grew strong and great;
opened, the Lungs outwardly were spotted, inwardly putrified.

Plater. Obs. Extuberantiae, page 646. In one (that he opened) he found the
Kidneys exulcerated and perforated, and no other matters of corruption to or in
other parts considerable, yet the crushing up of the Diaphragma and Lungs, by
the redundancie of water, caused a great Dyspnaea; the party before Death had
let out much water by blisters, made in the lower parts, and the Belly did
assuage and sink therefrom, and the Dyspnaea abated, so that the quantity of
water crushing up the parts of respiration, was apparently the Cause; and the
soaking of water into the Lungs, Diaphragma, and Muscles of the Breast, does in
some occasion hard breathing,; but the party aforenamed, the water being
lessened, and seemingly she in a better condition, died with fainting.

2. A second Symptom or Concomitant Affect in Dropsies, is Wind, which in some
is more, in some less; in some it more afflicts at one time, in others at
another; in some in one part, in others in another; and many of the many and
different symptoms and ails that afflict Hydropicks, arise partly from Wind and
Phlegm as well as Water.

A Dropsy first began with inflation, the Belly was Tympanitical, then the
feet began to swell with Water, and other signs of a Water-Dropsie arose,
cured, River. Cent. 3. Obs. 86.

Also Felix Platerus in Observationibus, in an Ascites, or Water-Dropsie saw
abundance of wind, or a Tympany therewith.

In a Lady I knew that was Hydropical, after letting Blood, wind did so
increase that she died Tympanitical; the taking away Blood in such cold
Distempers, which all are not cold, weakens Nature, and adds to the Morbifick
Cause.

Those swellings that come suddenly all over, or in the Belly either, though
the swelling dints like water, yet there is much wind therein. See Tulp. Obs.
Med. lib. 2. and Plat. page 632. two such were cured: All things have their
variety, and diverse kinds, and every kind its species, and every species
variety and degrees; two Extremes, and one Medium: the greatest wisdom is to
distinguish between likes; that might put an end to many Controversies; and to
know Natures variety might end many Disputes; and when one says a thing is
thus, another says, Nay, but it is so, and both these may be true; for in one
it may be so, in another thus; one says this is the Cause of a Dropsy,
another that, and both may be in the right; for both these are in some the
Causes.

Sometimes there is much wind without any water, as in our seventh Head or
Distinction of Kinds, and sometimes there is much water without any wind or
flatuosity; sometimes they are equally quantatized; and sometimes in an
Inflation is a little water, and in an Ascites a little wind; and so for Phlegm,
which is only thickened water, or glutinated moisture.

3. The third Symptom or Ail in Dropsies is Phlegm, or a clogging up, stoppage,
or Obstructions therefrom. The Ancients made three Dropsies, the Water-Dropsie,
or Ascit^s, the Wind-Dropsie, or Tympanites, the Flegm-Dropsie, or
Leucophlegmatia, which also they called Anasarcha, but the signification of
these two words differ, though in common acceptance they may be one:
Anasarcha, as we said, signifies matter or humors in the flesh, or diffused
under the skin throughout the flesh, (...) comes from (...), white, and (...),
Phlegm, put together, it signifies white Fleam, or Phlegm; so that if the
Ancients had took Leucophlegmatia for the Cause, and Anasarcha for the Effect,
these two together might mystically have shown a Disease: We must say of this,
as of wind, sometimes there is much water or wind without any phlegm, and
sometimes much phlegm without any water or wind; sometimes a little phlegm, a
little wind, and much water, are complicated together in one Body; sometimes a
Tympany and Leucophlegmatia seem most to exsuperate, sometimes an Ascites and
Tympany, sometimes an Ascites and Leucophlegmatia, and sometimes they are
separate and distinct: but then I think it not so proper to call white phlegm
and wind a Dropsy, without any water, though they distend the skin in all
places.

Paulus Renealmus, Obs. 122. At first the party had a Leucophlegmatia, and then
an Ascites supervened, and was added to it; cured.

In another, Obs. 166. he saw an Ascites and Leucophlegmatia, or water and
white phlegm equally swelling the body for two years, and he cured it.

And Obs. 195. he observed that those that were puffed up with white phlegm had
cloggings of their Stomach, rawness and pursiness, and he cured two or three
with Vomits of Chemical Powders: and he mentions little or no water in the
last, which also Plater. Extub. Obs. page 630. mentions not; but this
Leucophlegmatia came from two large drawing forth of Blood, or Phlebotomy; how
frequent is it in most Dropsies to see the face bluft, puffed up as it were
with pale Phlegm, and sometimes it goes before Dropsies, as Horstius in Obs.
lib. 4. Obs. 31. and Obs. 29. He observed little Urine made in one to the
proportion he drank, to effect most apparently a Tympany, or rather a windy
than waterish.

Swelling of the Body, difficult breathing, weariness, pursiness, dullness, bad
color, vitiated sanguification, puffing up, loss of appetite, Cachexyes, etc.
arise as much from phlegm as water in many Hydropicks; yet in those that are
opened, no phlegm is conspicuous, but the parts are often clammy, and grown
together, and have viscous corruption in them, and Glandules, and Apostems: We
know in outward things (for by them it is best judging of inward, and by
apparent and visible things, things occult and invisible) the thin parts
exhaling, the Remains are made thicker, specially in saccharates and gummy
things, which have most syngeny and coherence with phlegm.

I suppose that which some call a Leucophlegmatia, others call a Cachexia, for
indeed there is no difference but of degrees; for what wonderful variety is
there in Nature? and those are mistaken that think Nature is bound to make it a
Leucophlegmatia, as they describe it, if it is not a Cachexia as they describe
it; for to find a Leucophlegmatia just as they describe, or a Cachexia just so,
is rare: Many distempers are like either in some symptoms, and like neither in
some.

4. A fourth Symptom is Leanness; yet this happens not in many Dropsies, but in
some the party is fat, as River. Obs. Cent. 2. Obs. 67. shows, and most are
noted for neither; often though the Belly, Legs, and nether parts be turgid,
the upper are emaciated, River. Cent. 2. Obs. 85. and so Cent. 3. Obs. 17. Most
that we have observed in Dropsies in the face seem fat, that being bluffed, and
some have a good color. See the seven following.

5. But where the color is wan and bluft, they call it a Cachexia, if they are
also obstructed, weary, short-winded, loose-skinned, etc. Riverius, Cent. 3.
Obs. 33. observed such complicated with the waterswelling: and so Plater. Obs.
page 638. The last in a Virgin that wanted her Courses, a Chachectick distemper
seized her, with water-swelling or Dropsy, but with this and her pale color,
her thirst was extreme; one would think likelier to be hot Dropsies; her
Appetite dejected: A Dropsy sometimes follows Cachexeys, as well as to have
this condition complicated therewith.

6. It is sometimes coupled with a Quartane, as Paul Renealm. Obs. 29.
observed; but the Quartane was a year before that: Diverse Tertians also
degenerate into Dropsies, or continue still with the Dropsy.

7. A continual Fever with implacable thirst and restlesness, was complicated
with a Dropsy, River. Obs. communicate is ab aliis Medicis, page 285. A Fever
supervening, has sometimes been mortal.

And Riverius, in his communicated Observations from other Physicians, page
316, relates in one there was watching, inappetence, difficult breathing, sloth
to move, swelling, and hardness of the Spleen, with wasting; cured.

Plater. Obs. page 650. A Boy twelve years old, his Belly, and his Legs, and
Scrotum were swelled with water; yet he was lean and wasted; Worms he had in
his Belly, with his Chyle and Food, and Parsley as he eat it, came forth of an
hole of his Navil, that naturally spontaneously opened; he died. We relate
these that our Readers may guess at the like in others, and that all may see
all the symptoms, and how they are joined together, and with what varietyin
persons.

Johannes Aicholizius, in his Epistles, testifies of a Woman that in-Summer and
Autumn had a swelling of her Belly, she was newly married, and they thought her
with Child; in Winter grievous pains tearing and stretching out, vexed her,
specially on Nights; no other parts swelled, no seeming windiness, she grew
rather leaner, her Belly rose in bigness; when they saw no motion of an Infant,
she was thought with Child no longer, but to have a Dropsy: she died of
wonderful pains; and being anatomized, abundance of fat was found in her Body,
no loose water, but bladdrs of pure water here and there in the passages, that
did distend the Belly; no wind, her parts were sound, Liver pale, and Caul very
little.

8. Fainting and weakness was coupled with one Dropsy, Riverius, Cent. 3. Obs.
33.

9. A Scirrh of the Spleen, and swelling thereof outwardly was in one
Hydropick, Riv. Cent. 3. Obs. 16.

10. One had a huge heat for a long time in his right Hypochonder, and a
Diuturne sickness; died Hydropical: the Liver did grow to that side, many
yellow stones in Liver, and Gall obstructed: Jacobus Camenicenus Epistola ad
Matthiolum.

11. A Dropsy is sometimes coupled with bleeding upwards and downwards, as
Nicholaus Tulpius, lib. 2. Obs. 35. did observe; there were signs of wind that
puffed up, as well as water: the Body anatomized, the Spleen was found swelled,
the Liver torrid, and the Kidneys putrid. Many will not believe the
extraordinary vomiting of Blood comes from the Spleen, but this demonstrates
it; and we could instance in others, that the Spleen holds sometimes many
quarts of blood, and casts it forth by vomit, and then downwards.

12. Pthises, and Rheums, and Defluxions are found to forego or accompany many
Dropsies: Riverius in his Obs. mentions two or three such; Rondeletius observed
the same: but of Phthisicks we have mentioned leanness before.

13. An Hernia or Rupture Platerus saw in two coupled with a Dropsy, and so
did Mercurialis.

14. The Jaundice: Plater. Obs. lib. 3. Discoloratione, page 616. saw the black
Jaundice joined with swelling of the Feet and Belly, like a Dropsy, which he
cured.

15. In Diverse Hydropicks the Navil struts forth, and in some the inward skin
breaks, and it shines as a bladder; the water in some breaks this pelluced
bladder in the Navil, and runs out: We have mentioned somewhat of this before,
and more may be mentioned hereafter. Skenkius has collected, and Platerus seen
diverse such.

16. The Haemorrhoids opened in one, but did no good to his Dropsy, Plat. 643.

17. Skenk. Vir Optimus, page 414. brings an Example of one exceedingly
swelled, that voided a Serpent per Anum two Cubits long, piecemeal, like
another Serpent; she died presently after: her Dropsy was so great, that she
could neither sit nor lie, and breathed difficultly.

18. In another Hydropick, such huge pains in one Thigh molested him, that he
used to cry out miserably: Skenk. 417.'

19. Little Urine, or stoppage thereof, is found in some Hydropicks.

Horstius lib. 4. Obs. 29. In the beginning of a Tympany was little Urine made,
and crude, the Feet did swell, and an Asthma was increased. And in the
beginning of another Dropsy, he observed with little Urine, the Feet and Belly
began to swell with water; there was inappetence, paleness of face, weariness,
straitness of Breast, and swoonding.

Plater. 638. observed little Urine to begin a Dropsy.

20. Thirst is in many Hydropicks, and dejection of Appetite, which we have by
the way instanced in before; but in some is no Thirst, and yet dejection of
Appetite; in some is neither Thirst nor Appetite.

Plater. page 638. Obs. found huge Thirst in a pale Virgin subject to the
Green Sickness, that was coupled with her Dropsy; she wanted her Courses, and
had dejection of Appetite: this seemed a cold case.

But Riverius, in Observe. Communic. page 285. relates of implacable Thirst in a
Dropsy, where a continual Fever was complicated.

A Dropsy began with Vomiting, Heart-pains, Jaundice and Thirst, Plater. Obs.
653.

Some in Dropsies have neither want of Appetite nor Thirst, as diverse of our
aforegoing Observations, relating all the Symptoms that happened to diverse
Hydropicks, mention; as also Tidicaeus, in his Epistles to Jo. Schenk,
testifies.

21. There are many other and varying Symptoms happening to Hydropicks, though
not peculiar thereto; as also all the Symptoms in Hydropicks do happen in most
other sicknesses; which could not be, if Nature observed such a Rule and Method
in Diseases as the Practicks thought: Sometimes a Cough troubles Hydropicks,
which we have observed, and to be from Serum transuding into the Breast, and by
its mild sharpness tickling the Lungs and rough Artery; and thence, by the
faculty of Expulsion given them, they cough, that nothing may stop our
breathing: Two we have known recovered, that coughed pretty much in Dropsies;
though Hippocrates, Sect. 6. Aphor. 35. says, (...), (...), (...), Those that
have water betwixt the Skin, a Cough coming, it is evil: Scoliographus ad cap.
39. lib. 1. Holler. de Morb. int. also says, In some Dropsies, a Cough is no
evil sign: We see reason in many Hydropicks for Coughs, the Lungs being found
so faulty in such a different manner when they are opened.

Next we shall show from the Truth of Observation in diverse, the beginning of
Dropsies, or how any may best (though never certainly) tell the coming on of a
Dropsy: Indeed the knowledge of the Stars for all foreseeing, is more certain
than Galenical, or Hippocratical Rules.

We related two Observations before out of Horstius, of a Tympany with water,
that began with little Urine, and crude, swelling of the Feet, Lassitude, and
short breathing: In another water swelled without Inflation; the beginning was
inappetence, lassitude, pale color, faintings, and difficult breathing.

In one a Dropsy began with swelling of the Feet toward night, and bad
breathing, Plat. Obs. 632. And

Plat. 641 page of Obs. Extuberantiae, One used to drink much variety of Wine,
he had a Distillation, a Cough, difficulty of breath, and a Dropsy ensued.

And Page 653. First the Haemorrhoids were stopped in one that they used to
flow in, then the Urine was stopped for three days, but both were moved again,
and at liberty; but then the feet swell, a Fever comes, but that soon cease;
then comes thirst, vomiting, Heartpains, and Jaundice, and they also cease in
part; the Dropsy increases, and continues.

Plater. lib. 3. Obs. Extub. page 655. A Woman has her Belly grown great, and
distended like a Tympany, or windy puffing up, then her feet toward evening
begin to swell; being timely taken, she is cured.

Johannes Fridericus did observe, in Obs. Mod. a Diarrhaea, Strangury, and hard
breathing together, to begin a Dropsy.

And Plat. observed little Urin, thick and Saffron-coloured, in beginning of one
Dropsy, and very red in another.

Riverius observed two or three Rheumaticks to fall therefrom into Dropsies,
and to be pestered with Distillations in Dropsies.

We will endeavor to be short: Nothing holds alike in all; some Symptoms come
before the Dropsy, and then cease; some begin with the Dropsy, and go through
with it; some supervene, and last till after the Dropsy is cured.

Daretus commenting upon Hippocrates in Coacis, observed in one Dropsy an
Epilepsie arose or supervened; and to that Falling Sickness an Apoplexy, that
took Life away: Epilepsies are caused often of water in the Brain, and
therefore in reason they might oftener occur in Dropsies.

Next we shall discover what Diseases or Affects Dropsies follow upon, that all
may see what Method and Course is in Nature, as nigh as we can, briefly.

Mareellus Donatus, Hist. Med. lib. 4. cap. 21. writes that he has seen
Dropsies to follow sometimes upon a wasting of the Lungs, sometimes upon
Exulcerations of the Lungs, and sometimes after spitting of Blood much.

River. Cent. 1. Obs. 70. found a Dropsy follow a continual and intermitting
Fever: And Cent. 2. Obs. 67. it arose after a Tertian Fever; and after a
double Tertian, Cent. 3. Obs. 23.

A Dropsy arose after a sharp Fever, Horstius, lib. 4. Obs. 28.

Johannes Fridericus Trafelmannus Obs. Med. writes, One was subject to Teruan
Agues, and Erysipela's for five years, then he was troubled with a difficult
breathing, or short-windedness, a Strangury and Diarrhaea, then his Belly
swells, and he died Hydropical; eighteen pints of water were found in him; the
Liver was pale and hard, the Kidneys small and the Bladder, but the Heart and
Lungs were large, the Spleen small.

Jacobus Caminicenus, in Observatione per Epistolam ad Matthiolum missa,
Relates how one had a Jaundice for a long time, then a Dropsy comes upon it,
and the party dies: opened, the bladder of Gall was found Turgid, and the way
to the Guts from it stopped with a Stone, the Liver grew to the Diaphragma, and
was filled with many black stones.

A Dropsy or swelling of Water arose after an Asthma, that still continuing
with the Dropsy, River. Obs. Cent. 3. Obs. 8.

To a Phlegmatic bluft and pale swelling, came a swelling of the whole Body
from Water, Paulus Renealmus, Obs. 122.

A Pain in the Region of the Spleen went before a Dropsy, Riv. Cent. 3. Obs. 17.

One had beating of the Arteries, a stopped and Phlegmatic Distemper, the Courses
were long stopped, and to these a Dropsy puts a period, Plat. 638.

A Maid thirty years old had long a beating of her Heart and Arteries,
difficult breathing, a pale color, then comes a Dropsy, wherein was great
thirst; the middle of her Body, or half was macilent, dejected appetite, stopped
courses, and swelling of her Face also were present, idem ibidem.

One that was subject to Cholical Nephritical and Arthritical pains, had
sometimes his Joints contracted, he used many strong hot Drinks, and being old,
none of his former Distempers, but a Dropsy supervening, took him away, Plat.
Obs. 641.

After suppression of Haemorrhoids and Urine, bringing a Fever, the Fever
ceasing, a Jaundice ensues with Vomit and Thirst; those ceasing, or at least
mitigated, a Dropsy takes rise, and yet is cured, Plat. page 653.

A Dropsy did ensue on large bleeding, and frequent Haemorrhages, Schenk. in
Obs. med. page 414. in diverse.

Next we will deliver some observations of the difference of Dropsies
concerning their Cronicalness, or Acuteness and Criticalness, though diverse
such have been discovered amongst the Observations preceding.

In an Hydropsie and phlegmatic puffing up, one lived two years, Paul, Reneal.
Obs. 166.

A Dropsy was three years increasing gently in a Maid, that was thought for
the first year with Child, then they seeing themselves deceived, suspected it a
Dropsy; at last dying, and Anatomized, all the inward parts were found safe,
only the Mesentary was lifted up into an huge Tumor, full of Bladders or Skins
of Water, Tulp. lib. 2. Obs. 34.

A Dropsy of the Breast was four years increasing, all that while
shortwindedness did afflict, and daily increased: dying, the Lungs were found
spotted outwardly, and being cut, did inwardly appear putrified, Johannes
Bilgerus, Epist. Med.

Hercules Saxonia and Mercurialis, Observed some Dropsies, soon made, in few
days killing; dissected, much Blood, to fourteen or fifteen pints, were found
in the Capacity of the Belly.

We commonly have observed Dropsies, as they differ in all other things, so in
the Acuteness and Cronicalness; some die in a quarter of a year, some in half a
year; some at the years end, and some not till two years: and so some recover
in a quarter, some in half, some in a whole year; and some recover after two
years Hydropicalness, but this not very frequent: they are best and easiliest
cured at first. Durius Ejicitur quam non admittitur Hostis.

We may better keep out an Enemy, then having let him in, to thrust him back
again.



Diverse in Dropsies find one thing that cures them or lessens their evil, and
then through uncarefulness, or Astral Ordination, they fall back and die; and
sometimes are cured upon a relaps, but not so commonly: that Medicine that gave
help or ease at first, upon a relaps for the most part will avail little.

In the next place we shall show somewhat of Prognostic Signs: Though nothing
is more uncertain; many things may be gathered from what Observations preceded:
for we set down at the end of the Relations of the Symptoms, such an one died,
or recovered, or was cured, to avoid the trouble of writing all those
Observations over again here, for the Prognostic Signs therein: for unless in
many the whole Relation is shown, it cannot well be judged how desperate or
hopeful the Party might be by one Symptom alone rehearsed; but when he sees all
the Symptoms, and the Cause by dissection manifested, he might judge truly of
Life or Death in another, the acuteness or slowness of the Disease in another
so handled, did two exactly accord, or have the event exactly alike. It is the
part of a wise man to suspend judgment, especially rashly in the most clear
cases, for we are never able to foresee the effects and diverse operations of
Nature; We must endeavor all things, but the work is of God, as Scaliger well
says, Sanitas opus est Dei, opera vero nostra.

Dodonaeus, Obs. 38. A man Tympanitical, his Belly struck gave a sound; his
Excrements and Urine were both suppressed, and he suddenly died.

Those whose Urine or Excrements are altogether suppressed, and yet they eat and
drink; we may the most certainly predict their death in a shorter or longer
time, if they do not go to Stool, or make Water, unless Nature takes care to
void it by the Navil or other places, which is rare; but what is this Prognosis
to a Physician? cannot every Rustic say and see so much?

Platerus in Obs. Med. Writes of one whose Urine was so stopped, and broke the
Bladder, and flowed out into the hollow of the Abdomen, as dissection did
demonstrate; any Country People, if they could tell how the business was
(which the Physician could not, before opening) might predict Death; however,
as we have seen such died swelled, whose Urine could not be voided, or to any
quantity, so might any imagine, as well as Physicians.

So for Gangraened Exulcerations of the Legs, Thighs or Navil, any would
predict Death, if they should continue rotting, the Water continue running, and
the Belly continue swelling; but who can tell whether these will continue
increasing, or if they do, when or how they will kill?

A Tabes first of the Stomach, then of the whole Body, with drinking of
Bath-Waters were permanent in one, whom a Dropsy following did presently kill,
Vidus Victius lib. 10. cap. 5.

Capiraccius, lib. 3. page 648. Pract. With a Cautery in the Knee, was made
Gangrenation, and the party died. Many times of Natures own accord does the
Navil break, and pour out water, and so the Legs and Thighs, by blisters or
bladders of the Skin; and sometime Hydropicks are so cured; but three to one
are not cured thereby: but as the water ouses out by those holes, so it
increases within the Body frequently, that the Dropsical are never the better;
and frequently if those water-blisters or Ulcers run long in some Bodies, from
a secret Cause they kill by Gangrene, or infecting the Blood with a poisonous
quality they contract by long Corruption; which Platerus did observe, as we
also have been informed; specially if by Art such Ulcers, Blisters or watery
Eruptions have been made; for as Hippocrates says in that truly, Ulcers in
Hydropick Bodies scarce admit of Cure.

Amatus Lusitanus, Capiraccius, Forestus, Marcellus Donatus, Gabelchoverus, and
Others, have observed diverse Hydropicks that died, when water by Art or Nature,
on heaps or by degrees, ran or was drawn forth of the Navil.

Nor is Paracentesis in Dropsies commonly lucky: for when all the water, is
drawn out on heaps, sometimes they die presently, even as Joannes Ludovicus,
sixty years old, the water drawn forth, died in the Artists hands, Mich. Joann.
Paschalius, lib. 1. cap. 44. Method. Cur. Morb.

Tulp. lib. 2. Obs. 39. A Hebrew Physician opened the Scrotum of one Hydropick,
that was hugely swelled, the water ran out by degrees daily, and yet he died. So

Plat. lib. 3. Obs. Extub. observed that though the water ran out finely and
gradually, and the Belly fell, and Dyspnaea abated, yet in a languishing the
party died: It is no judging in whom Paracentesis will take well; if they can
be cured otherwise, Paracentesis is not to be used; if they cannot be cured
otherways, Paracentesis is like to be an hastener of Death: Yet the worst of
Medicines or Administrations have cured, or seemingly helped some, or else they
would never be kept in use; and the best will not cure all.

The opening of the Haemorrhoids that did formerly flow in one Hydropick, did
no good, Plater. 643.

Vidus Victius did observe a Dropsy that followed constant pains of the
Stomach, vomiting and nausea, that was mortal.

Relapses for the most part are mortal, but not always; one will say this is
the Cause, another that; but if we could see the inward Bowels, many times we
could not tell the cause, or how they might change, live, or die.

Many that have had many, and the worst of Symptoms, have lived; and those that
seemingly have not been dangerous, have died: and in Dissections it is
abundantly cleared, that some live till all their parts are rotted or wasted,
or corrupted; some till two or three are wasted, rotted, or corrupted; and some
die when scarce any Cause can be found worthy of separating the Soul from its
Case the Body: But the quality and heterogeneity of all matter to our Blood and
Spirits, and that quality that constitutes our vitality, is the chief Cause,
which we can hardly see into.

Johannes Johnstonus, in his Thaumatographia de Lunae potestate inter subluna,
says, Dropsies are much moved by the Moon, and they die at Full Moons; and
just then it took away a Reverend Prelate of the Reformed Churches of Poland:
And we can confirm it; for the Moon rules over Water, and alters and moves it,
lessens and augments it; nor is any thing of greater certainly to judge of the
Acuteness or Cronicalness of sicknesses, or the event thereof, then to draw
Schemes of the Heavens at the Decumbiture of the Sick; but these are sometimes
ambiguous even to the best Artists, and they find sometimes as many Reasons for
a thing, as against it; and sometimes, the Lord of the seventh House impeded,
the Artist shall miss in Judgment; as also for other Causes.

Of the CAUSES of DROPSIES:
And first of the moving, antecedent, apparent, or procatarctick Cause.
We have showed before what Diseases Water-swellings or Tympanies do follow, as
Fevers continual and intermitting, as Tertian Agues chiefly, (and that shows
that Dropsies familiarly arise of heating Causes, contrary to the Doctrine of
the Ancients) Quartane Agues, Asthma's, suppression of Urine, of Courses and
Haemorrhoids, Jaundices, Cholicks, Rheumatismus, Phthisicks, spitting of Blood,
and Haemorrages, which may more exactly and particularly be found before, as we
have laid them down one by one, and showed more Examples of one then of
another, because it happens more frequently in the course of Nature.

Riv. Cent. 2. Obs. 65. Too much water being drank in the fits of a Tertian, a
Dropfie followed: And also, Cent. 3. Obs. 23. much drink was taken in a double
Tertian, which raised a Dropsy.

G. Horstius, Obs. p. 256. It arose sensibly from drinking, after a surfeit.

Paulus Renealm. Obs. 146. and also Plater. Obs. page 637. do both alike relate
the Dropsy to have arose in two women with Child, from drinking abundance of
cold water.

Swelling of the Spleen in a Tertian Ague, gave rise to a Dropsy, River. Cent.
3. Obs. 16.

Tulpius and Platerus observed it to come from hot antecedent Causes, as Tulp.
lib. 2. Obs. 35. relates of two that died, the Liver dried and burnt as it
were; the one ate much Garlic, the other drank Wines, Plater. 641.

A Gentleman drank diverse Wines and hot Liquors, and used an hot Diet, but
lastly he drank many Acid Therm Waters; and so, which caused his Dropsy is
disputable, or whether either did; for many drink both those largely, and have
no Dropsy; nay, sometime to cure a Dropsy; he died: his Kidneys were
exulcerated and perforated, letting out the serous Urine into the Belly:
Plater. did impute all to heat, in the spiced and hot Food, and Wines he took.

Schenkius brings several Examples, page 415. and 417. of bleeding at the Nose,
or downwards, that a Dropsy did arise therefrom; also from long pissing of
Blood in one. And

River. Cent. 3. Obs. 33. found that an immoderate Flux of Menstrues, gave
occasion to the Dropsy.

Skenk. 412 page It arose from Colliquation, or melting; and indeed Plater. did
find in one opened, Fat melted as it were from the Kidneys, and sticking here
and there in pieces, to the Guts; this might arise from heat; those Fluxes
preceding cooled the Body, and thence arose the Dropsy, and from the
sanguifick Spirit, or Principium Seminarium Sanguinis weakened.

When my Hands up to my Wrists were swelled two or three Winters, and brake
with blisters or bladders pouring forth water, I found it was nothing but Cold;
they were exceedingly swelled with water, and would pit so much as that an Egg
might lie therein, yet no part else; nor was it from vice of the inward parts:
warmer weather cured them; but the Ulcers were hardly cured, constantly pouring
out water. I have heard of others that have had a particular Dropsy of the
Legs, from standing in cold water.

Hydrocephali, or Head-Dropsies, have arose in Infants from their Mothers
imagination in time of bearing them.

Secondly, We shall show the inward Cause of Dropsies, and which are the
principal parts affected, how many and how, and how those and so may be
affected where this is no water gathered, and of the strange and stupendous
variety, and secret order of Nature therein, only referrable to occult
qualities in the parts or humors.

It may be thought that I have a prejudice to Antiquity, and all Tradition; I
confess I do honor and respect Antiquity and Tradition as much as most men;
but wherever in Person or Profession, in Antiquity or Novelty, is Falsity and
Deceit, I must be against that: Pacem cum Hominibus, bellum cum Vitiis oportet
habere; We should be peaceful with Men, but fighting with their Vices: So I
honor Antiquity, but not its Falsity. I have delivered all things as nigh as I
can, that the Readers may clearly understand the Truth of Nature, and may read
Tradition with the less misapprehension; and also be able to confirm or
enervate her.

It is certain that the Ancients delivered little or nothing of Truth,
concerning the inward causes of Dropsies, nor can the Reader understand one
thing in twenty, rightly as he should, by their Practices, even in most
Diseases; specially concerning the inward causes of the Disease: nor did they
understand Natures variety, nor Vermifick, Lapidifick, Crinifick, Ossifick,
Fermentative Putrefactive, and Preservative Faculties, or Qualities.

We will first show the quantity of water that lifts up the Bellies of some,
and is the cause of their swelling.

In two opened by Thomas Bartholin, the quantity of water half filled a Tonna;
the Nephew of the Illustrious Prince of Hafnia, scarce a year old, had 15 pints
of water found in it.

A Kinsmans Child of mine, died, they thought of a Dropsy, it was swelled,
and like water: opened, not above one Pint of water was found in it: the Liver
was huge large and knotted, but the Lungs wasted, the Liver made the Belly seem
so big. Familiarly in diverse that were opened where the Lungs are wasted, the
Liver grows out to possess the room they have left; my Kinsman had six or
seven Children, and all died; he was Tabid and Consumptive himself, and so his
Semen contaminated: they none of them lived to above five or six years of age
as I remember: they opened only one.

The Quantity of water in a old woman, filled two water Pitchers, Pet. Pawus.
Obs. Anatom. 5. and in another he opened, all the Bowels swam in Water.

One woman was so swelled with a Dropsy, she was three Else in ^^mpasse; and
when she was dissected, 56 Pints of Water flowed out of her, P. P.

Ninety Pints in one Hydropicks body, River. Obs. communicate. p. 285.

Thirty Pints found in one who, alive, was held Tympanitical as well as
Ascitical; the Liver seemed roasted, and Spleen swelled, Tulp. lib. 2. Obs. 35.

Twenty Measures were let out in a Womb-Dropsie, Guliel. Fab. Hild. Epist. Gr.
Hor.

One that was used much to drinking, when dead of a Dropsy, as soon as his
Belly was cut, the water flies out with violence and force, to the quantity of
60 Pints; and nigh as much before had ran our by Blisters and water-Ulcers;
also some was found in the Capacity of the Thorax; his Kidneys were perforated,
Gall swelled, Omentum and Mesentery wasted, and yet clear, against the Ancients
and most Modernes, both Liver and Spleen were unhurt, and Heart is not
mentioned to be amiss: for now some begin to say, the Heart is the cause; but
Experience will not show it, it is only a Fantasy or Imagination; though the
Heart, I believe, is the Seminarium Sanguinis Principium; Plater. Obs. Med.
Page 647.

Joannes Fridericus opened one that had 18 Pints of Water; the Liver pale and
hard, Kidneys and Milt small, Heart and Lungs great and strong.

2. Now we have given insight to the Studious Readers of the Extremes, and
Mediums, and variety of the quantity of Water found in the Bellies of
Hydropicks, we shall show the difference of the nature, color, consistence, or
smell of that Water.

Th. Barth. Cent. 1. Ob. 2. found it bloody and stinking; and Cent. 3. Obs. 81.
he found it in a Child one year old, dirty and stinking; and Obs. 83. of that
Cent. he found it vary from Water only in color, it was yellow.

Pet. Paw. Anatom. 13. with the yellowness of the Water found a most grievous
stench; what is the reason of these things, cannot well be known; I will not
spend time and pains to guess, others may do that as well as I; it is too
frequent for many to write confidently upon guess, which young Students
believe, and so are built up in falsity; in the party, when all the Water was
out, all the Guts, Caul, Liver, Mesentery, etc. were found fat, like Suet.

Mercurialis found the matter pure blood, to 14 Pints in quantity, in the Belly.

The Water was yellow and stinking, in one, Pet. Paw. Obs. Anat. 24. and it was
much; and Obs. 28. it was yellow and corrupted.

Much Yellow Water, and most stinking, in an Herniose, and Hydropick, where
Liver was putrid, and little else putrified, Plat 650. page.

The water was like washings of raw flesh, or bloody, Scholiographus ad cap.
39. lib. 1. Holler. de morbis internis.

Tulp. lib. 2. Obs. 40. Brings some examples of blood; doubtless blood at first
may, by corruption, turn water; that is clear by many things; it is hard to
say, whether it is waterish blood, or bloody water; but we have spoke of this
before.

In some the water is pure, clear, and sweet.

Next comes to be demonstrated the inward Cause of Dropsies, as by dissection
has been numerously demonstrated: and first of the Liver.

I. The Liver was found pale, Aicholizius in Epist. and Pet. Paw. Dissect. 5,
and Dissect. 19. it was of a burnt or adust color.

Tulp. lib. 2. Obs. found it look as if roasted and dried; we shall show more
of the variation of the color, in the following Heads.

II. Swellings of the Liver are in Hydropicks, as we mentioned of a Kinsmans
Child of ours: and P. Pawus, Obs. 28. the Liver was swelled, of a Saffron
color, and scirrhous, the Gall was obstructed, the Omentum wasted, and an
involution of the Meseraicks.

III. Of the wasting of the Liver in Dropsies, contrary to the growing, or
out-swelling of it: Pet. Pawus, Obs. Anatom. 29. in a woman found Fifty eight
Pints of Water; the Liver, Spleen, Reins and Omentum were all quite wasted, and
the Diaphragma in part, ere she died; it is wonderful she held out so long. And
in his 31. Obs. Dissect: the Liver was again found quite wasted, only some few
Fragments of the Veins left, the Spleen also with it was consumed, Johannes
Johnstonus de Epate and Spleen, and Schenkius in Obs. de Hep. have gathered
some Examples of those that have been dissected, and had neither Liver or
Spleen; I mean not both together, but one has been absent in one, and the
other in the other; and yet no Dropsy.

IV. The Liver was putrified, tied to the Diaphragma, with abundance of Fat,
and almost bloodless, Th. Barth. Cent. 4. Obs. 20.

Pet. Pawus. Obs. 24. found nothing else but the Liver corrupted.

Obs. Anatom. 27. Ulcers were in the bunch of the Liver; they went to the
Parenchyma, which was conglomerated, half an Urne of corruption poured forth.

Plat. Obs. 650. Liver stuck to the Spleen, and Peritonaeum: cut open, it
looked like black condensed blood, the Spleen and Reins were sound, only
changed in Figure.

V. Liver dried: it was pale and hard, P. Paw. Obs. 15.

P. Paw. Obs. 19. It was of an adust color, yet crushed, it fell into
putrefaction; yet this caused no Dropsy, and should have come hereafter.

Tulp. lib. 2. Obs. 35. Liver was burnt and dried, with swelled Spleen, blasted
Intestines, and putrid Kidny, in an Ascites and Tympany.

And Obs. 36. in one opened of a Jaundice and Dropsy, it was dried, void of
Juice, like a Leather, and very small: cut open, like Ink and yellow choler
were in it; in the party all the inward Bowels were discolored from choler, or
corrupted by water.

Plater. Obs. Extub. lib. 3. found the Liver dried, and enfissured, and in
those cracks little Bladders of water; and this he attributed to heat; also it
is clear that some Dropsies come from heat, for cool things cure.

VI. The Liver is sometime grown to a part, to the Diaphragma with Fat, as Th.
Barth. c. 4. Obs. 20. found.

Pet. Pawus, Obs. Anat. 16. found it bound in the gibbous part, by many nervous
filiaments, to the Peritonau^.

Plat. p. 649. Liver and Spleen firmly stuck to the Peritonaeu^, that they
could not be pulled away without tearing, in one that had a Rupture as well as
a Dropsy.

Jacobus Camenicenus in Epist. ad Matthiolu^, writes, how after a Jaundice one
fell into a Dropsy, and died, and was dissected; and the Liver was found
bound, or grown to the Diaphragma, and its Vessels were obstructed with many
stones; the Gall also was full, and obstructed; the Sick in his sickness did
much complain of pain, and very great heat in his right Hypochonder; and that
might be from adnascence of the Liver.

VII. In Dropsical Dissections the Liver is found enfissured diverse times.

Tho. Barth. Cent. 3. Obs. 81. Great pits of water in a Child a year old, the
Liver enfissured, it looked like a boiled Liver, and the Spleen was so too;
when the Liver was cut, much water ran out.

Tulp. lib. 2. Obs. 36. in the Liver dried, where a Jaundice was coupled with a
Dropsy, could find no fissures; as Fernelius did write: Indeed there is scarce
a like affection of the Bowels in any one Disease exactly in two persons.

Plater. Obs. Med. page 635. and 648. found two Hydropicks Livers enfissured,
and cracked, and in those cracks were bladders of water; and outwardly did
stick to the Liver bladders of water, which broke, and emptied themselves into
the hollow of the Belly, and closed up, and filled again; the Spleen was
vitiated after another manner, the Gall had stones in it, the Kidneys had
holes, or were perforated.

VIII. In some Hydropicks the Liver was found stony, or fungous.

Tho. Bartholin. Cent. 3. Obs. 37. found the Liver livid and scirrhous, and
then the Spleen was large, and filled with Blood, as if it did the Office of
the Liver.

In one part of the Liver a fungous did grow to it, and somewhat was concrete
therein, the Spleen within vitiated, and the Veins and Abdomen full of water;
Womb white and thick, like an Egg for bigness.

Plater. Obs. page 657. A Boy died of an Inflation, no water found in him, the
Guts were involved, and contorted, like an Iliack-passion; and in some wind was
so much, that it broke forth with violence; in other Guts, Worms with Dung did
distend, the Liver was found corrupted, stony, and gravelly; the Spleen less
then it should be, and Lungs affixed to the side.

Jacobus Camehicenus, in one of his Epistles to Matthiolus, writes, He found in
a Dropsical Cadaver the Liver large and black, the Veins stony, or full of
small stones, which did outwardly look black, but broken, were inwardly yellow;
the passage which goes from the bladder of Gall to the Intestines, was stopped
with a stone: This might be the cause of the Jaundice that this man had, long
before his Dropsy.

Johannes Schenkius, Obs. Med. page 395. shows Examples of Stones in the Liver,
which do not always cause Dropsies alone, but sometimes Jaundices, and
sometimes other grievous Symptoms and Affects, differing from these, having
often death at end.

Next we shall come to declare the faults of the Spleen in Dropsies: The Spleen
as well as the Liver, Kidneys, and other parts, is found just so, or otherwise
affected, more grievously than in the Dropsy, and yet no Dropsy, but other
evils arise therefrom; therefore it is hard to say what Bowel causes a Dropsy,
or what particular affect of that Bowel does it; since when it is so affected
in others, other distempers arise therefrom: the qualities in all matter, as we
have sufficiently demonstrated in our Book of qualities, in our Physiology,
Jatrosophy and Pneumatography, give the motion and alteration to all Bodies,
specially as they are influenced upon by the Air, altered by the qualities of
the Stars.

Platerus, and also Tulpius, Riverius, Barthol. etc. found the Liver, Spleen,
and Reins the most conjoined in suffering, or corruption; yet in some Dropsies,
both Liver and Spleen are safe, and in others, both Liver, Spleen and Kidneys.

I. The Spleen is fissured or cloven, and Bladders of water stick in those
sometimes, sometimes to the outward sides, and sometimes both, Plater. Obs. 635.

Though the Liver, Spleen, and Reins are conjoined in being affected together,
yet rarely are they found affected alike, but one vitiated in one manner,
another in another.

II. The Spleen was corrupted in one Hydropick, it looked like Tar, or Pix
liquida, and the Liver was found, Riverius, Obs. Commun. page 315.

III. The Alteration of form in the Spleen was found in one Hydropick, a Child;
the Spleen was filled with water huge big, it did grow to the left Kidney, and
there it received its water; it had three appendices to it, Th. Barth. Cent. 3.
Obs. 81.

It grew out both in length and latitude: Pet. Paw. Anatom. 5.

IV. Swelling is coincident to the Spleen, as well in Dropsies as other Affects
and Sicknesses.

Tho. Barth. Cent. 4. Obs. 25. it was Apostemated, and crushed, ^urulent matter
did ouse forth.

Pet. Paw. observed it very hard in an old woman, and hugely large: also Obs.
13. it was so swelled, it weighed three pound.

Tulpius. lib. 2. Obs. 35. found the Spleen swelled in one Ascitick, that
seemed to have much wind, or a Tympany in conjunction there with; he voided
much blood upwards and downwards, without question from his Spleen; with this
Extumescence of the Spleen, the Liver looked roasted, the Intestines blasted, or
corrupted in look; one Kidney was putrid; thirty pints of water were in the
Capacity of the Abdomen.

V. Contrary to swelling of the Spleen, is the wasting, which is found partly a
Cause of Dropsies as well as the swelling of it, and both these in other
persons are found in other Diseases.

Th. Barth. Cent. 1. Histor. 2. and C. 3. Obs. 83. found in two Hydropicks the
Spleen wasted and very small. And Pet. Pawus Obs. 29. one Hydropick that had
fifty six pints of water, the Liver, Spleen and Reins were all quite wasted:
and Obs. 31. in a general Dropsy he found the Liver and Spleen again wasted
away.

It was wasted or dried away in a dry Dropsy, where the Liver was corrupted,
and had stones in it, Plater. Obs. Extub. lib. 3.

Both the Liver and Spleen have been found in some absolutely consumed, I mean
the Spleen in one, and Liver in another; it was thought they never had any,
however the Dropsy did not follow in all these: see Johnston. Thaumatographia
Cap. de Hepate and Liene, and Sch^nk. de H^p. in his collected Observations.

Next we will show the Diseases of the Kidneys, or how they are found in
Dropsies, and so they are found in other Sicknesses, where is no collection of
water; and as they are variously found in other Sicknesses so also in other
Dropsies, for every new dissected Person has somewhat differing or new in his
Bowels.

I. Quite wasted. P. Paw. Obs. 29. the Kidneys were quite wasted, with the
Liver, Spleen and Omentum in one woman.

II. Figure of the Kidneys changed: Plater. Obs. page 650. One that had an
Hernia and Dropsy, most parts were firm, the Liver and Spleen grew to the
Peritonaeum, the Liver inwardly corrupted: the Kidneys changed in Figure like
those of horned Beasts.

III. Exulcerated and perforated: Plater. Obs. page 647. the Liver and Spleen
were safe, the Kidneys perforated, and Bladders of water did cleave thereto,
pouring out Serum into the hollow of the Belly, and the Mesentery, Caul and
Lungs were corrupted; most likely the water from the Kidneys corrupted them,
But the like reason is not to be given for all; that that holds good in one
will not in another: if the restagnating water did corrupt the Mesentery and
Caul, and also Lungs that are more distant, why not the Liver and Spleen, more
in the midst of the water?

The Kidneys were black and perforated, a Finger might be thrust into their
holes, the Gall full of Stones, Liver cleft, and had bladders of yellow water,
Spleen also vitiated in another manner: see Plat. Obs. page 648.

Before we have, as conjoined in affect, mentioned the Reins with the Liver and
Spleen; ^^d we may hereafter occasionally, as we find them vitiated with other
parts, mention more of them; being loath to write things several times over,
except very consultedly; The Kidneys are the Channels to convey, and have the
faculty given to draw water, and where they have no great visible
labefactation, yet not drawing and separating Urine they may cause a Dropsy.
Every like draws its like, the greater the less; the Lungs draw Air, or Wind;
the Gall, Choler; the Spleen, gross faeculent blood, being of such a matter it
self, and the Kidneys, Serum or water; now if any of these fail in their
office, man is burdened with that humor, that is not separated from the Blood,
and cast off by the Conduits of Nature, and perhaps in one it turn^ whayish, in
another, vermifies, in another, petrifies, in another putrifies, in another
ferments, etc. and perhaps little alteration is found in the Parenchyma of the
bowell: sometime though the office is depraved or abolished, God that appointed
diverse aliene and heterogenious humors to be in our Blood, and generated by
our Diet, appointed diverse parts to separate or carry off these aliene humors;
or because he had made diverse parts in man's Body of such faculties (for they
exist for no other use) he ordained Excrements to increase, to make these parts
useful: and so indeed is the whole Creation made one for another, and one
depending upon another; and all Contraries make one harmonious Fabric.

Next, as a considerable part in causing, or in being vitiated in Dropsies,
comes the Mesentery.

I. Which was wasted in one Hydropick, with the Omentum, and the fat Tunicle of
the Reins was dried, and these were folded up together; and pieces of Fat along
the Guts did cleave on gobbets, that probably might be melted from the
aforesaid parts: but the chief Cause of this Dropsy was the perforation of the
Kidneys, letting out the Serum or Water into the Belly, also the Bladder,
Platerus, Observe. page 64^.

II. Contrary to wasting, it was found swelled in one, Nic. Tulp. lib. 2. Obs.
34. saw diffected: Indeed there is nothing but variety, and the whole Cause of
the Dropsy in this party was the Mesentery; other parts were not corrupted,
nor did the water lie loose in the capacity or hollow of the Belly, as commonly
it does; but to the quantity of twenty pints lay in distinct and distinguished
bladders, all held in one Tumor, or complicated in one bunch within the
Mesentery; this Dropsy was three years increasing.

III. Apostemations of the Mesentery are found in Dropsies: Tulp. lib. 2. Obs.
32. A woman swelling gradually, for long time, was thought with Child, but
afterward it appeared a Drops^^ she died: dissected, it was found that too
great Steatomata of the Mesentery did so press the Uterus together, that she
could not bear: one of these Apostems was void of putrefaction, the other being
broke or cut, poured forth much water and corruption into the Belly.

IV. The Mesentery was colored with a livid and adust color, in one that died
of a Dropsy, where the Gall was stopped, Petrus Pawus, Obs. Anatom. 28.

Most that Physicians have writ and talked of, is, obstruction of the Meseraick
Veins, which is seldom or never found, they did so go aguess at things, and
miss of Truth: the Mesentery is commonly affected, and the Cause of many Griefs
we little imagine, following Tradition in Practices of Physic. It may be
subject to twenty kinds of alteration, and yet the Ancients gues^ed at one or
two that happen the seldomest, and are the slightest, for any thing I can find.

Next we shall relate how the Gall is found in Dropsies: both of that and the
Mesentery we hinted diverse things in the affects of the Liver and Spleen
aforegoing. The Gall is partly a Cause of Dropsies, specially, as it being
stopped makes a yellow humor (that it should separate and cast off to the
Intestines) regurgitate upon, and spoil and corrupt the Liver, to which it is
appendent.

I. Pet. Pawus, Obs. 28. Swelling of the Gall is found, many yellow and dirty
stones were therein; the Liver stony, scirrhous and yellow.

Plat. Obs. page 647. The Gall was swelled, and very large, its Neck was filled
with Water and Choler; this and the perforation of the Kidneys were the Cause.

II. Stones are found in the Gall, as in the Obs. of P. Paw.

Plater. page 648. Many stones and other vices were found in the Gall of a
certain Hydropical woman.

Jacobus Camenicenus Epist. ad Matthi^lum, mentions a stone that was found
stopping the passage of the Gall to the Intestines, where the sick for long
time had a Jaundice before his Dropsy.

Next follows somewhat to be said of the Middriff, or Diaphragma.

Petrus Pawus in two women, at two several times opened, that died with
Dropsies; found the Midriff (where the Liver, Spleen, and Reins were wasted and
consumed) with some difference, in both made hollow and holey, and eaten as it
were with a Sphac^lus.

Next the Caul or Omentum comes: It was wasted in an old woman, Tho. Barth.
Cent. 3. Obs. 83. Also quite wasted away in Christopher Raphelengius, P. Paw.
Obs. 28. yet nothing else wasted with it; but in Obs. Anatom. 29. the Liver,
Spleen and Kidneys were wasted with it; and if only being sopped in water was
the Cause of its wasting away, why is it not wasted in other Hydropicks? and
why alone? and why sometime other parts are wasted, and not the Caul? yet I
scarce believe the Caul to be any primary Cause of Dropsies.

Plat. Obs. page 647. found that, and the Mesentery, and the fat Tunicle of the
Kidneys wasted, but the remains of them were folded up together.

Tho. Barth. Cent. 1. Obs. 2. found the Omentum, with the Peritonaeum or Rim,
putrified, and fell in pieces like dirt.

Also P. Pawus, Obs. 19. found the Peritonaeum and Caul quite putrid, only a
Membrane, which he thought to be the Relics, with many nervous filiaments
appendent; to which did adhere many bladders of water, that, being crushed,
poured out Serum into the Belly.

Of the Rim of the Belly, or Peritonaeum, we have little to write; It is
related with other things of greater concernment.

River. in Obs. Communic. p. 286. found in a Dropsy the Peritonaeum grown to
the Stomach.

Next the Pancreas or Sweetbread is to be spoke of; but that being
inconsiderable, we may speak somewhat of it in another place.

Bladder remains. P. Paw. Obs. 9. saw no remains of it, it was quite consumed.

Plater. in Obs. Med. found where the Belly was swelled with water, and Urine
was stopped, that the Bladder had been distended, and was inwardly broke, and
had poured out the Water, or Urine, into the Belly.

The Uterus or Matrice, in a general Dropsy, was found by Joannes Posthius,
absolutely corrupted; and nothing else he relates to be the Cause, but the
Liver somewhat faulty; she was recovered, and then relapsed, and died: See more
of this business hereafter, in particular Dropsies.

The Intestines are in diverse Hydropicks found altered, in look especially.

Scholiagr. ad cap. 39. lib. 1. Holler. de Morb. writes that the Intestines
were syderated, or blasted and corrupted, as if sphacelated; and the humor
that did distend the Belly, was very bloody: and he relates no other Cause of
the Dropsy in this person.

Next the Veins may give Reason for somewhat to be said thereof.

Tho. Bartholinus, Cent. 4. Obs. 25. found the Veins in a Noble Matron filled
with water, and poured it out into the Belly; they were all complicated or
folded in a Membrane, and had adjoined three Vesicles or large Bladders filled
with water.

And Platerus, in one that died of a Rupture as well as Dropsy, where the
Liver and Spleen did firmly grow to the Peritonaeum, and the Belly full of
yellow stinking water, the Veins were full of water, especially the Vena
Umbilicalis, and the Scrotum was like a bag of water.

Some have experienced this; they fast a Dog two or three days, then he drinks
largely water; then they choke him, and cut him open, and find the Veins
exceedingly distended: I suppose the Emulgents, I was not told which.

Pet. Paw. Obs. 13. found in one three emulgent Veins, and three emulgent
Arteries.

But the Heart and Lungs surely deserve to be spoken of ere these; but because
they are in an upper Ventricle, and separated by a Membrane from the Bowels
that lie most in the water, we omitted them till now.

Some now adays think the heart must be the Cause of Dropsies, because the
chief Instrument of Sanguification; but their prepossessed Conceptions must
vail to Experience; We should think nothing to be so, till we find it by
Experience: Of all the Bowels, the Heart is the least corrupted in Dropsies.

Tho. Barth. Cent. 3. Obs. 81. It was void of blood; in a Child a year old, the
Heart did swim in the Pericardium that was full of water.

Plater. did indeed find it loose and flaccid in one or two, and a bone in it,
in one Hydropick. But very little alteration is in the Heart, as in the other
inferior Bowels, therefore that causes and suffers the least.

Of the Lungs in general Dropsies, these things are observed:

In a Dropsy with a Phthsick, the Lungs were rather dry then moist; the right
Lung grew to the side, Tho. Barth. Cent. 2. Obs. 37.

Pet. Paw. Obs. 13. They grew almost in a hundred places fast to the Pleura and
Ribs.

Platerus, page 647. found the Lungs, in a general Dropsy, inequally colored,
and in part vitiated; water was in the Thorax, and yet Liver and Spleen sound.

In a pure Tympany with a Convolvulus, Platerus found the Lungs corrupted, and
grown to the Side, the Liver had stones in it, and the Spleen was wasted.

We will now show a few Examples of the Method of Nature in making Bladders,
Blisters or Vesicles to hold water where the Parenchyma of any Bowel is
pestered therewith, either through moist aliament, or stoping of the right
passage of that water by the Kidneys, and so regurgitating upon this part or
that; or else the blood is waterish, and throws it off there; or else the part
is apostemated, and the blood turns to water; in this Case, Nature ordains
bladders to grow, to contain the superfluous moisture in these Bowels: and
because it is so frequent and familiar, as we have shown already by many
Examples, we may look upon it as the Rule, or a Method in Nature; yet as often
exsuperating water gets no bladders to hold it in. Yet if the Ancients had
wrote of Water-bladders in the Body of Man, their Causes, Signs, Differences,
Prognostics and Cures, they had done somewhat of reality and moment, and might
have exhibited one of Natures Rules, giving therewithal large exception, and
diversities.

Plater. page 635. found Bladders of water affixed to the Superficies of the
Liver, some small, some as big as Hens Eggs.

And page 648. The Liver was cleft, (even as we have seen the Kidney of a Calf,
and Bladders of water therein) and in those clefts little bladders of water.

Johannes Acholtzius in Epist. found no water in the hollow of the Belly, nor
Wind, but here and there many bladders of water growing to diverse parts, and
fat also was in the parties Body; she had no swelling of the Legs, but lived in
great pains.

Cordaeus in his Comment. upon Hippocrates, found many bladders of water
sticking both within and without to the Bowels, of all sorts, but no water was
in the hollow of the Belly, that did cause distension, the Heart had also
bladders of water affixed to it, so the Liver, Stomach and Intestines.

Tulp. lib. 2. Obs. 34. found the Mesentery weigh twenty pounds, only filled
with bladders of water, all conglomerated in one, no water in the Belly, no
part hutt. Ozia Aimar in his fifteenth Observation communicated to Lazarus
River. shows how an Hydropick had an Abscesse in the right part of his
Abdomen, and out of it came an innumerable company of little bladders, filled
with water, they issued out diverse days to the number of two hundred; and
this, says he, is the less strange, since Schenkius relates that one
Hydropick dissected had many bladders filled with water sticking to the
Peritonaeum and other parts: see Schenkius, page 413. and page 392, and 395.
brings many more examples, but it is needless here to reckon up more witnesses:
But these bladders of water more or fewer, greater or less, are often found
sticking in, or unto all sorts of Bowels, where there is no Dropsy; and
sometimes they swell so much they break, and pour the water into the hollow of
the belly, and so distend it, healing up and filling again, and sometimes they
do not break, or pour forth any water, though many and great.

Next it will be requisite to show how that the Liver, in many general
Dropsies, is not vitiated at all, and how it is vitiated and corrupted in many
very much, and after the manners and measures here before related, and yet no
Dropsy: also we shall show that the Spleen, Kidneys, Heart, Mesentery, Gall,
Pancreas, Omentum, Diaphragma, etc. if there be more, are affected in other
Diseases, or worse, after the manner here before related in Dropsies. From what
has preceded the Reader may see much hereof, or tending to this purpose; and
in our Monitory Proaemium to the Readers we have given the reasons thereof.

In a general Dropsy, Tho. Barth. Cent. 1. Obs. 2. found the Liver unhurt, and
Cent. 3. Obs. 83. it was found, neither Scirrh nor Putrescence in it, only the
flesh of it looser then ordinary.

River. Obs. Com. page 315. Liver was safe, but Spleen corrupted and like Tar.
Riolanus, then in his Anatomy was mistook to say what ever part was ill
affected or corrupted in a Dropsy, to be sure the Liver was* as the chief
Cause.

Plat. page 648. The Liver and Spleen both safe in a great Dropsy, though many
other parts and Kidneys were corrupted, and perforated, pouring the Serum into
the Belly.

Schenk. in Obs. Med. page 414. the Liver being sound, a Dropsy arose from the
vitiated Testicles in a Woman, other parts also being safe: there is no part
always altered in each Hydropick, and there is none of the Bowels of the
Abdomen or Thorax, but in some, and at some time are egregiously corrupted.

Nay in one Hydropick, both the Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Intestines Mesentery,
Gall, Bladder, and Uterus were safe, and only the Heart found flagging, the
Stomach corrupted, and the Peritonaeum, and the Duad^num ^ut amiss.

Now we will show that all these things happen to all these parts aforesaid,
after that or a worse manner and measure, and yet no Dropsy, or collection of
water distending the Belly or Body, any where, follows.

Johannes Bilgerus, Epistol ad Gr. H. saw Bladders of water affixed to the
Kidneys and Liver, where was no appearance of any Dropsy, alive.

Plater. page 635. saw Bladders of water, sometimes more, sometimes fewer,
less and greater, some as big as Hens Eggs, affixed to the Liver in
Cachecticks, where was no extuberance of the Belly or other tokens of a Dropsy.

The Liver was found hard, swelled, and stony, and growing to the sides, and
the Spleen ill affected in one, where was no Dropsy.

Pet. Paw. Obs. Anat. 27. found an Ulceration of the Liver, in Gibba part,
half an Urne of corruption poured forth, and yet no Dropsy.

And Obs. 19. It looked burnt, crushed, it fell into putrefaction, the Heart
was dried up, and much wasted, and Lungs bound to the Side, and yet no Dropsy.

So hardness, adnascence, putredo, etc. is found in the Spleen, where the Liver
also is ill affected, and yet no Dropsy.

Pet. Paw. Obs. 14. found the Pancreas grown to the hollow of the Liver and
hardened like a stone, and Obs. 16. the Pancreas was hardened and grew to the
Liver and Stomach and Vena Porta, the Liver was also grown to the right Side,
the Diaphragma and Spleen amiss, and yet no collection of, or distension from
water or wind.

Also the same Obs. 14. and 19. of Ana^ymes: found the Heart swim in a virulent
water in one, and in another it was dried up like a Pear, had no Succulency in
it, hung flacking, and the Liver was putrified too, and yet no Dropsy.

Joannes Schenkius may satisfy any farther, he has collected many
observations to that purpose, as may be seen de Liene, page 407, 408. de Epate,
vel Jerore, page 388, and 389. de Mesenteri^, page 385, 386, and 387. de Vesica
fellea, page 401, 402. 403, and 404. de Renibus, page 439, 440, and 441. de
Cord, 256, 257, 258, and 259. ad 262.

Schenkius by these may save us a labor, whither we refer the Reader.

We have hinted before somewhat of particular Dropsies, we will here treat a
little thereof a part: We related a Dropsy of the Legs, and Hands, to which we
may here add a Dropsieof the Throat, found in one in Skenk Obs. and a Dropsy
of the Head, of which, as I remember, Gul. Fab. Hild. or Forestus, says, He
found eighteen Pints of water in the forehead of one Hydrocephalos. The Breast
and Lungs have peculiar Dropsies, though they are often distended with water in
general Dropsies.

Petrus Paw. Obs. Anatom. 29. knew a Woman reputed Hydropical, she was three
Else in compass; dying, and being dissected, the cause was found to be a Mola,
or rude lump of many Scirrhous Condylomata in the Uterus; she had also water in
Cavo Abdominis, and Obs. 31. in another Woman thirty four years old, a
suspected Dropsy, was found a Mola like coagulated matter, it looked like
Honey and did distend the Uterus.

Horstius Epist. Med. Sect. 5. A Woman supposed to have a Dropsy of the
Uterus, was opened; the Uterus weighed eighty seven pound, it was full of hair,
and woolly Fibra's in a fat matter, and yellow Ichor.

Two observations are extant of two Hydropical Women dissected, that the
Testiculi, or Testes muliebres, were found the Cause, and no other Cause, the
rest of the bowels being safe; Schenkius quotes one, Obs. Medic. page 414. and
Gulielmus Fabritius Hildanus, in Epist. another; the right Testicle alone, in
this last, was affected; it was found full of hairy Fibrous matter; and twenty
measures of water ran forth of her Belly.

In a particular Dropsy of the Breast, the Lungs have been found wasted, the
Pericardium filled with water, the Heart flaccid, and bigger then ordinary,
filled with black blood.

The Heart, in one, wanted the Pericardion; all the bowels were grown over with
fat, in it was black blood, and the right Auricle was like an Aneurisma, Tho.
Bar^hol. Cent. 4. Obs. 20.

Johan. Bilgerus, in Epist. ad Gr. Horstium, relates how one was very
short-breathed for four years, increasing by degrees, being light at first; and
suddenly dying unexpectedly, was dissected; it was found a Dropsy of the
Thorax; the Lungs swam in water, they had outwardly many black spots, and
diverse Colors; and being cut, from within there issued out black blood; the
water was much in quantity, and green in Color, and rushed out impetuously
upon the Section.

Of the CURE of a DROPSY.
The Cure of a Dropsy is as various as the Signs and Causes; for one is
curable, another not; and he that is curable, differs from another in the way
of method he must be cured in, as well as particular Medicines.

I. We shall say somewhat of the chief and most successful quality in
Medicines, and that is, a Diuretic force: Diuretics, as we have well
observed, are most generally helpful; and those Purgers that, withal, do move
Urine; for it is contrary to Nature to expel redundant Serum by the Guts, the
faculty of the Kidneys, Emulgents and Ureters must be excited; purging often
weakens Nature, not carries forth the Disease: but nothing is so bad, that
helps not some; nor any thing so excellent, that will cure all: and I have
known in diverse Hydropicks, as well as other Sicknesses, one simple vulgar
Medicine has done more then Methods of Bleeding, Sweating, Purging, Vomiting,
and Opening.

Juice of our Flow-de-luce-Roots helped one in two or three days, not helped
by other Medicines; the Lee of Broom Ashes, another; Horsradish, one Rustic
did boast, would cure all; and another Woman helped diverse with common
Sambacus; Another I know, uses Broom Beer: almost so many Hydropical persons,
so many Medicines; but they try oftentimes diverse Medicines, ere they light on
that they think cures; but the inward disposition of the body, and lucky time,
according to the Stars, when that Medicine was given, is to be considered.

I found best success in a Drink of Orris, Danewort, Cort. Sambuci, Saldonella,
Guaiacum, Juniper Berries, Wood-Nightshade, with Liquorish and Caraway-seed:
and Platerus (who indeed used the best Medicines to cure the Dropsy, of any I
read) used such like, Obs. 632, 633. He cured two cum decocto Sambuci, Iridis,
Dulcamarae, and Absinthii. And page 634. he cured one with an Apozem of Senna,
Orris, Ebulus, Absinth, and sem. Carui. A fourth he cured with Rob Sambuci,
Ebuli, and spirit of Juniper, page 633. and page 637. a Gravid Woman, windy, as
well as Hydropical, he cured with decoct. R. Ebuli, Sambuci and red Docks. Page
639. he cured with Rheubarb, Saldonella, Orris, Hedera Terrena, Petroselinum,
Bitter-sweet, Elderne and Wormwood: Page 639. an Infusion of
Flower-de-luce-Roots, Enula, Ebulus, Sambucus, Horehound, Absinth, Hedera, in
Wine drunk for three days, gave huge relief, and the Belly fell; so 653, he
cured another.

River. in Obs. often used Decoctions, or Powders of Cychory, Asparagus,
Bruscus, Agrimonia, Adianthum, Ceterach, Pimpinella; but these come short of
Platerus his Simples afore-related: Cent. 1. Obs. 70. Cent. 2. Obs. 65. and 67.
cured Hydropicals with Openers.

We were told of one cured alone with Wormwood; Diuretics commonly do open,
and most Openers have some Diuretic force with them, for the provoking of
Urine is most effectual.

Decoction of Bruscus Roots cured one, in a Months time, River. C. 3. Obs. 4.
Juice of Orris another in twice or thrice taking; and we have heard the same in
the County of Northampton, of one so suddenly cured thereby, far gone, that
Purges, but chiefly Urine, Plater. 634.

One Dram of the bones of Animals given for a Month in white Wine and Juice of
Parsley cured one, River. Obs. Com. p. 327. but the white Wine and Parsley might
do most. Flints made red hot, and often extinguished in white Wine, and that
drunk, did cure, River. Obser. Com. page 369. and Salt of Millipedes is praised.

Paulus Renealmus. Obs. 29. with the use of the Decoction of Male Fern Roots,
cured one Dropsy, coupled with a Quartane; but he gave a Chemical Febrifick
Powder first, for the Ague.

Avicen. Cap. Curatio. Ascitidis, relates one hugely swelled, that eat
abundance of Pomegranates, and was cured; these were binding, but their
sharpness might provoke Urine; they were cool, but many Dropsies are hot,
wherefore Schenkius: Obs. Medic. page 419. relates some Histories of those that
were cured by drinking much cold water, when in others it causes the Dropsy.

A Juvantibus and nocentus optima desumitur indicatio: From those things that
help, and those that hurt, we may judge of the Cause; and Christopher a Vega
cured one Hydropick by Epithemes to the Liver, of Juice of Endive, Cychory and
Vinegar; this was a slight business, yet it is questionable, if they did it by
cooling; for Cychory being bitter, is held hot.

I have known Plantane help some; that is not likely to have any Spirituous hot
parts in it; yet Sennert. Epitom. Scientiae Naturali, p. 468. says, Plantane
has a mixed force both of binding and cleansing: For this and Pomegranates are
very binding, and so is Oak Bark, with the D^coction of which one Hydropick
was cured.

It was related to me, that a Gentleman's man being much swelled, was told that
Guaiacum was excellent for a Dropsy; he therefore took one of his Masters
Bowls, and either boiled or powdered it, and was cured by it; his Master
afterward missing his Bowl, it was ingenuously confessed, That his Man had took
it for his Dropsy; the Master seeing his Man cured, and as they attested, by
that, forgave him. It is held drying, but there is no such thing in Nature, but
it must expel moisture by Sweat, insensible Transpiration, or Urine, for
nothing wastes; indeed Gum Tragacanth and Litharge will absorb Liquor into their
bodies, but this does not so. Frogs or Toads, (they differ in Color, and
crawling, and perhaps in Quality,) are praised for the Dropsy: Forestus, lib.
19. Obs. 35. praises Frogs and Toads both inwardly and outwardly to provoke
Urine in Hydropicks: the Kidneys are anointed with an Oil, wherein they are
boiled, so Libavius. lib. 2. Batrachorum. Cap. 20. and Solenander Consil. Med.
Sect. 5. p. 15.

And Wierus lib. 3. Cap. 35. of the Deceits of the Devil, relates first the use
of Land Toads; A man lived miserably possessed with a Dropsy, had spent his
Means; his Wife, seeing her Husband likely to die, and if he lived longer, he
would spend all, got Toads, dried them in an Oven, and gave him the Powder, and
this set him a making water largely, and in stead of ending, was a mending to
him.

II. Of Purges: And first, River. found them successful in three Patients,
mixed with Openers; one of them had the Purgers mixed with their Openers in a
Mass, as Diarrhodon, Steel, Rhubarb, Agarick, etc.

I know one that hugely praises Steel, Rhubarb, Manna, and Syrup of Roses
mixed together, to take daily of; and one at Baldock hugely swelled, and his
Scrotum like a bag, was cured hereby, by a Ladies Direction; and it has helped
others; but the Rhubarb and Steel do the business.

Riv. Cent. 3. Obs. 8. found a purging Clyster do good; but commonly they will
not: in three he found purging Medicines do good, and they were delivered: he
gave great Doses of Scamony, and Calomelanos Turqueti, or Mercurius Dulcis;
Cent. 2. Obs. 94. Cent. 3. Obs. 16. and 86. but commonly strong Purgers do
harm; the Bowels are often wasted, or exulcerated, or corrupted; Elaterium is
most commended.

Paul. Renealmus, Obs. 166. cured one that had an Ascitis, with a
Leu^ophlegmatia, for two years, with a Stomachical Chemical Powder, that
wrought upwards and downwards, and cured in four days: And

Obs. 122. He cured one in eight days with a Chemical vomiting Powder; it
wrought both ways: He also gave the Decoction of Strawberries, and Spirit of
Mercury; the Party for diverse months had a Leucophlegmatia, with an Ascites,
and Languishing.

III. For bleeding: we knew it very bad in one, and a large swelling from wind
or inflation, increased, and the party died. Laz. Riverius let blood in two or
three Dropsies, and did well; also in one Tympany, Cent. 3. Obs. 86. Bleeding
commonly is not good, but in any Disease it may be proper or improper, as the
cause of the Evil is, and the qualification of the Body in which it is.

IV. Sweating is very available; we have known it.

Jo. Schenkius, Obs. page 420. by a natural or spontaneous sweat one was cured.

Tho. Barth. Cent. 3. Obs. 23. A young man several times had the Dropsy, his
Skin was pellucid, naturally, not by any Art; he sweat out water so that all
his Linen was wet; it run through his Skin, as water ouses through a cloth,
when strained: several times he did thus critically evacuate, yet the water
gathered again, and his natural Spirits and strength declined, and he died.

V. Concerning Vomiting, we recited two Observations out of Renealmus; one
Woman with Child drank much cold water, was hydropipical; a Chemical vomiting
powder brought up three pints of water, and water went by seigh for two days,
and health followed, P. Reneal. Obs. 146.

The same Powder, a little altered with small additions, cured two other
Hydropicks, working sharply upwards and downwards.

Marcellus Donatus, lib. 4. de Histor. Medica. Mirabili, relates how one was
cured by vomiting on Natures own accord, no Medicament took.

But another from Nicolus, Sermon. 5. Tract. 5. Cap. 15. died in vehement
Vomiting, that happened in his Dropsy.

Jo. Schenki^s, page 420. writes how one was observed from being Sea-sick, to
vomit, and that Vomiting cured his Dropsy.

We have experienced nothing of it: In any Sickness, if the Stomach is stopped
or oppressed, Vomiting may do well; and if the Stomach is clear, and not
affected, Vomiting is unnecessary in most Diseases; it may bring up much raw
Phlegm, if not water, in some Hydropicks; yet because it is very sick Physic,
certain to make sick, and uncertain to make well, it is to be superseded in
most Dropsies.

VI. Dye^: We have heard of some, and River. Obs. relates others, and Schenk.
more, that were delivered of Dropsies, only abstaining from drink, and some
from all potable Aliment.

Nicolus, Sermon. 5. Cap. 25. One was cured by Diet, void of moisture, and
Diuretic Parsley was put in exenterated Fowls he ate roasted, he ate Biscuit,
and drank a little Wine after it, and drank no more all day, except by chance,
and then Wine was mixed with Water; and another hugely swelled, was so cured:
but this is not to be trusted to commonly.

VII. We shall promiscuously in the next place show diverse strange ways, and
unusual means, whereby some have been cured of the Dropsy, and most of them
accidentally, and on Natures accord: Nature endeavors to free her self, and
cast out her Enemy; yet if the inward parts are corrupted, though she vents the
water by Holes, Apostems, Bladders, etc. the party often dies.

An Abscess from Nature opened in the right side of the Abdomen, and many
bladders of water ran forth for diverse days; the Sick was cured, River. Obs.
Commun. ult.

Rhasis, Cent. 21. A woman with a Womb-Dropsie, being a washing Clothes stoutly
over a Tub, buckling down often, avoided, per Uterum, many pints of water, and
was delivered.

Schenk. 418. One by daily Labor, another by Nature were healed: And 420.
another by natural sweat, and another by being Sea-sick, cured: By a wound
given by one in anger in the Belly, the Water of one Hydropick ran forth, and
was healed.

Another was burnt by chance in the Thigh, there arose a blister, and brake,
and daily the water vented thereby, and did cure.

Ex praecisis unguibus effluens aqua curatus est unus. In two Asciticks Nature
opened an hole in their Navils, water ran out daily gradually, and they were
healed: In another a bladder arose in the Navil, water ran out by it, and the
party was healed.

Nature spontaneously made an Orifice betwixt the Periton^um and Muscles of the
belly, from whence two hundred bladders of Water were drawn forth. See Schenk.
Collect. Obs. page 420, 421, 422.

Valeriola, lib. 4. Obs. 3. Nature opened the Navil of one, and water ran out
gradually and daily, and the Diseased recovered.

Plater. Obs. page 650. says, Blisters or Ulcers spontaneously opening in the
Feet or Scrotum do pour out much water, sometimes daily, and eases the Sick,
yet often the Spirits languish, and death follows.

Water ran forth by the Feet of one, and he was healed, Schenk. page 420.

A Vesicatory applied to one, set the water a running, which did continue till
the party was healed, River. Obs. Com. page 323.

And Marcell. Donatus, page 420. brings the like Examples.

An Hebrew Physician opened the Scrotum of one Hydropick, swelled as big as
ones head, daily the water ran out to eight or ten Ounces, yet he died, his
inward parts likelily being corrupted, Tulpius, lib. 2. Obs. 39.

Paracentesis and Blisters made in the Legs by Cauteries, Tulp. lib. 2. Obs.
39. condemns by two or three Examples. Sometimes the Belly sinks, and they
breathe better, yet die soon languishing, though the water is gradually drawn
out; but where by Paracentesis it is let out by a tap on heaps, they sometimes
die suddenly, all the Bowels sink and fall down, the water that used to support
them, being suddenly gone; it may be compared to Child-bed-Women.

Plat. Obs. Med. page 646. Blisters gave ease, but they looked black at last,
and the Party died. Secret Gangrenes kill some that way.

A Noble Matron, her belly and feet much swelled with water, she used to be
short-winded, and to drink much water, she was with Child, and was delivered of
her Child and Dropsy together, being well naturally purged in Delivery, Plat.
637.

So another great bellied woman was delivered of her Dropsy, 638.

Another used often to be hydropical when she was with Child, and did abort, then
was freed of her Dropsy; but the fourth of fifth time died in abortion. Idem,
ibidem.

If after the water is let out of the belly by Paracentesis, the Party does
relapse or swell again, death for the most part ensues; yet one is cured after
such a Relapse, Schenk. 421. He and Felix Platerus bring three or four Examples
of Hydropicks, whose Navil, the inward Skin being broke, did protuberate, and
look like a pellucid bladder full of water; in some they brake, poured out much
water, eased the Dyspn^a, and the belly fell, but most died when the water was
ran forth: One had Cardialgia, vomiting and sinking of her Spirits supervening
the free emission of the water.

Now we will deliver somewhat of the Cure of particular Symptoms, or
concomitant Ails in Dropsies.

A Dyspn^a or Asthma, Plat. Ext^b. Obs. page 65^. saw apparently in diverse, and
in other places he mentions it; the letting out of the water commonly, to abate
the short-windedness, that did depend upon the ^eaving up of the Belly,
distension making compression; he gave Juice of Orris, with Sugar Candy, and
Vinum Hipp^crat. i. the Pa^ty vomited much viscous and tenacious Phlegm, and had
three stools, and breathed pretty freely.

Another Asthmatick in a Dropsy begun, was helped by Squills, Enula, Orris,
Prassium Sambuc^s, Eb^l^s, Se^^a and Agaric. made by steeping into a gentle
Apozem.

Ins^ations in Dropsies: Plat. helped two, page 632. one with Decoction of our
Flower-de-luce-Roots, or Orris, Eldern, and Bittersweet, used for four days;
the other with Hartshorn, took three or four times, boiled in Broth: and
though this seem strange, we knew one use this to that purpose successfully;
and why not, by an occult quality, as well as Wolves Guts help Cholicks, Foxes
Lungs, the Lungs; Boars Tush, the Quinzey and Pleurisy; Bulls Pizzle, the
Pleurisy? etc.

A Black Jaundice coupled with an Ascites, was cured, Plat. lib. 3.
discolorated with a mass of Pills, whose Ingredients were Agarick, Rhu^arb,
Diagrid, Gum Amoniacum, etc. a Wine steeped with Orris, Saldonella, Sambucus,
Ebul^s, Cych^ry, Dent-de-Lion; all these are choice Medicines in Dropsies: Also
he had a Powder of Diagallanga, Dyacimini, Sentalis, Cinnamon, S. Anisi, and
Coreandri.

A Tympany with an Ascites begun, Plater. cured with Wine of the Roots of
Ebulus, Sambucus, Dulcamara, Absint^ium, and Orris; he sweat, with Spirit of
Juniper; his Belly was anointed with Aqua-Vit^, Spirit of Juniper, and
Caraway-Seed, Obs. page 656.

The End of the First Part.
A TABLE OF THE DISEASES Treated on In the Second Part of this BOOK.
Of the Diseases of the Head.
Chap. 1. OF a dry Distemper of the Head. Chap. 2. Of a moist Distemper of the
Head. Chap. 3. Of pains of the Head from an hot cause. Chap. 4. Of Headache from
cold. Chap. 5. Of a Dropsy of the Head or Hydrocephalo. Chap. 6. Of Headache
from waterish Humors. Chap. 7. Of Headache from Choler. Chap. 8. Of Headache
from Phlegm. Chap. 9. Of Headache by consent from the Womb. Chap. 10. Of Numbness
or Stupidity. Chap. 11. Of Head^ch from the Stomach. Chap. 12. Of Headache from
Drunk^nness. Chap. 13. Of Headache from Blood. Chap. 14. Of Headache from a
Melancholy humor. Chap. 15. Of Headache from windiness. Chap. 16. Of a Ve^^go,
or giddiness in the Head* Chap. 17. Of the Passion of the Mi^^ moved by Love.
Chap. 18. Of a Cephalaea, or old Headache.
Of the Diseases of the Eyes.
Chap. 1. OF Dimness of sight, or Blindness, called Amblyopia, or Amaurosis.
Chap. 2. Of Nyctalopia, or Night-Blindness. Chap. 3. Of Strabismos, or squint
Eyes. Chap. 4. Of Spots of the Cornea* or Webt of the Eyes, called Albugo or
Leucoma. Chap. 5. Of a Cataract or Suffusion. Chap. 6. Of an Ophthalmy, or
Inflammation of the Eye. Chap. 7. Of Pannus, or bloody Veins in the Eyes. Chap.
8. Of Clouds. Chap. 9. Of Midrias^s, or a dilatation of the Apple of the Eye.
Chap. 10. Of Procidence, or going forth of the Eye. Chap. 11. Of Pushes, or
little Wheals of the Eye. Chap. 12. Of Proptosis, or Procidence of the Urea.
Chap. 13. Of Phthisis, or narrowness of the Pupil. Chap. 14. Of Eyes bloodsh^t.
Chap. 15. Of Emphysema, or a windy Tumor of the Eyelids. Chap. 16. Of
Hydatis, or little Apostems of the Eyelids. Chap. 17. Of Chalazion, or a round
Tubercle. Chap. 18. Of Crithe, or the Corn of the Eyelids. Chap. 19. Of Ulcers
of the Cornea. Chap. 20. Of Hypopion, or matter under the Cornea. Chap. 21. Of
Ca^lous and rough Eyelids, called Sclerophthalmia, Ptilosis, and Trachoma.
Chap. 22. Of itching of the Eyelids, or Psorophthalmia.
Of the Diseases of the Nostrils, Tongue, Teeth, and Lips.
Chap. 1. OF the Pose, or Distillation by the Nostrils. Chap. 2. Of hurt of
smelling. Chap. 3. Of Sneezing. Chap. 4. Of a Carcinom^, or Cancer of the
Nostrils. Chap. 5. Of Polypus, or Excrescence of Flesh out of the Nose. Chap.
6. Of the Stench of the Nostrils. Chap. 7. Of depraved smelling, or
mis-seenting of things. Chap. 8. Of Sarcoma. Chap. 9. Of Ptyalismos, or
immeasureable spitting. Chap. 10. Of Teeth edged, or astonished. Chap. 11. Of
Teeth eroded, or broken away. Chap. 12. Of Toothing of Children, and pains.
Chap. 13. Of Paroulis, or Inflammation of the Gums. Chap. 14. Of Rhyas, or
Consumption of the weeping flesh. Chap. 15. Of Encanthis, or too great growing
forth* of that Flesh. Chap. 16. Of Ulcers of the Gums, or Mouth; also of a
Fistula, Putrefaction, and Ex^sion^ of the Gums, and of a Cancer thereof. Chap.
17. Of Excrescence of the Gums. Chap. 18. Of a Fistula of the Teeth. Chap. 19.
Of swelling of the Lips. Chap. 20. Of the Fissures, or chaps of the Lips. Chap.
21. Of Hare-Lips, or cloven Lips. Chap. 22. Of Discol^ration of the Lips; of
their paleness or lividity. Chap. 23. Of Mouth-writhing, or Convulsion of the
Face. Chap. 24. Of the Vice of Speaking, or defect of right Pronuntiation, and
Stuttering. Chap. 25. Of a Palsy of the Tongue, and the Black swelling of the
Tongue. Chap. 26. Of Tongue-ty'd-Infants, or the Frog, so called, being a
Ligature under their Tongue. Chap. 27. Of a Tumor, or Increment of the Tongue.
Chap. 28. Of an Aegylops.
Of the Diseases of the Lungs.
Chap. 1. OF Hoarsness. Chap. 2. Of a Catarrh, or Distillation of Rheum. Chap.
3. Of an Asthma, or hurt of Breathing. Of vomiting Blood from the Spleen. Of
Diseases of the Midriff. Of Blood extravasated, and clottered in the Bladder.
Of Inflammation of the Bladder.
Of the Diseases of the Uterus or Matrice.
Chap. 1. OF Distemper thereof. Chap. 2. Of Narrowness of the Vessels. Chap. 3.
Of Weakness. Chap. 4. Of Inflammation thereof. Chap. 5. Of Pains therefrom.
Chap. 6. Of Worms of the Matrice. Chap. 7. Of Stones therein. Chap. 8. Of a
Cancer Uterinus. Chap. 9. Of a Womb-Dropsie. Chap. 10. Of Inflammation. Chap.
11. Of Mola, or false Conception. Chap. 12. Of Condyloma Uteri. Chap. 13. Of
Prurient Pustules. Chap. 14. Of Womb-Melancholy. Chap. 15. Of diverse Symptoms
affecting Great-Bellied-Women. Chap. 16. Of Abortion, or Miscarriage. Chap. 17.
Of the dead Child. Chap. 18. Of a Fever after Delivery, or a Fever of Milk.
Chap. 19. Of Diarrh^ea's, or Fluxes following Delivery. Chap. 20. Of Monstrous
Births, or Imperfect Children. Chap. 21. Of following Symptoms, or Diseases of
delivered Women, as fault in Quantity or Quality of Loches, or
Child-Bed-Purgations: of Throes, or After-Pains: of stopped Secundines, or
After-Burdens staid, etc.
Of FEVERS.
Chap. 1. Of a Quotidian, or every-day Ague. Chap. 2. Of an Hemitrice, or
Semitertian Ague. Chap. 3. Of an Intermitting, Quartane, or Third Ague. Chap.
4. Of an Hectic Fever.
Of Diseases and Affects of the Hair, and of outward Eruptions.
Chap. 1. OF a Defluvium Capillorum, or general falling off of Hair. Chap. 2.
Of Psilothra, or Medicines taking away superfluous Hair. Chap. 3. Of Baldness.
Chap. 4. Of Ophiasis. Chap. 5. Of plating of the Hair, of cleaving of the Hair,
of Worms in the Hair. Chap. 6. Of Alopecia. Chap. 7. Of Medicines hindering the
growth of superfluous Hair. Chap. 8. Of Curling, or Coloring the Hair, to take
away gray Hairs, etc. Chap. 9. Of Scurfiness in Hair. Chap. 10. Of
Phtheiriasis, or the Lousy Evil.
Of Evils, and Outward Ails.
Chap. 1. OF the Kings Evil. Chap. 2. Of Corns. Chap. 3. Of Bronchocele, or a
Throat-Rupture. Chap. 4. Of Warts. Chap. 5. Of Swellings or Apostems that they
call Atheroma, Steatoma, and Meliceris. Chap. 6. Of Kibes, or Chilblanes. Chap.
7. Of Ancomes, or Paronychia in Greek. Chap. 8. Of Ecchimoma in Greek,
Sugillatio, or Livor in Latin, in English signifying black and blew Marks, or
Discoloration of the Skin from Bruises, or otherways.
Whereunto is Annexed
A small Treatise of Sicknesses and Diseases from Witchcraft, and Supernatural
Causes: Being useful to others besides Physicians, in that it confutes
Atheistical, Sadducistical, and Skeptical Principles and Imaginations.

Morbi Capitis.
ALI these papers, or chapters were formerly writ, about the year 1658. and
were compiled by Transcription from such Authors as are mentioned: I strove to
omit nothing of chief concernment, so that what one had not, I found in
another, and so thought to make up things complete; but since I have writ many
Observations, and read more, so that I see the Authors of those Practices of
Physic went conjecturally to work in some things, and upon mistaken Experience
in others; in many true, but those, not all the truth, nor the most material
truth; yet of these Diseases I then wrote of, they do as little infringe
Experience as any; for Authors were most mistaken in those Diseases it chanced
we had not wrote of; and therefore we were the willinger to put these to
Public View: yet the Reader must not think to find the Sick just thus, as we
have described, according to Practical Authors, in these Diseases; so many Men,
almost so many Varieties and Differences: we have best shown the Method and
Course of Nature, and what most commonly and truly happens to and in the Head
by the discourse of Head-Diseases preceding, drawn from true and sure
Experience and Observations; not only singular Cases, but chiefly all ordinary
Distempers of the Head may be judged thereby: and that, that in an extreme
degree causes Death, in a remiss degree is the cause of a Disease. I have not
picked Observations for me, or left out those against me; for indeed I do not
set my self to be for one or other, and then bring Experiences that make for me
to prove it; but impartially, leaning neither to one, or other, I search
Experience, and to the Truth Lapply, and subject my Opinions thereto. Yet here
will come in some things considerable, besides what has gone before, different
from what Practical Authors have writ, or over and above what they writ.

1. As to the Subject or Part, Headache varies; the Ancients only
distinguished a (...) which comes from (...) fignifying half, and (...) the
Skull, in Latin, Hemicrania; in English, the Megrim: now for pains to happen
just so, is a rarity; for they fall no more on one side, than another, and
oftener on the forepart of the Head, then either Side; and as often in the
hinder part of the Head: they are sometimes, viz. Pains, in the Crown;
sometimes in the Sutures, sometimes at Root of the Nose and Eyes; sometimes in
one Temple, or both; sometimes in one Ear, or both.

2. So for matter of Genera, or kinds of Headaches; the Ancients did not know
all, and those they wrote for, the common Course and Method of Nature are as
seldom found in, as those things they count Rarityes; in all Diseases, as
Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Lethargyes, Madness, Phrensy, Delirium, Convulsions,
Palsies, Stupor, etc. may be pain of the Head, according as a waterish Phlegm,
or green, or yellow, or black water, or gelly, or purulency, or Apostematous
matter is generated in this part or that of the Head, more or less for
quantity, more homogenious or heterogenious in quality.

Some have a pain of the Head always at Sun rise, and as the Sun draws ^igher,
the more vehement; and after Noon, that the Sun goes farther off, the pain
fades.

Others have a pain only at Noon, a days.

Others have pain in the Head, according to the course o^ the Moon; as the Moon
increases, greater; as it decreaseth, less.

Sometimes pains of the Head are Epidemical, sometimes they are continual,
sometimes they come by certain Periods, and Paroxysmes, as Agues; sometimes a
Dispositio patibilis, Capitis, as Platerus, in Praxi Medica, observes, is the
Cause every light motion, imagination, fretting, heat of the fire, lying
awaken, etc, raises Headache.

Sometimes the pain is a shooting and dogging, sometimes an heaviness and
dullness, sometimes like pulling and dilaceration, sometimes a sense of violent
distension, and burdening; and there are more Varieties still.

3. Nor are the Causes the same, and no more than what Practical Authors write.

Stones of diverse forms and magnitudes are found the cause of many sharp and
Cronical Head-pains; these Stones lie sometime in one part of the Head
sometimes another; sometimes they are sneezed forth, and Headache has ceased
therefrom; sometimes they have killed, and been found by Dissection.

Worms also of diverse shapes and magnitudes are generated in the Brain, or
parts of the Head, even as they and Stones are generated in all parts of the
Body besides; they cause great itching in some, pain and dogging in the Heads
of others.

Sometime Critical, sometimes Cronical, sometimes they creep forth, or are
sneezed out; sometimes they kill, and are found by Anatomy.

Epidemical Headaches have been found from a Temperature and quality of the
Air, turning the Humors in the Head into Worms, even as the Air disposes
Children to verminous affects in Guts or Stomach.

In others that are dissected, there are found bladders of water, or Apostemes
of a sharp matter, or Inky matter, or yellow water, Abscesses, Gellyes, Globes
of Phlegm, pure water; causing either eating asunder some parts in the Head,
Distension, Vellication, contamination, or poisoning to the Brain, etc. thence
raising great Headache.

An Acquaiutance of mine, a prudent Physician, told me that two or three years
since, a Child was opened nigh Peterborough, I think by Doctor Wright, it had
long been troubled with Head-pains, and grievous; in the forepart, there was
found a Bladder of water lying in the forehead, as it was betwixt the eyes.

CHAP. I.
Of a Dry Distemper of the Head.

THis alone effects not pain simply of it self, unless heat, or cold be
adjoined.

Its Causes are, 1. A dryer constitution of the Air. 2. Hunger and Fasting. 3.
Too great and long continued Exercise and Sweats. 4. Lechery and venerious
acts, 5. Perturbation of mind, eioffensive or pensive; as Wrath and Studying.
6. Watchings. 7. Too great emp^^^ing, whether natural or artificial.

(...) perceived by the Nose, sending forth few or (...).

2. By the Eyes being hollow, if watching preceded.

3. The skin of the Head is felt dryer than naturally it should be.

4. Want of sleep, and the Senses are sharpened.

5. Squallour of the Face, or a wrinkled look.

6. There went before a diet tending to dryness, or some or all of the
aforesaid Causes.

Diet. 1. Where the Air is moist. 2. Diet moistening and yielding good
nutritive Juice, are to be chiefly prepared; Cock's Stones, or the Broth of a
Pullet, Cock or Capon, or other Yelk of Eggs, Pheasants, Patridges and the
like, which nourish much, are very proper Diet. Salt Meats are not alowable.

For Drink may be made Emulsions of the four great cold Seeds, with
Barly-water, and sweetened with Syrups of Violets; if Wine may be permitted, it
must be thin, and well allayed with watet.

Baths of sweet Water warmed, are to be frequented.

But carnal pleasure, great exercise, fasting, thirst, all perturbations of the
mind and watching, are to be eschewed, as adding to a dry Distemper; neither is
costiveness beneficial: therefore Lenitives are good, used now and then, to set
the passages free.

In Topicals, or application, Oils for Unction, chiefly of the fore-seam of the
Head, or Os triquetrum, are commended; as Oil of Fleawort mixed with Oil of
sweet Almonds, Oil of Gourds and of Violets, a Liniment or Unguent may also be
prepared of them, adding Goose-grease and Hens-grease.

Embrocation of Water Lillies, Violets, Mallows, Lettice-leaves, etc. are very
useful, and all such things that are proper for the Head, and of a moistening
quality.

CHAP. II.
Of a moist Distemper of the Head.

MOisture seldom alone raises Headache, but as it is commixed with Humors;
therefore we think it improper to entitle it as a cause of Headache, but only
treat of it as it is a bare Distemper of the Quality. Yet heat or cold mixed
herewith in the Head, may effect pain. And seldom but there is an humor joined
with moisture.

Its Causes are,

1. Air of a moistening temperature; as Rainy. 2. Diet, where those things that
multiply blood, greatly further it. 3. Medicines of a moistening quality,
either internals or externals; as Baths and Unctions.
Diagnosticks are gathered,

1. From much filth flowing out at the Nostrils. 2. From fullness and puffing up
of the Eyes, with moisture in them. 3. From propensness to sleep, and proneness
to a lethargical state, especially if a pituitous Humor be collected. 4. From
fullness and pulsation of the Veins. 5. Catarrhs for the most part follow.
Diet. All things that moisten, are to be shumed. A Diet generally composed of
drying Meats, is to be used, and such an one as is prescribed for a Lethargy:
and contrary to that directed for a dry Distemper; chiefly use of
Guaiacum-drink.

Externals: Caps made of Cephalicks and Aromaticks, Suffumes and dry Bags,
perfuming the Cap at night with the smoke of Gum Anime, and Nigella-seeds, is
very profitable, if also Headache be present.

CHAP. III.
Of Pains in the Head from an hot Cause.

PAin in the Head, or Headache, is reckoned threefold by Galen. The first kind
whereof the Greeks call Cephalalgia: some abusively Soda; the Latins, Capitis
dolor. The second Kind is called by the Greeks and Latins Cephalaea, and is an
invetterate old Headache. The third Kind is the Megrim, possessing only one side
of the Head, called both in Greek and Latin, Hemicrani.

Of the first of these we think it convenient to treat distinctly according to
its various Causes.

And first therefore of a Distemper. And first from Heat.

A bare Distemper of the Quality without presence of any Humor.

This Distemper is caused by all such things as kindle and stir up Humors,
whether internal or external.

1. Internal Causes are, First, Such as raise Humors, and enkindle and inflame
the Blood and Spirits, as are immoderate motion of the Body. Secondly, Of the
Mind, as Anger, Furiousness and Solicitudes. Thirdly, Plenty of spirituous
Blood, whereby the Head quickly grows hot, and conceiving preternatural heat,
is pained, according to Platerus.

2. External. First, as Heat of the Sun, which is a main cause, and happens to
such as stand long bareheaded in the Sun. Secondly, Heat of the Fire, specially
having a great flame. Thirdly, Hot Baths. Fourthly, Use of Meats and Drinks, 1.
too hot in nature, 2. vaporous, as Garlic, Leeks, Onions, Wine, etc. Fifthly,
Keeping in an air that is heat, or naturally of too hot a temper.

Prog. If there be with Heat vellication or distention, it is bad; for it shows
that there is a Matter fomenting. Choleric persons are most troubled herewith.

Platerus says, There Is a Dispositio Patibibis, or a Disposition of the Head
to aching, without the arising from any manifest Cause, as may be perceived, but
is rather from a too exquisite sense, or hereditary, or contracted by evil
customs in such to whom there is with it no hurt of the other Functions.

The place of the Headache, says Platerus, is inter Calvaria, or in the Menings
of the Brain, or Brain it self; in the Menings, because they are endued with a
sense of Touch; in the substance of the Brain, (whenas it is insensible;) many
think there can no pain arise there, but in the Nerves proceeding therefrom, in
the fore and hinder part of the Head.

Sign. 1. The pain is somewhat violent with heat, intense, and to be felt, with
dryness of the Skin.

2. The sprinkling of cold things refreshes and delights.

3. The Eyes look red.

4. Beating of the Pulse of the Temples within the Skull.

5. Little Sleep.

6. Changing of the imagination and quietness of the Senses.

Diet 1. First, Air cool; if not so naturally, it is to be acquired by Art: the
Air is tempered and cool^d,

1. By strewing Boughs and cooling Herbs, and such as have also a grateful
smell, as Violets, Roses, Water Lillies, Willow-Leaves, Vine-Leaves, Endive,
and the like.

2. By sprinkling cold water in the Floor, distilled Water of Roses for the
richer sort, or other cooling distilled Waters for that use, would be more
beneficial; or by pouring of cold Water out of one Vessel into another.

3. By smelling to Posies, or Nosegayes, made of Roses, Violets,
Clove-Gilliflowers, and other Herbs, that cool and refresh the Brain; or a
little Camphir dissolved in Vinegar and Rose Water; or to snuff up Rose Water
into the Nose: Jo. Prevotius adds unction of the Nostrils with Oil of the
Flowers of Willow, made by Insolation.

4. By freeness of the Air, and openness of the Room; against which make much
company, that by their breathing do apparently and very much heat the Room.

5. The North Air is best; if a Chamber may be had commodiously for the Sick,
whose Windows open Northward.

Secondly, Quietness and Rest is by all means to be procured: where

1. All perturbations of the Mind are to be eschewed, and the occasions of them.

2. Noises, frettings, clamours, are no ways Innocent.

3. Motion and Labors are to be avoided, and Carnal Copulation.

4. Sleep by all means to be procured; for it is not altogether imprudency to
make his sleeps now, longer than before they were wont to be, which is much
furthered by smelling to Herbs that cool and refresh, and are a little
soporiferous, as Roses, Violets, Water Lillies, Lettice, Cowslips; stronger,
are Flowers of Poppies red and white, Nightshade, Mandrakes, Henbane, Hemlock,
etc. with Opium, which are seldom (unless watching be very much excessive) to
be used alone, and then but sparingly, or mixed with some of the asorenamed
gentler Narcoticks; they may be laid upon the Patients Pillow commodiously for
him to smell to, when he is about to compose to rest; the Forehead and Temples
also may be anointed with Oil of Roses, Violets, and Water Lillies, Poppies, of
the Apples of Mandrakes; of such may be made an Ointment for the aforesaid
purpose, both to alter the Distemper, and appease the Pain also: as thus:

Oils of Violets, Mandrake-Apples, and Poppies, ana i. Powder of Sanders,
Lettice-seed, ana ii. Camphir, i. with white Wax as much as may be sufficient,
make it of a due thickness for an Ointment.

Embrocations also, and Epithemes may be made for washing the Forehead and
Temples, of Waters and Juyces, (which are of greatest efficacy) adding Vinegar
for penetration, and Powders commixt. Also washing the Feet in Decoction of
Housleek, Nightshade, Lettices, Roses, Water Lillies, or the like, is very good
to temper the heat, and mittigate it: If yet watching be not lessened, one or
two grains of Laudanum may be given at night.

Diet 2. Where, 1. All things that are of hard digestion, 2. Vaprous, as Milk,
3. Heating, are to be shunned.

And where are to be chosen, 1. All cooling, 2. Not fuming, 3. Good digestive
Meats: Ptisan-Broath, Almond-Milk, Broth of Chickens, Birds of Mountains,
Rabbets, Fish tender, and of gravelly places, Bread dipped in cooling Juyces, as
of Pomegranates, Lemons, Vinegar, etc. for Meats for several sawces be made to
temper and correct their vices. Also in Broth may be boiled proper Herbs.

Strong Beer and all sorts of Wine are prejudicial; Barley water, or water
wherein a little Cinnamon is boiled, or tempering pleasant Julaps are to serve
for ordinary drinking.

I. Internals.

In Cure, 1. Respect is to be had to the constitution of the Belly: by no means
Costiveness is to be connived at, for thereby alone ofttimes is pain made from
vapors not permitted a passage, and the Body wants the ventilation Nature
requires: a cooling, emollient, lenitive Clister, is therefore to be premised.

2. Letting blood is to be instituted, for Evacuation of the quantity, and
correction of the hot temper of the blood: some like opening the veins in the
foot; but commonly the Cephallick Vein of the Arm is taken; it is best done at
Fall, or Spring.

3. Purging with more gentle Medicines, chiefly Aholagoges, Potions in great
quantity, and Specificals for the Head.

2. Topics: Where first Repellers, and Stoppers of the flowing of humors, and
prohibiters of inflammation, are to be applied: such as with cooling, have a
penetrive quality, and stupifie not much, are to be chosen; Oil of Roses,
Emphacine, a little Vinegar added, to anoint the Head all over, first being
shaven, is praised Lud. Septal. bids Oxirhodes to be dropped from on high, upon
the Coronal Suture, because so they temper more, a decoction of Plantane,
Red-Roses, Purslane, Housleek, etc. boiled in Water and Vinegar, may serve for
a Laviment of the Forehead, Face, and Sutures: after which, the Herbs
themselves may be applied upon the Forehead and Temples, also fresh Moss, and
boiled Mallows, applied to the Temples, excels.

II. Coolers. Where,

1. Observe such that are of a binding quality, though cooling, as Juice of
Quinces, Medlars, etc. are to be shunned.

2. Such as are of a stupifactive Nature must be as warily as may be dealt
withal, here; as is crude Opium, Poppies, Nightshade, Mandrakes, Henbane,
Hemlock, and Thorn Apples: yet they may more safely be applied to the Forehead
then Sutures, which being porey, would more quickly snatch in their Narcotick
force into the Brain, and so do great hurt: neither are they, as admonishes
Lud. Septal. to be used so much for pain, as for watching, that weakens; nor
are they to be inwardly taken to alter the distempers, except there be great
watching present.

A select Ointment may be made after this manner, void of danger, and
sufficiently cooling: Oil of Violets, Water Lillies, an. i. Juice of Housleek,
Ducks-Meat, Puislane, an. ss. Camphir,. Seeds of Lettice, White Poppies,
Cucumbers, an ii. Wax sufficient, make an Ointment. These things may be
actually cold applied, yet more warily in old People and Children: moreover, in
the ese of applications we must regard that they lie not too long, nor grow
hot, but are often to be removed; neither is free transpiration to be letting, by
having the head bound up with many clothes, which greatly augment the heat
together, which apply to the head; Padilotions also may be used profitably,
made of Coolers.

3. For the Symptom, Pain, Externals are chiefly in use; yet it is not
altogether frivolous to use cooling quieting Medicines, that quiet Humors, and
render them milder and hinder ascent or motion of Vapors, as such an one;
Water of Nightshade, Poppies, Violets and Roses, an. iiii. Syrupes of Violets,
Water Lillies, Mints and Poppies, an i. made tart with spirit of Vitriol.

Moreover, in more urgent pain, from which both a Fever and gathering of
Humors may be suspected, to give Narcoticks inwardly is not altogether
irrational; nor is opening a vein in the forehead to pacify, cool and lessen
the enkindled and fiery Spirits, always unsuccesful.

Topics: Anodine, the best are Oil of Dill-seed, of Roses, Eldern, Purslane,
Ducks-meat, Privet, Nightshade, Water Lillies, Fleabane Lettice, Camphir,
Cucumbers, Plantane, Housleek, and Poplar-Buds; of these may Oils, Unguents,
Lotions, Epithemes, Embrocations, and Powders be made.

First therefore an Ointment of great force may be made after this manner.

Oil of Fleabane, (but, say Astronomers, the Fleabane must be gathered in the
Hour of Mars, he being, if it be possible, in Aries, in a good Aspect to the
Moon) i. Poplar Buds, and Eldern Buds, an. i. Camphir, ss. Vinegar of Roses for
penetration, ii. with white Wax a sufficient quantity, compose all for an
Ointment; with which anoint the Forehead, Temples, and about the Ears, where
may be suffered by absence of Hair, when pain urges, or chiefly at night, at
lying down.

In the morning wash the Face all over with Vervain, Rose, and Flea.
bane-water, and a little Vinegar in it.

Emplaisters may be made of the afore-going Simples; but because by their long
lying on, they heat, and hinder the free passage of the hot Vapors, and
Spirits, by binding up the Pores too straightly, therefore Pultesies especially
to be applied in an exacerbation, are more convenient fot Transpiration, and
Ventilation: as thus,

Vervain, Mints, Housleek, an. mi; Seeds of Lettice, Mallows, and
Eldern-Flowers, an. ii. boil all in Water and Vinegar; then drain out the
superflous Liquor, with which, moderately heat, bathe the places
afore-directed; and then apply the Herbs, with Clothes moderately strait bound
on.

If Pain be more intense, and remits not with these gentler safe Remedies, then
we must use Narcoticks, such as were prescribed before for such as watch over
much: yet they are rather to be forborne (unless Delirium, Fever or Inflammation
is evidently foreseen to follow upon the greatness of the pain) in Children,
for their Constitution is colder and moister, that may congelemamous, and bring
them into Epilepsies, and other Diseases: 2. Not to old men, lest through
extinction of their weak heat, and stupifaction, they be brought into cold
Diseases, etc. e Caput: 3. Not in Women of soft and tender Skins: 4. Not so fit
where the Sutures are looser; nor indeed are they fit to be laid to the
Sutures, for so as we said before, they cool and dull the Brain too much;
therefore it is more safe to use them in application to the Forehead only: 5.
Nor in Catarrhous Constitutitutions: 6. Less useful in pain than watching, and
least of all in heat.

Lastly, It would not be ^miss (together with the continuation of the
afore-going Medicines for some time) always to wear a Cucupha made according to
Art, of the following Simples, powdered and interwoven.

Red Rose-Leaves, Nutmegs, white Sanders, ana iss. Violets, Water Lillies, ana
i. Seeds of Roses, Fleawort, Purslane, Plantane, Flowers of Melilot, Mint,
Bettony, Lettice, Couslips, ana ss. Vervain, ii. mix them for a Powder: this
will corroberate the Brain, hinder the gathering and stuffing of humors in it,
and if any be impacted discuss them, and hinder relapses of pain.

We think it not convenient to add discutient Digesters, and Discutients, for
a bare Distemper alone, without the afflux or congestion of any Humors, but
treat of them in other Chapters of Headache caused by Humors.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Headache from Cold.

A Cold Distemper without afflux of humors, is made from external Causes,
cooling; as is outward Cold, going bareheaded; as also by application of cold
things to the head, or Medicines, or whatever may induce Cold, which in Bodies,
pure and not Cachochymical nor Plethorick, make no apparelling of Humors, but
only do distemper.

Sig^^ are quite contrary to those of Headache caused by heat:

1. Head not hot when felt unto, though Headache may be violent enough.

2. No redness of the Face nor Eyes, nor be they hollow, nor is the Face
shrunk, but as it were distended and pale.

3. Cold things bring offense to them, and alleviate not, but hot things are
delightful.

4. Heaviness of the Head, a drowsy disposition, and propenseness to sleep.

Diet. 1. Air that is cold is by all means to be eschewed, a good fire is
therefore to be kept.

2. Sleep not excessive, nor too mean.

3. Exercises good, as riding or walking.

4. Molestation of Mind, Sadness, Studies, deep Speculation, and all other
Affections of the Mind, that be immoderate.

5. Meat: Where Flesh of all Water-fowls is to be eschewed, and all Meats that
be cold potentially.

Flesh of Hens, Chickens, Partridges, Pheasants, rere Eggs, etc. with Wine, are
good Food.

Cure. The Distemper is to be taken away, to make way for which,

1. Costiveness is to be let.

2. (...) if the Body be Cachochymick, it is to be corrected, or taken away,

1. By Internals: Where such things as heat the Brain are to be given only
for alteration-sake, as Water of hot Bathes, and of Brimstone.

2. Externals: Where

1. Hot Bathes are ordained.

2. Odorants, where all ill-scented and fuliginous-vapoured things are to be
shunned; a Pomander of Aromaticks and Cephalicks are approved; or to snuff up
decoction of Vervain into the Nose.

3. Topics, all eating and friendly to the Brain, yet the greatness of the
Distemper, and Constitution of the Brain, are first to be considered, and
accordingly Medicines suited thereto.

First therefore, as most commendable, we prescribe such an Ointment for the
Temples, Forehead, Nostrils, and holes behind the Ears.

Oil of Vervain i^. Oil of Rhu^, and of the Seeds of Cow-Parsnip, an. ss. of
Nutmegs, ii. Aniseeds, Roots of Piony, Sage, Betony, ana i. with Wax make an
Ointment.

These following are commended by Authors for Pain from a cold Cause;

1. The leaves of the Tile-tree applied like a Pulteis. 2. Tobaccoleaves used
in like manner. 3. The kernels of Peaches beaten with Bettony, or
Vervain-water. 4. Amber-greese mixed with Ointment of Orange-flowers. 5. Oil of
Vervain, by all is recorded as special. 6. Juice of Prucedane with Oil and
Vinegar, or an Oil made of the Herb. 7. Oil of Serpillum, or Mother of Time,
with Vinegar, is excellent. 8. A Garland of Peniroyal, or root of Vervain, worn
about the neck in manner of Amulets.

Authors direct Vesicatories for Cauteries, to be applied to the Head; and
Setaues for the Neck; but because in a bare Distemper there is no matter to
extract, we omit them.

A Cucupha, is very convenient to be worn for long time, to strengthen and
rightly constitute the Brain; for which, these Simples thus composed we think
most excellent;. Flowers of Cowslips, Marigolds, Camomile, ana i. Nutmegs, wild
Time, or Mother of Time, Staechas, or French-Lavender, Bay Berries, Piony-seed,
ana s. Castoreum, i. Eldern-flowers, Mint, Featherfew, ana ij. Vervain gathered
in the hour of Venus, she ascending fortunately, ij. Reduce all into gross
Powder, and interweave, or sew it in a Sattain-Cap, and wear it constantly, the
hair being first cut very thin, so that the force of the Powder may the better
pass to the brain. Of these Simples may several Compositions be made, seeing
they are all very conducible for Pain.

Also Cephalical Electuaries and Conserves for internal use, would be very
necessary and advantageous, being continued a good while together.

CHAP. V.
Of a Dropsy of the Head.

HYdrocephalos is a watery swelling, or Dropsy of the Head, made from
collection of a serious Humor, or windy Matter, in some part of the Members
making or constituting the Head.

Place. It Is either within or without the Skull, between the Pericrane and the
Skin, or the Pericarnium and the Mouth, or between the Mouth and the Membranes
of the Brain.

Cause is the same with a Dropsies Cause; viz. collection of water, which runs
out by Anastomosis or Diapedests of the Veins. Fabrit. found in the fore
Ventricles of the Brain, eighteen pound of clear Water.

2. It happens to Infants from the violence of Midwives in delivery.

3. From the waterishness and moistness of the maternal Heat in the Infant.

Secondly. This Tumor is sometime windy from weakness of Heat in the Infant,
and causes generating wind; and then it is called Emphys^ma.

Thirdly. It Is sometime a more faeculent and bloody matter.

Sign. Diag. 1. It Is a Tumor soft and tractable to the feeling (unless it be
betwixt the Crane and the Membranes.)

2. Conspicuous to the sight; 1. As it is in respect of its magnitude; 2. its
good color. 3. Happens most to young Children.

II. If internal, then, 1. there is headache and heaviness present; 2. the eyes
weep.

III. If it founds, or gives no place to the touch, it is an Emphyseme from wind.

Prog. It Is bad, 1. Because in a noble part. 2. Because ^^e subject is tender.
3. By reason of the great danger that there is of a Convulsion, Lethargy or
Apoplexy.

2. There Is no cure, 1. If it affects the internal parts. 2. Mortal, if it be
made in the Brain it self.

3. It Is best, if, 1. More external. 2. Without the concomitance of bad
Symptoms: yet then its hard to be cured.

Diet. Such as is prescribed for cold affects of the Head, abstaining from Wine.

I. Internal.

Cure. 1. We must draw forth the water after preparatives by Hydragoges, if
their age may bear it. 2. By Diuretics. 3. Sweaters. 4. We must use drying
Cephalicks.

II. External. Where,

First, Resolving Topics and discussing Foments, of Lee, Salt and Sulphurous
Wate is, or the water of Quicklime, commended by Aquapendius for Children, an
Ointment of Powder of Brimstone, Bay Berries and Orris, with Wax, and Oil of
Camomile.

Secondly, Dryers.

Thirdly, Causticks.

Celsus appoints one or many according as the part is greater or smaller: Some
use them to the neck.

II. Chyrurgery. Paulus opens the Tumor in the descending part, makes many
sections; but this is somewhat dangerous, specially if, 1. We have not a care
of anointing the temporal Muscles. 2. To evacuate the matter by degrees: if
betwixt the Pericrane and Crane the matter be collected, double section is to
be made.

Lastly, The Brain is to be dried by inward Cephalicks, and reduced to its
right temper.

Diff. I. From the Humor;

1. Either water, and that more pure, or mixed with faeculent Humors, and Blood
or Wind.

II. From the Situation;

1. One is made betwixt the Skin and the Pericrane; Another betwixt the
Pericrane and Crane; A third betwixt the Crane and Membranes.

CHAP. VI.
Of Headache from watery Humors.

IT is a serious Distemper of the Brain: Its Cause being water derived to the
Head; Either 1. gradually, specially with the very Spirits and arterious Blood;
Or, 2. on heaps, by reason of stronger outward Causes, as all extraordinary
exercising, furiousness, and much drinking of wine.

Sig. The pains are not settled, but wandering. 2. The Mouth is always very
moist, and there is much spittle. 3. Defluxions of Rheum are very often
molesting.

Cure is done,

1. By evacuating the waters; 1. By water-purgers proper to the Head, no
premising of Preparatives.

2. Let blood if Heat and a Fever be present, for they cause fluctuating of
the water in the Head; also if any accustomed evacuation be stopped.

3. Sweaters; as decoction of Sarsaparilla is best: but hot ones, as Antimony,
Diaphoreticum, are accounted bad.

4. Diuretics, which also profit for the Spleen.

5. Gargarismes, that draw much water from the Head* as of Mustard, or of
Pellitory, and a little Staneatre excel.

6. Errhines, where Juice of Primroses is choicest.

II. Dryers and Correcters of the Distempers; where such, like an Electuary,
taken to the quantity of a Nutmeg every morning and night, may greatly help
both to dry and consume the Cause, quiet the Symptom, and strengthen the
Brain. of Sarsaparilla, ij. Nard, of Indian Nutmegs, ana i. dry Sage, men's
Bones prepared, ana ss. Conserve of Betony, Rosemary and Marjoram, ana i. with
Syrup of Paeony, confect an Electuary.

III. Topics, (which, first, consume and dry up and discuss the Cause;
Secondly, ease the symptom pain) are to be used together with the former. 1.
The Root of the greater Valerian, fresh, bruised, warmed and applied. 2. Rye,
beaten and sprinkled with Vinegar, bound hot to the head by some; As also 3.
Vinegar of wild Thym to wash the forehead and temples for the pain, are praised.

Some Empericks hold these for secrets in Rheumatick Distempers and Molestation
of the Head.

1. Decoction of Pimpernel, drank morning and evening.

2. To smell to an Onion, being newly roasted and fuming, often and for long
time.

3. To bathe the head, forehead and nostrils with the Liquor of stewed Onions.

CHAP. VII.
Of Headache from Choler.

PLaterus says, If we mean such Choler as being separated from Serum, or a
wheyish water in the Head, is purged mere and pure into the Ears; that being
poured forth to the Menings and Brain, without doubt would stir up great and
pricking pain; but that scarcely happens being washed with a wheyish serous
matter; nor then always does it beget pain; when as to those that have the
Jaundice, the Head in no wise aches, unless some other accident happens. Thus
far Platerus.

1. All Causes that generate Choler; as Garlic, Onions, Red Herrings, Old
Wallnuts, salt things, which make it exsuperating and luxurious, all things
that heat and dry the body.

3. All aggravations of it generated, as Care, Anger, Exercise, laborious
Pains, abstinence and long watching, all which enkindle it.

2. Smelling to Myrrh, Saffron, etc. Sun-heat, etc. may bring it into
agitation, cause it to abound more, and render it sharper and hotter.

Sig. 1. A Choleric temper, and youthful age for the most part.

2. The Pain is like to that that happens upon reflection of the hot beams of
the Sun upon a bare head, but rather hotter, and more pricking, according as
Choler is more tame, or sharp, more or less in quantity, or hotter or colder
qualited.

3. If with gravity; 1. It shows multitude of the Humor. 2. If with knowing
the Acrimony of it. 3. If with Pulsation, Inflammation.

4. If with distention without gravity and beating, 1. It argues Choler very
vaperous, or abundance of Choleric vapors; 2. Dryness of the Mouth, and
Tongue and Eyes; 3. Bitterness of the Mouth; 4. A sense of preternatural heat
in the Head; 5. Excrements of the Ears, many, and more yellow.

Diff. 1. It Is distinguished from Headache, from Blood, for that offending by
plenty, there is Pulsation and Gravity, but Choler being little, is without
Gravity, and is more biting from its Acrimony.

2. Fumes may arise from yellow Choler in the Stomach, or lower parts; and is
distingushing from Choler in the Head by sign of those parts affected, by
Symptoms, as nausea, 1. Disdaining of Meats, bitterness of the Mouth, vomiting,
etc. 2. There is no gravity, as in a plentiful matter, but distension only,
with levity, is effected by the ascent of vapors, and this is not essential,
but by consent.

Progn. Want of Sleep is bad, arguing the Brain too much affected by heat and
dryness: If after Sleep there is ease, it is good; if not, a pernicious Sign.

Diet. Where,

1. Air is to be cold and moist; if not so naturally, it is to be procured by
Art, as in foregoing Chapters.

2. A cool and moist Diet, gravelly-Rivered-Fish: no Wine, nor strong Drink, no
vexings, nor movings of Passion, or inordinate motion of the Body, or watching,
are any ways innocent.

1. Preparation of a double kind, first to thicken and prepare Choler for
expulsion, secondly to cool and render it stiller, milder, and less Acrimonious.

2. For the second, Cooling and Anodine, Internals and Externals, having
somewhat a stupifactive force; for pain that is raised from lighter Causes, as
wrath, is quelled by Mittigaters, and also Medicines that dispose to quieting
and rest.

1. For the first. Prepare thin hot Choler, with Syrupes of Violets,
Water Lillies, Lettice, Endive, Gourds, Barley, Jujubins, S^bestens, Pruins,
Sorrel, Purslane, etc. of which confusedly named, may Decoctions, Apozemes,
Syrups, Julaps, etc. be made.

2. Evacuation. Here Hartman praises greatly Aqua Benedicta, for a Vomit, to
extinguish all pains of the Head, and Mercatus, Stibium.

A Clyster is good to be premised, before purging downwards, of Lenitives and
Coolers, with Cassia; and because Choleric Habits are most commonly costive,
they are good to be used often; which purging is most commodiously done with
cooler and more gentle Simples, as Pulpe of Cassia Fistula, and Tamarinds.

Some commend Potions of the Infusion of Senna, with black Hellebore, also
Scammony, Merc. Vitae, and Flower of Antimony; but these seem too exasperating
and heating at the first, till Choler is somewhat tamed and cooled.

Potions are more innocent of Infusion of Rhubarb, Senna, and Epithimum, in
Cychory or Endive-Water, adding to the strained Liquor Syrups of Violets, or
Epithimum, and Pulpe of Cassia, or the like.

But these Pills following are of greatest benefit, and are not much unlike
those of Fernelius in materials.:

Al^es, i. Senna, ss. Red-Roses, Violet-Flowers, Water Lillies, Purslane and
Coriander-Seed, white Sanders, ana Gr. xv. with Syrup of Violets make a ma^s,
for Pills; of which, ss. in four Pills may be taken every night, for a month.

To some delicate persons that nauseate Potions, and cannot swallow Pills, this
Bole may be a sufficient Purge:

Diacridium, ss. Conserve of Roses, ij. Cinnamon, Gr. v.

3. Blood-letting is to be instituted, both for evacuation, and also cooling,
and making mind Choleric Humors: If the Occiput be most pained, it is to be
cured by opening the Forehead-Vein, says Hollerins, for there come two
Branches from the Jugulars, one whereof is brought to the Occiput, the other to
the Forehead; by which Branches there is a certain communion twixt the fore and
hinder parts of the Head. In Bleeding, whether by the Arm of Forehead-Veins, we
must not draw out so largely as in the Headache caused of Blood; nor at once is
it so good to take our whole quantity, for the Choleric and hot Humors are
more tempered and cooled by repeated Phlebotomy: some instead of opening the
Forehead-Veins, set on Leeches.

Platerus says, Arteriotomy in contumacidous and persevering Headaches, with
great pulsation and heat, has often helped; specially if therewith there is a
Vertigo.

4. Derivation and Revulsion is done by Cups, with Scarif to the Neck and
Shoulders, to draw from the affected part; also to the Buttocks and Legs, to
pull back from the Head.

Errhines and Sneezers also serve here, but are to be superseded, if the Eyes
be weak and obnoxious to fluxions, as also Masticatories; but says Lud. Sept.
they are to be suspected, whenas the Cause is a thin serous hot humor, lest
they should violently draw that from the Head, which falling upon the Lungs
might effect a P^isick, or some other Disease there.

5. Consumption of the Relics by Topicals: Where, 1. Camphir, because it is
thought to cause watching, is disallowed: 2. Others institute Discussion in its
place; where Oils of Camomile, Dill, Rheu, are good, or Pouders of Nutmegs,
Staechas, Rosemary-flowers, Camomileflowers, Eldern, Vervain, wild Time, Rhue,
etc. some add Mosch, to penetrate and corroberate, as says Rondel. Of these
may Caps or interbasted Frontals be made; yet the Powders alone strewed, are
better than interwoven in Caps, because so their virtue is not so nearly
communicated to the Brain, though the Caps.

This, with the aforesaid Pills, may be used for some time, to spend and
discuss the remainder or regenerating of Choler in the Head, and there from
Relapses.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Headache from Phlegm.

Phlegm, or pituitous Humors, collected and cooling the Membranes, but not the
Brain it self, for then would a Stupor follow, or Drowsiness: This is of the
same nature with that Mucus, or filth that being actually cold, is wont to flow
out by the Nostrils, and Headache from the efflowing of such Humors, as in the
Pose, is often eased.

Causes generating Phlegm (being received and made effecting, from first a cold
Brain, secondly a cold and moist Liver, which may send thither vaporous Blood)
are, A Diet of sweet and fat Meats, cold and moist qualitied, Fish, Things raw,
Milk, Cheese, Sugared Meats, Fruits, Olives, etc.

Adjutant hereto be,

1. An Air cold and moist.

2. Idleness, and neglect of Exercise.

3. Sleeping overmuch, specially on a full Stomach.

4. Actual external Coldness, as by application of Medicines, whereby the cold
penetrates inwardly, and induces a Distemper.

Sign. All that indicate a cold and moist Distemper: As,

1. Whiteness and moistness of the Face; unless from blood fallen to the part
it should be suffused with redness.

2. Much and profound Sleep, Dullness of Senses, slowness to action.

3. Abundance of excrements flow out by the Nostrils; but if a Catarrhous
matter be abundantly sent to the Nose and Jaws, and raises a Cough, sleep may
be lessened and Phlegm loosened.

4. Pain is more in the hinder part of the Head from Phlegm, taking its
possession there, and afflicts most from the third hour of the night to the
ninth.

5. There is a sense of fullness and gravity in the Head.

Diet. 1. An Air naturally hot and dry; if not, made so Artificially, keeping a
bright fire, into which may fine-scented-things be cast, for rectifying bad
vapors; as, Wood of Aloes, Storax, Benjamin, Juniper-Wood, Labdanum, Cinnamon,
Gum Anime, Frankincense, and the like.

2. Meat; where Roast is better than Boiled: Spices are very commodiously used;
Bisket-Bread, or Bread baked with Aromaticks, chiefly Nutmegs and An^seeds; ^et
his Bread be well sevened, and his Flesh be of those Creatures that are void of
Excrements, used to Exercise, and condite with hot Sawces: But all these
Aliments are not to be too much glutted off, for a sparing Diet is best.

3. Drink; where thin and small Wine is allowed, as is also the infusion of
Aromaticks in it: To which add Exercising, as very helpful.

Cure of Headache from Phlegm: Where,
First, We respect the Cause: Where,

1. A Diet convenient hereto, is to be ordered, as is afore-written.

2. Preparers of pituitous Humors for expulsion; where hotter Preparers at
first are bad, for they melt the gross matter by their heat, whence it being
made larger requires greater room, and therefrom distends and pains: 2. Strong
Heaters are not to be given after meat, for so are Obstructions made.

3. More mild Preparers at first: as, 1. Healing and dry Cephalicks say some,
for alteration: 2. Attenuating and cutting Simples, say others, for incision
and attenuation, ought to be used, which we think thus well reconciled; the
first suits in a thin, and moveable, and more waterish pituitous matter, such
are Nutmegs, Cloves, Pepper, Castor, Lavender, Marjoram, Sage, Be^ony,
Rosemary, wild Time, etc. the second are more meet in a thick tenacious and
compacted Phlegm, for which Organy, Savory Winter and Summer, Marjoram, wild
Time, Hyssop, Stcaehas, Oxymels specially of Squills, are most beneficial.

Secondly, The Humor being prepared, evacuate it: Proper Purgers of Phlegm from
the Head, are to be given, mixed with Alteratives, and repeated; Pills for this
purpose, are thought most prevalent, of Agarick, Collocinthis, Laureata,
Turbith; yet say some, Agarick is not to be given in substance, for so it
causes Vomiting, but in Infusion; yet mixed in Pills it does not* These are
given one hour after Supper, that their Virtue may be carried to the Head, with
the Vapors of the Meat.

Clisters also are commended for pulling back Vapors and more fluxible Humors
that are going from the Head; in which, for evacuation sake, some Irritaters of
the expulsive faculty of the Intestines, are convenient.

Letting Blood is wholly to be omitted, unless we see much Blood to abound in
the Body.

Physicians make a distinction in the Cure of Redundancy of pituitous Humors;
for some, as we said before, institute only Cutters and Makers thin of a
viscid tough thick Phlegm; whenas others appoint drying, sweating, and Diuretic
Medicines, by which we guess they mean for a waterish or thin loose pituitous
Humor, wherein drying Drinks of Guaicum, China, Sarsaparilla, etc. are helpful.

But in the following intention we may treat generally, composing both under
one kind of Method, to be cured: As,

Thirdly, Diverting of the Phlegm from the Head to the lower Parts: Where,

1. Clisters drawing sensibly from the Head, help.

2. By the Nose, Derivation is good, 1. By Errhines, as of dry Leaves of
Tobacco put into the Nostrils, Juice of Beets, and Juice of Ground Ivy, which
is excellent; as also Juice of Laureata. 2. By Nasalia, in form, sharp at one
end, and broad at the other, to put up the Nose, made of sharp irritating
Simples. 3. Sneezers, yet too great concussion hurts.

3. Evacuation made by the Palate, which is instituted by Nature for that use,
where 1. Gargarisms, 2. Masticatories.

4. By the Ears, into which may be put some harmless opening Oils, being all
Emissaries of the Brain, and by which it is eased.

In the the use of which Gargarisms, which divert fluent Humors from the Eyes,
they, with all Head-Purgers, are to be used after purging.

Masticatories are ordained, whenas there is no peril of a Catarrh falling to
the Breast.

Errhines, and Nasal, and Sneezers best, whenas Nature was wont before to send
out excrements by the Nose, which now are suppressed: Yet these are not good in a
thin pituit, they are bad in affects of the Eyes or Nostrils, being obnoxious
to Ulcers.

Lastly, Topics: whereby, 1. The matter is insensibly consumed, 2. Evacuated,
as by Cauteries to the Coronal Suture.

Then we must provide that the Brain be rightly constituted, and gather not
such Humors again by the taking and applying of fit Corroberative Remedies, as
before in the precedent Chapters.

As to the Symptom, Pain, of whose Cure we have and shall treat very large in
precedent and subsequent Chapters; we shall omit too much troubling the Reader,
it being also a General Rule, Take away the Cause, and the Effect will cease.

Of Siriasis.
Desin. It Is an Inflammation of the Brain and Membranes happening for the most
part to Infants and very young Babes, taking its name from (...), or Sirius, in
Latin a Star, otherwise called Canicula the Dogstar, of some in other
Countries Das Blat Schissen, because the Membrane of the Brain slacking, there
is made hollowness.

Cause in being, Is an Inflammation of the Brain, and its Membranes; the proper
substance of the Brain, as in a Frenzy, is inflamed, and not the Menings
alone, says Riolanus.

Causes efficient, or that effected this Inflammation not in being, were, 1.
Material, 2. Exciting.

The first material Cause might be Milk, that the Infant is nourished withal,
that being too hot, and made so from Nurses using a more spirituous and hot
Drink, as Lueretius says, That young Children may be made mad from sucking
merely Goats Milk.

The second material Cause may be phlegmatic Blood putrified.

II. The exciting Cause; It was called Siriasis for some Reason, for though the
aforesaid Causes be set down by Authors, as general, and all that it arises
from, yet the distinct propriety of it proceeds from the ruling of the Star
Sirius, at which time this Disease raigns most, and from this (whose force is
most perpetrated on them that are conversant in the Sun) may the aforesaid
Causes be transacted, by the great Influence the Stars have upon Humors in
Man's Body.

Diag. It Is known,

1. By great pain of the Head.

2. By hollowness or lankness of the fore part of the Head and Eyes.

3. By the ruling of the Sirius or Dog Star, and by the Child's too much abiding
in the Sun, specially about that time.

4. As we may by sight discern the hollowness of the fore part of the Head, so
by touch the bones in the upper part of the fore part of the Head, where the
Sagittal and Coronal Suture meet, seem membranous, and the ends of them seem
hardened.

Progn. It most troubles Infants, seldom those of riper years; it is very acute,
and commonly kills in three days.

In Cure the Belly must be loosened, the Nurses Milk must be rectified, if
there be cause; she must use a cold and moist Diet, and dwell in a cooler Air,
or keep her Body in cool temper: too great use of Coolers may take too deep
effect in such young Infants Brains; Oil of Roses may be used at first, and
then Oil of Camomile may be added for unction of the parts diseased.

CHAP. IX.
Of Headache from the Womb.

GAllen says, Pains of the Head from consent of the Womb are chiefly stated in
the hinder part, which also Lud. Market. assents to, by reason of the Veins and
Arteries which about the Back do come hither; others say these vapors causing
pain are transferred from the Womb to the hinder part of the Head and Crown, by
the Nerves and spinal Marrow.

Cause immediate, is a matter, says Sennertus, sent from the Womb by the Veins
and Arteries to the Head, and by vellicating and stretching out the parts
effects pain, but though it may arise from vicious blood, or humors, yet not
without a vapor.

Cause remote is some vice of the Menstrues that went before.

Sign. 1. It possesses the back part most, or for the most part-it does so.

2. The Womb is otherwise affected, and the Menstrues it is like have not or do
not perform their legal evacuation.

3. Anxiety, palpitation, and swooning succeed from the Heart; also drawn into
consent with the Womb by the Arteries, by which those vapors are also
communicated to the Heart.

4. These pains debilitate, cause Watching, and much afflict the Sick.

Differences of the Humor are known,

1. By heaviness, and sudden invading and ceasing again of the pain, which
argues the ascension of Vapors.

2. By the contrary we may guess it an humor, and that 1. Either from Blood,
where an heavy pain is the greatest: 2. From Choler, which is discerned by
gnawing and pricking: 3. From Phlegm, wherein there is a greater propensness to
sleep: 4. From Melancholy, wherein they are more sad: 5. Commixtion of two or
more of these Humors, or a windy matter together, for these humors are hardly
pure, and alone, but commixt, and for the most part wind is the chief Cause.

Cure respects the Cause, Parts, and Symptom.

First, for the Cause. 1. The Womb is to be looked to, that sends matter up to
the head, its vices are to be corrected: see an Epilepsie from consent of the
Womb. 2. The Head that receives these Vapors is to be respected, from whence
we must repel and drive them back. 3. Care also is to be taken if they afflict
the heart, then pull them back by sharp Clisters, suppress Frictions of the
nether parts, and give Cordials.

Secondly, The Symptom, Pain; Of this we have treated sufficiently in other
Chapters, and think a needless repitition superfluous.

CHAP. X.
Of Numbness or Stupidity.

Desin. STupor is a difficulty of sense and moving, being a Palsy in a low
degree, or its forerunner, a kin to an Apoplexy, sense and motion in a manner
being both hurt.

Cause is,

1. Either cold or compression of the Nerves, prohibiting the influx of the
Spirits.

2. A contract of Drowsiness.

3. Too great use of Narcotical and stupefactive Medicines.

4. Bearing of heavy weights, or lying upon some Member.

5. Const^iction of the Nerves by hard binding.

6. P^legmone or a Scirrh.

7. The Bone either luxated or broke.

8. From wounds of the Brain.

Sign. It Is known by relation of the Affected.

Progn. Stupidity upon wounds of the Brain, is deadly; from a melancholy
humor, that being removed, it ceases of it self.

Cure. We must first know the Cause; whenas it is a Palsy lessened the same
cure may be ordered for it, as for a Palsy; observing, as that is of a low
degrew, so more gentle Medicines may serve to its cure.

In internals we must respect the Head, to heat and uphold the Spirits and
Faculties; for such an Intention may an Electuary be made, or Water be
distilled from Rosemary, Sage, Betony, Marjoram, VVood-Sage, Pellitory of
Spain, Couslips, Balm, Piony, wild Time, and Lavender English or French, to
which may be added some drops of Oil of Fennel Seeds, or rather Oil of
Rosemary, as much as may be convenient.

In Lochals the Chemical Oil of Marjoram, to anoint the Nape of the Neck and
spinal Marrow, greatly strengthen the Nerves.

2. Rondeletius says, The best Remedy is to wash the stupid Member with
Mustum, or new Wine, Tempore Vindemiarum.

3. A Pulteis of the Root of Garden-Bears-breach fresh roasted in Embers,
beaten, and applied Pultis-wise is commended for Numbness in the Hands or Feet.

Of Headache from Quicksilver.
It Is made from Unction of Quicksilver in the French Pox, or at other times,
whereby Quicksilver insinuates it self, and lies within the Flesh, and effects
very great pain and symptoms, and fixed in one place, and very contumacious,
sometimes vexes most in the night.

Here Physic avails not; Gold is to be put up into the Nostrils; a Cephalic
Emplaister with Leaves of Gold, is to be applied to the Head, being first
shaven; a Gold Ring is to be held in the mouth, Plates of Gold are to be
applied to the pained part, and always worn; and if the Gold be white, it is a
sign the Quicksilver is extracted; and if this Gold be cast upon Coals, it
receives its true color again. See Riverius, Obs. 91. Cent. 2.

CHAP. XI.
Of Headache caused of the Stomach.

BEfore we treated of Headache that was essential to the Head, caused from
Distemper, and Humors there placed.

Now we shall begin with all those Parts that effect pain of the Head by
Sympathy and Consent, sending thither Vapors, and communicating Humous from
the communion of those parts with the Head.

Cause. Therefore we will begin with the Stomach, causing Headache by consent,
and which sends corrupt and noxious Vapors, from corrupt and putrified Humors
remaining there, specially in the mouth of it, which disturb and pain the Head.

Sign. 1. First from the pain, which is not constant; secondly, But when it is
made, it vellicates, and is sharp; thirdly, The more hunger the sick suffers,
the more pain rages, for then the Humor is not allayed.

2. From the Stomach, which is first vomitishly disposed, especially if its
mouth be affected; secondly, Nauseating, inappetence, or the like, are often
joined.

In Diet it is good to use some astringent things, to hinder the ready
exhalation of those bad Humors to the Head; 2. To avoid those things that send
hurtful Vapors to the Head, as Saffron, Pine-Nuts, Quinces, Milk, etc. which
are apt to increase Headache, if taken inwardly.

Cure. Here Vomits are chiefly necessary and helpful to bring forth the Cause,
to wit the Humors seated in the Stomach; some wish the drinking of warm water,
and the Patient to put a Feather, or his Finger into his Throat, and provoke
Vomit; which may serve in a light Affect, but hardly effectual enough at all
times.

Preparation of the Humor, which may be supposed to be viscous, and stick
fast, is advised by others, and that not without reason: The best thing for
that purpose is Vinegar of Squills, from i. to ij. according as its operation
may be desired, weaker or stronger, given for two or three times, then
administer a Vomit of Emetick Wine, or Infusion of Crocus Metallorum; the dose
of which to men may be from iss. to iiss. Some praise a Radish Vomit with
Oximel.

Vomits are of two sorts; gentle, which only purge the Stomach, and evacuate
what they find there; strong, which draw Humors from other parts to the
Stomach, and cast them out forcibly, without any other help: but Hellebore and
strongest vomitory Medicines are not without danger; nor are mean Vomits safe
in Ptissicks, or Asthmaticks, or in Affects of the Eyes, because they raise
fumes to them.

If Vomits may not be requisite for the Habit and Constitution of the Patients
Stomach, Pills may carry down the Humor, and be very prevalent, they may be
taken to ss. or ij. before supper, or at going to Bed, in Syrup of Violets, Pap
of a roasted Apple, or what else the Party best likes; they may be made of
greatest efficacy, according to this Example:

Aloe, ij. Senna, j. Mint, Red-Rose-leaves, Cinnamon, and Coriander Seed, ana
i. Salt of Wormwood, ss. with Syrup of Violets make a mass for Pills; these are
rather convenient than Vomits, for thick, phlegmatic, sour, and salt Humors,
that more aptly descend to the bottom of the Stomach; but for Cholder that is
most desposed to float in the mouth of the Stomach, vomits are most helpful.

Topicals are to be made,

First for the Head: 1. To strengthen it, that it may not so easily admit of
Vapors ascending to it: 2. To repel and drive back the Cause that is already
received; but some hold these needless, and not helpful, but after a Vomit, and
the prescribed Stomach-Pills; Medicines applied to the Head, may together be
beneficial.

Secondly, For the Stomach: An Ointment composed of Stomachicals and
Astringents may hinder the disposition of the Vapors arising from those
Humors upwards; but this is best after a Vomit, or Pills, that have first
carried away the Humors; for if they be viscous, by Astringents they may be
made worse, and more fastened.

Lastly, Corroberate both Head and Stomach, chiefly by Internals, with
Medicines appropriated to them and their vices.

CHAP. XII.
Of Headache from Drunkenness.

CAuses are evident enough to be Liquors that fume to the Head, and disturb the
sensitive Faculties, and cause Headache; such be either Wines, specially
generous Wines and Sack, Strong Water, Ale, Strong Drink, or fumes of hot
Humors so ascending and filling the Brain with Vapors, which if it be hot, is
so much the more quickly taken, says Galen; and such as have the Os
Triquetrum, and Suitors closer shut, bear Drink less then others ere they be
drunk.

The same Cause works molestation of the Senses diverse ways, according as the
occult Natures of men are disposed. For,

1. In some it effects Raging, Staring, Swearing, Cursing, Fighting, and the
like.

2. In others the contrary, for some will then be most complemental, most
flattering, Smile and Laugh, and be wantonly disposed.

From hence was brought that proverbial Verse,

Per multum risum potuis cognoscere Stultum.
By much laughter thou may know a Fool.
3. Some are more melancholy and Stupid, forget almost all things, are more
busied in pensiveness of Mind, and more sad.

4. Others be more Merry, Sing, Play, Rant it, and are Lascivious, Blasphemous,
are more vigilant, and remember things better.

Signs are apparent enough. 1. By dullness of their Eyes. 2. By the carriage of
their Body. 3. By their Speech; often they Vomit, they Shutter, Babble,
Stagger, and can hardly stand, and fall, Head aches; think all turns round; Eyes
are disposed to moisture; after the Wine or Drink is a little digested, they
slep, after which for the most part they are eased.

Progn. Though Wine be hot, it begets cold Diseases, for through too much
accustomed drinking Wine or Ale, there follows often weakness of the Nervs,
Palsies, Trembling, Convulsion, Falling Sickness and Catarrhs: if the Drunken
Man be made Dumb, he will die of a Convulsion, unless a Fever supervenes, or
he recovers his voice at that time wherein Surfeits are wont to be dissolved,
says Hippocrates.

Cure is double, first Preservative; where,

1. Diverse Medicines are set down by Authors to preserve from being Drunk. As
1. Milk drank fasting will that day defend from being Drunk. 2. Rhue, whence
the Poets said, Ruta tibi convertit pocula tuta. 3. Aetius bids every morning
to eat six or seven bitter Almonds, and to drink Wormwood-wine fasting. 4. To
burn Swallows, Feathers and all, in a Crucible, and eat the Ashes of them in a
Morning. 5. Peach Kernels, whose force some attribute to their Diuretic force.
Arculanus says, If a Man eat in the morning fasting, a top of Rhue or
Wormwood, it will secure him from being Drunk.

2. As Medicines, so Precepts are set down by Authors to impedite Drunkenness.

Platerus says, Let them drink very sparingly at first.

Mnesitheus the Athenian bids three things to be observed: 1. To have their
Wine mixed. 2. Not to Eat or Junquet overmuch at the second Course. 3. Before
they sleep, to Vomit; which Sylvius is against, saying, That fills the Head
more with the Vapors.

Secondly, If Drunkenness be already made, we must first Evacuate the Wine, if
yet undigested.

1. By Vomit, by warm Water, or stronger Vomits, Roots of Ararum, of Primroses,
of Betony, white Bliths o^ Colworts, with fat Broth, or Mallows boild in
Barley-Water, all which are very cool and gentle Vomits, and may hardly work of
themselves without the Stomach much nauseates them; or they be provoked.

2. By Evacuation downwards, by Clisters and Catharticks, which are less
profitable and available at first, unless the Liquor be somewhat digested and
carried downwards.

3. After Vomit, sleep and rest do profit much, fasting, also drinking of
Water, or exicrate, or sharp astringent Juyces mixed therewith.

Forestus gave small Beer to Drunkards, bidding them to sleep upon it, Si
nocturna tibi noceat potatio Vini, hoc mane rebibas and erit tibi Medicina.

For Diet. Cooling Meats, not fuming, grateful to the Stomach, and of good
digestion; some astrictive Sawces to keep back fumes are allowable; Cooling
Herbs in Broth, specially Colworts and Lettice, which by a propriety help;
Bread steeped in Water; abstaining from Dates, Mesch, Saffron and the like,
that fill the Head again with Vapors, and raise pain.

But food is denied specially to be given liberally or presently, but
abstinence and fasting are very wholesome.

In the mean while we must not neglect the use of Specificals, and such as by a
propriety drive away Drunkenness; Observing also that 1. Vapors are to be
prohibited from ascending. 2. The Head comforted; Specificals are, Broth, or
decoction of Colworts, or of Lettice, Syrup of Garden-Currants, Vervain,
Centuary, Hartshorn, Bay Leaves, Amethist worn, or a Garland of
Colwort-Leaves: Platerus says, this Powder avails; Seeds of Colworts i. of
Plantane, Purslane, Barberies, ana ss. Coriander-Seeds prepared, ij.
Red-Rose-Leaves, Water Lillies, red Saunders, ana. ss. Mastick i. Camphir gr.
ij. this prohibits Vapors, cools the Head and comforts the Stomach.

Topicals are for both the last named intentions; For the first therefore to
drive back and keep Vapors from the Head, Repellers are used, as Oxirhodines.
For the second many Medicines have been set down in precedent Chapters to
reduce the Brain to its right temper and strength after Diseases. Simeon
Partlicius says, An Amethist Stone bound to the Navil, instantly makes a
Drunken man Sober.

Lastly, Discussion of the Relics, if any thing be left and impacted in the
Head, for which use Oil of Orris, of Bays, of Dill, Rheu, Camomile, etc.
together with Frictions, Walkings, Exercises, and the rest.

2. The Symptom pain is to be cured, which may be done almost by the same way
directed for Headache from Choler, by Oxirhodines; but the best of helps for
Headache from Drunkenness, is the Oil of Tree-Ivy-leaves, to anoint the Temples,
Forehead and Nostrils, also to snuff some of the Juice up into the Nose.

They say Eelop put into Wine or Beer, and suffered to die in it, he that
drinks that Liquor, will never love it afterward.

Of Headache from Fevers.
Commonly this is a Symptom, and always less or more at one time or other,
either at beginning, middle, or end of the Fever; it is an inseparable Symptom,
therefore we must consider whether it be only a Concomitant Symptom, either
from the beginning of both continual and intermitting Fevers, or whether it
urged not before the state of the Fever, by which we may judge it Critical,
and curing of it is to be superseded: And say some Astronomers, If the Moon
come to the Opposition of the Sign and Degree she was in at the falling sick of
the affected Person, or if she or her Beams extend so far as that place she
then was in at the Parties falling sick, (it, as the other, portending a
Decretory Haemorrhage, or bleeding at Nostiils, or Vomiting to follow) no
Physic is then to be given; but if vehement and pulsant, (as in acute Fevers,
with watching, redness of the Face and Eyes, and sometimes with a Delirium, and
coming not in the state of burning and continual Fevers alone, and in the fits
always of intermitting Fevers) it is to be respected and mitigated: and though
a Symptom, yet may be worse than the Disease it depends upon; 1. As to its
Molestation. 2. As to the Dangers that it may bring in some, especially where
not Vapors alone, but also hot and Choleric Humors are carried to the Brain,
or Blood, hot and much perfused with Choler.

Cure. For its cure therefore (neglecting, as needless, the penning of Causes,
or Diagnostick or Prognostic Signs, looking to the Disease it self, viz. a
Fever, of which this is but a Symptom) Phlebotomy or breathing the
Cephalick-Vein of the Arm; this may respect both Fever and Headache, though we
intend here not to speak of the Cause, the Fever, but only of curing the
Headache arising therein and therefrom: If it be not sufficient in the Arm,
opening a Vein of the Forehead, or Arteriotomy, is greatly praised by some; and
experience has often found not only successful, but safe also: Hereby the
Fiery and Feverish Spirits that are in the Blood, and sent to the Head, from
consent of the whole Body, are let out.

2. Keep the Body soluble, for costivenes in Fevers often causes the ascent of
Vapors (their free passage downwards being narrowed) which molest and pain the
Head; we may not use Purgatives of any great strength, lest they enkindle the
Fever more.

But we must use Topics to appease the pain, which are first to be repelling,
that ^o they may stop and hinder the flowing of Humors, or gathering of hot
Choleric Vapors to the Head; but as we said before, where there be signs of
Concoction, and Headache comes nigh upon the Crisis of the Fever, Natures
endeavor to expel that ma^tor by a flowing of Blood out at Nostrils, or some
other way, may be stopped, and so the Disease either increased, or the matter
fixed there, may effect some pernicious Disease afterward; for to repel
therefore Oxirhodon is chiefly used: A red-Rose-Cake sprinkled with a little,
is to be applied to the Forehead, after the anointing of this Ointment there
first: Buds of the Poplar-Tree, Houfleek, Red-Roses, Water Lillies, ana j.
Leaves of Primroses, Violet-flowers, Camphir, ana ss. Vinegar of Vervain, j.
Oil of Poppies, of the Seeds of Cucumbers by extraction, ana ss. Capon-Grease,
j. white Wax as much as may suffice, make an Ointment, which may serve for all
Intentions, both for repelling, cooling, to cause sleep, and ease the pain: For
which,

1. The Root Rhodium being cold in quality, and so called from its good smell,
a Pulteis of it beaten, boild in Vinegar and Oil of Roses, and laid to the
Forehead and Temples, excells.

2. So does an Emplaister of Aloes of America, with Juice of Housleek, and a
small portion of Camphir.

3. Hartman advises to a stupifying Frontal, which is best in great watching,
and if a Delirium be present, thus made; of Laudanum Opiatum, gr. x. Rose and
Nightshade-water, ana iij. Rose-Vinegar, i ss. mix them exactly, and a linneu
cloth dipped therein, apply it to the Forehead Blood-warm.

4. Plantane-Root is thought to help by a propriety, either held in the Mouth,
or hung about the Neck, which way also Vervain may be used.

5. Ivy-Leaves beat in form of a Liniment with Oxirhodon are praised.

6. Also River-Crabs prepared, are applied by some, together with the use of
some of these, which the discreet Physician best likes; the Sick may smell to
Rose Water, Vinegar and Camphir, hold cooling, astringents, but pleasant Waters
or Juyces in his mouth; apply a Radish-Root slit, first washed in Salt and
Vinegar, to his Feet, which is commended, together with Irrigation, or washing
of the Coronal Suture with Decoction of some or most of the Specificals we have
named.

If yet the pain be not eased, make Blisters in the Neck, Forehead, or
forepart of the Head, for therefrom may many serous and hot sharp Humors of
the Blood be evacuated.

After these, Discussion of the Relics is done by Oils of Orris, of Dill,
Camomile, Mother of Time: Or these boiled in Oil; Mother of Time, Camomile,
Eldern, ana p. 1. Nutmegs, Peucedane-root, Zedoary, Tobacco-Leaves, and Marish
Mallow-Roots, ana j. boil all in Oil, strain them out, and use it for unction
of all the forepart of the Head and Sutures.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Headache from Blood.

WE treated before of Headache from distemper without the admission of any
Humors: Now we treat of it diversely, from several kinds of Humors, of which
it is caused: And first of Blood; not humerous, but pure, unmixed, offending
only in quantity. The Greeks call it Phlethora, the Latins Plenitudo, in
English Plethory, Plenitude or Fullness.

Cause. First, It Is made,

1. Originally from Plenitude and abounding of Blood in the Body, made from
things too much nourishing and increasing Blood whether Meats or Drinks, being
too plentifully taken.

2. To this add the omitting of Exercises, Sweatings, and Evacuation, natural
or artificial, as Bleeding, Purging, etc.

Secondly, It Is brought into Action (being thicker or thinner, more or less
spirituous, colder or hotter, sharp or milder, or less humerous and pure) from
too great affects, which bring either heat or pain to the Head, so that the
Blood filling the large dimensions of the Brain is over-heat, whence follows
heat and distentive pain, yet acquires it not such a heat, as that a Delirium
should follow.

Thirdly, Particular Causes that both attract and make this Blood to pain, be
chiefly,

1. Drinking of Wine.

2. Heat of the Sun.

3. An hot House and Baths.

4. A Blow or Fall.

5. Much Crying, vehement Coughing, or the like.

6. All perturbation of Mind, and immoderate motion of the Body.

Signs Diagnost.

1. The pain is pulsant, there is distension and gravity, unless it come from
any external Cause, specially austro flante.

2. The Temple-Veins beat more strong and lustily than those at the Wrists, and
the pulsative faculty is very great and vehement.

3. Urine muddy and thick.

4. Swelling of the Veins, and redness of the Eyes and Face.

5. The pain infects the forepart of the Head, chiefly from the ninth hour of
the night to the third hour of the day.

Progn. Hipp. Aph. 10. Sect. 6. says, Blood issuing out by the Nostrils, Mouth
or Ears, dissolves a vehement or grievous Headache. 'Ti^ oft^^ changed into
Phrensies, and other grievous Diseases of the Head* Yet if in any Disease this
comes Symptomatically, and shows a Cr^^^s, ^is better to be silent in
Medicines, and wait its state, specially no Fever nor Inflammation
cerebrifeavered.

Diet. Cool and dry; all meats nourishing much, as Flesh, rere Eggs, are to be
shunned.

2. All Meats tempered and made wh^lsom, or their Inimical quality corrected
by S^wces of Coolers: cool Herbs, as Cychory, Le^tice, Violet-Leaves, Endive,
Borrage, Purslane, etc. Sallads also of such Herbs are very good.

Barly-Water may serve for his ordinary drinking, or small Cinnamon Water; Wine
is not to be permitted, yet white Wine is loast hurtful to the Head and Sinews.

Let sleep not exceed, let not Croffes disturb, let Exercise not be immoderate,
but moderate does good, as do Frictions, but not of the Head, till he is
perfectly whole.

Cure. 1. We must premise a Clister.

2. Open the Arm-Vein, the sooner the safer, for there is fear of Inflammation,
the Cephalic on the same side with the pain, is best; draw out Blood largely:
if that may not suffice, opening a Vein of the Forehead has been wonderful
helpful. Lazarus Riverius, Obs. 89. Cent. 2. in a violent pulsant and diuturnal
Headache, many Remedies first used in vain, letting out iij. of Blood from the
Forehead Vein presently mi^^igated and quelled the pain: An agglutinative
Emplaister of Mastick, Bole, Dragons Blood, Frankincense, White of an Egg, and
Hares Hairs, are to be applied upon the wound to stop the Blood, and
agglutinate the wound. Obs. 40. Cent. 3. Riverius tells of another that after
often letting Blood in the Arm, opening the Ankle-Vein, did it instantly.
However this is to be tried in Courses stopped in Women. Arterioromy, says
Johnston, is not to be tried by reason of a Neuris^a.

3. Evacuation is to be instituted, of cooler and gentler Medicines, made of
Infusion of Senna, Rhubarb, etc. with altering Cephalicks, a Clister first
premised, for the Humor may become adust, and get Ac^imony, unless means be
used to detract from it, and render it purer: Rondel. advises gentle laxative
Apozems to be given one hour before Dinner, that the gravity of Meat may be the
better carried downwards, and ^umes may not ascend upwards, to offend the Head.

Clisters also had in frequent use, may do good for the same purpose, specially
if the Patient be disposed to Costiveness, which is not to be flighted.

1. Topicals: Which are to be applied to the forepart, for Blood possesses
the Forehead to the Temples, and the Coronal Suture; they are held hurtful to
the Marrow of the Back, if they be applied to the hinder.

They are to be first repelling, and the stronger the better to strengthen the
part, and keep back the Flux of Blood; in liquid forms, to penetrate the
easilier, for Emplaisters sticking close heat more: Oxirhodinum with Oil of the
Sloe-Bush, or the Leaves of the Sloe-Tree, boiled with Self-heal, Plantane,
Housleek, etc. in Oil and Vinegar, in winter they are to be cold only
potentially, but in summer actually.

2. Digesters: Yet in great pain that is first to be mittigated, says
Rondeletius: 1. By such as dull the Sense, as Narcotical and cold things, Oil
of the Seeds of Poppies, which hurts less than the Juice, as not being so cold;
Oil of the Apples of Mandrakes are good for unction, Henbane and Nightshade are
thought to induce foolishness; fumes also of Opium or soporiferous Herbs boild
in Oil, to smell to. 2. Relax the Part distended, where Oil of sweet Almonds,
Violets, Sesa^^m, and Melilot, Marish Mallows, have place. 3. Correct the
Acrimony of the Blood, if that offend, by demulcent things.

For digestion and dispersion of the Relics of the matter, Foments are useful
here; the best Simples are such as respect the Headache, and are Specificals, as
Camomile, Eldern, Dill, Melilot, Mint and Mallows. The Ointment of Alablaster,
of Bened. Vic. Faven. is praised by Platerus and diverse others, and is made
thus: Juice of Camomile, ij. Juice of Red-Roses, j. Juice of fresh Rheu and
Berony, ana vj. Juice of the Root of Althea, j. purest Alablaster finely pulu.
j. Ol. Ros. Ompha. xij. macerate them, and with iij. of Wax boil them to an
Ointment.

Also for Discussions sake, some wish the applying to the Head of the Liver or
Lungs of any Animal, or a Cock-Pigeon, which though the blood be all repelled
and gone, yet it leaves behind it a fumous and vaprous matter, that is aptly
dispersed and vanquished by such as these that we have rehearsed: if the pain
be more inward, hotter and stronger Digesters are to be used.

Others instead hereof, viz. of Discutient Medicines, institute emptying out of
the Blood, after repulsion, by Milfoil, or Nose-bleed, so called from its
property, put into the Nose, and section of the Forehead-Vein, if the
hinder-part be affected.

However, it would not be amiss to use Errhines to purge the Head by the Nose,
as of Juice of Primrose-Roots, snuft up, which also much prevails against the
pain, or Juice of Beets.

Lastly, the Head is to be corroberated by Internals and Externals; Cucupha's
are made more unwholesome in some, where they are overmuch moistened by swear.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Headache from a Melancholy Humor.

H^adach from a Melancholy Humor is divided into Essential and Sympathetical,
or by consent from the Spleen.

I. Essential in the Head, is often mixed with a phlegmatic Humor, as in the
French Pox, says Rondeletius, and is discovered by a Delirium, adjoined with
Fear and Sadness, Sleeps are troublesome, and molested with Visions, sometimes
there is sudden loss of motion.

Cause. All such things as engender or increase a Melancholy Humor.

Progh. Cure is easier at first.

1. In Cure, Melancholy is to be prepared with Heaters and Moistners; it is not
to be delayed, lest the Brain be over-dried thereby.

2. Opening of the first ways premised, we must purge out the peccant Humor,
chi^fly with Potions, and at first more gentle; Apozems with Splenical
Medicines and Specificals, as black Hellebore, Epithimum, Lapis Lazuli, Senna,
etc. Errhines also serve for evacuation-sake, which with Purgers are to be used
often, and by courses, for once nor twice will not suffice to empty out that
thick Humor.

Letting Blood, if the Blood be blackish and thick, is very convenient, but if
not, may be less emptied out: Other things prescribed for Madness and
Melancholy may be used here.

3. Corroborate and strengthen the Brain and Spirits, more hurt by the
impression of dryness than the coldness of Melancholy, therefore in Topicals,
Bags and Suffumes are less beneficial than Lotions or Unctions.

4. A good Diet is to be observed; Vinegar (fermenting Melancholy) is to be
shunned.

II. By Consent: Yet Melancholy being thick and viscid, affects not by consent,
but by sending Vapors to the Brain, raises pain: This comes chiefly from the
Spleen, where that is to be respected, or from Haemorrhoids or Courses stopped;
where opening of them, then revulsion and opening the Ankle-Vein, are helpful.

CHAP. XV.
Of Headache from Windiness.

PAin of the Head from windiness is a distentive painful sense of feeling in
the Head, from wind made from its generative Causes, and either gathered there
from weakness, or transmitted from inferior parts from their repletion.

Causes are,

1. More general, as from a constitution apt to engender wind.

2. Abundant eating of windy or wind-breeding things.

3. Obstruction, whence fuliginous Vapors from Excrements retained cannot pass
out.

4. Weakness of the Head, and parts of it, whence Crudities are accumulated,
and cannot be digested from impaired heat.

5. Odours, smelling to stinking things, Metals, fume of Coals, etc. do raise
heavy sense of feeling to the Head.

Sign. In crudity and quantity of flatuosity, there is distention without pulse
and gravity, noise in the Ears, and tinkling pain in the Temples; sometime a
Vertigo; it quickly rises and remits: Where the Humors are more sharp, and the
temper of the Brain more hot and choleric, pain is felt more sharp and
pricking.

Progn. Aph. 51. S. 6. They that are suddenly taken, and presently are made
dumb, and snort, unless a Fever supervene, die ere the seventh day pass, but a
Fever coming, resolves the pituitous and windy Humors that produce these
effects.

Diet. Such things as engender not windiness, are only to be used.

Cure. After generals, as Purging, a Carminative Clister premised, which may
draw down the Vapors from the Head, we come to Topics; in the use of which,
the first intention is to repel; adding after a while concoctive and discutient
Medicines: Oil of Roses is here most necessary for all purposes, which may be
mixed afterward with stronger Concocters, Discussers, and Anodines; as Oils of
Dill, of sweet Almonds, Camomile, Rhue, Melilot, etc. which are very
profitable; yet we must not use too strong Discussers before time is given for
concoction of it.

Riverius wishes to sprinkle on the Head the sequent Powder, (the Head first
rubbed with Bags:) Nutmegs, Cloves, Pellitory of Spain, Pepper, ana ss. Leaves
of Sage, Bay Berries, ana ij. Mustard Seed, Cresses, ana vj. sprinkle it on,
and rub it in; and the next morning comb it out, and sprinkle on more; the
Virtues of Powders sprinkled, is better communicated to the Brain, than Caps.

In Oils for Unction may be mixed hot Carminatives in a colder Constitution;
among which Mother of Time, Nutmegs, and Tobacco-Leaves, are most profitable.

In a more hot temper of the Head, and youthfuller Habit, Epithemes may be
commodious for the Forehead and Temples to be washed therewith, or the whole
Head being first shaven: Among such, this of Riverius seems most applaudable:
Pulu Zedoar. j. Waters of Betony, Vervain, and Eldern, of each j. apply it
moderately hot with Scarlet Clothes.

Sneezings are allowed of, of white Hellebore, care of catching cold after it
being observed.

So are Odours, as smelling to Castorium, Ambergreese, and their like, that are
friendly and comfortable to the Brain.

Lastly, The Head is to be strengthened, Carminative Cephalicks taken inwardly,
that help weakness and coldness of the Head, and hinder the regeneration of
wind in it, for which also a Cucupha is to be worn for a good while after.

Differ. First, from internal Causes.

1. One Essential (of which we treat generally) where pain is more constant,
there be signs of the Head affected, and other parts well constituted.

2. By Consent of the lower parts, (viz. of the Stomach, Liver, or Spleen) and
its signs are, Distension of the Neck-Veins, Urine is full of bubbles, wind
ascends by the fore-parts with stretching out of the Thorax, and deep beating
of the Arteries or hinder-parts, with tention of the Veins and Arteries there;
Revulsion is here most necessary, specially by Clifters and Repellers, for
Topicals meet rather then in the Head affected.

Secondly, External Causes, as unwholsom Metals smelt to, and vapors rising
from unwholsom places, sum of Coals, and the like; where amending of the
stinking Air, or flying their unwholesome vapors, use of Zedoary, Antidotaries,
and Steinutatories, are chiefly to be expected helpful.

To these some add a sharp pain about the Eyebrows, called Clavus, from a
sharp windy matter included between the Crane and the Pericrane.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Vertigo, or giddiness in the Head.

VErtigo is a Symptom of depraved Sense and Imagination, wherein they think all
things turn round, and are hurried about in a preposterous manner, made from
agitation and swift circumvolution of animal Spirits, or airy matter, contained
in the anterior Ventricles of the Brain.

Subject is the Brain, or forepart thereof, in whose Ventricles the animal
Spirits are immoderately agitated, or else vaporous Humors are moved; and it
is no wonder, if these Organick parts be affected that are made to rule, if the
imagination and sight be not according to Nature; and if the Fountain of Sense
be amiss, the Streams must needs be molested thereby, having influence and
force only herefrom.

Cause is circular motion of the animal Spirits, made from aireal Humors, or
an exhaling matter, exciting great agitation and molestuous disturbance of the
imaginary faculties.

Causes of these vapors are twofold: 1. Primary, whereof they are made: 2.
Secundary, whereby they are put upon action.

First, Primary: Herein some suppose the original to be from Phlegm, and raw
Humors; others from whatever supplies bad vapors from a peculiar bad quality
it yeildeth to the Head, as Radishes, Mustard, Garlic, Wine, etc. Vapors are
made also from Emptiness as well as Crudity or Fullness, also from imperfect
Crisis after long Diseases, from suppression of accustomed evacuation, from an
hot distemper of the Brain, dissolving Humors into a flatuous and airy matter,
or a cold distemper thereof, whereby Crudities are not digested, and through
weakness of the force of concoctive heat, many gross crude winds are heaped up;
from plenty also of hot Blood do vapors plentifully arise.

Platerus says a waterish pituitous and fluctuating Humor is cause thereof.

Secondly, Secundary: wherein are observed,

1. Great heat, (or mean sometimes) as of the Sun, or of fire, whereby the
Humors are dissolved into Vapors, and the Vapors agitated.

2. The looking steadfastly upon Whirl-pools, or Wheels, or whatever turns
round, or the looking down steep Hills, or from height, causes a turbulent
harmony of the Spirits, and deceives imagination.

3. Violent motions, great pain, perturbations of both Body and Mind, wrath,
etc. excite and much exasperate.

4. From violent purging, the South-winds blowing, a moist and hot temper of
the air, and from rowsing up winds from parts below to fill the head, a Vertigo
is often excited.

The Causes take effect from the Brain, which is either obstructed, wherein the
animal Spirits are stirred up to an inordinate motion, but cannot go the right
way, which obstruction may arise several ways, either through plenitude of
gross humors within obstructing, or without compressing the Arteries or
Fractures.

Or too readily applies that airy circumrotative vapor, and sucks it into the
Veins and Arteries, whereby the animal Spirits are hurried out of their due
station, and beyond their natural and ordinary course.

Or is distempered, whereby it makes many vapors, and either through the force
of heat expelling them hither and thither, or weakness of the parts, in not
digesting and repelling them, the quiet harmony of the Spirits is disturbed.

Signs Diagnostick, that are in all causes evident, are the false imagination
of the Diseased, that all things turn round, and are carried round, and whirl
about in a circular preposterous manner; also depraved seeing, whereas the eyes
being fixed on such things, discern not their rest and abode, but are affected
with a mistiness; sometimes they fall down, and are affected much after the
sort as Children that turn often round, for then they are dizzey, think all
turns round, even House and all, and are scarce able to stand: There is
sometimes Headache, and tinkling of the Ears.

Other Signs are taken from the Differences.

And Differences are taken from the Causes, which are either internal or
external.

Internal are either Humors, or Vapors; Humors are either Sanguine, wherein
things are discerned to be red; there is redness of the face, and beating of
the Arteries: or Choleric, wherein the Sick deems things to be yellow, that
are not; and so of the rest.

Vapors arise from Humors essentially in the Head, or by consent from other
parts: other parts that send up Vapors to the Head, and cause a giddiness, are
either the Stomach, which chiefly offends, and that either when it is empty,
and so plenty of virulent windiness abounds therein, and is sent up to the
Head; or when it is too full, which is chiefly from things bad in quality, as
Drunkenness, or unwholesome vaporous Meats and Drinks, then there is a gnawing
in the Stomach, like to that the Vulgar call the Heart-burn; also there is a
disposition to vomit before the fit, the evil afflicts now and then, according
to the putrefaction or stirring of a Choleric or Pituitous matter in the
Stomach; or from the Womb, in suppression of the Courses; or from the Liver and
Spleen, or Intestines, in suppression of the Haemorrhoids and Faeces, together
with which signs of those particular parts affected, may be demonstration of
the Cause to arise from thence.

External Causes are either Objects set before the eyes, which are either low,
and steep-down low places, and the cause is natural, for fear dissipates the
Spirits, and frighting recals them to the center, whence they are hurried in a
contrary motion.

Or things that turn round, and whisk about, as Whirl-pools, Wind-Mills,
Wheels, and the like, whence the beholding of such, causes a circumvolution
also of the visive Spirits, which communicate such a false sense to the
apprehension, so that they imagine all things turn round.

Or strong heat, as of the Sun and fire, which is known by the Sick relating
his too long stay in the hot Sun, or nigh the hot fire, either bareheaded or
covered.

A Vertigo is also divided doubly by Galen and Hippocrates: one is a plain
Vertigo, of which we have spoken; another is called by the Greeks Scotoma, and
Scotodinos, in Latin Tenebricosa Vertigo, or a dark Vertigo, wherein sight is
wanting, and a very mistiness or blindness possesses the Sick, together with
his imagination of turning round, caused from atrabilis, and grosser thicker
vapors: But Fuchsius, and others, would not have a difference to be made,
conceiving it to be only a greater degree of a Vertigo, and not of a different
nature.

Prognostics. It often degenerates into an Apoplexy, and Fallingsickness, and
is often a forerunner thereof, but the dark Vertigo is ^ighest to the
Falling Sickness, but there is most fear if it last long, for if neither
Apoplexy nor Epilepsie be made, the sick at last often are used to swoond and
faint with it; the Scotoma is worst in Winter; to Choleric persons there is
most danger in Summer, and to Melancholic in Autumn, because then it is most
vehement to such; it is bad to old men because their Brain is weak; that that
is primary is more dangerous than that made from consent of parts; if Objects
appeared to them, there is most fear of a frenzy; it is timely to be helped
lest a worse Disease succeed it.

Diet, in what cause soever, is to be modelized of Meats easy to digest, and
of pure Nutriment; all windy things shunned, Crudity and Drunkenness, too great
satiety, or fasting, use of Onions, Leeks, Mustard Seed, old Wine, Milk,
Garlic, Radish, and things of like nature are not to be permitted: wholsomer
food is River-Crabs, Partridges, Pheasants, scaley Fishes, Veal, Pullets, and
Chickens, Meats that are pleasant to the Palate, not vaporous, sauced with
some Astringents that prohibit the ascent of hurtful vapors from the Stomach,
are to be allowed him; white Wine is allowed for drink sometimes, but where the
affect is grown inveterate, Physicians commend Guaicum-Drink to be drunk for
their ordinary Beer.

Air Austral, or hot and moist, is to be avoided, so is also cloudy weather,
and Sunshine too sometimes hurtful; they are not to be permitted to see things
that turn quick about, or to look from steep high places; keep their minds
quiet, stir not up and exasperate Humors by the Passions enraged; also too
great heat and stirring of the Head brings damage to the Sick.

Let sleep be moderate, and let him be two hours always, or above, ere he lies
down to sleep; sleep does some much good, because it discusseth vapors.

Cure is first directed to the Cause, secondly to the Part.

I. The Causes are various, and therefore the method of curing cannot be one
and the same: For,

1. If Phlethory offend, and Blood abound too copiously in the Head, it is
necessary, 1. To respect the whole, as by opening of the Hepatick Vein of the
Arm: 2. The Head, by opening the Arteries behind the Ears by a skilful Artist;
but Blood is gradually to be drawn away, for some fall upon every light
occasion: Cupping-glasses, with Scarification, may also be applied to the
hinder part of the Head.

2. If Phlegm and gross crude Humors be impacted in the Head, after preparation
thereof, they are to be purged forth; Revulsion is to be followed, as by
rubbing and bindings, Gargarisms, Sternutatories, and Errhines, the two last
whereof are condemned by Septalius, because Vapors being inordinately moved in
the Brain, the Symptom is exacerbated, and an Epilepsie sooner made, whenas
little of the Morbifick matter is extracted thereby: Cauteries are to be
applied behind the Ears, chiefly to the Sinciput, says Zach. Lusitanus;
natural Baths, specially those flowing from Allom, are good; also Embrocations,
and Topics, to digest.

3. If Indications of a Choleric or Atrabilatious Humor abounding in the
Head, be present, they are cured as Headache, and distemper of the Head from
those Humors.

4. If windy Exhalations and bad Vapors, either in the Head, or other
inferior parts, be cause hereof, Repel by Oxirhodinum, give inwardly things
that stop and settle vapors; revulse, where Clisters and Suppositories are
good; Frictions also and Ligatures for aversion; Odours are to be held to the
Nostrils, that amend and correct the quality of those fumes, and by a propriety
help a Vertigo.

II. Respect the Part: Where if the Cause lie primarily in the Brain, the Brain
is to be purged, as before, then strengthened by Internals and Externals.

If from consent of the inferior Bowels, Cure is to be directed to them; where
if the Stomach suppeditate vapors to the Head, a Vomit for bringing forth of
putrified Humors is sometimes very effectual; then give Alortick Pills, both
to cleanse and strengthen the faculty of good digestion: Astringent Powders are
always to be given after meat, to prohibit and rectify vapors.

2. If from a putrefaction of Choleric Humors in the Mesentery-Veins vapors
are transmitted to the Head, prepare with Wormwood-Wine, and the five
Opening-Roots, then purge forth that Humor, and keep back Vapors arising from
thence.

3. If from other Bowels, as Liver, Spleen, Intestines, and Hypochonders; we
must diligently look into, and correct the vice of those parts, evacuate the
Humors there seated, and intercept their vapors, whose Remedies, as things
also for all other intentions, are to be found out in the list of Medicines
that are held to help a Vertigo from a propriety and specifical quality in
them; and they may be variously used and applied, according to the Causes, and
preceding Institution.

Those things therefore that help a Vertigo by a propriety, or an hidden
Sympathetical or Antipathetical Quality in them, are Southernwood, whose
Decoction in Wine taken often (as all others are to be) is said to be a most
effectual Remedy; nor less praise has the Hear Bittersweet, born about the
Neck in manner of a Garland; or Vinegrb of Squills taken every morning fasting,
Syrup of the sharp Juice of Cit^ons, Bears-Ear, Extract of Scorzonera-Roots,
Dung of a male Peacock dried, for a Man, and of a female for a Woman; and
flowers of the Tile-Tree are choice Specificals.

Compositions of greatest effect, and of the choicest Simples are thus made:

of Roman Doronicum, or Wolfs-bane, Scorzonera Roots, the faeces of Juice of
Briony, of each j. Flowers of Couslips, of the Tile-Tree, of Lavender, Sage,
and Holy Thistle, of each ij. make thereof a Powder, and give from ss. to j ss.
in some convenient Water.

of D^ng of a Peacock, Southernwood, of each iss. Emeralds, Flowers of Sage,
Betony, Lillies of the Valley, Featherfew, of each ss. Castorium, j. Pellitory
of Spain, Pennyroyal, China-Roots, white Beets, of each j. with the treble
weight of Sugar dissolved in some Cephalical Water, make an Electuary.

of Squills dried, Southernwood, Holy Thistle, of each mj. Catmint, Featherfew,
Cowslips, Alheal, of each mss Bay Berries, Lavender, Bears-Ear, of each iij.
Castorium, Amber, Cinnamon, of each ij. prepared and mixed with white Wine, let
them be distilled, and of that Water ss. or j. may be taken every morning and
night fasting, before or after food, two hours or more.

A specifical Purgative may be thus made in form of Pills:

of Collocinthis, j. Agarick, i ss. Root of Briony, ij. Carrawayseeds, and
Cinnamon, of each ss. with Syrup of the Juice of Briony, make Pills; two
Scruples, or more, whereof, may be taken at once, and is most proper in a
phlegmatic Cause, and by an hidden quality insinuate themselves, and draw forth
the matter of a Vertigo.

Marcellus commends the Juice of black Beets, anointed on the Temples.

Quercetanus praises a Powder of native Cinabrium; as, of true Mineral
Verm^lion, ss. Pearls, and red Corral, of each ij. Saffron, j. Leaves of Gold,
in number ten; it is given to a weight in Valley-Lilly-Water. The same Author
also greatly praised the Dung of a Peacock dried, and given in Powder.

Partlicius and Platerus commend Crystal, hung about the Neck.

Others commend anointing of the Forehead with the fat of Land-Snakes, strewing
of the Powder of Silkworms on the Crown, a Garland of Pennyroyal, and an
Emerald Ring, to help by propriety, and their whole substance.

All these are to be used as the Cause does most require, and according to the
foregoing Precepts.

In the Fit peculiarly, these things are to be observed:

1. To take meat before it, for so it is made more mild, as says Platerus.

2. To bring them to quiet, lay them on their Backs, their Nostrils higher than
their Head; use Oxirhodinum to repel vapors; put a Tent dipped in
Cinnamon Water, up their Nostrils, which sometimes suddenly helps; rub their
Nostrils with Oil of Amber.

3. To bring them again, as is needful in some, hold Peucedane-root dipped in
Vinegar, to their Nostrils, and Galbanum; rub their Forehead and Temples with
Oil of Pennyroyal, or Rosemary and wild Marjoram boild in Vinegar.

Lastly, To preserve from an Apoplexy, the Seeds of Caraways steeped in Wine,
are commended.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Passion of the Mind moved by Love.

LOVE is a depravation of the Fantasy, erring from Judgment, and arising from
an inward Cause affecting the Heart with Passion, upon the apprehension and
pondering upon the outward Subject.

Cause is obscure, nor can the Reason hereof sufficiently be rendered; only
such as are so deeply in love, are such as for the most part are very subject
to be altered, and have their Passions moved upon every light Cause, as will
quickly fligger with Joy, or despair with Sadness; some attribute it more
specially to redundancy of the Seed, and Idleness; whence Ovid writ,

Otia si tollus periere Cupidinis Arts.

If Sloth you take away, the god of Love'l decay.

Some call it the Noblemans Madness, but Poor are struck with Cupid's Dart as
well as Rich.

Signs are not always the same of all; the Pulse in most is very wavering,
either very high, or very low, very unconstant; whence Erasistratus found out
Love-Sickness: when they are dejected and in despair, their Pulse is very small
and low; but if their Love be but talked of, or come in sight, or they hear any
joyful news thereof, presently their Pulse is augmented.

2. When they are in despair, or cannot have Him or Her that is desired, they
mourn, lament, sigh, are very thoughtful, forget to eat their Food at due
seasons, cannot slep, nor are at all delighted in the management of their
Businesses; but when they are elavated by his presence, or good news from him,
or talking of him, they break forth into exceeding Joy; sing, play on Music,
talk many lascivious and fond Sentences; yea, and sometimes are very forward,
and offer themselves to perpetrate unlawful Copulation.

3. After some continuance of time, with anxieties, solicitudes, and deplored
thoughtfulness of mind, they grow very pale, which is in general to all.

And lastly, Some through despair either turn mad, and are distracted, or else
lay violent hands, or make away themselves, or bring themselves into other
grievous Diseases, that kill them in the end.

Cure. They will not use any Remedy, nor hear any Advice, nor receive any
comfort, nor hardly have their thoughts diverted, and set on any other Object,
or Subject. If they be lascivious, and abound with Blood, it is good to let
them Blood, let them use a thin and sparing Diet; and such things as cool,
enervate, and consume the Seed; let them have some employment set them that may
busy their Mind, and indulge venerious thoughts the less: If they incline to a
melancholy temper, things, and the Method ordained for Melancholicks are
proper, only avoiding such things as increase Seed, and provoke to Venery.

If they be distracted and delire, they must be cured as Mad People.

Sometimes Medicines are given to cause Love, which the Latins call Philtra,
which bring the Party taking them into a raving and restless condition after
the Party desired; or else are such as vehemently stir up lust; as many
Whoremongers use to give Cantharides for that purpose, which do not cause
mutual Love, but by their Acrimony mightily tickle and irritate to Venery.

Against such kind of Love-Potions that so enrage the Affections into a fury,
Hartman advises to (as a Specifical) the Powder of a Secundine, being first
dried in an Oven, and then given with Treacle, or some Antidotary water for
certain times.

Ernestus commends Aurum Vitae for the Plague, and for Love-Potions taken by
Women; from which, says he, they are wont to pine away, nor have they any
desire to Venus.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Cephalaea, or an old Headache.

CEphalaea is an inveterate and old Headache, that has remained for a long
time, not risen of a sudden from light Causes, but of long continuance from
Humors seated in the Head, and and afflicts with exacerbations.

The Cause is the same as Cephalalgia, or a sudden or periodick Headache is
caused of, as to Humors; but all slight Causes of the Cephalalgia cause not a
Cephalaea.

Signs are only necessary for distinction of the Humor predominant, and are
easily found out by a diligent perusal of the aforegoing Chapters of Headache.

Prognostics. This is worse than Cephalalgia, because of the durance of it,
and the contumacy of the Cause, and is more easily or hardly cured, according
to the Cause, which is easily found out by the aforegoing Chapters.

Cure also varies as the Cause, and every particular Cause is taken away as in
the foregoing Chapters is directed.

Only in a Cephalaea there is need of more forcible Medicines, and a longer
continuation of them.

As longer purging by Apozems and Pills, letting Blood in the Arm, and after
that in the Forehead; if need be, oftener.

Gargarisms, Errhines, Sneezers, Blisters, and Rubificatives to the hinder part
of the Head, and behind the Ears.

Ludovicus Septalius says, In Diuturn pains, where the matter has been thick,
experience has shown that the Head being shaved, and a Vesicatory applied
thereon, has cured, whenas other Remedies failed. So the Ancients, both Greeks
and Arabians, did much use Rubificatives and Synapisms in contumacious
Headaches, that did attract and draw forth the matter through the pores of the
skin; and attenuating a thick matter, did avoid it by insensible transpiration.

In an hot Cause, Medicines cooling, and in a cold Cause, heating; as is shown
in the foregoing Chapters of particular Causes, are to be administered.

Lest the Head should be over-weakened, the use of Cephalic Electuaries, and
Caps, prescribed in the other foregoing Chapters, are constantly to be used.

So are all Topicals as are prescribed in the precedent Chapters to be used;
and effectual in a Cephalaea, the Cause considered.

Morbi Oculorum.
ALL these Diseases of the Eyes were writ about 1658. and were collected
from Authors, the best things I could find; and where I found any Author
vvanting, I made a supply from another: They contain the chief Method and
Medicines, Signs Diagnostick, Prognostic, and Causes, writ by the Ancient and
Modern Practical Physicians: Yet since I vvrote them, I see by my own
Experience, and the pure and uninterested Experience of others, they are
defective, and the Readers of them cannot know the Truth fully and clearly of
the Method of Nature thereby; yet in these Diseases I happened to write upon,
Authors writ the most experimentally, because they had not so many Ambiguities
and Intricacies, and the Causes were more palpable: I did also draw out all
the best Medicines and Specificals, which because they were commonly founded
on good and reiterated Experience, they will hold throughout all Ages; and
whatever is not surely founded on Experience will be contradictable: Yet in
Experience many have been deceived, vvriting of one how all others must be;
when we scarce find two alike in any one Disease in all things: And so the
Ancients writ Chapters by one or two, or three sick Persons they savv, and
perhaps they were different cases from the most common: It is certain, under
twenty or thirty Patients, seeing the varieties in them all, we cannot
punctually conclude of any thing, in any one Disease. Yet do all these things
happen in some, and much as they are found writ. We did most lean to the
Moderns, and the best of them, as Sennertus, Riverius, Platerus, Johnstonus,
etc. And with what I have delivered in other places, I think these indigested
Papers may do well, and the Readers be much bettered thereby: And these were
more clearly writ from Experience than others we have omitted. Most of these
Distempers of the Eyes have been examined by Oculists that have practiced
peculiarly that way, and yet I perceive in their Writings, though they had
Experience enough of their own to write by, they vvrote after the Ancients in
most things; finding that the easier way, and the Method ready drawn to their
Hand, and in Credit and Popular Applause.

CHAP. I.
Of Dimness of Sight, or Blindness.

DImness of Sight, or Blindness, is a defect of Seeing, either perfectly, or
unrightly, made from want of visive Spirits, Obstructions of the Optic Nerves,
or other Causes hurting the visive faculty, no vice or spot being to be seen in
the Eye.

CAUSE
Is either from the fewness of Spirits, as happens after long Diseases, or from
the Brain not supplying Animal Spirits, or from fault of the Animal Spirits,
which are thickened, cooled, and weakened, as in old men, whenas they ought to be
Iucid, thin, and many; and then it is called Amblyopia.

2. From the Optic Nerves; which are, 1. Obstructed either by Melancholy, or
Phlegmatic Humors falling from the Head, as in a Palsy, so that the Optic
Spirits cannot pass to the Eyes. 2. From Constriction as well as Obstruction of
those Nerves, is Amblyopia made, they are narrowed and compressed diverse ways;
for in Phrensies, Inflammation, and other Diseases of Plentitude of Blood, from
Bruises also, whence Pus is gathered, and Tumors compressing the Nerves, so
that the Spirits cannot pass, as has been found in those that have been
opened. 3. Wounds and solution of the continuity of those Nerves from the same
reason cause Blindness, and then it is called Amaurosis.

Some add a third kind, viz. Myopia, which is whenas they see only what is
nigh them, made from weakness of the visive Spirits, and thickning of the Coats
from Humors.

Antecedent and generative Causes were,

1. Crudities and Drunkenness.

2. Reading, and that after meat, and of small Letters, or by Candlelight.

3. An evil-kind of Diet, meats of bad digestion, and exhalative.

4. Strong Vomits or Purges, that violently stir up Humors, that are carried
to the Optic Nerves.

5. The Sunbeams, and too great light.

6. The immoderate use of Venery, passions of the mind, and sorrow.

7. Shedding of many tears, and immoderate weeping.

8. All intent looking of the Eyes, and the beholding of things small very
wishly, or things that whisk and turn about; fire, smoke, dust, a thick Air and
Baths are also hurtful: Collyries of Opium, Poppies, and the like, thicken the
Pupil, and dull and thick ^n the visive Spirits also.

DIAGNOSTICKS.
There is no vice appearing in the Eye, so that sight by degrees grows dimmer
and weaker, and no film, cloud or spot is seen in the Pupil unless that the
Pupil be larger, and more big then naturally accustomed, and sometimes black.

There is sometime like a Gnat before the Eye, a little obliquely, which shadow
is seen most in an open and clear Air; it grows bigger in time, and there is
another made to it, so that whither soever the Patient looks, if it be abroad
in a light time, these two shadows are always like two Gnats, a little
obliquely before their Eyes.

Moreover, we must guess at the Cause and Disease by the foregoing, of things
hurtful by Pain, Heaviness, Fullness, and Heat in the Head, that preceded,
whereby were the noxious Humors translated to the Optic Nerves: if none of
these preceded, and we cannot gather that they are either obstructed or
constrict, we may suppose the fault to be in the Optic Spirits, and the more
if from old Age.

Amaurosis is soon made sometimes, but Amblyopia by degrees.

PROGNOSTICS.
Amblyopia therefore is better than Amaurosis, because in that so contumacious
a stoppage of the Nerves is not suddenly made, whence it is also easilier cured.

Amaurosis is bad, because the Nerves obstructed are hard to be recovered, as
in Palseys; yet if imperfect seeing be only made, there is hope, though it
yields not after the use of much Physic; if it be made from constriction of
those Nerves, it ceases upon the taking away or ceasing of the Cause that
crushed the Nerves together: If it come suddenly from violent vomiting, by
taking another Vomit the Humors have been taken from thence, that were moved
thither by the same Cause before; the like also, if it come from disturbance of
Humors from violent Purgers, it is taken away by Purging again.

Women with Child at time of Delivery, or before, are delivered from their
Blindness; but old men hardly recover sight again, because the defect in them
made through Age, cannot be repaired. If sight in sick men fails suddenly, it
argues death.

If Humors be more loosly seated about the Nerves, though they have been very
dim for a long time, yet there is great hopes of Cure; specially if the Sick
shutting the sound Eye, the Pupil or Apple of the other be dilated.

CURE
Consists, 1. In good regiment and order of Diet, where all things that hurt
are to be avoided and shunned, as Air that is misty, thick, and rainy,
caliginous and Austral; Flesh, and meats of bad Juice, and hard concoction; fly
the use of Leeks, Onions, Garlic, Radish, Colworts, and strong Spices, as
Mustard, Ginger, especially too immoderately used; Toadstools, Milk, Fishes and
Fruits.

Meats must be moderated and medicated; use not unwholesome or too much food at
Supper, sleep not presently thereupon, let not also that exceed; lie on the
Back, shun too great light and sunshine, exercise moderately; yet fly all
things that bring Humors to the Eyes, as smoke, dust, wind, too intense
reading, and looking on things, watching, tears, sadness, etc. Gourdon his
Verses are,

Haec Oculos multum Sol. pulvis fumus and aestus,
Ventus, cum fletu Vina, Venusque nocent.
2. In Medicines, where, 1. We must respect the part, whether the Cause be
Essential, or affecting by Consent; if Essential, look to the Head; Capital
Pills are made of Senna, and Aloes, of each j. Diagridium, j. Seeds of Rheu, of
Fennel, of each j. Nutmegs and Cloves, of each ss. with Syrup of Eyebright make
Pills; take every other day a convenient dose; or Apozems may be used in their
stead, and be continued long, wherein may be put Specificals for the Eyes. In
Amaurosis also we must use Apophlegmatisms, Errhines, Gargarisms, and the like
Head-Purgers, Cupping-Glasses to the Shoulders, Setons to the Neck;
Sternutatories, and Errhines too, are disliked by most, and therefore may be
left untried, other ways of helping being so plentiful, and more effectual.

In the next place we must come to take away the Obstruction of the Optic
Nerves, strengthen the feebleness and restore the deficiency of the visive
Spirits, these are such as by a propriety strengthen the Brain and sight, and
are made the more effectual, used after Purging has made preparation for them,
and are to be continued with and after the use of the former things for long
time, as well to strengthen the sight restored for fear of a Relapse again, as
restore it being decayed: among such, Eyebright is chiefly praised, it is
steeped in white Wine, and called Eyebright-Wine, which has cured some of a
years Blindness, and brings acuteness of sight to aged People. Some advise to
take in Powder a every morning, and say the very looking on it sharpens the
sight.

A Water may be composed of the following Specificals, distilled in an Alimbeck.

Eyebright, miij. Rheu, Fennel, Chelidone, or Sellondine, Bastard-Parsly, of
each mj. Nutmegs, Cloves, of each j. macerate them in white Wine a due time,
being all rightly mixed, and prepared, and distill them; a draught of this Water
may be taken every morning and night, fasting before and after it: the same way
also may of the sequent Powder, of great virtue, be taken: Flowers of
Eyebright, ij. Seeds of sweet Fennel, j. common Fennel-Seeds, Nutmegs, Cloves,
Vervain, Rosemary, of each ss. Sugar, j. make of all a Powder. Rheu is
commended also, taken inwardly; whence the Poet spoke,

Nobilis est Ruta, quia luminis reddit acuta;
Auxilio Rutae, vir lip videbis acute.
An Electuary also, to whom it may be more pleasing, may not be less
efficactious: as, Conserve of Eyebright, ij. Pulpe of Juniper Berries drawn
with Fennel-Water, iij. sweet Fennel-Seeds, j. Seeds of Mountain-Siler, Ashes
of Swallows, Ebony-Wood, of each ss. with some Cephalical Syrup make an
Electuary hereof. Condite Mirobolanes also, and condite Nutmegs, Wormwood-Beer,
Vinegar of Squils, etc. are good for the Eyes and visive Spirits; some ordain
sweating, and the use of Bituminous Waters to dry the Head.

Topics are of little use here, because the Cause is internal, and there is no
excrescent matter upon the Eye, yet Topicals are thought to avail much in
Amblyopia, for succouring and corroberating the Optic Nerves, and Visive
Faculty, as Foments of Decoction of Rheu, Eyebright, Spiked-loose-strife,
Tormentile, Vervain, Lovage, Fennel, Chelidone, and Centuary; such kind of
Waters as this, are much commended:

of Rheu, Vervain, Chelidone, Eyebright, Fennel, Clary, of each mj, the Liver
of a Goat cut small, Sal Gem. ij. Spiked-loosestrife, mjss. distill them by an
Alimbeck, any proper moisture being first added thereto.

All Galls, except of venomous Beasts, are good; the Liquor of Serapio is
useful, dropping from the Liver of a Bear roasted, sprinkled with long Pepper
in the roasting.

Also the Powder of a burnt Magpy mixed with Fennel-water of Gerardus a solo;
but these scarcely penetrate to the Optic Nerves.

Other local Medicines are also used to the Head, Cucupha's and Powders to
sprinkle in the Hair, to dry the Brain, where we suspect a moist Distemper.

2. If by Consent of Parts, as it is seldom made, though agravated, being always
essential to the Head, though fomented by fumes, and bad vapors arising from
the Stomach, generating more matter, and a more contumacious Disease, therefore
digestion is to be rectified, let them not eat great suppers, not sleep
presently thereupon, forbear all evaporative things, give a Powder to prohibit
that always after supper, of Coriander-Seeds, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Fennel-Seeds,
Wormwood, Cloves, etc. which also perfects digestion, and turns the quality of
the vapors from hurting to helping; for which also Turnips in Meat are thought
by a propriety to help the Eyes, and Broth and Flesh of Vipers; Meats are also
to be condite with Spices, as Ginger, Cloves, Nutmegs, sweet and common
Fennel-Seeds, etc. Let concoction be perfected before they eat again, else
crude vapors are carried to the Head: In an Hectical state of the Body, an
Analeptick Diet, and such as is ordered for Hecticks, is to be directed,
whereby the animal and visive Spirits may be restored.

CHAP. II.
Of Night-Blindness, or Nyctalopia.

Nyctalopes are such as see nothing in the night, and but badly the Sunsetting,
from thickness of the Spirits and Tunicles.

CAUSE.
The reason hereof is from weakness of the Head, and visive Spirits, or
thickness of them, or of the Tunicles of the Eyes, whereby Light has not such
an influence, as not able to penetrate, or penetating not sufficiently, used
from weakness and fewness of Spirits; the Tunicles are also thought to thickened
more on nights through moisture from influence of the Moon, and men's sight is
thought to be more acute and quick in the New Moon, than when she is come to
her Full: Some see better on nights than they do a days, which is a very rare
thing, and comes from rarity of the Spirits, that are dissipated by sight.

DIAGNOSTICKS.
If it be essential to the Brain, the other faculties of the Brain are hurt; if
it had a sudden rise, the Optic Nerves were stopped through the sudden falling
thither of some Humors; if it has had a long time of increasing, there is
distemper of the Brain, and grosness of the Blood and Spirits therefrom. Celsus
says, It never happens to Women that have due and ordinate flux of Courses.

DIET.
Diet must be attenuating; things that thicken the Blood are to be shunned.

CURE.
If signs of Phlethory or Fullness be present, we must let Blood, however
Cephalical Purging Pills are to be used as are directed for Amaurosis; yet
where we have no Indications of plenty of Humors, less purging will serve:
Some premise preparation, and add Masticatories, Gargarisms, Vesicatories,
Cupping-Glasses, etc. for Revulsion and Derivation, which do good in a
plentiful matter, and where the Head redounds with Humors.

Next hereto are strengtheners of the Head and Optic Nerves to be directed, as
may be plentifully exemplarized out of the Chapter of Amblyopia and Amaurosis.

Topicals are used here, and commended; as the Liver of a Goat, which applied
to the Eyes, is said to make men see as well on nights as days, and the reason
is thought to be from Sympathy, because the Goats see as well on nights as
days; yet there is no coherence betwixt the Liver and the Eye.

This is also various ways prepared for this use, as roasted and b^sted with
Galls of Animals, and the liquor that drops therefrom is put into the Eye; or
it is roasted, being cut and stuck with Fennel, Chelidine, Rheu, and the Liquor
dropping therefrom reserved for use; the vapor of it also boiling is
appointed: Some advise it to be eaten with Salt of Eyebright often.

The Water of Honey, also or Galls of Animals, the water of a Saphire-Stone,
the Collity of Gentilis, of Pompholix and Stibium, washed in Fennel-water, etc.
are useful.

Forestus used the Liquor of the Liver of the Fish Elpuick, that fried
therefrom in torrifying, as a secret.

Sharp Medicines are hurtful, and too much washing the Eyes with cold water,
thickens the Tunicles and Spirits, and renders the Disease the worse.

CHAP. III.
Of Squinting, or Strabismos.

STrabismos is a depraved motion of the Eyes, which is either natural, from
faulty situation, whenas the Eyes are moved to the sides, or the Crystal-Line
is distorted; or not natural, which is made in Children and Infants looking
always one way to the Light; or in elder Persons, from convulsion of the
Muscles moving the Eyes, made from their dryness or repletion.

CURE.
The Cure is not performed in that which comes naturally: That which is made
from a convulsion of the Muscles, is cured as Spasms, a Palsy of the Eye; and
Tortura, Orris, the Powder of Swallows Heads blown in, or a Magpy burnt,
Turtles Blood, etc. are proper: That which comes through vice of looking awry
in Children, is timely to be looked to; for if it be inveterate, it is hardly
helped; therefore Cases for the Eyes for such are to be made, so that they
cannot see but by looking streight-forth through them.

CHAP. IV.
Of Spots of the Cornea, or Webs of the Eyes.

Aule in Greek signifies a Cicatrice, or Skar, which happening in the black of
the Eye, or pellucid part of the Cornea, and being white, is called Leucoma in
Greek, and Albugo in Latin; if more bright and splendent, it is termed by some
Paralampsis; if this white spot be less, it is called in Greek Nephelion, and
in Latin Nebula, a Cloud; if it be more thin, it is called in Greek Achlis,
and Caligo in Latin, signifying a Mist.

CAUSE.
Its Cause is either external, as a Cicatrice, a Wound or Ulcer foregoing; or
internal, as a Phlegmatic matter gathered twixt the Membranes, or an Humor
seated and soaked into the Cornea twixt the coats, and there concrete and
compacted.

SIGNS
Be a white spot, which is thicker and whiter than other affects happening to
the Cornea, and thickning it so that a passage is denied in the visible
species, and the Sick sometime seem to see as if it were through smoke and
mists.

Some are more superficiary, some more deep, and incline to black, where the
Urea is sometimes offended, sometimes the albuginous Humor, in which they are
not so conspicuous.

PROGNOSTICS.
If not inveterate, if in Children, if only from a thick pituitous matter left
there from Opthalmies, it is the easilier cured; but if inveterate, if in old
Persons, if from a Cicatrice hard and gross, and in a part so exquisite of
sense, wherein sharp Medicines fit for it may not be endured, it is hardly
cured.

CURE
Is internal, as by generals, Purging and Bleeding in Phlethorick and
Cacochymick Bodies, to take away the antecedent Cause, and an exact Diet for
prohibiting increase of Humors, which are gathered, and fall upon a part that
is weak: Or external, where first, revulse, if the Sick be apt to defluxions,
into his Eyes; apply Cupping-Glasses to the sides of his Neck, Vesicatories to
the Crown, and nape of his Neck, to pull back and draw forth Excrements apt to
tend to the Eyes.

Secondly, apply Topicals to the Eyes, 1. To mollify the concrete matter: 2.
To attenuate it: 3. To wipe it away, which is done by things abstergent, and
that have a peculiarity to take away Pearls, Spots, and Webs from the Eyes.

In the use of such, we must observe these things: 1. That they be not too
sharp; 2. If they may not be cured, they are to be changed into another color;
3. Herewith such as preserve the strength of the Eye are to be used.

These Simples and Compounds, above others, are applauded:

1. The Powder of Liquorish put often into the Eye, being very finely poudered,
as all Eye-Pouders ought to be.

2. The Juice of Pimpernel, with the blew Flower dropped upon the Web.

3. A Colliry (of Lapis Calaminaris thrice burnt, and twice extinct in
Wine-Vinegar, j. Myrrh, burnt Lead, and washed, of each ss. Oriental Saffron
five Grains, Opium six Grains, burnt Brass iiij. Decoction of Fennigreek, j.
beaten and mixed upon a Marble) of Johnstonus.

4. The Water of Honey, which says Platerus, most certainly blots out all
spots of the Eyes.

5. A Water (of Honey, lbij. Fennel, Eldern, Eyebright, of each two Pugils,
with Sugar Candy iv. distilled in Balneo Mariae) of Amatus Lusitanus.

6. The Juice of Pearl-Trefoile, so called from its virtue of taking away
Pearls and VVebs from the Eyes.

7. The Powder of the Stone found in the Head of a long Snail, blown in, or put
upon the Web.

8. The Juice of Herbs that be bitter, and endued with a nitrous quality, mixed
with Honey, for so they stick better upon the Pupil, and are not so apt to flow
to the corner, such be Draconts, Chelidone, Ground Ivy, Pimpernel, Centuary,
Amurca, sour Grapes, Rosemary, etc.

9. Galls of Animals, as of Goats, Eagles, Vultures, Lizards, Kites, etc.

10. The fat of the Liver of Lampreys (that being put in a Glass, and set in
the Sun) of Hartman, to anoint the Eyelids at going to Bed, together with
eating the Powder of Thistles of the Meadow several times.

11. Let a Child often lick the Spot with his Tongue.

12. Or put in the Seeds of Clary into his Eye, which afterward will come out
again, being compassed with much matter: If sharp things hurt, we must leviate
and appease pain from acrimony.

Use mucilaginous matter, as of Flea-Seeds, Marish-Mallow-Seed, and Fennigreek:
wash with Milk, and let sharp Medicines be tempered by mild ones.

Some commend the Leaves of Hemlock applied only upon the Eyebrows, to have a
propriety to take away Pins, VVebs, and Spots; or the same Hemlock-Leaves to
mss. and Bay Salt, mj. bruised, and applied with renovation to the VVrists.

If the Spot may not be taken away, yet its white color is changed by Juice of
Pomegranates; some make them black with burnt Lead, Vitriol, Litharge, Galls,
Bark of Pomegranates, Cipress-Nuts, etc. used by the Ancients, but not so much
respected by Modern Men; for although they are laid only the Cornea, yet by
falling upon the white of the Eye, they make that black.

If a yellow Color, as happens to those that have the Jaundice, seiz upon the
Cornea from Choler poured out thither, and affecting a false imagination, as to
the color of objects, which seem yellow; it is cured by a fume of Vinegar cast
upon red hot Tiles, and received by the Eye held over it: But if we would not
be hasty in having of it cured, it would cease spontaneously with the ceasing
of the Disease, viz. the Jaundice, on which it is grounded.

CHAP. V.
Of a Cataract or Suffusion.

DEFINITION.
A Cataract or Suffusion is an Obstruction of the Pupil or Apple of the Eye,
from an Humor: Or, as others well, A corrupt Water congealed like a Curd, and
hindering the sight.

CAUSE
Paraeus says, is a Skin obstructing the Pupil; others say, A Water congealed:
Certain it is it is an Humor either sincere or mixed, and great standing-out
Eyes does give great occasion to the gathering of it, because the Virtue
diffused is more weak in a large space, and yields an easy coming to of
Humors, which are originally bred from Meats yiedling ill Juice, and
transferred thither either by way of evaporation from the Stomach to the Brain,
where bad concoction in probability went before, and it is reckoned as Cause of
a Bastard-Suffusion; or the effusion of them (being either serous, or
Phlegmatic, others add Melancholic) into the space betwixt the Cornea and
Crystal Humors. Weakness of the Eyes commonly goes before, whereby they are
less able to repel the falling down of Humors that are collected in the Head;
which weakness is either native, as in the Eyes sticking forth, or accidental,
made by blows, bruises, hurts, Baths, rainly Air, heat of the Sun, long
reading, specially on nights late, and by Candlelight, in Books of small
print, and with intensness; and whatever exagitates, irritates, or sets Humors
in motion; also weeping, and shedding of tears from great sorrows and troubles
of mind, produce this, through weakening of the Eyes, and stirring and
irritating Humors.

THE PLACE.
The coming of this Humor is by the Veins of the Tunicles, Urea, or Nerves
Optic, those Veins being many, are derived from the Pericrane passing to the
conjunctive Tunicles, from thence to the Cornea and Urea; or from the Menings
of the Brain, whence Branches are derived to the Membranes of the Eyes, from
which chiefly the Urea Tunica may with facility drop the Humor into the watery
Humor; they easily also come from the Brain by the Optic Nerves to the
Crystal Humor, and than the matter of the Suffusion sticks to the Crystal,
sometime by fluxion, and sometime by congestion, wherein weakness of the
expulsive faculty is a main Cause.

NAMES.
It has diverse, according to its growth: 1. When it is fresh, Authors call it a
Suffusion: 2. Whenas there is a matter gathered in the Apple like water, they
term it Water: 3. When it is consumed, and sight darkened, they call it a
Cataract or Hypochyma.

SIGNS are expressed in DIFFERENCES. PROGNOSTICS.
They are not healed till they be grown; Sky-Colour, Seagreen, or of the
color of Chess-Nuts, are curable: Those that are not dilated by rubbing, if it
be not already made, and unconfirmed, it may be cured by Medicines, by which
may also a Bastard-Suffusion, wherein are as it were appearances of flies, and
is made chiefly by vice of the Stomach sending hurtful vapors. If they follow
Fevers or vehement Headache, if it happens in Children or old men, then cure is
bad; if the Sick discerns no light, no cure. That which is with a consumption
of the Eyes, that that comes from great Diseases, incurable; or where Head
disses, as Phrensies, Headaches, Peripneumonies, etc. very difficulty cured:
That which is caused by a Blow, though the suffuse Humor be extracted by the
Needles, yet the eye being hurt and bruised, never perfectly recovers sight
again. Some make seven kinds of Cataracts, four whereof are, and three are not
curable: The first of the curable ones is bright like Alablaster, the second
white like Sky-Colour, the third Gray, or Ashes-Colour; the fourth Citrine.

Of one newly begun and not yet confirmed, and curable by Medicines, the Cure,
or at least the increase hindered, if not too far grown, and then it must grow
more to the Cataract.

DIET.
A thin and attenuating Diet, inclining to heat and drying; let their Supper be
very moderate, abstaining from Wine and Broth, fasting and abstinence also are
very advantageous; whereby a young Woman thinking to kill her self by hunger,
and a most thin Diet, being thereby exceedingly wasted, was delivered of the
Cataract called Gutta serena, from an absumption of the moist substance,
through defect of nourishment, as in Riverius his communicated Observations;
Venery must be avoided, and the frequenting hot Baths, or the like, hurt much.

2. Concocters of the watery Humor; also Preparers of a pituitous matter
superabounding, are to be had in use; among such, they are to be chosen that
are most specifical, and proper for the Head and Eyes.

3. Evacuation of the watery Humors; but this evacuation is to be continued
throughout the whole Cure, and reiterated Evacuation may avail; but once,
twice, or thrice do little in so contumacious an Affect: Yet Phlebotomy is
seldom to be acted herein, lest the Brain be over-cooled, and accumulate more
watery Humors, and send them to the Eyes.

4. Averters, where chiefly do avail Cupping-Glasses, and Vesicacatories, a
Cautery to the Crown, or behind the Ears, Setons, also Clisters,
Suppositories, and painful Frictions are useful.

5. Dissolvers of the Relics of the matter, and dissipaters; where in
internals, observe to give them at night, that the force of them may be the
better carried with the vapors of the meat to the Head. Topics must be
discutient, mixed with Emollients and Abstergents, beginning always with
mildest, and so by degrees proceeding to the strongest: for the Eye having an
exact sense of feeling, will not endure so strong Medicines at the first, as it
may do afterward, being accustomed thereto; among which, gentlest Medicines,
proper for this affect, are good: a Water distilled from Fennel, Eyebright,
Rheu, Celondine, and the like, to wash the Eyes every morning, Aqua Mellis, or
Honey-Water, is reckoned one of the best Remedies; the Powder of white
Sugar Candy put often into the Eyes, or the Powder of Swallows Heads burnt, are
helpful: Fonseca says, A Water distilled from Swallows with Bread in white
Wine, is miraculous: Avicen above others praises Sagapen dissolved in
Honey-VVater and Trypochymia; the Urine of a Child distilled with abstergent
Ophthalmicks, to drop a drop or two often into the Eye, is commended: the
Water of Crocus Metallorum, three or four drops at a time, is greatly praised
by Que^c^^^^^s, in his Dispensatory; it is made by infusion of j. of Crocus
Metallorum, in vj. of Celondine-VVater: Sylvins says, The Powder of Os Sepiae
put into the Eye wipes off these Waters: Zeehius also praises Water distilled
from Bread, made with Powder of Rheu, Chelidon, Betony, Fennel, and Honey.
Gulielmus Lozellus describes a Water with which he cured many that were stark
blind, made of Goats Liver, Eyebright, Chelidon, Sarcocol, Aloes, Pepper, Rheu,
Rosemary, Galls of Birds of prey, etc. Where we see the evil more contumacious,
and not yiedling to ordinary Remedies, we must try stronger; as is Botius his
Remedy of Cocks Gall, ss. Blood of a Mouse, iijss. with Woman's Milk make it
like a Colliry; or the Water of Man's Dung, or Doves Dung rather, with the Gall
of a Hare, and of a Weasel, with white Sugar Candy, and Pearls, are very
prevalent; the strongest Waters are made of Honey, the Galls of Birds of prey,
of Vultures, Kites, Partridges, with Ophthalm-Herbs, Myrrh, Pepper, etc.
distilled in a Glass Alimbeck; the strongest Galls are those that are venomous,
as of Vipers, Mad-Dogs, Serpents, etc. But Sylvius says, Alexiph. Med. are to
be used, because they being poisonous may pass by the corner of the Eye, and
hole of the Palate, into the Stomach: Other strong eating Medicines are made
of Vitriol, Rust of Brass, and the like, either used by way of fine Porder, and
so laid just upon the Cataract, or mixed (...) and dropped in: But in using all
these strong Remedies, we must greatly caution their use, for they by
increasing pain bring greater fluxion, and many dimsighted have thereby grown
quite blind; and therefore to mittigate the acrimony mix them with muscilage of
Fennugreek-Seed, Flea-Seed, etc. or wash the Eye afterward with warm VVomans
Milk; licking of the Eye for a long time with a Child's or Whelps Tongue, much
avails, so does a young Pigeon unfeathered cut in the middle, and applied warm
to the Eyes: Fumes also and Foments of the precedent things may be very
beneficial.

Of the Needle.
WE are not to try the Needle, if the Cataract be in the Center of the Pupil,
where things seem holey, for there is fear of the Eye being filled, and so an
absolute loss of sight. Dr. Banister sometime in couching Cataracts had the
whole Eye filled with a milky substance, which he supposed to be the matter of
the Cataract; and in others upon couching, Blood has been so diffused all over
the Eye: Some are so sollid and viscous, that being depressed by the Needle, do
again rise, when as others are so soft that the Needle pierces them, and takes
no hold, although of seven or eight years growth: again, Others so
pertinaciously bound to the Urea, that there is greater danger of distorting
that, than removing the Cataract: In all we must see they be grown and old,
else there will not be success; for the Needle will not take hold; they must be
quite blind ere they are to be couched; neither are wasted Eyes, nor old Men's,
nor Childrens, wherein it is incurable, to be Let the Moon decrease, let it be
two or three days after the Full; let her not be in Aries, let there be no
Headache nauseating, etc.
tried by the Needle; in Coughs also, as admonishes Lud Sept. it is dangerous to
cut them for fear of a disruption that supervening; Sneezing also happening is
inconvenient; for avoiding which, the finger is to be held upon the greater
Corner of the Eye; that the Needle make not a Rupture, compress the Pupil with
the finger: before couching, most Physicians approve of evacuation, and
cleansing of the Head by Pills, etc. Apozems. 2. To prepare the matter by
champing Fennel, or Cumminseeds, and Pepper, and breathing into the Eye; after
this, on a morning fasting, place him opposite on a stool, shut his sound Eye,
exhort him to patience, to endure, for his tractability furthers the dispatch
much; then with your left hand lift up the upper Eyelid, and with the right
hand put in the Needle (made of Iron, which others greatly condemn, thinking
that if the Cataract should prove hard in drawing down, the point of it, being
a brittle Metal, might break in the Eye, and so spoil sight for ever, and
therefore they order it to be made of Gold or Silver, or Spanish Lattin) in the
middle space betwixt the lesser Cornea and the Iris, avoiding the Veins, thrust
the Cataract downwards, the Sick must look with his Eyes toward his Nose, and
if the Cataract return back, draw it down again, and then take it away with the
point of the Needle: Some use to eat raw Onions, Beef, and Goats Flesh, to
ripen it, but not afterward: It Is cured by the Needle. Then a most exquisite
Diet is to be observed; the Sick must feed sparingly; great nutrition does
great hurt, specially presently after the act, by engendering much Blood; let
his Drink be Water, or Wine well limpate or tempered with Water; all kind of
Meats that engender bad Juice, and spoil the Blood, are to be avoided, and a
regular Diet, specially for a good while after the Cure, is diligently to be
observed. The Brain is also to be comforted and strengthened, and the visive
Spirits upheld and quickened by continuing the taking of this or the like
Electuary* Cloves, ij. Eyebright, j. sweet Fennel, Rheu, and Mountain
Siler-Seed, ana ss. Conserve of Sage, Betony, Rosemary, of each j. with Syrup
of the Juice of Rheu, of Eyebright as much as suffices, make an Electuary. Or
this that follows, set down as principal by some: Cloves, ij. Nutmegs, Saffron,
ana iss. Castor, j. with treble weight of clarified Honey, make an Electuary;
where Tears are abounding, the addition of some specifical Astringents will be
very commodious.

Outwardly to the Eyes themselves apply an Emplaister of the white of an Egg
upon Flax, and so let him keep his Bed till nine days are expired; renewing the
Emplaister often, and keeping him from light: If need be, it will be good to
keep open an Issue in the forepart of the Head: Also for long time after we
must ever and anon use purging, for fear of a Relapse, shunning all such things
as are offensive to the Eyes; washing the Eyes with Wine every morning; the use
of Spectacles also are very convenient, that represent objects just as they
are, neither bigger, nor less.

DIFFERENCES of a Suffusion are many:
1. In a black and clear, there is no Cure; here the Eyelids move much in a
trembling fashion, the original Cause is from the Mothers Womb, and therefore
they that have these, are for the most part born blind; the Nerves Optic are
stopped, and their faculty mortified, therefore all trial of cure is in vain;
though many to their end see the light of the Sun, or stature of a Man.

2. Copulation does yet much hurt in this; the color shows the Humor of which
they are made.

3. Skie-colour, not curable; Glancus not; like Quicksilver, not cureable.

4. Seagreen not curable, or very hardly; green is most dangerous of all,
being produced from great coldness of the Brain, and the percussion of it, and
sometime through great fasting and emptiness.

3. Barrow: The third kind of incurable Cataract is, when the Pupil of the Eye
is dilated, and spread so far that there is no circle seen within the Tunicle of
the Eyes; and the Eyes show totally affected either with Blackness or
Whiteness, all over.

5. Yellow not curable.

2. One is true, which only occupies one Eye, or if both, not at once, or not
in like manner; whose Symptoms are continual, they see clearest about break of
day, because a few Spirits dispersed by a greater light, by a less are
collected; a true commonly grows in six months, sometimes in a few days;
Fernelius says, confirmed in one day, but that is very strange.

2. Bastard, which is contrary to signs in a true, and is made from vapors
arising from the inferior Parts, and ceases upon taking away the affect; from
vice of the Ventricle, as in Children and Drunken Men; there is like appearances
of Gnats before their Eyes; or when he reads, he thinks the Letters green; or
some other false color or twinkling things before his Eyes: Some, says
Banister, are like Spiders Webs, and are of ten years growth, and yet they can
read Letters, though imperfectly, which if arising from Rheum, and deflux, are
to be cured, not without Purging and Specificals: In Bastards, no darkness
appears in the Pupil, as in a true; it is many years growing.

In place they differ, for some be in the center of the Apple, where objects
are represented pertuse, seem holey, as if fenestris, and it is bad trying cure
by the Needle, lest the whole Pupil be filled.

2. Some be betwixt the Urea and Cornea, and then the Apple is seen more deeply
to be darkened, and is of necessity dilated from the Humor distending.

3. Another is betwixt the Urea and Crystalline Humor, and then things appear
opposite.

4. Deeper, wherein the Pupil is narrow, or less deep, and then it is broader.

5. Diff. In degrees and growth, for in a new begun, like Gnats or misty Bodies
are perceived; Or 2. Increased, and then the Sea-colour of the Apple appears,
or is like to the Air abounding with mists: 3. Perfect, and then the white
color of the Apples appear, and the sick see not: Some are confirmed in ten
Months, when as some are almost so many years ere fully grown: Here Medicines
do no good, and the Needle is only now, and not before it be confirmed, to be
used.

6. By reason of Cause, 1. The matter is thin and fluxible, as is wont in the
beginning: 2. Tough, or tenacious: 3. The matter is of the species of pure Air,
of Quicksilver of Gypsam.

CHAP. VI.
Of an Ophthalmy, or Inflammation of the Eye.

DEFINITION.
OPhthalmy is an Inflammation of the annate or adnate Tunicle from sharp Blood,
or yellow Choler, distending its Veins.

CAUSE
Is shedding of many Tears, and they hot and sharp, occasioned from Causes
producing Sorrow and Lamentation; herefrom the Eyes are swollen with continual
anguish and pain, seeming to the Patient as if his Eyes were full of Thorns, or
sharp Gravel; evil Diet, Phlethory, Acrimony of Humors, Bites, Winds; Vide
Diff. Hipp. S. 3. Aph. 12. Winter, Southerly, rainy, and warm, and a Northerly
and dry Spring, there is inflammation of the Eyes, and the 14 Aph. to some a dry
and Northerly Autumn causes hot inflammation in the Eyes. Outward Causes, Sun,
Dust, Wind, drinking Wine, Smoke, etc. External, a Blow, Fall, Bruise, a moist
catarrhous Brain for long time, and sanguine Temper.

TIME.
They commonliest happen in August and September, Autumn.

NAMES.
Traxis is lightest, as from some light Cause suddenly raised.

Chemosis is when it is very great, and the white swells above the black.

SIGNS.
A Tumor, redness and pain, sometime the Eye with its lid, is glewed to;
succeeding also, there is a stretching out of the Pupil, or lessening of it by
consuming, or a suffusion; the Inflammation reaches, sometime to the Jaws, and
the Eye sends forth Tears: Sometimes Thores, Ulceration follows.

PROGNOSTICS.
Southerly, rainy, and warm Winters, the Spring dry and Northerly; So likewise
a Northernly and dry Autumn are bad, S. 3. Aph. 12, 14. In hot Regions, as it is
soon made, so soon dissolved; it is worse to cure in Winter and cold Regions,
because the Members are bound; it is bad in Children, because it flows
continually, their Heads being weak; so is much pain, for it shows the matter
very sharp, or distending, or suppurative: If it come by consent of the other
parts, and made from outward Causes, it is easilier cured then if otherwise; so
it is also if there be a more copious Flux of Tears, and sharp, because then
it is like to come sooner to its end.

DIET and ORDER.
1. Diet cooling, and Air made cool by Art; darkness is most convenient,
helping both to pleasure and quiet: avoid too great feeding; for when the parts
want nutriment, they will retain that they have, and so both the greatness and
diuturness of the flux will be abated; We must not use Wine when the Veins of
the Eyes are full of thick Blood, then Flesh and Blood breeding things; Sleep
conducing to quiet the Humors, and all Frettings, and Passions of the Mind
too, for they exasperate the Humors, and consequently the Inflammation.

2. Averters, or Turners away of the flowing Blood, for which, bleeding of the
same Side; in great Plenitude cut the Cubit-Vein before you cut the Cephalic;
bleed young Men more largely; also some bid to open the Frontal-Veins; Cuppers
to the shoulders, Setaces to the Neck, etc. which Ph. in one hour sometime
Ophthalmies have assuaged.

3. To the Forehead, etc. use Repellers of the matter, if the matter flow by
the Veins and Arteries without the Crane, as it is almost always, this Tunicle
being adduced from the Pericrane: Here an Emplaister of Pompions, with
Astringents to the Eyes.

Repellers are oftenest used, but condemned, and not unworthily, by some who
have experienced diverse to be made blind by use of too many and great variety
of Medicines to the Eyes; Rose Water, Plantane-Water, Bastard wild Poppies,
Juice of Acatia, Housleek, Elatine, etc. do excel to repress the hot flowing
Blood; Woman's milk also is commended, or the Water of Milk distilled:
Cataplasms also are made of the Pulpe of Crabs; sunripe Quinces, with a little
Frankincense, and the paring of an Apple laid upon the Eyes all night, does
often much good: to repel we must often use warm things inclining to cold.

Where painful Ulcers are adjoined, Balsam of Sugar melted in the white of an
Egg that is boiled hard.

Pains: Here Opiates are frequently used, which not, unless in most implacable
Torments, are to be admitted; for they thicken the Optic Spirits, and they
stopping the Humors, make them more sharp, whereby they exulcerate; hardened
also are thereby the Tunicles, and sight dulled. If we do use Opium, it must
not be much not often: It cools, but says Lud. Sept. by its bitterness raises
some pain to the Eye: The use of Woman's Milk, or the Water of it distilled, is
praised for a good Anodine; but if Milk be left long in the Eye, from the
vehement heat of the Eye, it gets Acrimony, and is corrupted; therefore it is
either to be wiped gently, or washed off: If after Foments, pain is increased,
it argues need of purging; an Emulsion of white Poppy-seed made in Milk, with
Alh. Ovi.

If great flux of tears provoke, and accrimonious, we must use Liniments and
Mollifiers; strong Astringents are bad, because they stop in the matter, nor
glewing-qualitied things, nor such as dry, and grow acrimonious; the white of
an Egg, with Red-Rose and Myrtle-Water, and a little Powder of Tutty, is
safest, and of great efficacy: Juice of Housleek in Pulpe Cidoni; or much use
of Locals does much prejudice the Eyes: Jo. Prevot. praises an Emulsion of
white Poppy-seed made in Milk, dropped in warm, or mixed with white of an Egg, and
Pulp Piony, for hot sharp flux.

4. Preparers of the thick matter in Cachochymia: Cepha^ick Medicines are here
proper; Wine by some is approved from Hippocrates, because it liquifies and
attennates a pituitous matter, and does sometime much avail in Ophthalmy.

5. Evacuation of the matter, as P. Ph. etc.

DIFFERENCES
Are Taraxis or a perturbation, which we know from only a sense of heat and
redness, there being no copious flux of Tears: Its Causes are outward, As heat
of the Sun, or Fire; then Coolers. 2. Headache made from Suns heat; then
Universals should be premised. 3. From Wind, Smoke, or Dust; then wash with
Milk, and Sleep. 4. From a Blow or Fall; then Ph. presently. The fluxion being
raised therefrom, it is best to use mucilage of Fennugreek-Seed made in
Rose Water; for the Roses repel, and the Fennugreek discusses the fixed: Also
to quiet and repel the motion of the Humor, a cool Air, Woman's Milk, with the
white of an Egg, and Red-Rose-Water is a Vulgar Medicine. 5. Striking of Bees,
Hornets, Wasps, or the like; then use of Repellers, Alh. Ovi cum Lact. mulich.

2. Another is a true Ophthalmy, which comes either from hot or cold Causes;
alt. is (...), whenas the Eyelids are as it were turned inward, nor can they be
shut, and the white swells above the black of the Eye, requires stronger
Remedies: For this is greatly praised, and proved by some to be singular, the
Powder of white Sarcocal, wherewith the Patients Eye is to be filled, and he is
to lie with his Eye wide open till it be consumed, laying upon the Eye flaxen
hards wet in cold water, and drained therefrom. Forestus commends Crocus
Metalor the yolk of an Egg beat with the flesh of a Fly, spread upon a Cloth,
and laid on.

Alt. is periodick which keeps its Intervals, and is familiar to hot and moist
Heads, and at last wastes the Eye, sanguine Temper; Riverius cured such an one
after Ph. and P. and Cuppers to, and a Cautery twixt both Scalps, and an
Unguent of Tutty, Camphir, Lap. Calam. with a little Virid-aris received with
fresh Butter; Rose Water alt. which keeps not its Periods; alt. contag. alt.
moist, alt. dry, in which is little theum or watering, and at night the
Eyelids are hardened, it arises from a little Salt and Nitrous Humor; or its
with itching, and if the Tears lightly flow, it is called Psorophthal.

CHAP. VII.
Of Pannus.

DEFINITION.
PAnnus, or Cloth, is a certain red thing like to rags, arising from abundance
of Blood in the exterior Veins of the Eyes, derived to them, (being either
mixed or pure alone) either by way of fluxion of congestion, either by the
external Vessels, or Internals, etc.

CAUSE.
Ophthalmies, also evil Diet, great Pains, and the Megrim often went before,
where the extremity of the pain rising into the Temples, and therefrom into the
Eyebrows, causes a beating with pain to the Eyes, whereby is Pannus often made.

SIGNS.
It appears as a carnous Web, chiefly in the superficial part of the Annata,
with itching pain, by the Eyes offended by light.

CURE.
After general evacuation and rectifying of the Blood and Humors, are proper
abstergent Medicines, the extract of the Gall of a Pike, with Saccarum Saturni,
and Spirit of Wine, or a Water distilled from whites of Eggs, is excellent:
Also the Powder of White-Sugar Candy.

Chyrurgery, advised by some, is condemned by others, for fear of prejudicing
the Tunicle, ere that be removed.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Clouds.

THere be several kinds of differences of mistiness, and darkning of the sight,
wherein only some particular things make differences: As, some imagine some
thick Bodies to be betwixt them and the light, like some dark shadows, arising
from vapors thick and Choleric, exhaling from the Stomach into the Head, and
so disturbing the visive Faculty.

2. To others there appears like mistiness, or thin Clouds in a clear Air, to
be seated before their Eyes; arising from Fumes of Choler, and Diet generating
such Choleric Vapors, hapening to Choleric persons.

CURE.
The Stomach, if that sends evil Vapors and Exhalations, and do not perfect
its digestion, we must correct that, 1. By cleansing it, 2. By strengthening
it, and giving Medicines that stop the ascent of vapors.

If from evil Diet, we must institute a more wholesome and regular, and such
meats as neither engender Choler, nor are apt to fume up to the Brain, nor hard
to be digested.

For the last, Topicals are commended, as the Powder of a Saphirstone put once
a day into the Eye, for some while; or the Gall of an Hare dried and poudered,
used in like manner, is thought of no less efficacy.

CHAP. IX.
Of Mydriasis, or a dilatation of the Apple of the Eye.

MYdriasis is a dilatation of the Pupil, or enlarging of it beyond Nature,
about the Circle of the Iris, from natural conformation, or accidentary Causes,
and is a Disease of bad Conformation.

CAUSE
Arises either from a natural conformation from the Birth, or preternatural
Causes, whereof the proximate, internal and immediate is a stretching forth of
the Vrea, of which the Pupil is the hole: This distension of the Urea is
effected two ways; 1. By dryness, that stretches out the Urea, even as we see
in holey skins dried; this dryness also has a cause, as Watchings, Fevers,
and other drying Causes. 2. By moisture, which causes an enlargement and
distention of every Part, and makes the Parts to swell forth beyond their
accustomed bounds, and that are allotted by Nature. This also is caused by too
much abounding of the watery Humor, by flux of serous Humors insinuated
there, which are the primitive or remote Causes; distension also is made from
winds, as in Childbearing.

Moreover, solution of the continuity of the Urea, causes the space of the
Pupil, or Apple of the Eye to be enlarged; this is done by Rupture or Wounds,
whence a dilatation is suddenly made.

External Causes are bruisings and falls from high, whereby the Urea is broke,
or distorted, or a flux or congestion of Humors made.

DIAGNOSTICKS.
Diagnostick Signs are taken, 1. From a preternatural bigness of the Pupil,
that is to be seen about the Iris, and is so enlarged that it equalizes the
circumference of the Iris, and then it is more easily known. 2. From sight
mutilated, which according to the greatness of the affect is lessened more or
less; and they see best in dark places, being the visible Species and Objects
are thus much illustrated, and light goes in too plentifully; therefore a mean
bigness of the Pupil is most requisite for right seeing; and they that go out
of the light into the dark, scarce see, because therefrom the Pupil is suddenly
contracted; but after their stay in the dark, from the Pupil dilating by
degrees, they see better, all things seem less to them, they cannot well look
upon the ground or downright.

3. In a natural constitution, if one Eye be shut, the Pupil of the other is
dilated, but it is not so here; for the Urea distended from a preternatural
Cause cannot be more expatiated.

DIFFERENCES.
1. One is from Nature, another from preternatural Causes.

2. Sometimes only one Eye is affected, sometimes both.

3. One from internal Causes, another from external; which sometimes effects,
1. A rupture, or solution of continuity; 2. Or a distortion; 3. Or constriction
from excess of moisture, or dryness, induced from their several Causes; 4. Or
dilatation of the Pupil from the same Causes.

4. One from violent Causes, as wounds, suppression of the breath in Women's
Travel, or Trumpetting; another not.

PROGNOSTICS.
That is better that is made from Nature, than that from preternatural Causes,
for therein they see best, but it is altogether incurable; that that is not
natural is very hardly cured, because the Urea is membranous: that made from
moisture is easilier cured by far than that that arises from dryness, except
vehement Headache preceded: from a rupture of the Urea, or a Wound, it is hardly
cured, though they may be healed: from bruises or falls, if it be without
inflammation, it is more easily cured; the fresher, the easier cured from all
Causes. It most often happens to Children, and such as have Black Eyes.

CURE
Is as various as Causes: For, 1. In too great moisture, a drying attenuating
Diet is to be used, avoiding Bathings and Lotions of the Head, Wines, etc. with
Evacuation, and drying of the Head, opening of the Veins of the Temples, and
those in the corners of the Eyes; Cupping-Glasses are to be applied to the
Occiput for Revulsion-sake, and Leeches behind the Ears: Then we must resolve,
discuss and dissipate the Humors that are flown and settled by fit Topicals,
as a Foment of Dill, Fennel, Eyebright, Chelidone, etc. boiled in Salt or
Seawater; no sharp things, which call forth Humors to the Part, and distend
the Membrane, are to be used.

Then must follow the use of Astringents to render the Pupil narrower, and
contract it: of Powder of Tutty, Bark of Frankincense, Red-Rose, Sarcocol,
Mirth, Acatia, of each a like quantity; put them into a fine silken Cloth, and
boil them a while in Rose Water, then strain out the Decoction, and drop
thereof into the Eye, or foment therewith, and lay the Bag so boiled upon the
Eye afterward.

Fernelius used the sequent: of dry Roses, Mint, and Spikenard, of each ij.
Myrrh, and the Bark of Frankincense, ana ss. Sp^dium, Pompholix, Acatia, of
each, washed, j. Aloe, j. being Poundered with a mucilage of Gum Tragacanth
dissolved in Rose Water, make Troches; forbear the use of too strong Binders,
for they harden, and sometimes bring a Tabes.

2. In too great dryness, an Analeptick and moistening Diet, is helpful; Bathes
of sweet Water, and of Milk, but Goats Milk is best, wherein the Eye is to be
dipped.

3. In violent Causes, as, 1. Wounds, we must try at beginning to stop and
hinder its amplifying and increase; let Blood and repel, then corroberate, and
use contracting and consoli^ating Topics. 2. In blows, falls, and contusions,
where if there be inflammation, take direction from the Chapter of an Ophthalmy;
if not, use Discussers, with some Astringents; Doves Blood, dropped in often,
helps much to heal all Contusions of the Eyes.

4. In winds, and distentive flatuosity, universal evacuation afore-ordered,
discuss wind by Internals and Topicals, wherein some Astringents to strengthen,
may be added; as that of Roudeletius, of Fennelseeds, Rheu, Dill, Rose-Leaves,
Myrtle-Berries and Saint- John's-Wort, boiled in white Wine for a Foment;
which used at the beginning (says he) will stay its increase.

CHAP. X.
Of Procidence, or going forth of the Eye.

DEFINITION.
ECpiesmos is a going forth of the Eye out of its Orb unacustomedly, so that it
cannot be covered by the Eyelids; made from violent Causes, and solution of
continuity.

CAUSES
Are either Internal, or External: First, Internal are either from Humors,
which violently by a de^luxion extend it: Or 2. From relaxation of the
Ligaments, resolution of the Muscles and Nerves, whereby the force of retention
is made weak: 3. From the forcible rushing thither of winds, and diftentive
^^^tious matter, Nature ^^riving to make expulsion thereof, which happens
chiefly to such as are strangled, to such as blow very hard with Trumpets, and
in retention of the Breath in Childbearing, in going to stool, vomiting, and
suchlike strivings of Nature.

2. Externals are either first from violent Causes, as a Blow, or Fall,
specially if great pain also thereupon ensue, and the Parts be more tender and
loose: Secondly, from dissolved Unity of the part, as from Wounds and Ulcers.

DIAGNOSTICKS.
Signs Diagnostick are known by sight, the particular Cause is commonly related
by the Sick, there is sometimes present heaviness of the Head, and the Pupil is
enlarged.

CURE.
Herein we must respect antecedent and suppeditating Causes; as by letting
Blood to prevent Inflammation, and purging to take away Hummours flown, as well
as flowing.

Externally: 1. We must drive and repel Humors, and consequently Inflammation;
Cuppers to the Occiput.

2. The Eye must gently be put up. Hartman advises the part to be mollified,
and then sprinkled with the Powder of Beetles that are found in Horse-dung,
being dried in a Glass.

3. It being put up, we must labor the retention of it in its place; that is
done by Astringents, Bathes, Unctions, Foments, Cataplasms, etc. of Roses,
Oak-Buds, Balaustians, Sumach, Galls, Cypress-Nuts, Roots of Tormentile,
Pomegranate-Rinds, Bramble-Buds, Hypochistic, Sea-VVater, etc. It must also be
kept up with easy and straight ligature.

If too much moisture be the Cause, drying Topics and Universals are useful.

If VVindiness be in Cause, use hotter Medicines both actually and potentially;
in other Causes they may be applied cold upon the Eyelids, being shut, but here
they do hurt, if applied cold.

If there be resolution of the Nerves and Muscles, it is convenient to use
Apophelgmatisms.

If it may not be put up into its place at all, nor is to be helped, it is
totally to be taken forth, if all things seem convenient hereto.

CHAP. XI.
Of Pushes, or little Wheals of the Eye.

THese Pushes or VVheals called Phlyctena by the Latins, of the Arabians,
Bothor, are made in the Cornea, and Annata or Adnata, from a sharp serous
Humor lifting up the Tunicles.

CAUSES
Be sharp Humors made from fullness of such an ill Blood.

SIGNS
Be, 1. Its magnitude, which is not above the bigness of Millium, or grains of
Millet.

2. Its Colors, which is black in the Cornea, more ruddy in the
Adnata-Tunicle, in the Compass or Superficies of the Cornea; if they be more
deep, the Cornea is sometimes white.

3. As to its substance, they are little Bladders of Water, even as Bladders
and watery Blisters are wont to be made throughout all parts of the Body,
either from serosity of the Blood, or Burns or Scalds: these little Bladders or
VVater-Whelks contain in them a pure Crystalline-Bubble, or drop of Water,
which possesses both the Membrances as well as superficies of the Eye.

DIFFERENCES.
1. One is with Inflammation, another without it.

2. One is the Cornea, another in the Adnata.

3. Some are more superficiary called Epicaumata, which are more black: Others
are more deep under a second or third film, called Encaumata, which by reason
of the whiteness of the Cornea do seem more white.

They differ from Procidence of the Urea, because they do not put forth a white
Circle in the bottom.

In Phlyctenae there is blackness every where, but in falling out of the Urea,
that only that is come forth, is black.

PROGNOSTICS.
They are common Tubercles to the Cornea and Annata, sometime afflicting with
pain and inflammation, which are so much the worse; and these are made either in
the Adnata, where they are less dangerous, or Cornea, where they are more
dangerous, and hardly cured, especially if the Cornea be broke in its inward
part, and the nearer they are to the Pupil, the worse; if they be superficial,
there is less danger, and more hope of Cure; if more deeply seated, we may fear
Erosion of the whole thickness of the Cornea, and either from ruption of the
Cornea the watery Humor may flow out, or Procidence of going forth of the
Urea. A Cicatrice also succeeding, hinders sight.

CURE.
In Cure, before we use Topicals, we must observe these Precepts:

1. To premise generals.

2. After that, use a cooling Diet.

3. Avoid sneezing, too great motion, anger, too great brightness, detention of
the breath, much speaking, and immoderate drinking of Wine.

We must resolve the conjoined matter; Topicals must at first be repelling,
then discuss; Leaves of Mallows applied, Gall of Birds, of an Hen, of a Goose,
with Honey to anoint them, Water of white Vitriol, Extract of Fennugreek-seeds:
In the progress we must dry and dissolve more with proper Topics.

If therewith there be inflammation, Saccharum Saturni, dissolved in Rose Water,
or Eyebright-Water, is most excellent; also together with pain, these are good
in this case, A Mucilage of Fennugreek-seeds in Plantane-Water, Rose Water, the
white of an Egg beat in Plantane or Nightshade-Water; and if Inflammation and
Pain be very intense, add a little Opium.

If herefrom we fear a great flux of Humors, we must revulse, use Cupping,
Repellers, as Verjuyce, Plantane, Red Rose and Myrtle-Water, Water of Milk, of
Quinces, etc.

We must hinder their suppuration or turning ulcerous, made by the breaking of
the little film or skin asunder, which by the former Rules observed, is most
often prohibited.

CHAP. XII.
Of Proptosis, or Procidence of the Urea.

PRoptosis is a going forth of the Urea, from dissolved Unity of the Cornea,
being a vice in situation.

CAUSES
That effect the Urea's falling forth of the Cornea, are solution of
continuity, a Wound or Ulcer, which break the Cornea.

SIGNS
Are, 1. from change of the figure of the Eye, and situation of the Urea: 2.
There is a white circle in the bottom about the Rupture, from the lips of the
Cornea eroded, but that is black which comes forth: 3. The Pupil seems in a
certain part of it to be pulled up, or appears not from the divulsion.

PROGNOSTICS.
Cure in general is hard, and the harder if the greater; Myocephalon is
easilier cured by moderate Astringents, as the Rupture of the Cornea; and a
fresh Staphyloma is sometimes cured, but a callous cannot, nor when there is
whiteness.

DIFFERENCES.
Paulus reckons up four kinds: 1. The first is Myocephalon, because it has the
form of the Head of a Fly, and happens whenas a small portion of the Urea goes
forth, and has not yet increased: 2. A second kind is called Staphyloma, from
the form of a Grape Kernel, and is a greater Rupture or Procidence of the Urea:
3. A third and greatest Eruption of the Urea is called Melon, whenas it comes
to the bigness of an Apple, and passes the Eyelids: 4. A fourth is called
Elos in Greek, Clavus in Latin, and is whenas the Procidence is inveterate,
and rendered callous, which Aetius calls A Callous Nail.

CURE
Is done by Astringents that have no sharpness or roughness, such as are
propounded in the Rupture of the Cornea and Ecpiesmos; if it yield not to
Medicines, as old ones seldom do, we must use Chyrurgery; some speak of drawing
it artificially with a little Pipe; the Ancients, as Celsus, Paulus and Aetius,
used Chyrurgery, whose event is very doubtful, and therefore rejected by Modern
Practicks.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Pthisis, or narrowness of the Pupil.

DEFINITION.
PThisis or Myosis, is a narrowness or lessening of the Pupil, contrary to
Mydriasis or a Dilatorum of the Pupil, made from contracting of the Urea, and
is a Disease in conformation.

CAUSE.
1. Is from too great humidity, contracting the Urea from the Circumference to
the Center; for although it might also cause Mydriasis, by filling and
distending the Pupil, yet here it may cause a diminution of it by relaxating.

2. Is from too great siccity and dryness, made either, first from Consumption
of the watery or albuginous Humors, as in Wounds, where the albuginous Humor
is evacuated, it is very soon contracted; secondly, or from other Causes drying
and binding up, and causing a constriction thereof. This also might cause
Mydriasis, or enlarging of the Apple of the Eye, because in that tention and
stretching out, was made from Humors dried, but dryness in this is from defect
of moisture, and a Consumption of the watery Humor, so that it wrinkles and
wastes therefrom.

3. It Is from a lesser afflux of the visive Spirits to the Pupil; either,
first, through obstruction of the Nerves Optic; or, secondly, from paucity or
fewness of Spirits, which often happens to old Men that have their Pupil
contracted.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK,
Are taken, first, from the Pupils magnitude; which is less then naturally
should and was wont to be, which is known by comparing it with the other Eye.
Secondly, By blindness at first when we go into a dark place, by reason of the
constriction of the Pupil, yet after it is dilated they see better, but best in
bright places; and Objects are resented greater, because the visible Species
being received in by the narrow hole, they are dilated in a more ample space
toward the Crystalline: A moderate bigness of the Pupil is therefore necessary
for receiving the visible Species. Moreover the Pupil is more obscure, rugged
and wrinkled, and pains of the Head sometimes preceded.

PROGNOSTICS
^Are taken from the Causes, that made from Consumption or loss of the watery
Humor, is incurable; because that once effused cannot be regenerated: yet if
made from a Wound in Children, it is sometimes repaired: It is also incureable
when there is a defect of the white; also in old Men; from siccity it is more
hardly cured then from humidity or moisture, from which yet if inveterate, it
is very hardly also cured: the freshness and newness of all Diseases makes much
for their more easy Cure.

DIFFERENCE.
One is from the Birth and Natural Conformation, Who (says Galen) see more
acutely.

Another from Preternatural Causes, and that either dryness, or its contrary,
too great moisture; either from vice of the Visive Spirits, or Nerves Optic.

CURE
Is to be done by contradicting the Cause, and though the same cause produce
contrary affects, as Mydriasis and Pthisis both; yet these differing affects
proceeding from one and the same Cause, are cured one and the same way.

1. Therefore for Siccity or Dryness, whether Consumptive or Contractive, we
must attract and draw nourishment, foment with warm Milk and a little Sack;
some add Emolients, but others dislike them; a Colliry of Mucilage of
Flea-Seed, Milk, and Oil of Lin-Seed, foment also with warm Water.

2. For moisture, see the direction in the Chapter of Mydriasis or dilatation
of the Apple; Rhue, Chelidone, etc. that are drying Ophthalmick Remedies, are
also useful.

3. For obstruction of the Optic Nerves, see Amaurosis, or Amblyopia, or also
for Restoration of the fewness and weakness of the visive Spirits.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Eyes Blood-shot.

NAMES and DEFINITION.
HYposphagma or Aimalops, in Greek; S^gillatio or Sanguinis effusio, in Latin:
sometimes Macula is that which in English is called Blood-shot, and is an
effusion of Blood into the Cornea chiefly, and Adnata-Tunicles of the Eye,
appearing at first red, and afterward livid, or black and blew, arising from
violent Causes.

CAUSE.
The Cause immediate, is Blood poured forth into the Cornea and Adnata or
Conjunctive Tunicles, by the Veins dispersed there, and opened.

Exciting Causes, were either contusion, as a fall or blow, or a violent
rushing of Blood thither by loud clamours, blowing with Trumpets, etc. where
there was plenty of Blood in the adjacent vein.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
Signs be, first, its visibility, it being at first redder, because Blood at
first breaking forth of the Vessels is red; afterward black and blew, because
Blood after it is out of the Vessels cools, and grows livid or black,
possessing the Cornea or Horny Membrane, and sometimes the Adnata or
Conjunctive Membrane, and sometimes both; and if it be more plentiful, it is at
last often changed into Pus or Matter, and when as it cannot be discussed, it
makes an Hypopyon.

Secondly, Its Symptoms; it makes all Objects to seem red, even as Glasses that
are red or green make us think all things that we see in them of that Color.

PROGNOSTICS.
The Cure is easy in the beginning; if inveterate, it is more contumacious; it
is bad, if it turns to Hypopyon, or a purulent Matter under the Cornea.

CURE.
In Cure for a fresh one, and if Blood abound, let Blood; use Topicals to
discuss, but with astringents to repel the flux of Blood, and inflammation
therefrom: The Whites of new-laid-Eggs, beaten and applied to the Eye with fine
Flax, are commended, and the Blood of a Turtle Dove or Pigeon, with Woman's Milk
dropped in, is commended by all for a fresh Hyposphagma.

If it be more old, and the part look livid, or black and blew; Topicals must
discuss more, and somewhat attenuate, wherein the most effectual, are, 1. a
Colliry of extract of Fennugreek-Seeds, in Camomile and Melilot-Water, adding
thereto a little Saffron, Lapis Hematitis, and Aqua Mellis, etc. of the Fat of
the Bird Questula, with juice of holy Thiftle and Chelidone. 2. A Cataphasm of
Roots of Salomons-Seal and holy Thistle boiled in Fennel, Chelidone, or
Eyebright-Water, or of Hysop boild and applied, which is greatly commended by
Galen, Avicen, etc. which takes out the Blood so sensibly, that the Cloth in
which it is applied to the Eye is bloody therefrom. 3. Fumes of Decoctions
received by the Eyes, as of Chelidone, Eyebright, Fennel, Myrrh, Amurca, etc.
4. Foments, as of Decoction of Myrrh, Saffron, Frankincense, Colwort-leaves,
Fennugreek-Seeds, Roots of Devils-bit, etc. or of juice of Radish, which put
upon the Cornea, says Rondeletius, discusses it; Or that of Aetius, of the
Urine of a sound Boy, beaten in a Brass Mortar, with a Brass Pestil in the Sun,
and afterward mixed with Honey. Such as were set down to resolve Phlyctena, and
for suffusions, are good here; only we must have a care of sharp and
acrimonious Medicines, least we draw more blood to the Eyes.

CHAP. XV.
Of Emphysema, or a Windy Tumor of the Eyelids.

A Loose tractable and flatulent Tumor of the Eyelids is called, Emphysema
Ophthalmon by the Greeks; Iuflatio Palpebrae by the Latins, and is a puffing
up of the Eyelid from a windy Matter.

Causes, Internally or Externally fomenting it; as watchings, in Fevers, and
Cachectick Bodies, often a serous Matter falling or translated thither, effects
these kinds of swellings; sometimes an Airy matter puffs it up. The stinging of
Bees, Wasps, Hornets, or Nettles, are External Causes.

CURE.
In Cure, we must first use Generals, and respect the habit, specially in
Cachectick and Hydropick Bodies, where such a matter is generated ^^om plenty,
or a crude, and vaporours Airy Matter, and weakness of na^ive heat in digesting
it: Topicals must be emolient and dissipating, and withal, corroborating, and
resolving Cataplasms of Cummin-Seeds, with Milk, of Lentiles, and Honey, of
Aetius: if it come through sting of a Be, Wasp, Hornet, Nettle, etc. some
advise to Treacle mixed with Plantane-Water, or the Be that stung is to be
bruised and applied; also a Colliry of Pulp of Crabs, Yolks of Eggs, and Woman's
Milk, is good in such a case; above other things, some extol greatly an
Emplaister of holy-Thistle, beaten with Whites of Eggs, spread upon flaxen
Hards, for the Eyelids swelled and pained from the stinging of Bees, and other
venomous Creatures.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Hydatis, or little Apostemes of the Eyelids.

HYdatis, is a Tumor in the upper Eyelid, referring the Species of Meliceris
or Steatoma, arising from an increment and growing forth of the fatty
Substance, and resembles a piece of fat under the upper Eyelid, betwixt the
Skin and Cartilage, or Membranes of the Eyelids, in the midst of which is that
Flesh which Physicians call the Unctuous Substance; this affect most molests
Children, by reason of great moisture in them; and in some becomes Oedematous,
and so grieves the upper Eyelids, that they may not be lifted up; it pours
forth an Humor much in quantity, and serous in quality, and that chiefly on
mornings, or at day break, because they are more copiously gathered in the
Night, they most often sleep upon their Faces; some call it Aquula, and Celsus,
Vesica.

CURE.
If it be fresh, fasting Spittle does sometime cure it, and it may be resolved
by Dissolvers, as Oil of Camomile, etc. Salt chewed with Cumming-Seeds, unless
pain prohibit it: if it be inveterate, if it be included in a Skin or Membrane,
as Meliceris and Steatoma, it is cured by Chyrurgery, and the Bladder also by
overthwart incision is taken away, lest a new matter be gathered afresh in it;
after manual operation, the whole Eye must be covered with an Emplaister of the
white of an Egg beaten with red-Rose-Water; or if the Bladder may not be drawn
out, it is to be wasted by Cathereticks, or eating Medicines, which are
cautulously to be used, consideration of the Part being had.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Tubercle of the Eyelid, called Grando, or the Hail-stone.

CHalazion of the Greeks, Grando, or Tuberculum, Rotundum, Palpebrae of the
Latins, is a Tumor of the Eyelids, made from Collection and Coaservation of
Humors there, which are condensated and thickened, and make a Tumor like an
Hail-stone, which differs from Crithe or Hordeolum, because this is, 1. More
stony and hard. 2. More round. 3. More shining and clear. 4. It is moveable
this way or that way. 5. It is more hard and stubborn to be cured by Medicines.

Aetius reckons two kinds, One more bright, wherein is included a matter like
the White of an Egg hardened, and not paining; the other more blackish, bigger,
and paining upon the touch; sometimes it is more externally placed on top of
the Eyelid, sometimes more internally under the Lid.

CURE.
Cure, if it may be done by Medicines, is by an emolient Emplaister of Gum
Amoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, mixed with Wax, Hens-Grease, and Turpentine, in
due quantities: if this be not effectually used, Chyrurgery is to be tried; and
if the Tubercle or little knot be more outwardly seated, it is taken away by
excision, and plucked away with a Chyrurgions Hook; if under the Eyelid, turn
up the Eyelid, and by incision take forth the matter: and lastly, use
Consolidaters: See more in the Cure of Hydatis and Crithe, or the Corn of the
Eyelids.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Crithe, or a Tubercle of the Eyelids.

CRithe or Posthion in Greek, Hordeolum or Preputiolum in Latin, is a little
long Tubercle of the Eyelids, softer then Grando, growing externally on the
top of the Eyelid, included in a Membrane, like Atheroma, and suppurating,
(which it does not easily) it refers the figure of a Barly-Corn, and thence had
its name.

CURE.
It is cured by Barley chewed fasting, and applied to it; or it may be rubbed
with the Body of a Fly: Forestus and Avicen used the Blood of a Turtle. It is
sometimes dissolved by an Emplaister of Amoniacum: Anthony Musa used Galbanum
with Niter; Galen the Blood of Birds of prey; Chyrurgions open it with a
Bistory, take forth all the matter, and deterge it with Honey, and Yolks of
Eggs: Celsus feared the matter, if not let out by incision, might corrupt the
Cartilage; afterward we must use some repelling Colliry to drive back Humors
that are apt to flow, and heal the sore.

If the Tubercle be more hard, round, and moveable, it is called Grando, or
Hailestone, of which see more elsewhere.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Ulcers of the Cornea.

ULcers of the Eyes are taken variously, and have diverse denominations
according to their degrees and situation, those in the Superficies are called
Achlys Nephelion about the Circle of the Iris or Rainbow, they are called
Argemon; if deep, Bothrion; and deepest, Caeloma; if foul and crustulous, it is
called Epicauma, or Encauma, generally also it is called Aegylops Coiloma, etc.

CAUSE.
They are wont to succeed to Ophthalmits suppurated, to Phlyctenes, or Blisters
of the Eyes being broke, from white Pushes preceding and breaking, from Causes
external and procatarctick, from pricking with a Thorn, or hurt from Glass,
from Blows, Contusions dilacerating the Cornea, which is thick; Internals are
flux of sharp Humors, or Humors made by Congestion.

SIGNS.
Signs Diagnostick and Prognostic have their grounds and rise from
Differences: Where,

1. Observe some are more superficiary, and broad, less deep, and are called
Coiloma.

2. Others are more deep, crusty, sharp, and sollid, called Epicauma, and
Encauma, chiefly from the quality of the sorbid Ulcers, and Bothrion, and
Caeloma, from the depth; these are easy to know, and to be distinguished by
sight, have sharper pain.

3. Some are situated in the Circle of the Iris, and called Argemon, and from
some Vlcus Coronale, these are ruddy toward the outward part of the Iris,
toward the inward part white.

4. Some are in the Cornta, which appear in the black of the Eye, are harder to
cure; there is fear of an efflux of the Humor Aq^eus, or watery Humor, or
Procidence of the Urea, from erosion of sharp Humors; if healed, a Cicatrice
sometimes hinders fight; fluxes of rheum also sometime following, cause
blindness.

5. In the Adnata, there is redness in the white of the Eyes from the Veins of
its Tunicles stuffed with Blood; they are better in condition then those of the
Cornea.

CURE.
In Cure, First, Evacuate by Catharticks, in which proper Medicines for the
Eyes are intermixed.

Secondly, Let Blood if need be, if inflammation or an Ophthalmy be present.

Thirdly, Divert Humors by Frictions and Cuppers, Ligatures, etc.

Fourthly, Interception, where Medicines applied to the Forehead and Temples,
intercept the flux.

Fifthly, To the Ulcer it self we must,

1. Use Detergents; yet more mild, because of the tenderness and exquisite
sense of the part; a Liniment of Powder of white Sugar Candy and Honey, or
Mucilage of Fennugreek, extract in Juice of Saint John's-Wort, are to be used;
also Vervain, Rheu, Chelidone, and Eyebright-Water.

2. We must dry the Ulcers, but Pouders are gritty, and by their harshness hurt
the Eye; sharp Medicines also provoke a greater flux of thin Humors, and
watery; but things that dry potentially, and without sharpness, having some
propriety to the Eyes, are here useful; Aloes, Tutty-stone, Sarcocol,
Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh, Lycium.

3. Agglutinate. Hartman praises Water of the whites of Eggs; Montanus the
Powder of whites of Eggs; Sarcocol also insused in Brest-Milk, and Frankincense
are praised: of the Powder of the white of Eggs, of Frankincense, of each j.
Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth extract in red Rose Water, ij. Aloe ss. Cream what
may suffice, make a thin Medicine.

4. Induce a Cicatrice, where this is effectual: whites of Eggs, beat them in a
Leaden Mortar, with Water of Milk; add thereto Ce^uss, Frankincense, Aloe, of
each two parts, Powder of red Roses, of Myrtle-Berries, and Sarcocol, of each
one part; Tutty, Lapis Calaminaris, of each one part and an half; Cream and Oil
of Roses what may suffice to make it of a convenient consistence.

Lastly, We must correct Symptoms: In great pain, a Colliry of the white of an
Egg in Rose-VVater, and a little Opium, if need, added, is effectual; if
acrimony be adjoined, temper that with Brest-Milk, water of the whites of Eggs,
Mucilage of Psyllium-seeds, Fennugreek, and Lint-seed: if they turn cancerous,
where there arises great pain, we must palliate with cooling Anodines: if the
sight be hurt, or we fear blindness, from what Cause soever, give inwardly to
restore sight, Salt of Eyebright, Eyebright-Wine, Extract of Rheu and Valerian;
fly Wines, and hot evaporative things.

CHAP. XX.
Of Hypopyon, or matter under the Cornea.

HYpopyon is a collection of Pus or matter under the Cornea-Tunicle of the Eye,
from an ulcerous disposition of the part.

NAMES
Hereof with the Greeks are Hypopyon and Pyosis, with the Latins Unguis, and
Pus sub Cornea.

CAUSES
Are Ulcers or Inflammations suppurated; adjutant Causes also are opening of the
Veins through plentitude, and there imparting^a muddy limentary matter, so that
it possesses half ^he black of the Eye, sometimes covers all the Pupil, and
hinders sight; also by reason of Blows, Falls, Contusions, etc. letting out
Blood, which under the Tunicles grows pale and black.

SIGNS
Are from inflammation, that cannot be terminated but by suppuration, from
precedence of manifest causes, from pulsative pain, redness of the Eyes; or at
least it went before: the Eye being moved, the matter under the Cornea seems
also to be moved: also there is a white color of the part showing a purulent
matter.

DIFFERENCES.
Whenas the Eye is filled with matter, the Greeks call it Pyosis, as if ^n heap
of viscous matter, which the Ancients divided twofold, one they called Onyx,
the Latins Vnguis, or a Nail in English, referring the figure of a Nail cut
off, compassing the circuit of the Iris, from a corrupted and limous matter
gathered in an ulcerous cavity.

Another is called Hypopyon with the Greeks, and Pus sub Cornea by the Latins;
and in this is a more copious matter gathered under the Cornea, whereby the
whole Pupil is sometime covered, and sight is hindered.

CURE.
Opening a Vein and purging, are better helpers in irs growing than growth.
Inflammation, if that preceded, is warily to be respected, lest this evil ensue
by its suppurating; some open not only the Arm, but also the Temple-Veins, and
those seen in the Corners of the Eyes, together with which other Prohibiters of
Inflammation are necessary; Discussers are to have emollients mixed with them,
lest that part of the matter that is not hereby resolved, should be made
thicker and unresolvable; Fomentation of Cammomile, Melilot, Fennugreek, and
Lintseed, Fleawort-seeds, etc. wherein fine Linen may be dipped, and applied
to the Eye; also Colliryes, or Waters to wash the Eye, of Eyebright, Chelidone,
Fennel, etc. with Honey: Some speak of shaking forth this collection of
purulent matter by great concussion of the Head; others, and they more
generally and probably, advise to, and use Chyrurgery, which is done by opening
of the Cornea with a Lancet, and sucking out the Pus; this is to be done by a
skilful Artist, lest the watery Humor with the Pus should also flow out, by
reason of which it is not much used: after it, Astringents and Comforters of
the Eyes are to be used.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Callous and rough Eyelids, called Seleroph chalmia, Ptilosis, and Trachoma.

SClerophthalmia, otherwise called Ptilosis and Trachoma by the Greeks, and
Lippitudo Dura, Hirsutin, and Asperitas Palp^^rar^^^ by the Latins, is a
Disease of the Eyelids, wherein they are red, thick, rough and hard.

CAUSE.
The Cause is attributed to an adult, falt and sharp Humor, and often to sharp
Colliryes and Eye-Medicines.

It is variously divided, for one is called Sclerophthalmia, or hardness of the
Eyes, wherewith is an hot distemper and thick Humor, sometime with itching
pain and redness, and sticking together of the Eyelids after sleep, from the
aforesaid thick Humor.

Another is called Ptilosis, which is a callous thickness and red, without
inflammation, itching or pain.

Trachoma is a roughness and scabbedness of the Eyelids, called also Sycopis
when it is more grown, wherein oftentimes there be pushes like Millet-seed, and
the ulcerated sore places sometimes chap and grow callous; it is more inwardly
than outwardly.

If the Humor causing these be Choler, then little Pustules are made; if Phlegm
that is salt, there is more serosity; if Blood, there is less itching, if a
more melancholy Humor, that may be discovered by color of that that comes
forth: and according to the difference of the Humor, is the difference of, the
Tumor.

CURE.
One Cure may generally suit with all, as to Evacuation and Aversion of the
matter: secondly intercepient and emollient Topics; but not in respect of
differences, for in Sclerophthalmia stronger are used, as Water of Lime much
praised, Vitriol-Water, with Myrrh, Aloes and Saffron; but before these be
used, more mild Medicines are to be tried, by degrees proceeding to stronger.

Where there is more heat, redness and pushes, together with the thickness and
callosity, Coolers are to be used that inflame not, as a bathing of it with
warm water, wherein Mallows and Tutty have boiled, or the white of an Egg with
Oil of Roses, a Colliry of Myrrh dissolved in Woman's Milk, mixed with Butter
and Hens Grease.

If withal there be fissures and soreness, acrimony and saltness of the Humors
must be tempered: Avicen used the Mucilage of Fennugreek seeds drawn in milk.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Itching of the Eyelids, or Psorophthalmia.

Pyorophthalmia is a redness of the Eyelids, with a flux of Humors, from a
salt rheumatick matter, exulcerating the Corners of the Eyes, causing great
itching and heat therein.

Xerophthalmia is a dry distemper of the Eyelids, with redness, but no
swelling nor rheumatick matter distilling, made from a Melancholy Humor
stirring up great Itching and more Pain then in a Psorophthalmy.

CURE.
Cure of Psorophthalmia, is first by opening the middle-Vein of the Forehead,
by lenifying the sharpness and saltness of Humors, and intercepting their
course; Topicals are to be emollient, as whites of Eggs beat in Rose water, and
applied. This also is greatly praised; of white Lead washed, j. white Starch,
vj. Gum Tragacanth, Sarcocol, and Tutty prepared, of each ss. The baick, Opium,
Camphir, of each j. with Rose Water make a mass thereof, which being dissolved,
drop sometimes a drop or two into the Eye with a Feather: the Decoction of
Bramble-Buds boiled in white Wine, and dropped in twice or thrice a day, is
also commended.

In a Xerophthalmia, Baths, and such as draw moisture to the Eyes, are good;
such also as lenify and make tractable, and mollify the Eyelids; the Eyelids
are to be anointed overnight, lest they stick together, and be not easily
opened in the morning.

For the Symptom Itching, which sometimes is very molestuous, are commended, 1.
A Colliry of Aloe, Tutty, Ceruse, equally mixed with Rose Water: 2. The Water
of the Flowers of Mead-sweet, or Queen of the Meddow, with Juice of Daysies,
dropped in, and a Clout wet therein, and applied: 3. More sharp Medicines that
want a propriety are good against Itching, as Coperas, Salt, Lici^^, sharp
Vinegar, the Urine of the Sick, being stale, Sugar, etc. We must have a care
that only the Eyelids, and not the Eyes, be touched with such Medicines.

OF THE DISEASES OF THE Nostrils, Tongue, Teeth, and Lips.
THese Diseases, or most of them at least, may not be found in some Practices
of Physic, therefore they may be very convenient here: It is supposed few will
come to the reading these, at least to practice by them, that have not read, or
have the Books to read, all greater and more frequent Diseases. Authors were
the least mistaken in these: Dissection is not so clearly satisfactory in these
Distempers of the Nose, Tongue, Teeth, and Lips; such small Diseases of small
Parts can show but little in Anatomizing; but there is great variation of the
kinds, and degrees, and different Productions of all these, which we have
collected from good Authors, and composed them as fully for matter, and as
shortly for words, and as commodiously to be well understood, as we could.

CHAP. I.
Of the Pose, or Distillation by the Nostrils.

COryza in Greek, in Latin Gravedo, is a kind of Catarrh, or a deflux of orude
Humors, or thin Excrements contained in the fore-Ventricles of the Brain by
the Nostrils, with a frequent Sneezing, and sense of Obstruction in the
passages of the Nostrils.

DIFFERENCE of it is according to CAUSES.
1. An hot Distemper of the Brain, or Heat that melts and pours out pituitous
moist Excrements, being collected and retained in the Head, that is effected or
caused by outward Causes, as immoderate drinking of Wine, keeping too long in
heat of the Sun, or using Ho^ Baths.

2. By an hot Distemper of the Liver, are hot and sharp Poses made.

DIAGNOSTICKS.
1. It Is easily known by the Patients own discerning.

2. It Is ^^sily cured, and safer then Catar^he.

PROGNOSTICS.
1. It Is bad in Diseases of the Lungs. 2. If the Distemper is stubbornly
rooted. 3. By its Acrimony, it often ulcerates the Nostrils, and produces other
affect^ 4. If from an hot Distemper in the Liver, whence also are produced hot
and sharp Catarrs. 5. Better if outward Causes produce it.

CURE.
It Is Cured as a Catarrh from an hot Cause. 1. We must evacuate. 2. Revulse or
pull back the flowing Humor. 3. Derive: the use of Errhines are condemned,
because they draw too violently, but Apophlegm^^isms and Masticatories are
safely used, to stop and restrain Vapors, are much approved, specially a
Vapor of Mario, boiled in its own Water, and received into the Nostrils; or a
Vapor of Vinegar, wherein hot Iron has been quenched; Gum Anime, or the Oil
of it cast upon Coals for a Suffume.

2. A cold Distemper, that is made from inward Causes, as Phlegm and crude
moisture collected in the Head. 1. Through the digestive faculty weakened from
a cold Distemper. 2. From outward Causes cooling the Brain, whereby it is
compressed like a Sponge, and sends forth the moisture to the subjected parts;
the Brain also from penury of heat concocting all Aliments badly, gathers new
matter, and more moist pituitous Excrements, that upon every light occasion are
shut out by the nearest open ways, by the expulsive faculty.

PROGNOSTICS.
1. From a cold and bad concoctive force and constitution in the Brain, it is
hard to cure perfectly.

2. If older, the worse to cure.

CURE.
After Universals, a Fume; Nigella-Romana-Seeds, Frankincense, etc. cast upon
Coals, to dry and consume the cold moist superfluous humidity of the Brain; the
Seeds of Nigella-Romana also roasted, put into Silk, and often smelt to, are
commended; so is the taking of Tobacco, sprinkled with Oil of Anni-Seeds, to
such as are accustomed thereto.

CHAP. II.
Of hurt of Smelling.

OLfactus or Smelling, may be taken away, lessened, or depraved, as the rest of
the Actions of the Body, and only differ in degrees or magnitude: Of Depraved
Smelling, we shall speak in a Chapter by it self.

CAUSE.
Made from a Distemper of the Brain, cold and moist, which either occupies the
anteriour part of it, and then taste is abolished from the Propagine of the
third pair of the Nerves of the Brain, efforming the (Tongue ling. rather)
Speech affected; a cold and moist distemper, or with a pituitous Matter
adjoined, is wont to dull any Sense, whence in Catarrhs and Poses, smell is
often hurt; and native heat being deficient, the function of parts are hurt,
and Nature bedulled.

2. Obstruction from the same pituitous Humor, as well senseless as the
passages of the Nostrils; or insenseless, as the Aliis est Obstruct.
Ossi^-Ethmoidis.
Pores of the Brain, and Processus Mamillares, that Scents cannot pass to those
parts; to this may be joined a Polypus Sarcoma, or the like, that may stop or
fill up the Passages.

3. Astriction made from the same pituitous Humor, gathered in the forepart of
the Brain, and compressing the Processus Mamillares; that astriction may also
come from a Native Conformation, if they be so depressed and narrow, that there
lies not open a free passage for Scents.

SIGNS.
1. A Distemper cold and pituitous, may be gathered by those Signs of phlegm,
from phlegm in the Head, and by a Mucous Pituit stilling from the Brain.

2. Are diverse, according to Causes. 1. If from those Nerves, that constitute
the Organ of Smelling affected, then there is perceived no hurt either in the
Brain, or rest of the Senses, the voice remains clear.

3. From narrowness. 1. In the Brain, and then gravity is present. 2. In the
passages of the Nostrils, or Bone-Ethmoides affected; then there is, 1. Hurt of
Voice, because the Nostrils help to form the Voice. 2. Resperation is vitiated.
3. Wonted excrements are restrained. 4. Smelling is sometime totally abolished,
if Pituit be hardened in the Holes of that Bone.

4. From stoping of the Passages of the Nose, by excrescences of flesh, as
Sarcoma, Polypus, or the like: we must seek out their signs in their proper
Chapters.

PROGNOSTICS.
1. Lessened or abolished Smelling, is dangerous in a Carus, Apoplexy, or other
affects of the Brain. 2. It Is incurable, if from ill confirmation of the
Nostrils, as Noses by Nature flat. 3. It Is hardly cured, if inveterate, and
from a Distemper confirmed; but fresh and newly made, it is more hopeful.

CURE
Varies as Causes: from a cold Distemper, correct that with hot Cephal. with
such Remedies as are taught in the Chapter of Headache, from a cold Distemper,
and of a Catarrh; extract of Marjoram taken to ss. every night and morning, is
held a Specifical; but obstruction of the Nostrils or Ethmoid-Bone, from
pituitous Humors, is best taken away after purging of the Redundancy of
Pituitous Humors in the whole Body; 1. By a Nasale of the Root of Gentian, put
into the Nose. 2. Errhines, where Juice of Red Beets is best, and draws out
stuff, phlegm, or decoction of Nigella-Seeds with Castor. 3. Sternutatories
(which avail most, faith Hartman, when the Vice is in the Ethmoid-Bone) as of
Elatery,,

4. Odours, as Oil of Nigella-Seeds, but the best way is to take the Seed of
Roman Nigella, and torrifie them, and so wrap them in fine Silk, and often
smell unto them when they are hot.

5. Sinapismos in a contumacious evil.

2. From narrowness in the Brain it self; here Sternutatories most help, and
Erthines are less useful. 2. Apophlegmatisms.

3. From a blow, specially, if fresh, it may be cured, if a Pipe of Lead be put
into the Nose.

4. From stopping up of the passage of the Nostrils, from Excrescences of
Flesh, as Sarcoma and Polypus. See the Cure in the Chapters of them.

CHAP. III.
Of Sneezing.

DEFINITION.
SNeezing is a Symptom of the voluntary faculty, or a concussion of the Brain,
and of near affinity to an Epileptick passion, endeavoring a casting forth of
some offending and tickling matter, either Phlegmatic, or more watery, and
thin, or windy, or other causes beyond Nature, stirring up a depraved motion of
the Animal Spirits, and breaking forth with noise and concussion.

SUBJECT
Is either the Brain, Nostrils, or Jaws, Trachart, or Lungs, but rather
somewhat molestuous, that sticks about, or tickles the Trachae'a-Artery, or top
of the Nostrils.

CAUSE.
1. Proximate the Lungs, contracting themselves suddenly and forcible, so that
by the Breath is suddenly cast out that that did molest.

2. Remote Causes are either Internal or External.

1. Internal, are either flatuous or humorous Causes, which humors are more
thick or thin, as in the Pose.

2. These Humors are brought into Action from catching cold, whereby the Brain
sends down some sharp thin Matter to the Membranes of the Nostrils, that are
endued with an exquisite sense, so that attracting Air, the Lungs with violence
contracting themselves, cast forth the Breath with that force, and on heaps,
which coming at the Nostrils causes a sound.

2. From Nature irritated by the sharpness of some matter provoking the
expulsive faculty generally, so that not only from the Head, Jaws, Nose, Rough
Artery, Lungs and Breast, is the offensive matter excussed, but also from the
Womb and lower parts. 1. This Vaporous moisture, is either restrained, and
wanting its free passage out, irritates; Or, 2. Having free passage and running
out, tickles the parts from the retentive faculty of the Brain weakened through
cold, as in Catarrhs and Defluctions, where Sneezing is sometime very urging:
As Forestus relates, Obs. 127. lib. 10. of one that had a sharp and salt
Catarth; and though the Membranes of the Brain may be irritated, yet there is
no Sneezing before the offensive Matter comes to the Membranes of the Nostrils.

3. In Fevers, says Avicen, it is made from sharp Vapors carried from the
whole Body up to the Head, Verte fol. per Cause. exter.

4. From eating of Vaporous things, as Onions, Mustard, etc.

PROGNOSTICS.
It Is a good Sign, and Nature's help in Diseases of those parts, that it may
ease.

1. Because it shows the faculty strong, 2. Concoction of the Matter, 3. The
aptness of Nature to be lightened and unburdened. 2. In accute and malignant
Diseases and Fevers, it does often great good, and promises Health, and though
it may raise an Haemorrage of the Nostrils, that seldom does hurt.

2. But it is bad in Catarrhs and Poses, because the Humor requires quietness
to be concocted.

3. In Fits of the Mother, or difficult Birth, Sneezing is helpful, Aph. 35.
Sect. 5.

4. For Pituit, gathered in the lappets of the Lungs or Breast, that may not be
expelled by Coughing, may by Sneezing.

5. In a Singulius or Hickop, it greatly profits; and it is often ceased hereby.

6. In Soporiferous affects, its good; and if in Appoplexies, by Ptarmicals put
into the Nostrils, they sneeze not, it portends danger, Nature sinking under
her burden.

2. It Is bad in Diseases of the Lungs, as Ptissicks, and Peripneumonies, or
inflammation of the Lungs, or Pleurisy, not avoiding the Morbisick Matter, but
increasing the evils by violent disturbing and tearing the Lungs.

^. If too often and too violent, whereby, says Rondeletius, many have been
with an Epileptick Fit; and hence came the Superstitious saying, I pray God
bless thee.

2. External Causes, as 1. Medicines that are put into the Nostrils, to cause
Sneezing, by their irritation and acrimony.

2. Sometime it is made from holding up the Head to look at the Sun Beams, which
causes Melting and loosening of the Humors. 2. Contraction of the Brain that
sqeezes them out; Or, 3. From a cold Air received at the Nostrils. 4. From
smelling of Vaporous things, whose fumes irritate. 5. From Feathers, or the
like, put into the Nostrils, provoking the expulsive Faculty.

DIAGNOSTICKS.
Diagnosticks be conspicuous of themselves, and by relation of the Sick, from
seeing the Matter avoided, and the part that was molested, eased.

CURE.
Cure, is not always necessary, unless it be immoderate, and do molest and
shake the afflicted or diseased parts.

1. From External Causes, and then they removed, it ceases.

2. Internals: And 1. hot: Here Bleeding, Purging, Revulsion, Derivation and
Discussion, are to be premised with friction of the Eyes, Nose and Forehead,
strong combing, compression of the Veins in the Corners of the Eyes, retention
of Breath; clea^se the Nostrils, and pluck the Ears, and hold the Hands in cold
Water: If after these, the faculty expulsive be still disturbed, from some
acrimony or the like, take the fume of warm Water up the Nose, or snuff up
fresh Milk, or Oil of Sweet-Almonds: These not helping, use Narcoticks, smell
to cold things, Roses, Violets, Mandrake-Apples, and Opium it self, and snuff
up Decoction of such like; smell to no Spices.

2. Cold, here preparation premised, use Lenitives, Revuse, Derive, and Discuss
the Cause, as before directed; Frictions, Ligatures, hot Decoctions drawn into
the Nostrils, Pomanders of Aromaticks to smell to, and whatever may conduce to
rectifying the cold distemper.

Of an Erysipelas of the Nostrils.
An Ery sipelas of the Nostrils, after Generals, as Purging, letting Blood, and
the like, as for Erysipelas in General.

CURE.
It Is restrained after the manner of other Erysipela's of other parts; a
Specifical, is the Menstrues of a Virgin washed in distilled Rose-Vinegar, per
applicationem calide in petius If vehement pain urge, Roots of Henbane beat
with the Leaves, and Hog's Grease, to an Ointment, helps.

CHAP. IV.
Of a Carcinoma, or Cancer of the Nostrils.

AN Ulcerated Cancer, is 1. to be stopped from its eating and spreading: Here
Juice of Bistort or Snake-weed excels; many Medicines may be made of Ceruse,
White-Lead, Mastich, Frankincense, Pompholix, Litharge, Tutty, Camphir, etc.
that may be conducible hereto.

2. To kill and correct its quality, for which the Water of Arsenick mode of
equal parts, of White-Arsenick, and Salt of Niter, made mild with Plantain or
Peach-Leaf-Water, is efficacious: Goats-Dung with Honey, says Petous Hispone,
kills a Cancer; but (...) better most with (...) Poets in form a Liniment.

CHAP. V.
Of Polycus.

DEFINITION.
It Is a Carnous Excrescende sticking with small Roots to the Bone of the Nose,
broad, and hanging down to the lower part of the Nostrils; and sometimes also
descending upon the Palate, referring to the likeness of the Fish Polypus,
whence it had its Name: But Rhasis calls them Haemorrhoids of the Nose, because
somewhat like Haemorrhoids in the Anus or Tuel.

CAUSES.
1. Causes are, 1. Viscid Humors, as Pituit chiefly, mixed with Blood, falling
from the Head into Ulcers of the Nostrils, and there cleaves; sometime a
melancholy Humor is admixt, and then there is fear lest it should turn into a
Cancer.

2. It Is made, when as that fungous Flesh within the Nostrils is more loose and
thin, and receives a viscid and flatuous Matter sent from the Head, being of a
very moist constitution, so that by puffing up and marching out that Spongy
Flesh; a great Carnous Excrescence seems to be made.

3. For particular Causes, as of some differing from others in whiteness,
redness or blackness: 1. They that are white, are made of more pure viscous
Phlegm. 2. The red, of a more excrementitious bloody matter. 3. The black,
Cancrous, from Melancholy.

DIAGNOSTICKS.
It Is a fleshly lump, and soft, with small Roots, but broader in its Body;
sometime filling the whole Nose, and hangs forth; sometime is throughout the
whole passage, by which the Breath is brought, and descends upon the Palate,
specially when it is placed in the upper part of the Nostrils, and may easily be
seen behind the Uvnla.

2. This Caruncle, or hanging piece of flesh, is in color sometime whiter,
sometime redder, sometime of a bluish black, according as the humor causing
it is colored.

3. It Is greatly swelled in a Southerly Air, yea and in South-Winds, sometimes
strangles; also in full Moon it is much enlarged: but on the contrary, in a
Northerly Wind, and drier constitution of the Air, and in new, it is greatly
lessened and abated.

DIFFERENCES from Sarcoma,
1. By all the precedent Signs. 2. Sarcoma, is in the lower ^arts of the
Nostrils, and more fleshly; but a Polypus grows in the upper part and top about
the Root of the Nose.

DIFFERENCES of Polypus it self be diverse,
One White, that is, 1. Soft. 2. Void of pain; 3. More easily cured. Specially,
if, 1. it be more tender, 2. Fresher, 3. Lower seated in the Nostrils; for if
toward the top, Medicines cannot be so well accommodated to it.

2. Red or subruse, which is also curable, though worse then White (...).

3. Livid or black; which, 1. Degenerates into a Cancer, or there is great fear
of it. 2. Therefore at first requires speedy help, lest future danger happen.
3. If not prevented, it is hardly cured. 1. It cancerates. 2. It Is hard. 3.
Painful. 4. Stinking sometime.

2. As they differ in color; so also, 1. In touch, as some hard, some soft: 2.
In place, as higher, that is more dangerous, as nigher the Brain: 2. Growing in
the lower parts of the Nostrils, which is discerned by the Eye.

PROGNOSTICS.
1. It Is hard to cure, but easiest in the lower or middle parts of the Nostrils.

2. Easier to stop its growth, than grown, to extirpate it.

3. Cancrous, painful, black, hard and stinking ones, are bad to be meddled
withal, unless by gentle Medicines to hinder their growth.

4. It Is worse if made in both Nostrils, for then there is danger of choking,
specially if they sleep not with their mouth open, whereby breathing is more
free.

CURE is double:
First, To hinder its growth by taking away the Cause:

1. By Universals, (an attenuating and drying Dyer being also observed) as
Purging, Revolsion, Detrication, and drying of the Head used in decrease of the
Moon, because then it is less, and all Medicines take greatest place then,
specially Topics; the use of G^aicum. Drink with a drying Diet is commended by
Authors.

Cupping-Glasses are applied to the Neck, and some direct Bleeding.

2. Topics: Upon the part in the mean while Astringents of the strongest sort,
with Causticks, Dryers, and Discutients, are to be applied.

2. As hindering its quantity, so its quality: We must hinder its degenerating
cancrou^: Here observe that hot humors be not by unwary: (...) caused to mix
with pituitous. 1. Letting Blood, as also all other Evacuation, Derivation, and
Revulsion, may prove helpful. 2. An Unguent of Yolks of Eggs, beat in a Leaden
Mortar till they acquire the color of the Lead, and mixed with j. of Camphir;
also the Liniment of Powder of Red Roses, with Juice of unripe Pomgranates.

Secondly, If grown, to take it away: Here observe,

1. That gentler Medicines be used at first, which will sometime cure it, if
more fresh, tender, and well-qualitied; such Medicines are largely described by
Authors; the chief be Cypress, Pomgranate-Rinds, Allom, Litharge, Galls,
Ceruse, Gentian, Pompholix, etc. of which Waters, Liniments, and Pouders may be
prepared without sharpness, and to dry up and consume the excrementitious
Humor.

2. Stronger are to be used, if it be more corrumacious, and will not yield to
the precedent Remedies, among which excel, 1. Pollipody of the Oak,
plaister-wise applied: 2. A Tent made of the Juice of Ivy, a little Cotton dipped
in, put up the Nose, and renewed as there shall be need, seems most laudable:
3. Juice of Nettles so used: 4. Juice of Dragons, which is somewhat stronger
than the rest: 5. Juice of Bistort: 6. Of Adders Tongue; all these consume it,
and help by propriety, and their specifical quality: 7. A Tent made of
Gentian-Roots is greatly praised by Hartman, which is first to be daubed with
an Ointment of Mallow-Leaves, and Althea-Roots beat and fearced, and mixed with
Goose-Grease.

3. If these suffice not by reason of its contumacy, we must come to strongest
means, and Cauteries, which are first potential; where we must observe, 1. To
defend the sound parts of the Nostrils, that they be not touched and hurt by
applying things on the Polypus, 1. by unction of those parts, 2. by conveying
Medicines to the Polypus by a Silver-Pipe. 2. To attempt this cure in decrease
of the Moon, for then it is less, and Medicines may be better applied upon it,
having more room in the Nostril; potential Causticks are, Arsenick, green
Coperas, Orpent, Rust of Brass, Mercury, precipitate Antimony, etc. of which a
glutinous Emplaister may be made, according to the pleasure of the discreet
Physician: Gum Lacer applied Plaister-wise with Coperas and Verdigrene is
praised: Some advise first to scarifie it, and then dip a Lint in Oil of
Vitriol, and apply it.

4. If it may not be taken away by Medicines, we must come to Chyrurgery; it
must be cut off by Pincers, or sharp Instruments, and it ought to be extirpated
wholly, for the root remaining grows again; therefore a potential Cautery is to
be used after its cutting off, to hinder its growth again: Some advise to
cutting of it round about its root or top, and if so not wholly extracted, to
use corrosive Medicines to consume the remainder.

CHAP. VI.
Of stench of the Nostrils.

CAUSES.
1. THe Cause is putrified Phlegm, stopping in the Ethmoid-Bone, thence sending
forth a stink of bad savor; this Phlegm is stopped through obstruction, and
putrifies in a hot and moist distemper of the Brain; also mattery Pus or filth
is restained in the Nose, through too great constriction, as flatted Noses, and
so putrifies and sends forth a bad stench.

PROGNOSTICS.
From flatness of the Nose, incurable.

CURE.
Cure is by taking away the Cause: 1. Errhines, as Juice of the red Beet for
extract, excels: 2. Sweet things in Errhines, to alter the smell, as sweet
smelling Reed, Storax, Cloves, Cypress, Myrrh, Marjoram, Orange-Flowers; some
things to thicken and make them stick longer in the Nostrils, as things made in
form of Nasales, that remain fast in the Nostrils.

II. This Humor may be in the fore part of the Brain, nigh the Processus
Mamilares, or Os Cribosum, there retained, through heat and moisture of the
Brain putrifies, and therefrom ill scents are transmitted to the Nostrils.

SIGN.
Then there be no apparent Signs.

PROGNOSTICS
Fresh, easilier cured; hardly, if inveterate.

CURE.
The Head must be purged of Phlegm, and if the Body be flegmatickly affected,
that must first be cleared, a sweating Diet instituted, then abstergent and
odorous things must be used, as afore-directed.

III. From the Ethmoid-Bone corrupted.

IV. From putrified Ulcers may this bad stench arise, as in Ozana, Sarcoma, and
Polypus; these are easily discerned, and are first to be cured: For the Cause
taken away, the Effect cease.

CHAP. VII.
Of depraved Smelling, or mis-scenting of things.

It Is a bad Odor continually offending the Nostrils.

CAUSES
It is made from the lying of rotten phlegm in the Ethmoid-Bone, or Ulcers of
the Nostrils, whereby exhalation always suppeditated from these, infect all
scents and odorous things, so that they seem to be of the same smell that
vicious stench is of; nor can the true and sweet fresh smell of any thing be
rightly perceived, but is over-powred by that exhalation that comes from the
aforesaid places, and always molests the Nostrils; even as it happens to the
Tongue, when it is infected with bitter Choler, all things that are taken within
the Mouth seem to relish of the same bitter taste.

PROGNOSTICS.
It Is bad in acute Diseases, whereas a stench is perceived in the Nostrils.

CURE.
It may be cured after the same manner as stench of the Nostrils, the Cause
from whence it arises being diligently enquired, and found out.

CHAP. VIII.
Of SARCOMA.

EXcrescences of Flesh in the Nose, are of two kinds, Sarcoma and Polypus,
being Tumors above Nature.

CAUSES.
1. Sarcoma is a fleshly excrescence in the Nose, wanting a certain figure;
happens often in feeding, and virulent Ulcers, that have certain loose
exerescences of Flesh, as in Ozana and Polypus ulcerated.

CURE.
In Cure hereof we must chiefly look to the cure of the Ulcers, as in their
Chapters is directed: Then the superfluous flesh must be consumed with Caustic
Medicines, or cut off with Instruments.

2. Of a superfluous nourishment of the Nostrils turned into luxurious Flesh.

PROGNOSTICS.
It Is easilier cured.

CURE.
In Cure, pituitous Humors, or the antecedent Cause, is to be taken away; 2.
Consuming of the excre^cent Flesh with potential Caute^ies; but gentler are to
be used at first, then if need be proceeding by degrees to the strongest, as
Spirit of Vitriol, Sanda^ach, Rust of B^ass, Orpement, Mercury, etc. but we
must have a care they hurt not the Nostrils, for which cause they are first to
be daubed with some defensative Ointment, and for more security they are to be
put in by a Silver-Pipe.

3. A viscid and thick Humor falling from the Brain, to which some Blood is
gathered.

PROG.
This is somewhat dangerous of degenerating into a Cancer.

CURE.
In Cure we must, 1. Purge the Head of excrementitious and phlegmatic Humors.
2. Proceed as in the aforegoing direction.

CHAP. IX.
Of Immeasurable Spitting, or a Ptyalismos.

PTyalismos is an inordinate gathering and ^^ix of moisture making spittle to
the Mouth, arising from a moist Brain, and moistening Causes, and cast forth
without coughing or hawking, offending only in quantity, and molestuous.

SUBJECT.
The Subject is either the Brain, which unburdens it self of moist Humors, and
waterish Exerements, which falling upon, and being communicated to the Th^ran,
cause a Ca^arrh; to the Winde-Pipe, or Aspera Arteria, an Hoarsness; into the
Nostrils, a Coryza, or Pose, and lastly, into the Mouth and Pallates frequent
spitting, called Ptyalismos, ^^ Ptyalismos, of Aeti^^.

Or, 2. The Stomach, which is moist and flegmatickly affected, or weakened,
after Cronical Diseases, and through weakness of its heat and concoctive force,
waterish and pituitous Excrements are abundantly made, which are continually
suppeditated, and sent to the Mouth, which is done without coughing or hauking,
and happens often in Quartanes, and to Melancholicks; for spittle by its
lightness swims above the Meat, and sweats forth from the Ventricle where in
great plenty it is gathered, and made, by communion of the Membrane to the
Mouth.

Or, 3. The Spleen, whence Splenitiques and Scorbaticks are often affected
herewith, and Hypocondriacks.

Or, 4. The whole Body, as in Children that abound with moisture, or were
affected from bad alimentary matter in the Womb.

Or, 5. The Lungs and Breast, as in Catarrhs and Distillations, Distemper or
weakness of them.

Or, 6. From the Intestines, whenas Worms abound.

CAUSES are either Internal, or External:
Internal are either irritating and attracting: As first Aphthae, or Ulcers of
the Mouth, by whose pain a flux of serous Humors, are made, and the Head being
more moist, and abounding with such Humors sends them plentifully to the
Mouth, which by concoction are made Spittle; but the attractive faculty of this
Part, causes the motion of the expulsion of the Brain; so also in inflammation
of the Mouth and Jaws, Apophlegmatisms, and the like, a serous pituitous matter
is drawn from the Head, or a weakening, whence the part cannot repel, but needs
must receive the flux that falls upon it, as 1. in weakness of the Stomach
aforesaid; 2. distemper of the Mouth and Jaws, which give occasion to the
gathering of moisture, and cannot consume, dry, and expel that matter; chiefly,
1. Of the Glandules or Tonsils, which readily receive a pituitous and waterish
Excrement, transmitted from parts ^ll affected by communion. 2. Of the
Columella or Uvula, in whose relaxation is a flesh is made spongy and thin, and
the hole of the Palate dilated, so that a copious pituitous Humor falls
continually from the Head, suppeditating it into the Mouth, having nothing to
obstruct its passage, or dissipate it.

It is aggravated or continued longer then naturally it would, from Custom.

External Causes are either moist Meats or Drink, or in unction of Quicksilver,
or taking it inwardly, in the French Pox, etc. whereby a most plentious
falivation is made.

SIGNS
Are taken from too great plenty of spittle, which whenas it is ordained by
Nature to moisten meats, and help right pronuntiation in speaking, and right
tasting, ought to be mean, neither offending in quantity nor quality; as also
it does whenas it is more thick or waterish, stinking or evil-tasted.

A Ptyalism is greatest on mornings, and sometimes after meat; sometimes
fasting; it is not voluntary, unless by custom.

The Causes are known, and the parts from whence the Original is deduced; for
if the Mouth be affected, that draws from heat, or cannot repel through
weakness, which is perceived by its Causes; from the Lungs it is brought forth
more froathy and thick, and comes by hauking or excreation, theumatisms and
Catarrhs causing it, are easily known; so are outward Causes, as anointing with
Quicksilver, and moistening Causes that precede it.

DIFFERENCES.
One is from hot, another cold Causes: One is Critical, another not: One is
from superior parts whose retentive faculty is overthrown, another from
inferior parts, by whose expulsive faculty spittle is sent upward to the Mouth.

PROGNOSTICS.
It is sometimes healthful, and preserves from Diseases, as some acute Fevers
by copious casting forth of spittle have been healed: It is better or worse,
according to the degree, and nature, and greatness of the Disease whereby it is
raised, and whereon it depends; it often presages vomiting, sometimes also
putrifies and begets stench of the Mouth, difficult Respiration, and Coughs.

CURE.
The Cure consists in taking away the generative cause, and corroborating of
the parts; in distillations we must follow the direction for Catarrhs: from bad
concoction in the Stomach, we must purge by Aloeticks, crude serous Phlegm, dry
and heat by Galanga, Red Roses, Cinnamon, and Gua^cum, a Powder made thereof;
Mustard-sauce, Frankincense and Mastick, given in Wine.

In the French Pox, Sourvy. Vice of the Bowels, Spleen, and Hypochonders; the
Disease from whence it arises is first to be taken away.

Astringent Gargarisms are for the Symptom, and to strengthen the Tonsils, and
Uvula, and dry; as of Cinnamon, Red Roses, Pomgranate-Peeles, Mirtle-Leaves,
of each an equal quantity; boil them in steeled White Wind for a Gargarism: Or,
Roots of the Sloe-Tree, Wood of Aloes, Root of Hounds-tongue, of each iij.
Cypress-Nuts, Cinnamon, Mastich, Galls, of each ij. boil them in Water, and add
Vinegar of Quinces, and Syrup of dry Roses, of each what may seem sufficient.

Sennertus says, A Sponge held in the Mouth drinks up the moisture.

If the Evacuation be Critical, we may not stop its Flux.

CHAP. X.
Of Teeth Edged or Astonished.

HAemodia in Greek, Stupor Dentium in Latin, is a certain molestuous sense the
Teeth have in eating; induced from sour things that have first been eaten.

CAUSE.
Cause, is from eating sharp, tart, and sour things, whereby the Teeth are set
on edge, and are exasperated in eating; the Membranes participating with them,
from the cold austere faculty of Fruits; for this acidity or sharp tartness is
inimical to the Nerves and Bones.

Moreover by acid, and sour Humors, are the Teeth sometime edged or
astonished, which sometime are cast out by Vomit; to Hypochondriacks also, that
Vomit for long together, acid humors, or where acid and sharp Vapors are more
plentifully and directly carried to the Teeth.

Imagination is also very apt to effect this; for the only seeing of another
eat sour things, or hearing of Cork cut, or the like noises, do, as it were,
astonish and molest the Teeth; for the Organ of hearing is hurt, and little
Nerves going from its Membrane to the Roots of the Teeth, carry thither a sense
of horror.

SIGNS.
Signs are evident from the Patients perceivance, who cannot bite or eat any
thing, by reason of a molestuous titillation that presently arises in the
Teeth, from the Membranes, perceiving the sharpness impressed and soaked in
before, by the pressure of the Teeth, in biting, or unequal chewing.

Sennertus says, They are then endued with an exquisite sense of Feeling, and
therefore cannot properly be called stupefied or astonished, for then they
should not feel at all; but now if they be but touched, they presently feel,
and are offended thereby, by a peculiar painful feeling, which Platerus says,
Is rather a molestation, then pain.

Sometime the Teeth have such an exquisite sense, as they are offended, and
ache, by hot or cold things, or hard things, made from weakness and distemper.

CURE.
Purslane is chiefly and above others praised for Hamodia, for that it is most
certain, and speediliest helps; the Juice hereof is to be sucked out by chewing
of the Leaves, which is to be continued; or the Juice alone may be used, as a
Gargarism; or the Leaves alone, as a Masticatory; for this by its slimy
Substance, and a propriety, takes away Hamodia.

Rhasis and Johnstonus, commend chewing of Wax.

Har^man wishes to rub them with Salt, or to bite an Hairy Cap, or Fuzzy Cloth.

Others commend Lees of Oil boiled to the thickness of Honey, in a ^rass
Vessel; the Yolk of an Egg roasted or boilded hard, chewed, or applied, beaten,
to the Teeth; Gargarise with hot Wine, with Oil, or Wine and Macilages; Pulpe
of Bread, and of Cheese, bitter Almonds, Liquorish, Mastick, Kernels of Walnuts
and Filbirds have been experienced by some also.

CHAP. XI.
Of Teeth eroded, or broken away.

DEFINITION.
IT is a lessening of their due and natural bigness from Causes eroding, and
causing solution of continuity.

CAUSE.
1. The Cause is a continuated fluxion, specially more hot and sharp; 2. Meats,
which either as Sugar, and other sweet things, rot them; or by staying in them,
as all Flesh is wont to do, pu^rifies, and so rots the Teeth; which is so much
the sooner effected, when as the Teeth were hollow before: Also hot things,
whence came the Verse,

Pultes ferventes faciunt corrumpere Dentes. And cold things cast in presently
after; also Ointment of Quicksilver, Worms, and the like, rot the Teeth, and
sometime make Fistula's.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
The Teeth are black, rotten, stubby and broken; if from a defluxion, there is
commonly pain; if a Fistula, there is a greater stench of the Mouth.

CURE.
If there be a defluxion from the Head, we must consider and stop that; the
Humor is to be stopped, the Head dried; then use Medicines that resist
putrefaction and corruption; wash them with Salt and White Wind, deterge and
cleanse them after Mear; Decoction of Capers, Allom, Mastick, Nigella, Ginger,
Myrrh, etc. are good to gargarise, to hinder their erosion and wasting; a
Powder also of Five-leav'd-Grass, Mint, Red-Roses, Mir^les, Myrrh, Ginger, and
Ashes of a burnt Hare, to rub the Teeth with, is good; also Salt Gem and
Armoniack; also a Suff^me of the Seeds of Henbane is praised.

Miraldus praises Water of the Root of Pellitory of Spain distilled in Wine.

If Stench be present, put in sweet things, and hinderers of putrefaction; if
Worms, because they are to be killed, then Astringents to fix and confirm the
Teeth are to be used.

Hollow Teeth are stopped up with Camphir, Root of Pelletory of Spain, and Wax;
But Rondeletius thinks Wax mollifies too much, specially the Nerve: Medicines
also to make them fall out are to be used, if so be they cannot be cured, or
not to do any service, but offense; such Medicines are not to touch their
sound, lest they also be loosened and fall out; nor the Gums neither, lest they
be inflamed or excoriated from their sharpness: an Ointment of Juice of Spurge
and Oil of Henbane, with Flower put into the Hollow Tooth; or Juice of Spurge
and Flower; or Globules of Henbane, Onion and Leek-Seed, made up with Goats
Suet, and put into the Cavity of the Tooth, are useful, to the intent to make
the Teeth fall out: Many more, and good Medicines are rehearsed in the Chapter
of Toothache, that cause a fall, and coming forth of rotten, useless, and
paining Teeth.

CHAP. XII.
Of Toothing of Children, and Pain.

TOothing of Children is a molestuous Symptom, with pain and other concomitans
accidents.

SIGNS DIAG. and PROG.
The Children, at such time as they Toothe are very froward, cry, and are
Feverish; sometimes Convulsions and Looseness arise, which are not so
dangerous, as when they proceed from other Causes; if they have a looseness,
they are less subject to Convulsions; if they are bound and costive, they are
more drowsy, and more Convulsive; there is a little redness in the place of
the Jaw that is affected; the Teeth are perceived to put forth and rise in
swelling the Gums: they commonly come forth in the seventh Month, at which time
Parents have no comfort of their Children; greatest pain arises at coming
forth of the Dog-Teeth.

Hardness and thickness of Gums hinder the readier budding forth, and so causes
more pain.

CURE.
Authors have left Medicines, and Rules for this Symptom.

1. Therefore for Precepts, observe, whether Inflammation be present and
mitigate and lenify that'; where Nightshade, Lettice, Juice of Housleek, with
Oil of Roses, Mucilage of Lin-Seed, and Marsh-Mallow-Seed, mixed with fresh
Butter, are effectual; the like also for appeasing pain.

2. Mollify and laxate the Gums; here Juice of Mallows, of Marshmallows, with
Honey or fresh Butter, are frequently to be used, which in inflammation may not
be used actually cold.

of the Oil of sweet Almonds, i. Honey, ss. Hens-Grease, ss. make an Ointment.

The Brains of Hares are chiefly commended; so also the Brains of Chickens and
Birds; the Brains also of Lambs and Goats; the Juice of River-Crabs, with the
Water of the Flower of Beans, Bitches Milk, etc. are commended by Authors, and
thought greatly to help the eruption of the Teeth.

Forestus stamps the Brain of an Hare and Honey together, and rubs the Gums
with that.

Platerus. wishes to boil them in Wine, or mix them with Butter, or Honey,
after Forestus's way, wherein the Finger is to be dipped, and the Gums gently
rubbed therewith.

Hartmanus says, To anoint them with the fresh Blood of a Cocks-Comb often,
makes them come forth without any further trouble or accidents.

Amulets are much spoken of, and variously recited by Authors, which are
thought by an hidden propriety to do much.

Miraldus says, That the Tooth of a Colt of a year old, hung about the Neck of
the Infant, causes it to bring forth Teeth.

Calves Teeth of that age, or Man's Teeth so hung, are thought also to purpose:
much credit is given to the Right Dog-Tooth of a Wolf, hung about the Neck.
Others commend a Male Vipers Tooth so used.

Aetius praises the Roots of wild Colocynthis, used the same way.

Mathi^lus ascribes as much virtue to the Stone found in the Head of Naked
Snails; but he bids to bind it to the parts affected: and so probably if the
other were used, they might be of greater efficacy.

Paraeus opened the Gums with a Penknife, and found it very successful in
diverse, from great pain, inflammation, and a Fever, that they may labor
withal: Also sometimes from Mid-wives rash loosing it with their Nails, or edge
of Money; in opening also sometimes they are made mad, if it be black, fuscous,
hard, and insensible, it is Cancerous, and then we may tough it; yet for the
most part it is void of danger, and seldom cured by resolution.

CURE.
After general Evacuation suited to the Age, Constitution and strength of the
Sick, to take away the Antecedent-Cause; for which Cause also, Gargarisms,
Errhines, Apophlegmatisms, and Sternutatories are useful; if it be more
inveterate, Sweaters and Cauteries are used.

Then Topics for resolution of the Tumor are often to be put under the
Tongue; some use Astringents first, others use Astringents with Resolvers, as
Bark of Pomegranates, Galls, Salt Gem, Salt of Armoniack, Balaustians, Allom,
burnt Brass, torrifyed Tragaganth, with Root of Hermodactils: more resolving,
are Salt and Hyssop, Salt-Armoniack, with Sage, Organy or Mugwort.

Forestus counsels to rubing of it with Salt Gem; some use Oil of Vitriol.

If it will not thus be resolved, but tend to suppuration, open it suddenly by
incision, or a Caustic; open it largely, for else the matter yeeks in, and the
Tumor is made afresh; make long cutting, that all the Matter may flow out, then
wash it first with Lenients, and then Detergents or Mundifiers; if we cannot
draw forth all the Vomica or Bag; we must consume it with Verdigrease, and
Sal-Armoniack. Then it is to be cured as an Ulcer.

Gulielmus Fabritius cured his Brother that was Dumb for four years, by cutting
off this Ligature of his Tongue.

Paraeus advises to use an actual Cautery, which is better approved of, if it
be malign; but in these we must have a diligent heed that the sound parts be
not touched and hurt hereby.

If the Disease returns again, it must be cut again, or use an actual Cautery.

If it be a Caruncle, it must be cured, as with Remedies for a Polypus.

If it be black, fuscous, hard and cancerous, it is not to be meddled withal, for
thereby 'its most irritated and exacerbated.

CHAP. XIII. Of Paroulis, or Inflammation of the Gums.
PAroulis, otherwise Parulis, is at Inslamation of the Gums, with swelling and
painful redness.

CAUSE.
The Cause arises from defluxion of Blood, either pure or impure, fallen from
the Head by the Vessels.

SIGNS.
It is made in some part or other of the Gums, and stretching to the Roots of
the Teeth; the near parts are distended, red and hot, their swelling is to be
seen.

If the Tumor be hotter, pain is greater; if made from a more Pituitous Blood,
they are colder, Inflammation and pain are more remiss; the Pus breaks forth at
Roots of the Teeth covered with a small covering.

PROGNOSTIC.
This often degenerates into Ulcers, Fistula' s, Cancers, and Gangrenes, and
therefore the sooner represt the better; for if it apostemate it may turn to
bad affects, as aforesaid.

CURE.
Cure is by purging and bleeding, then open a Vein under the Tongue, and
Cuppers to the Neck, Astringent Gargarisms to repel, wherein sharp biting
things, and Vinegar that pains, are to be shunned, they not being Pu^trid or
Eroded; a Decoction of Bramble-Buds, Rose-Leaves, Purslane, and Sal Prunella is
most excellent; Oak-Buds, Sal Nitri, Plantane, Housleek, Self-heal, and
Mulberry-Leaves are also Medicinal.

Galen above others praises Oil of the Mastich-Tree, being new, and temperately
hot, held in the Mouth: in a cold Cause, and Pituitous Defluxion, add hotter
Resolvers; Decoction of Ba^ley, Liquorish, Mallows, Jujubes, Agrimony, etc. A
Gargarism or Collution of Decoction of Self-heal, Sage and Watercresses is
commended; or a Decoction of Self-heal in the Water of English Tobacco, with
Sal Prunella.

If it be not dissolved by Discutients, but tend to Suppuration; it is to be
opened, its maturity being made by Suppurators; some set Leeches to the swollen
Gums.

But a Penknife to open it, if it open not spontaneously, is best approved;
then the Ulcer is to be cleansed, dried, and heated; and if an Haemorrhage or
Flux of Blood should follow, use the first Gargarism in this Chapter.

The pain, as a very vexing Symptom, is to be appeased; warm Milk is to be
gargarised alone, or wherein red-Rose-Leaves have boiled; outwardly a Cataplasm
of Crumbs of White-Bread boild in Milk, is to be applied warm.

CHAP. XIV. Of Consumption of the Caruncle, or weeping Flesh in the greater
Corner of the Eye.
DEFINITION.
RHyas is a Diminitution or Consumption of the weeping Flesh or Caruncle of the
greater corner of the Eye, arising either from Corrosion, or defect of Aliment,
inducing a constant weeping, and sheding of tears involuntarily.

CAUSE.
Cause is either from the foregoing of a Fistula Lacrymalis, or of a Leucoma
and Encanthis, which were badly cured; sometimes it succeeds Epiphora, or a
large or more sharp flux of Humors, or sharp Medicines, causing erosion of it;
it is sometimes made from the POX, sometimes by Excision, etc.

SIGNS.
The use of this glandulous Flesh, seated in the Corner of the Eye, being to
stop the hole tending therefrom to the Nose, and suck up, and impedite Tears,
and unvoluntary weeping; whenas it is deficient, there is a constant
unvoluntary weeping, whereas before the Humors falling from the Brain to the
Os Cribrosum, were thence derived to the Nostrils, and cast out.

PROGNOSTICS.
That which is plainly eaten up, is not cured; if only in part, we are to go
about the Cure.

CURE.
Is by Sarcotticks, with Consolidaters and Astringents: a Colliry of Aloe,
Tutty-Stone, and Mucilage of Psyllium-Seed is good; or Cypress-Nuts, Red-Roses,
Myrtles, Sumach, Dragons-Blood, Bark of Pomegranets, Myrrh, etc. prepared after
those ways as may seem most convenient; some stop up the hole, and supply the
place of the Caruncle with some matter; but regeneration of that flesh should
rather be made, so that the work of Nature might be done thereby.

CHAP. XV. Of too great growing forth of that flesh.
DEFINITION.
ENcanthis in Greek; Additio Carnis Lacrymalis in Latin, so called by Avicon,
is an immoderate Eminence or growing forth of the Caruncle in the greater
corner of the Eye, made from too plentiful nourishment, or redundant Blood,
sometimes malign, and effecting pain.

CAUSE.
It comes from evil cure of Ptergium, from too much Aliment, or Blood fallen
thither.

SIGN.
It is quite contrary to Rhyas; for in this the Caruncle of the corner of the
Eye or weeping Flesh sticks out, and is much bigger then naturally it should,
and accustomedly was wont to be.

DIFFERENCES.
1. Is malignant and painful, which is blew, hard, ^rough, resisting Medicines.

2. Another not; which contrary to the other is smaller, ruddy, looser, soft,
and without pain, and is made from Blood, or a more pure Aliment.

3. Another is from melancholy Blood, which partakes of the Nature of a Wart.

4. Another is from excrescence of Flesh after Ulcers.

5. From reduction of Cataracts thither, which there are kept and nourished.

CURE.
In a more soft and benign Encanthis, drying and more mild eating Medicines are
to be tried at first; as this of Aetius, praised by him; of Allom and Mysum
burnt, Vitriol, of each equal parts; mix them: we must proceed to stronger by
degrees; some touch it with Oil of Vitriol, or Sulphur.

If it be great and old, it is only cured by Chyrurgery, it is tied about with
a strait Thread, and then the superfluous part is cut off with a Bistory or
Razor; others use an hot Iron, or actual Cautery; then we must lay Driers upon
the part to prevent its growing again.

But before we too rashly undertake the Cure by Chyrurgery, these things are to
be considered.

1. That Evacuation of the Body be made, to take away fluxions that are to
arise to the pained part.

2. We must use Corrosives first for trial, before Chyrurgery.

Wherein, 1. we must use gentlest, as aforesaid. 2. Defend the other parts
about Encanthis from being touched by them. 3. We must have a care that the
whole Caruncle be not consumed by them, but only what is superfluous, else it
will turn to the contrary affect, Rhyas: the like is to be considered in Cure
by Chyrurgery.

CHAP. XVI. Of Ulcers of the Gums.
ULcers of the Gums are made from erosion by sharp Humors, from inflammation
and pustules suppurated and broke, from Worms and the S^urvy.

DIFFERENCE.
Some are proper to Scorbaticks, some are more creeping and eating, others
less; some succeed to foregoing affects, others arise of themselves.

CURE.
Their Cure, after purging and letting Blood, if the matter be more hot and
sharp, is by Revulsion, Blister, and Cup and Cauterize, to avert and turn away
the Flux; then Dryers are to be used. Riverus proved this Balsam, wherewith the
Ulcer was anointed often in a day; of Myrrh and White-Sugar-Candy, as much as
may seem convenient, put them into an Egg, and roast them, and then make use of
the mixture; things are best used at time of sleep, for then they best stay in,
and molest least; if they be more foul, and are suppeditated by vicious
Humors, Driers are not sufficient: touch them with Oil of Sulphur; if the
Cause be colder, hotter Remedies; if hot, colder Remedies are to be used: if
the Tooth next to it be rotted, that must be taken away, else the Ulcer will
not fully be healed; see to the peculiarity of the Cause.

Of a Fistula of the Gums.
A Fistula of the Gums is caused as an Ulcer of them, and Cured as Fistula's of
other parts: a Decoction of Agrimony with Allom, one drop of Gum-Ammoniacum,
Honey of Roses, with Oil of Vitriol, are held peculiar; some add a Caustic.
Celsus advises to pulling out of the Tooth.

Of Looseness, Putrefaction and Exesion of the Gums. CAUSE.
CAuse is from deflux of sharp or vicious Humors, from the Scurvy, etc.

SIGNS are best discerned by Sight. CURE.
It is cured, after Universals, by washing with the water of Columbines; if
there be putrefaction, we must use Detergents, else only confirm and restore
the Gums decayed, by Topics; a Powder of Galls, Myrrh, Root of Bistort, and
Bark of Pomgranates, is most excellent; to stay their wasting, Mastick is to be
^hewed; they are also to be rubbed with Sage Leaves; wash them clean every
morning with Water of Columbines, or Sage, or of Self-heal, or Bramble-Buds,
with Allom: If they be Scorbatickly affected, see to the Cure of the Scurvy.

Of a Cancer of the Gums.
A Cancer of the Gums is made from an Inflammation of them, turning
apostematous, and breaking ulcerous, which Ulcer not healing, turns cancerous:
The Juice of Rheu applied by a Linen Cloth dipped therein, and a Gargarism of
Decoction of Allom, and Root of fiveleav'd-Grass in White Wind, are praised.

Guordonius used Birthwort, Allom, Hellebore, Balaustians, and Brimstone, with
Juice of Agrimony. See for more direction herein the general Chapter of a
Cancer.

CHAP. XVII. Of Excrescence of the Gums.
EPoulis is a carnous Excrescence of the Gums, sometimes with pain, and a
Fever.

CAUSE.
Cause is from vicious, serous, and corrupt Blood, flowing plentifully to the
Gums, which is easily received from their spongious rarity; also from Ulcers
ill cured.

SIGNS.
It happens frequently to Scorbaticks; it is sometimes so big that the Grinders
are covered, and puts the Teeth out of their Sockets, and hinders close
shutting of the Mouth; sometimes the excrescent Flesh is loose, wavering and
filthy; sometimes it follows inflammation, and is partaker of putrefaction,
other times not.

CURE.
If it be light and without putrefaction, it is more easily cured by Astringents
and Repressers; Columbines are held most effectual, either the Water of them to
gargarise, the Powder of them for Friction, or an Ointment thereof for Unction,
may be used; also to rub them with Mint till they bleed; Powder of the Root of
the Sloe-Tree, Rasp Leaves, etc. are useful: The Juice of Water-Caltrops are
very effectual.

Johnstonus says this Powder is proved by much Experience: of the Leaves of
Collumbines, Sage, Mint, Nutmegs, of each ss. burnt Allom, j. Honey despumated
iv. make a Liniment for the Teeth.

If it be greater and with putrefaction, stronger Eaters and Consumers of it
are to be used; as Aquafortis, burnt Allom, burnt Salt, Vitriol, and Galls;
but we must have a care they be not swallowed; wash the mouth before and after
meat with salt Water.

Others, if it be greater, bind it daily harder and harder with a thread till it
fall off, or cut it off, or pull it off with a pair of Pincers.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a Fistula of the Teeth.
A Fistula of the Teeth arises as a Fistula of the Gums; there is a corrupt
Humor and Sanies always coming forth, which is often stinking; sometimes it
flows out by the Roots of the Teeth, and Holes of the Jaw Bone, or Vessels
thereof; sometimes it is derived outwardly, and stirs up Tubercles in the Cheek
or Chin, and sometimes opened, it always leaves an Ulcer remaining.

CURE.
It is cured by taking forth of the Tooth, which is done by Instruments or
Medicines that make the Teeth to fall out, as with fat of green Frogs that live
in Trees.

Taber Montanus praises Amoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, and mixed with
Henbane-Seed; or Goblets of Flower and Juice of Tithimale or Spurge,
incorporate with dissolved Amoniacum, are effectual. See more of these in the
Chapter of Toothach, and ^rosion of Teeth, and the Precepts as to their use.

If an Ulcer of the Gums remain afterward, see the Chapter of an Ulcer of the
Gums.

CHAP. XIX. Of Swelling of the Lips.
THe Lips which the Greeks calls Cheile, the Latins Labia, from the word Lambo,
to lick, are variously affected; sometime from vice of Conformation; sometimes
from adventitious Causes; sometimes they are affected with Tumors, Ulcers,
Fissures, Inflammation, change of their natural Color, defect of right motion
and action; their use being,

1. For decency, and close closure of the mouth, and keeping out whatever being
hurtful or offensive might enter thereinto.

2. For forming the Voice, specially some Letters and Syllables.

3. For the more easy assumption or better taking of both Meat and Drink, and
retaining of it there to a due while.

4. To beautify, and keep the Teeth, which sometime are black, rotten and
unhandsome, and Gums, from sight; also to keep in the Tongue; and he would seem
like a Monster that had them not.

5. To cast Spittle out of the Mouth, or what else we would spit forth.

6. For blowing, or rendering a sound, as for whistling, trumpetting, piping,
etc.

7. For Infants to suck withal: And he that had them not, would look as a Dog
does when he girns, says Riolanus.

These are variously affected, as we said before, and do sometimes suffer
Diseases of magnitude, wherein the Lips be greater than naturally they are
accustomed to be; and they that are thus affected are called Labeones, or
great-Lipped, which comes, 1. Naturally, from evil conformation from their
Nativity: 2. Or is accidental and adventitious, induced from sundry Causes,
which are curable: As,

1. From stinging of Bees, Wasps, or Venomous Flies, whereby one Lip (unless
both be stung) is bigger then the other, and more swelled in one place, or one
side, than on the other. It Is known by relation of the afflicted: The sting is
then first to be plucked out, if it may be; then apply the same Creature
bruised that stung: Juice of Mallows, and Marshmallows also are available.

2. From Poisons, sharp blistering Medicines, handling of Mushrooms, and
touching the Lips thereupon, or things sticking to the Lips; These are easily
known by relation of what preceded: Antidotary and Lenifying Emollient
Medicines are useful.

3. From Contusion, which calls a Flux of Humors, and they Inflammation; a Flux
of Humors may also be made from other Causes: Repellers and Discutients are to
be used.

4. From salivation in the French Pox, then they are puffed up, and black like
Carcinoma, and are to be cured with Specificals for the French Pox.

5. Sometimes they are cancrous; then see to the Chapter of a Cancer, for their
Method of Curing.

6. They are hard like Steatoma, and are not helped by Suppuraters or
Discussers, but Section.

7. From a dry putrefaction, where there is no sign of matter; and this goes
often before death.

CHAP. XX. Of the Fissures or Chaps of the Lips.
FIssures of the Lips are a solution of the Continuity thereof, from Siccity
and Tension.

The Greeks call them Ragades, the Latins Scissuras, and Fissurae.

CAUSES.
Causes are, 1. Air that is cold, and North Wind, that hurts and chaps the
Lips, whose contexture of covering is of so great Tenuity and Tendernss; and
the lower Lip is sometimes cleft in twain, where the two extremities of the
Muscles end.

2. Dryness and stretching out are made from vapors hot and dry, ascending
thither either from the Stomach or Head; this happens in Fevers.

3. From Humors, there is extuberancy, soreness and itching; which Humors
being sharp, are cast down from the Head; or salt and sharp Humors do arise
from the lower parts by the Oesophagus, and are translated to the Lips.

It comes to Women marriageable from dryness of their Womb, and to Infants from
hardness of the Teats they suck; or from hotter Milk, Poisons, etc.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
1. If from cold and wind, it is known by relation of the Affected.

2. If it proceeds from dryness of the Womb in leacherous Women, then the
fissures are not very deep, not very frequently made, not hard, nor are they
hot, or itch.

3. If from dryness alone, and want of moisture, there is no sticking; Fevers
sometimes, or an hot constitution of the Body, and dry, is present; dust also,
or the like, preceded.

4. If from Humors, the Lips are more sticking; if they be more hot, there is
greater itching, and deepness of the chaps.

From Cuts or Poisons, as Cantharides, or hardness of the Teats that Infants
suck, the relation of the party diseased, and them about them, can relate.

PROGNOSTICS.
From Nativity, they are difficulty cured; if adventitious more easily, unless
they degenerate cancerous: In some Fevers they are Critical, and argue
thinness of the Humor; if they be not well ordered or looked to, they may
prove ulcerous, otherwise commonly they only smart sometimes, and are not
handsome to the sight: Sometimes they last long.

CURE.
In Cure, We must respect the Cause: As,

1. If from dryness, whether made and induced from internal or external Causes;
we must moisten, give inwardly Apples, Cucumbers, etc. Outwardly to the Lips,
apply Mucilages, the fat exstilling from wooden Kitchen Spoons fried in the
fire, Goose and Capon-Grease, Marrow of Ox shanks; or this Liniment of
greatest force. of the Mucilages of Fleawort and Quince-seed, of each ss.
Lycium, ij. Juice of Housleek, Oil of sweet Almonds, of each j. Yolk of an Egg,
ss. beat all into a Liniment, which is to be used in all Causes, as most
effectual; Juice of Crabfish with Cream.

2. If from hot and sharp Humors, we must take them away, purge, and let
Blood, and intercept their course to the Lips, the part offendent being first
found out.

We must use Topics, cooling, lenifying, and agglutinative; the fume of
Henbane-seeds is held mavelous; Oil of the Yolks of Eggs, and of Wax also,
excel: Grease of a Capon, Oil of Roses, Tallow, Oil of Wheat, Mucilage of
Tragacanth, etc. are useable; an Ointment of Rosin of the Fir Tree, Oil of
sweet Almonds, and Juice of Henbane is very good.

If in Children from sucking hard Nipples, anoint their Lips with the fat fried
from a Spoon that is used about Grease, with Oil of sweet Almonds, and Oil of
the Yolks of Eggs, which is best, also Oil of Wax.

All must eschew the outward air, keep the Lips inward; fly hot, dry and sharp
things, and hold moist things in the mouth.

CHAP. XXI. Of Hare-Lips, or Cloven-Lips.
HAre-Lips, or Clefts of the Lips, are called by the Latins Labia Leporina,
Rostra Leporina, or Leporis, or Fissura Labrorum, by the Germans Hasenschart.
It Is whenas from vice in conformation, the Lips do not cohere, or join unitely.

CAUSE.
The Cause is from the Birth, from the Woman's imagination at time of
Conception, who then either saw an Hare, or somewhat else so affected; or
longed to eat thereof, and could not have it.

Sometimes accidentally such fissures are made in the Nose or Ears.

DIFFERENCES.
Differences hereof are only as to the magnitude; for some are little, some
very great, wherein there seems as if a piece of flesh was taken away.

PROGNOSTICS.
The Evil is better born sometimes than the Remedy; it is dangerous in Children
that suck to use Chyrurgery, also to old men, and Hydropicks, where we may fear
a Cancer therefrom, and very bad scars are left after Chyrurgery.

CURE.
Cure is by Chyrurg^^y, the Patient must be aptly placed, then the skin of the
dissited and gaping Lip must be cut off with a Penknife on either side of its
gap, then conjoyn the Lip that is so excoriated, and with a Needle and Thread,
while it is yet bleeding, make suture of it, and so let the Thread hold the
parts together till they grow together naturally, which in eight or nine days
it often does; after this, draw out the Thread, and use Astringents to anoint
it; the fat that fries out of Wooden Kitchen Spoons (that have been used about
fat and dripping) being laid in the fire, Oil of Wax, of Eggs, etc. correct
excrescent flesh, and lastly induce a Cicatrice: Oil of Eggs is said to take
away the Deformity of the Scar made by Chyrurgery.

CHAP. XXII. Of Lividity, Paleness, Blackness or Blewness of the Lips.
LIvor is a paleness, or a blackness and blewness happening to the Lips, from
fear, and sudden frights and passions, or from an evil disposition of the
Bowels, and Blood infected.

CURE.
Cure is to be done by Paints, as of Spanish Red, of Madder-Roots, and
Aukanet-Roots; by rubbing them with a piece of Sheep-skin dyed red, or steeped
in a Decoction of red Sanders, with Gum Arabic, made in Aqua-Vitae.

Chalybeates are to be taken inwardly.

DIFFERENCES.
Differences are taken from Causes: For,

1. One is from fear, sudden frights, and moving of Passions, Wrath, etc.
whereby the Blood flows back to the Center, and they ceasing, it returns, and
the color is restored again.

2. It happens to Women, 1. Laboring with the Green Sickness: 2. With the pale
Colors or white Flux of Menstrues, both which being cured, it ceases.

3. From an evil disposition of the Bowels, the Lips want their pure ruddy
color, as in Cachecticks; 2. This evil disposition is seated variously in
parts; sometimes in the Liver, sometimes in the Spleen, and sometimes in the
mouth of the Stomach, affecting from communion of parts, even as we see
trembling of the Lips in a fit of vomiting.

4. Lividity of the Lips sometimes happens in continual Fevers, which is a
deadly sign, and shows extinction of native heat.

5. and 6. From Elephantiasis, or the French Pox, which being cured, it ceases.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Mouth-writhing, or convulsion of the Face.
VVRithing of the Mouth, or a Convulsion of the Jaws, arises from a depraved
motion of the Muscles or Nerves, drawing awry the Mouth and Skin of the Face.

NAMES.
It is called Spasmus Cynicus, from the figure of distortion of the mouth,
which is like to the grinning of angry or mad Dogs; and is called by the
Latins, Canina Convulsio, a Dog-like Convulsion.

Some call it Risus Sardonius, from the Herb Sardia, which is called
Batrachium, and of some Apium Risus, because those that take thereof have their
Mouths pulled awry, and distorted, and seem to laugh dying: It is most commonly
called Tortura Oris, signifying a simple drawing awry, or distortion of the
Mouth.

CAUSE.
Its Cause is from resolution of the Muscle of the Jaw, or Muscles of the Face,
or the stock of Nerves spread over the Face, affected; or the Nerves of the
third or fifth Conjugation, or those that descend from the first Vertebra's of
the Neck, or from the Spinal Marrow betwixt the second and third Vertebra,
brought from Causes cooling, as in those that remain in a cold Air, and windy,
after sweating or obstruction of the Nerves.

DIFFERENCES.
Distinction is to be made betwixt Tortura Oris, Spasmus Cynicus, and Risus
Sardoneus; as also twixt a Paralitick and Convulsive Motion: For,

1. Tortura Oris, or a drawing awry of the Mouth, which is more simple, comes
from the broad Muscle of the Mouth affected, wherein is stretching out of the
Mouth; sometimes the upper Lip is drawn toward the Eye, from the Nerve of the
third pair being hurt, which also causes the drawing awry of the Cheeks and
adjacent Skin, because the affected part draws the sound; the Nose, Eyes, and
half the Face, are distorted, whenas the Brain is half affected.

Spasmus Cynicus, or Caninus, is whenas the whole Face is drawn convulsively
from the Propago, or set of Nerves spread over the face affected.

Risus Sardoneus is such a contraction of the Muscles that the Skin is drawn up
and distended, as is wont in them that laugh, and the party seems to laugh.

SIGNS.
General Signs are taken from a Convulsion, wherein the sound parts are drawn
by the affected parts; there is often pain foregoing, ^ numbness of the Skin,
and beating; in a Palsy the affected part is drawn to the sound obliquely, the
use of the Teeth is spoiled, they cannot draw their mouth to laugh, nor
pronounce the Letter O; the Eyelid falls down from resolution of the forces,
and strength of the parts; the face loosens and flats downwards, and is not
drawn in wrinkles, as from a Convulsion.

PROGNOSTICS.
It is not easily cured, and threatens Epilepsies, Palsies, Apoplexies, and
Death especially, if prolonged; or if it supervened a Palsy of the whole, or a
general Convulsion; if it be strong and convulsive, it is deadly from the
matter translated to the Brain, and Death arrests them sometimes ere five days
expire, sometime not in ten days: The Body free from Fevers, Head-Diseases,
and strong, and the Disease fresh, and the face but in the half part affected,
we may draw from hence some hopes of Cure, and that they may cease, ^ooner, and
sometimes spontaneously, or of Natures own accord.

CURE.
In Cure it is requisite to consider the part affected, whether Convulsively or
Paralitickly, by what Nerves or Muscles affected, and whence those have their
Root and Original.

We may proceed in its Cure much after the same Order as for general Spasms and
Palseys, the part peculiarly respected: A Clister therefore premised, we may
prepare the matter with such as are prescribed in the Chapter of Palseys and
Convulsions; then purge the Brain with strong Cephalic Pills and
Phlegmagogues: if there be fullness, opening of a Vein, first in the Arm,
secondly in the Tongue, is approved, Cuppers may be applied to the Neck;
Internals, Nervals and Cephalicals are good, as were directed for Palseys and
Convulsions; Masticatories, Gargarisms, and Collutions of the Mouth are useful;
Troches also may be held under the Tongue, made in form of Lupines, of
Pelletory of Spain, with Castoreum, Gum Bdellium, Pepper, Mustard Seed, and
Aqua-Vitae; Vapors from convenient Decoctions may be received into the face.

Anointing of the Face, and Head, and Nape of the Neck, specially the Roots of
the Nerves affected, to the Vertebra's of the Neck; for from the second and
third do arise the Nerves moving the Jaws: Oil of Been, of Castor, of each j.
Pelletory of Spain, Sage, Rosemary Cowslips, Rheu, of each j. make a Liniment.

of Bettony, Sage, Rosemary, Couslips, Bay Leaves, Eldern, Organy, Calamint,
Fleabane, of each an equal quantity; put them, being reduced into Powder, into
Linen interwoven, sprinkled with Spirit of Wine, and heat hot, after
anointing, apply it to the whole Face, or that half of it that is distorted.

Some use Ligatures to draw it strait from the opposite part to the overthwart
part. It is not accounted a Disease, but only a figure vitiated; the Cramp it
self being only a Symptom of the Matrix-faculty hurt.

If the upper Lip be drawn upwards toward the Eye, the Nerve of the third pair
there affected, being cut a little below its compass, it is healed.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Stuttering, Stammering, or defect of right Pronuntiation.
STuttering, stammering, and lisping, are defects of right pronuntiation of
Words and Syllables, called by the Latins Balbuties and Blaesitas, arising from
several Causes.

CAUSES.
As, 1. A Palsy of the Tongue, where the Cause lies in the Nerves, being
obstructed by a moist pituitous matter, or viscid Phlegm, or relaxated or
overcooled therefrom, then motion of the Tongue hurt from the Nerves of the
seventh pair or Cunjugation being hurt: See more of this in the Chapter of a
Palsy of the Tongue.

2. A Ranula or Tumor under the Tongue, called the Bond or Ligature, whereby
Childrens Tongues are bound so straightly that their speech is impedited
therefrom; and it is wont to be taken away by Midwives with their Nails,
whereby right Pronuntiation and Speaking is afterward procured: See for better
information herein the Chapter of Ranula.

3. Too great moisture, or a moist distemper making the Tongue more soft and
loose, so that it exercises not its motion; this happens to Children from their
Nativity, who cannot pronounce R; yet by growth commonly that superfluous
Humidity is spent; but if that moist Distemper still continue, so long they
stutter or speak imperfectly: This happens also to elder People from
Drunkenness, or deflux of Catarrhs, and Rheumatick Distillation, which are
sooner acquitted again; but worse, if the same Distemper be in the Brain.

4. From too great siccity or dryness of the Tongue, whereby speech is
vitiated, coming often in Fevers.

5. From solution of Continuition, as Wounds and Ulcers.

6. From magnitude, 1. Increased, hindering its motion, which is either from
natural Conformation, or a swelling of the Tongue preternatural; which swelling
is either with or without Inflammation: See more of this in the Chapter of a
Tumor of the Tongue. 2. Lessened, which also is made either by ill
Conformation, or Accidents, as Wounds, Ulcers, hard Cicatrices, etc. which
shorten and lessen the Tongue.

7. From fault in the Aspera Arterin, or Windpipe, being the Pipe by which
both natural and vocal respiration is put forth; also from constriction or
obstruction of the clefts of the Larinx, is made ill utterance.

8. The Uvula, or Gargareon, being either defective, or the natural situation
or bigness of it changed, being very instrumental to forming the voice, causes
imperfect pronuntiation.

9. Vocal Respiration obstructed or mutilated, we cannot speak clearly and
perfectly; this is made either from stopping of the breath suddenly from
suffocation, or Tumors in the Jaws, or it is changed and mutilated from
weakness, whence they cease to speak, and it is called Aphonia: See the Chapter
of Aphonia, or Dumbness.

10. Those that are born Fools, and infatuated from their Birth, speak not
plain; which may be supposed to arise from too great moisture in the Tongue and
Brain, effecting too great flexibility thereof.

SIGNS.
Signs both Diagnostical and Prognostical, are gathered from the precedent
several Causes.

DIFFERENCES are fourfold:
1. The first is called Aphonia, or Dumbness, wherein they speak not at all.

2. The second is called Balbuties and Blesuas, or a stuttering and stammering,
wherein Words and Sentences are not rightly uttered, and they cannot pronounce
some Letters, as R, or in others K and T.

3. The third is Haesitantia Linguae, wherein they cannot bring out all the
word, or that very drawlingly.

4. The fourth is Antidogloss^r, called Tongue-ty'dness, from shortness of the
Tongue, and is peculiar to Children.

CURE.
If from defect of parts, that cannot be restored; it is incurable.

From a Palsy, and Ranula under the Tongue, see their Cures in their proper
Chapters.

From Tumors, also Wounds and Ulcers of the Tongue or Jaws, seek their Cure in
their proper places; and they being cured, this Affect cease.

From natural Conformation, whether the Tongues be too thick, or too short, it
is not curable.

Moisture indicates drying, and Dryness moistening; if phlegmatic impacted
Humors hinder vocal Respiration, they must be attenuated and excussed, the
Brain must be dried and strengthened; little Lozenges in form of Lupines are
held under the Tongue, made of Sage, Mustard, and Rheu-seeds, Lavender and
Rocket-seeds, with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth to embody them, also Gargarisms
of Spirit of black Cherries, Spirit of Wine wherein have been steeped Lillies
of the Valleys; Frictions of the Tongue also, with Sage-leaves, Couslips, and
Lavender: It is said that to rub Childrens Tongues with Salt Gem and Honey,
makes them speak presently.

CHAP. XXV. Of a Palsy of the Tongue.
A Palsy of the Tongue is an abolition of its actions and speaking, induced
from the Nerves, resolved.

CAUSE.
Cause arises from relaxation, obstruction, or refrigeration of the Nerves,
which if they be of the seventh Conjugation, there is a Palsy of the whole
Tongue, and motion totally perished: These Nerves come from the Brain, near to
the beginning of the Spinalis Medulla, or Back-Marrow, and are carried to the
Muscles moving (...) Tongue, which being hurt as before, or wounded, the motion
of the Tongue is depraved or abolished, and is well called a Palsy.

Moreover, a Palsy is sometime lateral, as of the right or left side; Taste is
also spoiled from the Nerves of the third pair affected.

SIGN.
Signs are taken from motion hurt, from vice in speaking, and taste hurt,
which sometimes is safe if the Nerves of the third pair be unhurt; sometimes
all, sometimes but half the Tongue is paralitick; the Tongue looks red, and
seems to be hot, at other times cooler and moister; there are sometimes present
signs of a cold distemper of the Brain, and it sometimes succeeds to
Apoplexies.

PROGNOSTICS.
In more aged People, in Apoplectick, or those that are generally Paralitick;
from a distemper of the Brain, it is more dangerous and more hardly cured, and if
an Apoplexy has not preceded, nor is present, there is great danger that it
will ensue.

In a lateral Palsy of the Tongue, and in youth and flourishing habits, it is
better, and some hopes there is of Cure.

CURE.
Cure is to be begun with Catharticks, wherewith specifical Cephalicks are
admixt to carry their force to the Head; general dryers and sweaters are then
to be insisted upon; Salt of Pearls is given to x. gr. in Malmsey;
Black-Cherry-Water, Oil of Rosemary, etc. are commended: this Powder serves
best to dry and strengthen the Brain and Nerves, of Castor, Pirethrum, of each.
Marjoram, Sage, Lavender, Spike, Betony, Staechas, of each j. Cloves, Nutmegs,
of each j. Sugar to the weight of all, make an exquisite fine Powder, whereof
j. may be taken every morning in Black-Cherry or Sage-Water, except on those
mornings we interpose some purging Apozem, or the like.

Topicals: To shake off and extract the Humors, and free the Nerves from
obstruction by impacted Humors, and strengthen them, are very effectual and
commodious,

1. Gargarisms of Juice of Sage, of Oximel of Squills, and Oil drawn from
Mustard Seed; of Decoctions of sweet Marjoram, Sage, Lavender, or Spike,
Organy, Cloves, etc. with Spirit of Castor, are very profitably and
commodiously used.

2. Lupines, or little flat Cakes held under the Tongue, there to melt by
continuance of time, made of Mucilage of Tragacanth, Pulpe of Mustard Seed,
Rocket-seed, Sage, Pelletory of Spain, Wood Sage, and the like, are useful and
effectual.

3. Rub the Tongue with Sage-Leaves, Rocket-seeds bruised, Tobacco, or lay upon
it Oil of Anniseeds, of Cloves, and Spirit of Black-Cherries.

4. The Neck or place of the Original of the Nerves must be anointed with
Aqua-Vitae, and Spirit of Castor: Some use Vesicatories to the hinder part of
the Head; and Avicen applies a Cupping-Glass under the Chin; Cucupha's and
Errhines are also useful.

To recover Speech, Spirit of Black-Cherries, Juice of Sage, and Primroses
gargarised, are greatly applauded; so are the Flowers of Valley-Lillies
distilled in Wine. See more in Aphonia.

There is another Disease of the Tongue, called by the Germans, De Braun, and
it is a great swelling thereof, with blackness, ruggedness, and dryness; with
it also is a Delirium, Insanies, and light-headedness, a Disease not mentioned
by the ancient Authors, but comes nearest to that of Paulus Aegineta, called
an Erisypelas of the Brain: It comes familiarly to Soldiers, that lie in Camps
in the open and cold raw air.

CURE.
After generals, as opening a Vein under the Tongue, Purging, etc. if it seem
requisite, a Gargarism of Decoction of Prunella, or Self-heal in Water, a
little Vinegar added, is the best Remedy, and held very certain for the Cure
hereof.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Frog, or Infants Ligature of their Tongue.
DEFINITION.
BAtrachos in Greek, Ranula, and by some Ranunculus in Latin, is a Tumor of
soft flesh risen under the Tongue, referring the form o^ a Frog, to which as to
a girt or band the Tongue adheres, causing impediment in speech.

CAUSE.
It arises from viscid and pituitous Blood, flowing thither and stirring up a
soft Tumor; sometimes it is only a fleshy excrescence without an humor.

SIGNS.
1. As to its Figure; It is like a Frog, thence called Rana and Ranula, for the
rift in the middle separating the right part of the Tumor from the left, the
hinder part in figure and color resembles a Frog.

2. As to its Substance; It is much of the nature of Oedema sometimes,
sometimes like to Atheroma and Steatoma. 1. Because it is involved in a Bag or
Follicle; 2. Because the matter within is like to the matter of these, or more
nearly resembles both in color and consistence the white of an Egg; therein
also sometime has a stone been found.

3. As to its Magnitude and bigness, it is seen under the Tongue in bigness of
a Bean or Chestnut; sometimes it grows so great that it covers the Teeth, and
the Mouth will hardly hold it, and induces great danger of suffocation, and
seems like another Tongue, the veins under the Tongue being so mightily
extuberated, and puffed up also, from the abundance of a muddy viscous pituit
fallen from the Head.

4. As to the Effects and concomitant Accidents: As, 1. They cannot speak plain
nor clearly, but croakingly like Frogs, because the Tongue is not stretched
forth duly, but held down, and kept straiter and shorter then is requisite to
speaking. 2. The Tongue is found lifted up more or less according to the growth
or bigness of the Tumor. 3. There is sometimes present Inflammation, sometimes
danger of Choking or Suffocation, where it is very great, sometime it is
Cancerous.

PROGNOSTIC.
The greater the more dangerous, it is often mortal, both from Suffocation,
which it may bring if it be the greater, and near the rough Artery and Larinx,
and also a Quinzy that it may bring to elder People.

CHAP. XXVII. Of a Tumor or Increment of the Tongue.
IT is divided variously, for one is an only distension and enlarging of it
from a plenteous aliment, so that it is neither Erisypelas, nor Scirrhus, nor
Oedema: It is without pain; sometime it is less at night, than in the morning;
herein the Tongue is sometime black or livid from the blood being cold. It is
to be cured by evacuation as a Phlegmone and Repulsion, a cloth dipped in Juice
of Lettice and laid upon the Tongue; other coolers and repellers of nourishment
are also convenient.

2. Another is a carnous swelling, or fleshy increment of the Tongue, made from
superfluous flesh, which had its rise from vicious excrements, and a pituitous
superfluous alimentary matter: Preparatives Premised, if curable, we may expect
most from Chyrurgery.

3. Another is from Blood, and is an inflammation of the Tongue, whose Cure is
described in the Chapter of Inflammation of the Tongue.

4. Another is from deflux of a pituitous matter, and then it is Oedema, or a
softer and loose Tumor, according as the matter is thicker or thinner, moister
or more dry: If it be Oedematous, Cure is as Oedema; if a soft and loose
Tumor, we may open the Sublinguar Veins, purge and revulse, use resolving and
ptarmick Gargarisms, some using sacrification, have cured by flowing forth of
the swelling matter.

5. Another is Erisypelatous from Choler, wherein is Inflammation, and for
which, see the Chapter of Inflammation of the Tongue.

6. Another is Scirrhous, from Atrabilis: Cure it as a Scirrh.

7. Another is Cancrous, wherein is small hopes of Curing; and putrefaction
coming at the Root of the Tongue, or a flux of Blood in Tongues eroded, the
Sick die.

8. Another is from the French Pox, anointings with Quicksilver, poisonous and
venomous funges: Shun Purges in this, and use specificalls; wash with Juice of
Plantane, Scabious and Lemons; if it be of the nature of Oedema, use Remedies
fit for an Oedematous swelling; if it be great we must beware lest it bring
danger of Suffocation.

Some have their Tongues remain without their Mouths, and this progress of it
may be called the falling out of the Tongue, and hurts chiefly by deforming.

I knew a Gentlewoman in London, Sister to one that married my Cousin, that if
a lock of hair that hung out of her hood behind her Head (which she showed me
when she told me the reason) was put up under her Hood, or in her Head-clothes,
with the rest of her hair, she could not shut her mouth, so that she always
wore this little brown lock hangin down behind: I told her it could not be
according to the course of Nature, there could be no natural cause for it; if
so, it must be supernatural; and if so, by the Devils Agents, Witches, which we
could show by diverse other Histories and Relations, and Reasons, but they are
impertinent here; she chose of two evils the least, rather to have her lock of
hair not very long, hanging without, than to go with her mouth open, but I
never asked her why she cut it not off; I suppose she suffered it not to grow
at length, being shorter than commonly women's hair is by far.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of an AEGYLOPS.
AN Aegylops is a little Tubercle situated betwixt the bone of the Nose and the
greater corner of the Eye, which before it be broke is called Anchylops, and
breaking, turns Fistulous, and is called Fistula Lacrymalis: The Arabians call
it Garaeb.

CAUSE
Arises from vicious humors falling from the Head, which are either more watery
or thick, muddy and virulent, driven to the corner of the Eye, and there
seeking a passage, but being retained they putrify, and rot also the bone,
effecting also a cavity, wherein, being broke, is a fistulous Ulcer.

SIGNS.
It is a little Tubercle or Prominence betwixt the root of the Nose and corner
of the Eye, reddish, and equally molesting at all times, conceiving within it a
cavity, and breaking, turns a Fistula.

DIFFERENCES.
1. One is from a more slow and thick humor, is contained in a bag or skin in
form of pap and honey mixed together, effecting no solution of continuity, that
opens not, but is taken away by Section, and turns not Fistulous; which the
Latins call Abscessus Ocularis, and the Greeks Anchylopa and Anchylops.

2. Another from effusion of a serous blood from adjacent veins, driven forth
by blows, or the like, conceiving Inflammation and pain; and breaking, turns an
hollow Ulcer or Fistula, wherein sometimes the Bone is corrupted, and then it
is called Aegylops.

In this also be differences, for some be benign, others cancrous, wherein
touch does much irritate; the color of them is pale and livid, the veins
appear full and ill colored.

PROGNOSTICS.
Anchylopa is better than Aegylopa; it is the worse if Inflammation and corruption
of the bone be present, it is incurable if cancerated; the worse also the more
deeply it is seated: a Fistula is bad to heal, and like to prove a Cronical
Affect, yet the fresher the better, the farther off of the Eye the better;
through nearness to which, and tenuity of the bones of the Nose, it is most to
be feared; the continual affluxes of the matter also, and motion of the Eye
hinders its drying up, and healing.

CURE.
Cure is by Revulsion and Repulsion, if not yet ulcerated; if it be ulcerated,
dilate the Ulcer, put in a Tent of Gentian-root, deterge and mundifie. Some use
Astringents for repressing the defluent humors, which others dislike, and use
resolving and maturating Topics, the Pus is all to be crushed out, and then
use Topics, the Collyry of Rhasis, of Aloes, Frankincense, i. Sarcocol,
Dragons-blood, Balaustians, Allom, Crude-Antimony, of each i. Verdigrease xv.
grains, with Eyebright-water, make a Collyry, Discussers are to be used, as
Rhue boiled in Lee; rank Nuts and Saffron boild in Alica, the Juice of Festuca
or St. Peter's Corn, is thought by a propriety to help, so also is the Milk of
Almonds.

SYMPTOMS.
Before it be consolidated we must look to the Symptoms: 1. Inflammation is to
be cautioned, for which repellers, letting blood, etc. are useful. 2. Hinder
its turning Cancerous; where revulsion is good, an actual Cautery, or touching
it with oil of Sulphur or Vitriol. 3. Look to the Bone, if that be rotted or
corrupted, scale it. Causticks (as a Powder of Verdigrease, Festuca, Myrrh, and
Gentian roots) are useful, dilatation of the Ulcer being first made, also an
actual Cautery. 4. If a Callows grow, take that away by Corrosives and
Chyrurgery; then use Sarcoticks and Cicatrizers: See a Fistula of the weeping
flesh.

OF THE Diseases of the Lungs.
THese three Distempers, Hoarsness, Catarrh, and Asthma, were writ long since,
compiled from the best Authors, compared and laid together; all things of
moment that were not in one, We extracted from others, and from all abjected
what was most unnecessary: Our precedent Discourse of the Lungs and their
Diseases, will show what these want: Here the Readers may see the Rules and
Method of the Ancients, and compare them. We endeavored to draw out all the
choice Specificals, and appropriated Medicines that ease the Symptom, and do
good in all Causes; so that if the Ancients were mistook in the Causes, yet in
those open Affects the Medicines are prevalent, and being found out by sure
Experience, never fail.

CHAP. I.
Of Hoarsness.

HOarsness is a Depravation of the Voice, from an Humor falling upon
Windpipe, and making of it rough.

CAUSE.
The Cause is a defluxion of Rheumatick Humors from the Head to the sharp
Artery, or Winde-pipe, made either through cold weakening the retentive faculty
of the Brain, or heat dissolving and pouring forth Humors, whose collection
and generation came from moistening Causes, or airy Exhalations from the
Stomach, which turned to a waterish matter which preceded, and were either from
too much Drink, Wines, Bathes, moistening Meats, and raw Fruits, and other
things, sending many moist Vapors to the Head.

SIGNS.
There needs no Signs to be set down whereby to know it, only to distinguish
twixt an hot and cold Cause; which are, if the Head be hot, if the Defluxion be
more sharp, if the Nose and Face look red, and the Party perceives the Head
hotter than accustomedly it is used to be; and if heating Causes preceded and
went before, we know it is from an hot Distemper, and heating Causes; if the
contrary Signs to thesebe present, we may well guess they have taken cold,
either being bare-headed, or by Clamours, whereby the Mouth was long kept open,
and cold air drawn in.

CURE.
In Cure, it is good, 1. To prevent a Fever in an hot Cause: 2. To concoct and
thicken the Humor for expulsion, which is done by Pectorals: As, of
Maidenhair, Liquorish, Figs, Jujubes, of each equal parts, boil them in Water,
and add Syrup of Violets and Poppies, of each what may seem sufficient to
sweeten the Clarified Liquor.

After this, purge with Cephalic Pills; and lastly, dry the Brain.

Medicines that respect the Symptom, and that besides their faculty of
lenifying the roughness of the Windpipe, and the tickling sharpness of the
Rheum, do by a propriety help, are these: of Juice pressed from green
Liquorish, j. Juice of Sage ss. with Sugar boil it to a Syrup; then add
Storax, Calamitis, Myrrh, Gum Tragacanth, Saffron, of each j. make hereof a
Lohoch, to be often licked of with a Liquorish Stick, suffering it to melt and
slip down by degrees.

Or, Leaves of the Fig Tree, Five-leav'd-Grass, of m ss. Seeds of
Srubb-thlaspeos, Dropwort-Roots, of each ij. Poppy and Violet-Flowers, of each
Pug. 1. boil them in Water, then strain them, and add to the Liquor Sugar for
the boiling of it up into a Syrup; Gum of the Cherry-Tree dissolved in Wine,
Mucilage of Quince, and Psyllium-Seeds in honied Water, are also very proper
for Hoarsness.

This is much praised, of Spirit of Sack, ss. make it as thick with
Sugar Candy, as a thick Eclegma, or Lohoch, and take thereof often; but in an
hot Distemper Oil of sweet Almonds so thickened with Sugar Candy, and a
Decoction of Pennyroyal well sweetened, is of great account with some.

Hartmanus says, If it be from Cold, a Draught of good Wine well tempered with
Sugar, takes it away.

Rondeletius says, To clear the Voice there is nothing better than to use
frequently our Pills of Benjonum, or this, which (says he) helps in
Hoarsnesses, from what Cause soever; Conserve of Violets, j. fresh Butter and
Milk drawn from Almonds, of each ij. Meal of Orobus, ss. Tragacanth, and
Penedies, of each j ss. mix all together into from of a Lohoch.

CHAP. II. Of a Catarrh, or Distillation of Rheum.
CAtarrhos is a Symptom of things cast out, being a Flux Rheum falling from the
Head upon the subjected parts, arising from Cold or Fullness.

SUBJECT.
A Catarrh is taken for a Defluxion of Waterish and Rheumatick Humors upon any
part, as upon the Jaws and rough Artery, into the Nose, Ears, and Eyes; but
here it is specially taken for a deflux upon the Lungs.

CAUSE.
Cause is effectual in the Brain, which either weakened in its retentive, or
irritated in its expulsive faculty, casts forth, or lets fall such serous
Humors upon the lower parts: Causes hereof are either remote or nigh; remote
are such as engender plenty of such a matter and serous Blood, such be all
vaporous things, and moistening Causes, as immoderate drinking, Bathes, Wines,
Apples, and crude Things in the Stomach, which either sends vapors to the
Head, or the Head draws them from thence, by immoderate heat in it.

Or, an hot Distemper of the Liver, or Obstruction of it, cause a Catarrhous
Matter to be heaped up in the Head; from an hot Liver, an hot Matter is sent,
and is the Cause of an hot Catar^h; from Obstruction are those Humors also
forced upwards, that were wont to have their passage downwards in their proper
Channels, which may happen in a cold state of the Liver, and where heat in the
Head more forcibly attracts; the same is also from obstruction of the Spleen
and Courses.

Or distemper of the Head, which if cold, it first repells not Humors and
crude Vapors sent thither; secondly concocts not that excrementitious
pituitous matter, from coldness and weakness: The south Air and rainy Weather
cause it, as Sect. 3. Aphor. 5.

Nigh, are such as weaken the retentive, as cold Air, or cooling Causes; or
move the expulsive, as heat, and plenty of the matter, or sharpness of it.

SIGNS.
General Signs are heaviness of the Head and Senses, dullness of the Sight and
Hearing, often Sneezing, a sense of the Humor distilling, which is sometimes
more sharp, other times milder; sometimes salt and phlegmatic, sometimes fresh,
and colored like Saffron, and troubles the Eyes, Nose, Jaws, and Lungs too
sometimes, whence a Cough is raised.

Particular are taken from Difference of Causes: For,

1. One is from Plethory, where antecedent Causes were such as filled the Head
with Vapors, or Humors, and comes by consent, as from Liver, Spleen, Courses
stopped, and Stomach, and then there are Signs of those parts, evil affected, and
obstructed; or from Crudity, Drunkenness, an Aquitonian constitution of the Air
that preceded; may easily be known also by a sense of distension and fullness in
the Head.

2. Another from heat, or a hot distemper of the Head, which is known, 1. By
heat perceived in the Head, both by the Patients sense, and also by feeling to
it. 2. The Humor is more thin, hot and sharp, so that the Nose thereby is
sometimes exulcerated, the Face and Nose be red, and sometime a Fever follows.

3. Another from cold, which is indicated by taking cold, either by being
bare-headed, or too much conversant in cold windy Air, also by absence of heat;
the Humor is more thick and phlegmatic, obstructing the Ethmoid-Bones, and
causing hoarsness of the Voice, and a greater sense of heaviness and distension
in the Head.

PROGNOSTICS.
It is familiar to Winter, and not dangerous; unless,

1. It be joined with Headache, and a Fever.

2. Or be more frequent, and happens to moist and Catarrhous Constitutions.

3. If they run with violence, called Choking Catarrhs, wherein is danger of
Suffocation, falling in so plenteous and preposterous a measure and manner upon
the Lungs and sharp Artery.

4. In Old men, for there they admit no Concoction, for their Bodies be cold.

DIET.
As touching Diet, and things to be observed, note the Cause; for in a Cold
Cause all cooling things are hurtful, as Diet or Air cooling actually or
potentially, North Winds: In an hot Cause, a cooling Diet and Air is good,
South Winds hurtful, Vexations of Mind, Watching, etc. bad.

Generally note,

1. To eschew moistening Diet, and too much sleep.

2. Vaporous things, as Garlic, Mustard, Horse-Radish-Roots, Onyons, Wine, and
strong Odours.

3. What ever things accumulating or dissolving Humors, as changing of the
temper of the Head from Heat to Cold, Baths, the Sun and Venery are hurtful;
let him sleep most upon his Belly, that so the matter may the more readily
break out by the Nostrils.

CURE.
In Cure, First, The matter is to be prepared not with Incidents and
Detergents, but Thickners and Concocters, which at first are to be more weak;
rest and sleep moderate help much.

2. Let Blood if the Liver be hot, if the Body be full and Sanguine, if
Pleurisies and Quinzies be endangered therefrom, or a Fever, which enkindles
the Humors; or if the Head be hot, letting Blood is good to hinder its drawing
more to it; otherwise omit Phlebotomy.

3. Purge the matter by Apozems, not too strong, least the matter be too much
agitated; not too often, (Corroboraters interposed) lest they be over-weakened;
in a thicker and more remote matter Phlegmagogues in form of Pills may be used.

4. Pull back, derive, and turn away the flux, Frictions and Ligatures to the
Extremities, Cupping-Glasses to the Buttocks, Setaces, Causticks behind the
Ears: Arculanus applied Causticks to the Crown, and by the sores drew forth
much matter; but Septalius says, Cauteries to the Coronal Suture are evil, and
by experience we never find good effects therefrom, but the Membranes, Veins,
Nerves, and Fibra's are inflamed therefrom; Revulsion is also made by Clisters,
Errhines, Gargarisms, Apophlegmatisms, etc. are used by some to evacuate the
matter contained in the Head, and condemned by others because they draw the
matter in greater force and plenty from the Head upon the Lungs and Aspera
Arteria, whence may be made a suffocative Catarrh, Inflammation or Exulceration
of the Windpipe, or Quinzies, though not always.

5. Strengthen the Brain, because a part strong may do more by Nature, than the
Physician by Art, and moreover stopping or binding up of the matter is not so
good or healthful, as Natures expulsion of it, if without damage to her; among
other things Serpillum, or Mother of Thyme is held to have a Propriety herein,
or the Wine of Pope Adrian, of the Bark of all sorts of Myrobalans, with the
Kernels dried, of each ijss. Cinnamon, j. Cloves, Galanga, Cubebs, Cardamoms
greater and less, of each ss. Red Roses dried, j ss. Lavender and Rosemary, of
each ss. bruise them, and steep them in seven pints of Wine for twenty four
hours, then drink morning and evening thereof.

6. Dryers, as a Drink of China, Sarsaparilla, Guaicum-Wood, of Rosemary, etc.
2. Or a, Powder of Negella-Seeds, red Roses, Succinum, and Bark of
Frankincense: (...) Or a Cap of Pouders interwoven in Flocks twixt fine.
Linhen, as Seeds of Roman Nigella, Amber, of each ij. red Roses,
Myrtle-Berries, Styrax, Galamitis, Galls Omphacite, of each jss. Nutmegs,
Cinnamon, Coriander-Seed, Labdanum, of each j. reduce all to a gross Powder for
a Cucupha, or loose Powders may be strewed in the Head.

The Seeds of Nigella and Cummin parched and applied warm, (the Head being
shaven) interbasted in fine Linen, being first poudered, are said to be a most
present remedy: 4. Suffumes to dry the Brain, are also very effectual, as of
Nigella-Seeds, tortified, and smelt to, or of this Powder cast upon Coals, over
the Fume of which the Head is to be holden; of Succinum, or Amber,
Frankincense, Seeds of Coriander, Rosemary, Mother of Thyme, Gum of Juniper,
Tobacco, of each ij. mix them.

Or, of Nigella-Seeds, and Amber, of each iij. Storax, Gum of Juniper,
Rosemary, and Coriander-Seed, of each ij. Myrtle-Berries, red Roses, Mastick,
Nutmegs, of each j. mix and powder them grossly, for the aforesaid use.

7. Respect the Flux or Symptom, which if it offend in quality, correct that,
as 1. Sharp, and then use Emulsions, and tempers of Acrimony, that the parts be
not excoriated, exulcerated, or inflamed from sharp pain; of Barley-Water,
lbiv. boil therein Liquorish, j. white Poppy-seed, ij. St. James-Wort, Flowers
of red Poppies, of each m ss. to the strained Liquor add Syrup of white
Poppies, and Violets, of each ij. mix all for a Drink, chiefly to be used at
going to rest; or Laudanum is given by some to the quantity of four or five
grains, which where it may safely be given, is very effectual: Chemists commend
Oil of Butter, given to j. at one Dose. 2. Salt, wherein Johannes Prevotius
proceeds thus; in salt Rheums or Spittle, the Decoction of Barley, Jujubes,
Liquorish, and sweet Pruines, chiefly in a Liquor that is made by boiling of
the Feet or Head of a Calf or Lamb is good; so are Snails of the Wood, or
Hodmondods, and Emulsion of the four less cold Seeds, with Almonds, adding the
Flower of Starch, and Cream of Ptysan, a Ponatel of the same Emulsions, adding
white Poppyseeds, if the saltness be more urgent; or lick up the Juice of fresh
Prunes, or Butter, or a Syrup of sweet Prunes juyced, and Juice of Purslane
boiled with Honey to a Syrup. Thus far Prevotius.

3. Hot and thin, and then Coolers and Thickners are conducing, those that were
prescribed for an hot matter, and Rotula's of Saccharates to hold under the
Tongue, are useful here; for example-sake, of Sugar penidiate, jss. Gum
Arabic, Tragacanth dissolved in Poppy-Water, of each ij. Root of
Hounds-Tongue, red Roses, Wood of the Frankinsence-Tree, of each j. with Syrup
of Poppies make Rotula's to hold under the Tongue, and melt by degrees.

4. Cold and thick, and then Attenuaters and Heaters are more proper both for
the matter in the Head, and that that is already flown into the Lungs, a Powder
of Valerian-Roots, Spiknard, Rosemary, Mother of Thyme, Myrrh, Sage, Saffron,
Costmary, and Spignel-Roots, is then most excellent; or a Wine of Rosemary,
Indian-Nard, Spignel-Roots, and Nigella-Seeds, with Aromaticals for the Head,
and Pectorals for the Lungs.

2. In quantity, if it offend, as sometimes, it induces fear of Choking; we
must stop it gradually, dull and retard its quick, violent, and preposterous
motion, by Intercipients applied to the Forehead, as an Emplaister of Mastich,
Frankincense, Cummin, and Nigella-seeds, with Oil of Jasmine-Flowers: Or taken
inwardly, as this Powder much commended, Bole Armonick, Man's Skull burnt,
Hounds-Tongue, Storax, Liquorish, Frankincense, Myrrh, of each j. Saffron, ss.
Opium, Thebaick, j. with Syrup of white Poppies, make Pills: These also are
praised, and held from a propriety to stop Catarrhs; Poppies, Rosemary,
Ragwort, Strawberries, Amber, Valerian-roots, Spignel, or Meum-roots,
Hounds-Tongue, Storax, Myrrh, Root of the Slot-Tree, Honey-Water, and Rosa
Solis-Water, Neck-Laces, or Beads of Amber hung about the Neck, fume of Onyons
stewed in an Oven, Leaves of Laurel and Winter-Bark snuft up the Nose, Tobacco
taken in a Pipe, and a Decoction of Pimpernel, taken morning and night in
fullness of the Head from Rheumatick Humors.

Renodaeus reckons up these things that stop a Catarrh; Syrup of Poppies,
Jujubes, and Quinces, Liquorish and Myrtles, Leaves of Coltsfoot condite,
Hyssop, Bole of Armenia, Hounds-Tongue, Troches of Camphir, and Oil Omphacine.

Hartmannus says, An Amulet of the Root of Female-Verbascus, or Mullein,
gathered from the fifteenth of August, to the eighth of September, the Moon
decreasing, being hung about the Neck, is the most sovereign Remedy for a
Catarrh. To intercept the Flux also, Intercipients applied to the Head shaven,
specially to the Crown, are available, as a Bag of Succinum sprinkled with
Spirit of Wine, or of the Powder of Chamepithis sprinkled with Oil of Succinum.

Lastly, The Symptoms are to be considered; If it happen to Infants, the Nurse
is to be dieted, Milk is to be rectified, and she must be purged, and take
Pectorals: One grain of Frankincense in Powder given to the Child, is held a
secret; the Head is to be sprinkled with Pouders that be astringent and
strengthening, but not too strong.

If a Fever be joined, let Blood, give Coolers, and omit hot Medicines; if a
Cough molest much, it must be suffered awhile, till the Cause which is the
Catarrh, be cured: so also Excoriation, and pain from sharpness, and heat of
the matter, is helped by the aforesaid things that cool and make mild the flux
of Humors; too great sneezing may lawfully be mittigated: See the Chapter of
Sneezing, to hinder a Quinzy impendent; a Decoction of Lentils are thought to
be effectual.

CHAP. III. Of an Asthma, or hurt of breathing.
AN Asthma is an hurt of breathing, with noise and frequency, arising from a
pertinacious Obstruction of the Lungs and its Vessels, or Compression thereof,
and afflicting without a Fever.

Respiration is the proper action of the Lungs, which we ought to know what its
right medium and constitution is in bodies not affected, whereby we may also
distinguish how much it is depraved; it is twofold, free or strait; Free
Respiration is a facility of Breathing, with little motion of the Chest, from
the Middriff and Lungs rightly constituted, and not diseased, whereby it is
voluntarily lessened or enlarged, drawn in or sent out, more quickly or slowly,
and is called Natural Respiration.

Unnatural Respiration is very diverse and various, according to its celerity or
rarity, greatness or smallness, motion and respite, equal or inequal. For,

1. Macropnaea is a Vice of Breathing, wherein plenty of Air by inspiration
distends the Breast exceedingly, and the whole Thorax is moved by all the
Muscles, because the Heart (for cooling of which, breathing is ordained) being
over-heat, as in Fevers, or almost suffocated with fuliginous Vapors,
requires much Air to fan and cool it by inspiration, and sends out many
fuliginous Vapors in expiration.

2. Tachypnaea is a greater and more frequent respiration from the same Causes,
being greater.

3. A third kind of depraved breathing is called Dyspnaea, or a short breathing.

4. Asthma, which is more frequent drawing of Breath.

5. Orthopnaea, whenas the sick are forced to stand upright to fetch their
Breath.

6. Apnaea, or an ablation or total abolishing of sensible respiration, wherein
is great danger of Suffocation; it comes sometimes from eating of Toad-stools,
sometimes from swoonding, and in suffocation of the Womb, wherein the Heart is
thought to be ventilated, refreshed, and cooled by Transpiration, or
Perspiration, of which it being the Author, and all the whole Body being
spirable, within and without, according to Hippocrates, why may not
perspiration by the pores of the Body supply the Heart in defect of
respiration? and Galen says, If that pores of the Skin be obstructed, so that
Transpiration is prohibited, and so consequently the fuliginous vapors
retained, putrid Fevers are raised, whose Basis is the Heart.

SUBJECT.
Subject is either the Lungs, Middriff, or sharp Artery, and the Organs of
breathing by the Animal Spirits and Nerves.

CAUSES.
Causes of Asthma are either obstruction of the Lapets and Grisles of the
Lungs, by a thick phlegmatic impacted matter, or stones, and crude Tubercles,
risen in its substance, and causing obstruction either through weakness of the
Lungs, and then it is gathered and made by degrees, or from vice of other
parts, which transmit such a matter to the Lungs. Sennertus thinks it to come
from the Liver by the Vena Arteriosa, because Asthmaticks are so often
Cachectick, and have their feet swell; and though Catarrhs be present, whereby
it may be thought that the matter falls from the Head, and is thickened and
dried in the Lungs, yet because a Cough would be made, if the Humors came by
the sharp Artery from the Head to the Lungs, he does not think the matter comes
from the Head, and because sometimes it ceases without expectorating.

Or, 2. Constriction of the Pipes and Vessels of the Lungs or Middriff, which
may come, 1. Through dryness, as in Ptissicks, specially when they are nigh
Death. 2. From the smoke and fume of Quicksilver, of Coals, Lime, anointing
with Quicksilver, gross Vapors, arising from the Womb to the Aspera Arteria
and Pipes of the Lungs, cause a constriction, straitening and narrowing of
those parts.

Or, 3. Compression of the Lungs and Middriff, which is made either, 1. Through
plenty of Blood, as in the Haemorrhoids stopped, whence the parts of Breathing
are straitened by compressing and crushing together: Or, 2. of Water, as in
Dropsies, by whose turgency and abundance, distention of the Abdomen is made,
so that a compression of the Lungs and Middriff is made therefrom, whereby free
breathing is impedited, and hurt. 3. From swelling also of the Liver, Spleen,
or other Bowels, or extraneous Bodies, causing Compression of the aforesaid
parts, cause a Dyspnaea, or short breathing. 4. From abundance of Vapors
collected in the inferior Ventricle, sometime being more benign, sometimes
malignant, which are carried to the Middriff, and hinder its free motion and
Office of Respiration.

To these also may be added Defluxions of a thin matter falling upon the
Muscles of the Breast, and ordained for its motion, or intercostal Muscles and
Nerves of the Middriff, so that free motion and acting of those parts is
impedited, and hindered; or the Spondils of the Back luxated inwardly, or lying
along on their Backs, whence the Breast falls upon the Back, and the way of the
Breath is made more narrow, and so Orthopnicks are suffocated.

SIGNS.
Signs are more common: As, 1. Thick and frequent breathing, which is
aggravated by running, or great stirring, by lying on their Back, or taking
cold, to which the Lungs and Middriff are exposed, and very obnoxious too: Or,
2. A Cough from a matter in the Lungs: 3. A noise or rattling in breathing, from
the Air breaking through the parts obstructed by a pituitous matter: 4.
Expiration is easier than Inspiraration, for in that the Instruments do
spontaneously fall down, being void of Air, that stretched out their Capacity;
but in this they are harder to be raised and distended to receive the Air, that
is to be drawn in, from the agglutination of the matter, and heaviness,
oppression and weakness of the Organs of Respiration.

Or less common; which come from particular Causes: As, 1. From a defluxion
upon the intercostal and Muscles of the Breast, and then the Breast is moved
heavily, and there is great pain thereof: 2. From a crude Tubercle, or botch in
the Lungs; there is a Fever present if it be apostematous, and this being
suppurated, the matter is cast out with the Cough; if only an excrescent
swelling, or some outgrowing Tubercle, or stony hard concrete matter, sticking
in the substance of the Lungs, then the Symptoms and short breathing increased
gradually as that increased; they are not so much troubled with difficulty of
Breathing, they have no Fever, the Disease is continual, and they are sound:
The same Signs also are present in obstruction of the Lungs and Windpipe from
a glutinous phlegmatic thick Humor, only that Stertor, or a rattling noise in
breathing is also present. 3. If the Cause be from the Liver, then there are
Signs of the Liver being weak and ill-affected, there is a Cachexy, or ill
habit of the whole Body, Clorosis, stopped Haemorrhoids, and swellings of the
feet. 4. If the Cause come from the Head, as Catarrhs do, (which sometimes in
an high degree suffocate or Quarchn, as the Vulgar term it) it is more
periodick, or comes at times; molests chiefly in Autumn and Winter, and is
worst on Nights.

DIFFERENCES.
One is continual, another periodick, or that comes by fits; one comes suddenly
from Catarrhs and Defluxions, or a matter translated from other parts to the
Lungs; another by degrees, and congestion of an Humor more thick, and
pertinaciously adhering: Differences also are made from parts offended and
offending; from Causes also, as Compression, Constriction, or Obstruction, of
all which we have sufficiently spoken heretofore.

SYMPTOMS.
Symptoms are a Cough, Catarrh, Noise, want of Breath, specially in going fast
or up-hill, swellings of the Feet, difficulty in making Water, which troubles
sometimes, and arises from a matter sent to the Reins; sometimes also a Fever,
Hoarsness and Expectoration are Companions.

PROGNOSTICS.
In dryness of the Lungs and a Ptysical state, in old men, and an inveterate
obstruction, there is little hopes; also if they are made bunohy from it, or in
an acute Fever, because by its heat the matter is made drier and harder, and
not easily cast out by Expectoraters; it sometimes strangles Children, and ends
in Dropsies and Peripneumonies sometimes; sometimes by its diuturnity and
stubborness kills; many times if they be weak they wound, because their breath
is gone: cold weather is bad for them; free breathing is a great sign of
health, and they that breath freely die not, as Hippocrates observed.

CURE.
In Cure, Consideration of Diet and Regiment is first to be had, wherein
observe these things: If it be from a Phlegmatic matter obstructing, as most
often it is, Diet must be heating and drying, with which Attenuaters, and
Cutters of a thick matter are meet to be mixed; Partridges, Capons, Hens, are
good, which are rather to be roasted then boiled; Flesh of Fish, Fruits and
Pulse are bad and engender crude and clammy Humors; Drink is to be little,
because by flathosity and distention of the Diaphragma or Midriff, the evil is
increased; if they thirst, Meats must be less hot, because the heart is
overheat; Drink is then often to be held in the Mouth to moisten, say some; but
others, more wisely, advise to drink freely, so the thick matter is made
thinner; Air is to be hot also and dry; the Breast is often to be rubbed
gently; Exercise is to be moderate.

In an hot Cause and dry, as in Ptissicks, Inflammation of the Lungs, and a
Fever, the contrary to these are to be used and endeavored.

Cure of an Asthma from thick and clammy Humors is performed.

1. By attenuation and thinning of it; this is done by cutters and makers thin
of a thick matter, which are hot and dry; and because reason shows us that
those things that dry too much make such a matter more thick and dry, whereas
by preparation we intend to make it more thin and moist, and easy to be
brought forth by Expectoraters, they are not to exceed in heat or dryness.
Among such as are held fit preparatives for such a matter, the most excellent
are, Oxymel of Squills, Syrup of Horehound, Hyssop, Liquorish; these may be
mixed with Waters in form of Julips, as of the Water of Horehound, of Enula
Campana, and Water of Honey, of each iv. Syrup of Maidenhair, Lungwort, and
Oxymel of Squills, of each j. with Oil of Brimstone, make it of a pleasant
tartness: or of the Conserve of Enula Campana, and Orris, of each j. of the
Powder of Oak of Jerusalem, Horehound, Coltsfoot, and Liquorish, of each j.
Figgs drawn through a Sive, being first beaten with Angelica-Water ss. Syrup of
Horehound, what may suffice to make an Eclegma.

Also Decoctions may be made of Herbs, Roots, and Seeds, and sweetened with
Syrups; or an Oxymel may thus be made, of Oak of Jerusalem, Lungwort, Hyssop,
Scabious, of each mj. Nettles, Thyme, Figs, of each mj ss. boil them in
Vinegar, and being streined, add thereunto Honey, and make an Oxymel.

2. Preparation being made, purging of those Humors is to follow, where among
other things, such an Apozem for diverse Doses is most excellent, of Agarick
sliced thin, iij. Roots of Briony grossly beaten, ss. Roots of Wild Cucumbers,
and Rubarb, thin sliced, of each ij. add thereto some Aromaticks, and let be
infused in Thyme and Hyssop Water, and add thereunto some Pectoral Syrups to
sweeten it.

To those that nauseate Potions, such Pills may be given, of Collocynthis,
Elatery, or Juice of Wild Cucumbers dried, of each ss. Agarick j. Zedoary,
Aniseeds, and Mustard Seed, of each v. Grains, with Syrup of the Juice of Orris
or Flower-de-luce-Roots, make Pills to be taken in three Mornings; some like
Pills better then Potions, because they stay longer in the Stomach, and draw
better from remote parts. We must purge by Intervals, but not in the Fits for
fear of suffocation.

3. Vomiting is much credited by some, and rejected by others; Rhasis,
Riverius, Hartmannus, and others, wish to vomit, and commend it from their own
experience, and that sometimes the Sick are delivered thereby; Primerosius
says, Sometimes it hurts not; but Ludovicus Septalius condemns Vomiting,
specially in a strong fit; because thereby the Breast, says he, is wonderfully
tortured, and there is danger of Suffocation, the Matter being violently drawn
to the Aspera Arteria; others are silent hereof, neither using nor condemning
it: See more hereof hereafter in Cure of an Ahstma from vice of the Liver, and
in Cachexies.

4. Sylvius advises to revulsion of the Matter, and aversion of Humors, as by
application of Cupping-glasses a little above the Reins, Errhines and
Apophlegmatisms.

5. Expectoraters or promoters of Spittle, which bring forth such thick matter
by Anacatharsis or Spitting; such were they that were directed for preparation
of this Matter, of clear Turpentine j. Syrup of Colworts, of Horehound, of each
j. Powder of Orris, Brimstone, and Enula Campana, of each j. Amoniacum
dissolved in Oil of Sweet-Almonds iv. make a Lohoch. Jacobus Sylvius says, The
Root of Aron or Cucopints prepared any way, and mixed with Pectorals, is the
best of things to promote spitting.

6. Discussion of the Matter is next useful, that is done by Externals, the
Breast being first rubbed that the Pores may be opened, and then foment with hot
Oils and Laxating, as Oil of Orris, of Sweet Almonds, of each j. Saffron j. mix
them for Unction: or of the Meal of Fennugreek, Melilot, Hyssop, Calamint, of
each equal parts, boil them in White Wind, and add Honey and Flower of
Brimstone a sufficient quantity to make a Cataplasm for the Breast.

Also the Breast may be fomented with Sponges dipped in Pectoral Oils or Liquors;
and these are to be used some at one time, and some at another for change, and
because they should not lie on too long.

7. Extracters of the Relics of the Matter, as by rubbing of the Breast with
blistering Medicines, and stinging Nettles; and burnings, described by Aetius,
were used by the Ancients, but left by Modern Practicks.

8. Dryers of the parts of breathing, as Lungs, etc. is to be ordered; that is
done by Fumes, as of Frankincense and Brimstone, to stay long about Baths of
Brimstone, or an hot and drying Air, Brimstone Baths; the use of Aromaticals:
Gentilis commends the fume of Arsenick to be wonderful herein, but because
Arseuick is of such a poisonous quality, we ought to be cautulous in its use,
and correct its vice with Aromaticks.

Secondly, In Dyspnaea's and Asthma's from vice of the Liver, transmitting a
matter to the Lungs, as in Cachecticks is apparent: These things are moreover
to be observed.

1. Let Blood, a Clister premised, for hereby those Humors are lessened in
quantity, and corrected in quality; and the Veins less swelling, Breathing is
made more free.

Galen proves Phlebotomy in a dry Orthopnaea, but in Ptissicks and dried
Bodies, and others, where we fear native heat thereby to be impaired, and so
greater plenty of crude, pituitous Humors are generated, it is not good to
open a Vein.

2. Purge, as before directed, frequently and more mildly, chiefly with Potions
and Apozemes, together with Purgers being admixt, such things as respect both
Liver and Symptom.

3. Vomit. 1. Because Humors redound in the whole Body. 2. Because the Stomach
is often ill affected. 3. Because by Vomit, Humors and Vapors, making
compression or constriction, are moved and brought forth.

Platerus used the following with good success, of the Juice of Orris, or
Flower-de-luce-Roots, ss. Hyppocras, j. mix them for a Vomit.

Hartmannus says, Asthma, Orthopnaea, and Dyspnaea are quickly at first cured
with a Vomit of Aqua Benedicta; but if through stubbornness and oldness of the
Disease, they are not cured after two Vomits, proceed to other things.

Riverius says, Among other Vomits for this purpose, The Juice of Tobacco
drunk to iij. obtains the principal place.

4. Diuretics are useful here, because Nature strives also to expel a great
part of the Noxious Humors by the Reins, which Septalius says, Are not to be
used generally, because that in a thick matter they dry, and carry off the
serous part of the Humor, whence the rest is left more hard and dry, but here
they seem to be very necessary and helpful.

3. If the Matter come from the Head, be directed by the Chapter of a Catarrh
to dry the Head, and stop defluxions that fall upon the Lungs.

4. If the Middriff be affected, and that by Vapors, causing compression,
Clisters more strong and frequently given, are useful: For says Rondeletius,
Asthmaticks are wont to be grieved with much windiness, from which sometime an
Asthma is made, distending the Septum Transversum or Middriff, from whence they
cannot breath freely: See for Medicines proper against Windiness in the
following List of such Medicines as peculiarly help short-windedness.

5. If any hurtful things by fume hurt the parts of breathing, or Organs of
respiration, their force is to be opposed by Antidotaries; together with other
things that generally are good for an Asthma, and short and frequent breathing;
in the fit we must only Palliate, not Vomit, Purge or give Clisters, for fear
of stirring the matter too much, and endangering suffocation; by exercising
before meat, many have been choked, which may be from the fit suddenly
thereupon invading, therefore let them not move violently or suddenly before
meat; then the Breast may not be rubbed; then are to be given such things as
respect the Symptom, and are helpful against shortness of Breath, among which
Saffron is chiefly commended, which is said to restore breathing afresh in
dying men; the Green Roots of Angellica condite, a Linctus of Sulphur washed
often in Coltsfoot Water, with Syrup of Oak of Jerusalem of Heurnius; Seeds of
Southernwood, Waters of hot Baths that proceed from Brimstone; the Broth of an
old Cock, with Pectorals, and Agarick of Benedictus, Victorius, Faventinus and
Prevotius, Syrup and Oxymel of Tobacco of Querectanus, Millepedes, or Sows, in
White Wind, macerated; Lac Sulphuris, or Quick Brimstone, with Benjamin and
Salt in an Egg, or the extract of Hors-Radish-Roots, with Essence of Sugar, or
of Enula with Oil of Aniseeds of Hartmannus, a draught of Wine ij. Amoniacum j.
Water of Hyssop, iv. of Johnstonus, Natural Balsom; Cardomoms which the
Physicians of Malaver give to Asthmaticks, Pine-Kernels, Oil of Sulphur,
Vinegar of Rheu, or of Squills, an Oxymel of Rheu, Squills, Seed of Woodbine,
Mustard, Nettles and Anise, boild in Vinegar, and then a sufficient quantity of
Honey added; also the Chemical Oil of Turpentine, of Hyssop, Thyme and
Aniseeds; Roots of Briony, of the greater Centaury, Peucedane, Cummin,
Nigella-Seeds, Rhubarb, Bay Berries, Germander, and a Conserve of Roots of
Holyoak, are most worthily praised.

Of Vomiting of Blood from the Spleen. DEFINITION.
It Is an Ejection of a thick Excrementitious Blood from the Spleen, by the
Mouth, and Seigh, or Stool.

CAUSE
Is obstruction of the Spleen; or too great quantity of feculent and melancholy
thick gross Blood sent thither, whereby the Spleen having more then it can
digest and acquit her self of, this dreggy and thick excrementitious Blood is
forced upwards, and so the Stomach being offended therewith, casts it out with
violence; Portion of it going also downwards by stool is cast out, the
Excrements being less or more colored without it.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
Blood is cast forth, 1. By Vomit, which is dreggy, black and thick. 2. Cast
out by violence, insomuch that it often causes fainting and swooning. 3. In
great plenty. 4. By Stool, where it is not cast forth so violently and
plentifully, nor on heaps, but sent forth mixed with the Excrements, sometimes
more plentifully, sometime only giving them a little Tincture.

PROGNOSTIC.
It does not often happen, but when it does, the more violent and often they
Vomit, the worse; a Tympany of hard and difficult Curation sometime succeeds.

CURE.
1. We must respect the Spleen, see that it be not obstructed. 2. Look to the
forces and strength to uphold them. 3. Hinder future dangers.

A Specifical, and that only that cures it, is Wormwood taken constantly for a
due time together; it may be used in diverse forms and manners, but because of
its bitterness, in Pills or Goblets it may be more plentifully and acceptably
taken.

Of Diseases of the Middriff.
THe Middriff being the chief Instrument of Respiration, and lying obliquely,
separates the Abdomen, and Thorax or Breast; and is afflicted either from other
parts by consent, or essentially in it self; in it self it is diseased either
through Distemper, Tumors, Inflammation or Wounds.

DISTEMPER.
Distemper of it is either hot or cold, a cold Distemper arises as a cold
Distemper of other parts; there is no Delirium nor Fever: they that have pain
of the Middriff without Inflammation, a Fever arising, are delivered. Hippocr.
Aphor. 40. Sect. 6.

A hot Distemper is of nigh affinity, though not of so high a degree, or so
dangerous as an Inflammation of the Middriff, which arises from Hot and bileous
Blood entering into the thickness of the Middriff or Diaphragma, and puts forth
it self by these Symptoms.

1. An Acute Fever, and continual.

2. A Delirium or doting rage following thereupon.

3. A beating or palpitation of the Hypochonders on the borders of the
Middriff, the Hypochonders from the Membrane of the Peritonaeum are also
plucked and stretched out.

4. Respiration is inequal, sometimes frequent, sometimes seldom, sometimes
little.

5. Pain.

6. Convulsions at last are made herefrom.

PROGNOSTIC.
Cure is difficult by reason of the great danger from its connection and
fellow-feeling with Heart, Liver and Brain; it is very acute, and the Sick
rave, and are deprived of rationality, whence they are not easily persuaded to
the use of such Medicines as might be most conducible to Curation.

CURE.
In Cure (which is like that of Inflammation of the Lungs) we must repress
flowing Blood by Internals, and Topicals applied to the Breast warm, but that
have a cooling force to mitigate the Inflammation and Ebullient Blood, we must
chiefly hinder and beware a Delirium, by reason of the danger thereon ensuing;
washing of the Extremities, and Revulsives, Repellers to the Head, and
Corroboraters, are useful.

Of Swellings, or Tumors of the Middriff.
Tumors of the Middriff are either hot or cold, of hot we have already spoken,
under the Title of Inflammation.

Cold arises from a crude and thin matter, which penetrates the thickness of
the Middriff, and insinuates it self thereinto, and effects a Tumor: the
collection of this Matter has its Original from Compression, as in those that
lean hard on their Breasts in Writing; or concussion, as Blows, Bruises, etc.

SIGNS.
It it is known by tension of the Hypochonders, a Dyspnea; there is no
appearance of the Tumor outwardly, or Delirium.

PROGNOSTIC.
The fresher, the easier to Cure; if they last long, they consume the sick by
degrees, by a Tabes, as says Fernelius, without any kind of a Delirium; but if
a Delirium be present, the Disease is more critical and dangerous.

CURE.
In Cure the matter is to be evacuated by Hydragogues, strengthen the Bowels
from a new collecting of such matter, outwardly apply Discutients, with
Emollients, Sarsaperilla is commended; but Dryers, that evacuate all the serous
matter, and leave the other remaining thicker, do hurt: sometime it may turn to
an Abscess, and the matter be cast forth into the Capacity of the Breast, and so
cast out by coughing.

Of Wounds of the Middriff.
VVOunds of the Middriff, say Authors, bring the Wounded to dye laughing, cause
a Delirium, and retraction of the small Guts upwards, and Stomach sometimes
ascends into the Thorax, with great sense of weight and pain there.

Wounds in the Carnous be not so dangerous as in its Nervous part, wherein it is
held incurable; a Convulsion sometimes takes them away; wherever it be hurt,
from its continual motion it is not easily consolidated.

CURE.
Its Cure is the same as for Wounds of the Lungs.

Of Blood broken out of the Vessels of the Bladder, and there clottered and
putrified. DEFINITION.
It Is an eruption of Blood from some Vein distended; and from breaking and
pouring forth the Blood into the Bladder, which sometimes and in part is cast
out, the rest remaining in the Bladder clotters, and induces oftentimes a
Gangrene, Faintings, obstruction of the Bladder, or other bad Symptoms.

Its CAUSE is expressed in the DEFINITION. SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
Signs Diagnostick be at first a fungous or spongy Flesh, which sometimes grows
within the Bladder, and filling the Bladder do greatly injure its actions, made
from a Haemorrhoid or Vein swelling, which at last breaks, and empties the
Blood into the Bladder.

Secondly, When it is broke, there is a voiding of Blood by the Urine in part,
though the other part clodders, and grows thick; upon which there is made,

1. Faintings, Heart-qualms, etc.

2. Change of the color to paleness.

3. His Pulse small, beating often, and various.

4. His courage fails, spirits are dull, he is sorrowful and listless.

5. The forces decay, his strength declines, and heat is enfeebled; putrified
Blood, as putrified Seed, brings many desperate Symptoms.

6. There is often clotted Blood pissed forth: Aph. 8. S. 4. Whosoever pisses
Blood thin or clottered, and is pained in the Hypogaster, or that part of the
Belly betwixt the Navil and Secrets, or Pinaeum, or Pecten, the Discase is
about the Bladder.

7. If it thus thicken and curdle in the Bladder, by the motion of Urine, the
clotters of Blood will sometime be carried into its Neck, or Urine-passage, and
there stop the going forth of the Urine, therefore by some it is called
Obstruction of the Bladder, or reckoned among the Causes of Obstruction of it.

PROGNOSTICS.
Great are the Symptoms that arises from Blood clottered and putrified;
Primrose says, it is pestiferous; Riolanus says, it quickly becomes gangrenous.

CURE.
Cure must be speedy, for delaying brings greater danger; therefore,

1. In a great Haemorrage, or when the Blood breaks out immoderately in the
Bladder, opening a Vein of the Arm is to be instituted and repeated, drawing
out the Blood by times.

2. Cupping-Glasses are to be affixed to the Loins and Ilia; the extreme parts
bound.

3. Applications, (which are to be done after due situation of the sick, who is
to be laid with his Hips upwards) and they are to cool and repress the flux of
Blood; Sponges dipped in Posca, laid to the share; Irrigations also, and
Foments, and Cataplasms of Astringents, and such as stop Bloody Fluxes, as
Plantains, Knotgrass, Shepherds Purse, Bloodwort, Horsetail, N^ttles, Comfrey,
Bramble-Leaves, Pomegranate-Rinds, etc. boild in Posca, or Vinegar and Water
mixed in equal Proportion, therewith somenting the Region of the Bladder, or
boiling them thicker, draw them through an Hair Sieve, for a Cataplasm to be
applied blood-warm to the Region of the Bladder, binding it on conveniently
with linen Clothes.

4. Together with these to stop the coming down of Blood from the opened Veins
into the Bladder, injections of Juyces that bind and constipate by a Syringe,
are profitable.

5. In the mean while we must not neglect internals, that may prohibit the
aptness of the Blood to flow, and bridle it; which is done also by astringent
Medicines, and chiefly such as are aforenamed.

Secondly, We must look to the Blood that remains in the Bladder, which
clotters there, and putrifies, and may beget very bad Symptoms; for which,

1. Inwardly are to be taken Medicines that hinder Blood from clottering, and
dissolve it being-clottered; Garden-Cresses in Broth, or a Decoction of them
in white Wine, are most laudable, which both dissolve Blood already clottered,
and also hinders it from coagulating in any part of the Body: Very prevalent to
break and cause the clods to come forth, be the Decoction of Bugle, Thyme,
Masterwort, or Herb Gerrard; of these also may Wound-Drinks (as they are
termed) be made, to drink of plentifully on Mornings, Afternoons, and Nights.
Platerus cured a Maid that pissed at first pure, then clottered Blood, with two
Potions of Mummy, Cubebs, and Cinnamon, in Shepherds-purse-Water, and of Gum
Carabe and Mummy in Whey; Decoction of a black Hen, her feathers on, boild with
Shepherds-purse, and an Unguent for the Pinaeum: Such a Powder (or Electuary
made of the following things, by adding some proper Syrup) for such as like not
Potions or Decoctions, may be of great force to dissolve and drive forth the
clots of Blood sticking in the Bladder, or its Neck; of Rhubarb, of Sperm of
the Whale, or Sperma Ceti, j. Seeds of Radish, Bitumen, Judaicum, Absinth,
Mummy. ana ss. mix them for a Powder.

2. Outwardly may Foments and Bathings be used, of Chervil, Mallows, Parsley,
Bistort, Wormwood, etc. Injections also to bring forth those clots sticking in
the Neck of the Bladder, and stopping the Urine are very good, which if they
avail not to do, a Syringe must be put up to loosen the passage: If all these
do no good, Death is impendent, unless by Chyrurgery the concreted Blood be
taken away.

Of Inflammation of the Bladder.
It Is a Distemper made from great heat residing in the Bladder, or rather its
Neck, with a sharp Fever, and other acute Symptoms accompanying.

CAUSE.
1. As to the Cause, it is Blood fallen thither putrified and inflamed, caused
from outward violent Causes, or inward, as Phlethory, or heat of the Blood, or
sharpness, and other Causes, expressed in the Chapters of the inflammation of
other parts.

2. As to the place, Fernelius says, The Neck alone is the subject, as being
more thick and fleshy than the substance of the Bladder, which (also says
Johnstonus) in its substance being thin, and without Blood, it is not so likely
Inflammation should be seated there, but rather in the Sphincter, the Muscle of
its Neck.

DIAGNOSTICKS.
1. There is an Acute Fever.

2. Great and vehement pain in the Pinaeum, or Share; and from these two arise
many other great and dangerous Symptoms, as Deliriums, Watchings, alienation of
the Mind, and Inquietude.

3. Heat and redness, and sometimes hardness of the Share.

4. Distention of the Share and Pecten, from plenty of Urine, because the Urine
is suppressed.

5. Binding of the Belly, because the strait Gut, or rectum Intestinum, is
straitened through the greatness of the Inflammation; and though they have a
desire to go to stool, yet, Tenasmus-like, they void nothing.

5. The Ordure and Excrements for the most part be thin, and without residence.

6. Suppression of Urine, with an earnest incitation and desire to piss.

7. Sometimes vomiting of a Choleric Matter.

PROGNOSTICS.
1. Of Diseases of the Bladder this is the most dangerous, and deadly for the
most part about the seventh day.

2. It Is sometime dissolved from the flowing forth of Urine copiously, or an
Erysipelas rising on the Skin.

3. There is hopes if it be more light, the Fever remiss, the Inflammation
changed into Pus, and the Abscess inwardly broke, and purged out by Urine.

DIET.
Thin Drinks, as Cinnamon Water, or Barley-Water; let him eat no Flesh, nor
their Broaths, etc. as in other Inflammations.

CURE.
1. Internals: 1. Generals, letting Blood by the Ham or Ankle-Vein: 2. Purging
at first is in, no wise to be used, because by stirring Humors, and making
them have recourse to the diseased part, it much aggravates the Evil, and for
this Cause Fluxes of the Belly at this time are to be stopped.

Clisters to bring forth hard Dung that may cause pressure of the Bladder, of
mild and emollient Medicines, are very allowable.

2. Externals: 1. We use Repellers, upon these we must not insist too much,
because the Bladder is membranous, and may by coldness hurt sinewy parts: 2.
Hinder free passing out of the Urine: 3. Prohibit resolution of Humors: Things
are to be applied actually warm, and their repelling Virtue counter-poised with
Anodines and Liniments; the Bladder inflamed indures not, so well as the Reins,
astringency.

If pain urges much, we may add Opium to Ointments; Cataplasms and Emplaisters
are not so good as Bathings, Lotions, Foments, or Unguents, because by their
weight they press and crush the Bladder.

A Liniment of VVhite-Bread-Crums, boild somewhat thick in Oil of Roses, with a
little Saffron and Camphir, with some grains of Opium, if pain be very intense,
is very helpful: Some use Foments of hot water applied in Oxes Bladders.
Insessions to sit in are very convement for the aforesaid purposes, then the
Sick may better void the Urine.

Then we must come to Resolvers of the matter into Pus, which is done by
Emollients and Suppuratives. If we fear its turning gangrenous, a Cataplasm of
Orobus, Beans and Lupines boild in Wine, is to be applied.

Lastly, The Symptoms are to be respected, as a Fever, Watching, Raving,
Ischury, and Disury; a Syringe is sometimes put into the Neck of the Bladder,
to bring forth the Urine. See the Cure of these in their proper Chapters.

3. Revulsion by Frictions, Bindings, Cuppers, with Scarification upon the
part, are directed; yet Cupping-Glasses are condemned by some, as bringing more
hurt than profit.

4. Blood is to be cooled; and humors tempered, and pain appeased; Julaps,
Emulsions, and Clisters may serve hereto, also Anodine Suppositories, or little
Bags wherein are put Yolks of Eggs, with Opium, and Juice of Henbane; but it is
better to boil Poppy-shells, Camphir, Saffron, and Henbane-Seeds, in Oil, and
therein dip Wool, and wear that in the Anus so long as may be convenient.

We must not use any Diuretic Medicines, nor any Irritaters, salt, sharp, or
erodent Things; nor may they drink much; the Urine is to be kept mild, and
made slippery, that thereby the Bladder be the less offended.

OF THE Diseases of the Uterus.
HEre are not all the Diseases and Affects of the Uterus; They are most of them
such as are not in many Practices of Physic that treat but of a few Diseases;
so that it is supposed the Physical Reader may have Books of those Diseases
that here are wanting, and these may be such as are wanting in some such Books,
and so as it were complete a Practice together: We did indulge our Genius and
Fancy in writing these thus out of order; for one time We wrote a Disease of
the Uterus, another time a Disease of the Lungs, and another time a Disease of
the Head; and We having wrote these, seeing many things in Observations, and in
our own Experience, somewhat deviating herefrom, ceased to write the rest in
this Order and Method. All these Signs, Causes, and Cures are found in many,
and the Readers may reap good, and benefit thereby, specially our Cautions and
Animadversions joined herewith, being considered, and well compared. There are
abundance of Books of all sorts extant, and daily put out; and We were loath to
obtrude upon the World matter of that old and drossy Mould, without some
Alteration or Refinement, or Additions of some Rarities, and new Experiments.

But it must not be expected that all People should be found thus, and no
otherwise handled than is described in these Chapters of Diseases of the
Uterus, nor must any think that here be all the Maladies and Distempers
incident to the Uterus; and those that have the Diseases here set down, are not
always so handled as those Diagnostick Signs specify; nor do they always arise
from those, and no other, nor no more Causes than what be there described:
Sometimes the Uterus is full of stones, sometimes smaller and more, sometimes
larger and fewer; and sometimes it is all stone, as we read of the Vesica
Urinaria. A Gentleman told me an old Woman, a Witch, was dissected some few
years since in London, and had a large Teat, like a Sow's, outwardly, and
inwardly her Uterus was turned to a perfect stone: This year at Rome a Serpent
was bred in the Uterus of one Woman. Lycosthenes, Pliny^ Reinerius, Paraeus,
Vierus, Bodinus, Rondeletius, Ludovicus Vives, and Others, have delivered their
Experiences of diverse sorts of Animals, both for bigness and form, bred in the
Uterus; as some like Frogs, some like Puppies, Mice, Rats, Kitlings, Magpies,
Harpies, Moles, Lizards, Horsleeches, etc. Also many little Worms are bred in
the Uterus, and Glandules watery or scirrhous, Water-Bladders, Bones, Hairy
Apostems, Grumous Blood, and Apostems of fat Crinis and Ichor together; the
Uterus weighed in one that was so filled, eighty seven pound: Many sorts of
Mola's and Fleshy Lumps, Bladders of gorey Matter, and purulent, are found in
some dissected; also Gangrenes, Fissures, Ulcers, and Discoloration, incident
to all other parts of the Body of Man, have been found by Dissection in the
Uterus; and most do arise from different, and some from strange Causes, and
have been very difficult to be known by the Signs, or relation of the Sick,
specially thereby to be distinguished one from another. Horace. Si quid nevisti
rectius istis
Candidus imperti, si non, his Utere meoum.


CHAP. I.
Of Distemper of the Uterus.

1. ONE is hot, known by Veneriousness, Fowlness, Yellowness, Blackness, and
Adustion of Menstrua; it is either from the Birth, or after the Birth, from
outward Causes, chiefly Venery.

2. Another is Cold, more frequent then an hot Distemper, caused by
immoderately cooling Medicines or external Causes; in it is less Lust, and in
Copulation not so much pleasure: the Menstrua are Pituitous, there is windiness
from multitude of cold, Pituitous Humors, and weakness of concoction, they are
more pale and listless.

3. Moist, there is cold adjoined, plenty and waterishness of Menses, Woman's
Flux and continual moistness of the Privities, bring molestation, there is
aptness to abort; the Seed is cast out, and they have no desire to Venus.

4. A dry Distemper of the Vterus is made also in a general dryness of the
Body, from defect of Humors or old Age, or drying Causes, as Inflammation and
Heat, there are sent forth few Menstrua, and Seed; the Mouth of the Uterus is
dry, blackish and clefty, they desire not much Copulation.

5. Compound Distempers, as of heat and dryness, of cold and moisture may be
made, whose Causes and Signs may be gathered from the four aforesaid
Differences.

CURE.
In cure of them all we are to observe;

1. That Heat indicates Coolers to be necessary, cold indicates Heaters to be
necessary; and so for dryness and moisture, their contraries; and for compound
Distempers, if heat and dryness be conjoined, Indications are for cooling and
moistening Medicines; and if cold and moisture be adjoined, we must heat and
dry by Medicines, as well outwardly applied, as inwardly taken.

In the choice of such Medicines as heat, dry, cool or moisten, we must elect
such as are proper to the Uterus, called Histericals.

3. In a bare Distemper there is no need of Purgers, because we do not suppose
that Choler, Phlegm, or Melancholy are present, but that by their aforegoing,
they may effect a Distemper to the Uterus; and we treat here only of the
Distemper, and not of hot, cold, dry or moist Humors.

4. We may not use Medicines hot, cold, dry, or moist, in the third degree;
it is best to have them of the first degree of temper; nor may they be too long
used, lest the Uterus be changed from one Distemper into a worse, and its
Functions be violated.

CHAP. II.
Of the Narrowness of the Vessels of the Uterus.

CAUSE.
It Is an Interception of them, made either, 1. From outward Causes, as Baths,
binding Medicines.

2. From Cicatrices, or from a thick or membranous Flesh, cleaving to the
Orifices of the Vessels.

3. From stoppage of them by the multitude, and thickness of Humors, which may
be endeavored by Nature to be avoided there, which had not heat to thin them,
or they are essential to the Uterus it self.

4. From Scirrhs, hard swellings, or too great Fat, either consisting within or
out of the Uterus.

SIGNS.
Signs of it differ as the Causes, in all the Menstrua are detained; cold
Distemper is discerned by its proper Signs, as see the Signs of a cold
Distemper of the Vterus in the aforegoing Chapter: From this Distemper we may
guess the thickness and indigestion of crude and phlegmatic Humors which stop
the Veins, and the Blood is less apt to flow.

Tumors, Scirrhs, and the like, causing Compression, are also known by their
proper Signs.

PROGNOSTICS.
From Tumors, Scirrhs, pieces of Flesh, Cicatrices, and Membranes growing
there, it is hard to cure; from outward Causes, and fatness of the near parts,
it is more easy.

CURE.
Cure varies as the Cause: 1. From binding Medicines, and then we must use
Moisteners and Emollients.

2. From obstructing Causes; the Cause being first taken away, we must move the
Menstrua; bitter, sharp, Histetick, and Chalybrate Medicines are to be used.

3. If there be fatness that causes it, it is to be cured by Extenuaters; we
must detract from its nourishment, and look to its original.

CHAP. III.
Of Weakness of the Uterus.

DEFINITION.
Weakness of the Uterus is a dullness or deficiency in undergoing its duty,
made from Distemper, occult Qualities, and weakness of native heat.

SIGNS.
Signs are windiness, little desire to Copulation or Venery, and when they do
couple, they take little pleasure therein; they are often barren; sometime they
conceive often, but abort; the Menses flow weakly, and untimely, and there is
an impotency of ejection of the Seed in the Carnal Act; all which are the
Actions of the Uterus, she should do, and through weakness cannot perform her
office.

CAUSES.
Causes are the same that cause Distemper, either hot, cold, dry, or moist; and
therefore the Chapter of Distemper may give sufficient light both as to the
Causes and Cures, especially from cold and moist Causes, under which the Uterus
is most defective in doing her Functions, and in hot Distempers she over-does;
therefore that cannot so well be added as a Cause effecting a weakness, or a
languishing of the Uterus in effecting its Office and several Actions: for
though Humors may be the Cause of Weakness, yet it is not weakened till
thereby it be first brought into some Distemper.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Inflammation of the Uterus.

THE heat, pain, and Fever being abated, we must digest and resolve; of the
Roots of red Lillies, Mallows, and marsh Mallows, of each two parts;
Barley-Flower, one part; Flowers of Chamomile and Melilot, of each half a part;
boil them in austere Wine with Oil, then heat them, and draw them through a
Sieve, and apply them in manner of a Cataplasm.

Oils, Liniments, Foments, and the like, may be made for this purpose, of the
aforegoing things, and their like.

But if it will not be resolved, but suppurate (which is known by increase of
Symptoms, as Resolution of it was known by their remitting) then hasten its
suppuration, which is done with such things as helped its resolving, whenas it
was naturally so disposed; but for Example-sake, of Pulpe of Figs drawn through
a Sieve, of the Leaves of Mallows, and marish Mallows, boiled soft in
Brest-Milk, and beaten to Pap, Hogsgrease, and Mucilage of Fennugreek, of each
what may seem sufficient for a Cataplasm. Or,

of Oil of Lillies, j. Butter, Hog's Grease, Mucilage of Althea-Roots, of each
ss. make a Liniment.

When Pus is made, heat and pain wax less, there is a sense of fluctuation,
then we must strive to break the Abscess with loud Vociferations, Coughing,
Sneezing, and application of Cupping-Glasses, exercise of the Body, and
Pessaries, whereof Riverius sets down this, of Goose-Fat, ss. Turpentine, ij.
Powder of Rheu, Niter, and Orris-Roots, of each ss. mix them, and use it with
Wool for a Pessary; when the Abscess is broke, we must cleanse and consolidate,
as is wont to be done to other Ulcers.

During the Cure, an exquisite and thin cooling Diet is to be observed,
Ptysan-Broath is commended, Wine is to be shunned, and all hot, salt, and sharp
things, all violent motion is hurtful; let them rest at quiet, and sit still,
in a dark House, if their senses be distempered.

SYMPTOMS.
Symptoms occurrent, and to be respected, are,

1. The Fever, for which letting Blood, cooling Julaps, Emulsions, and cool
Herbs in Broaths, are necessary.

2. Pain which is to be mitigated by Foments and Cataplasms, in Unctions, half
Tubs, Baths, and Pessaries, wherein Opium is to be put, inject VVomans-Milk
with Hens-Grease, Mucilages of Althea-Roots, Fleawort-Seeds, Fennugreek-Seeds,
and the like.

3. Watchings and disquierings of Nature, to compose which, give Narcoticks
with moderation.

4. Pains of the Middriff, Heart, Head and Stomach; for which revulse, use
Frictions, Ligatures, and Cupping, repel Vapors, and strengthen those parts by
Remedies proper thereto.

CHAP. V.
Pain of the Uterus.

PAin of the Uterus is made from Causes dissolving, continuiting and inducing a
sad sense of feeling. 1. The pain is vellicating: first, from sharp Humors:
secondly, from corrupted Seed, retained and made sharp; or sharp Humors coming
down in Woman's Flux, or therefrom the Menses vitiated, which set forth
themselves chiefly (by gnawing) in the Neck of the Uterus, and is like to the
Chollick from bilious Humors.

SIGNS.
The Blood is found sharp in other things; there went before bad Diet, and Cold
perhaps made the Humors sharper.

CURE.
Appeasers of Acrimony, as warm Water, Milk, Oil of Sweet Almonds; with
Anodines, and if need be, Narcoticks. 2. Takers away of the Cause.

II. Distentive. 1. From Winds, which are more stirred up, and raise more
vehement pain, from taking in cold Air after delivery, or when the Menses are
coming or already in flowing, or induced from the same Causes of Chollical
Pains.

SIGN.
From this Cause, as from all other, pains infest free (as well as
greatbellied) Women; there is chafing, ^umbling, and Signs of Wind are present,
to which if there be anxiety, faintings and disquietings, there is fear of a
malignancy in those breathy Vapors.

CURE.
Winds are to be discussed as in the Chollick; a draught of hot Water helps;
Infessions, Foments, Baths, and Emplasters of Carminatives; if we adjudge these
to be malignantly quallified, we must add Antidotes; Seeds for Nettle in Powder
drank in Wine, are most benificial for flatulent Pains. Heurnius has this
Electuary, Castor, Myrrh, Styrax, Saffron, ana ij. Orris, Spicknard,
Malabathrum, Roots of Asarabacca, ana j. Opium, ss. with Syrup of Mugwort, make
an Opiate; also Oil of Rhue, for unction of the Region of the Uterus, is
commended for its Pains from flatuosity.

2. From clottered Blood, which cannot pass out but is there retained, there
preceded that, a Copious Flux of Blood from the Uterus.

SIGN.
The pain is fixed and specially perceived about the Orifice of the Uterus, and
is very sharp, if the Blood has acquired putrefaction, the Blood cast out, it
ceases, or is mitigated, and then returns again; it draws into consent the
straight Gut and Bladder, when as a Tenesm and frequent making Water are made
therefrom.

CURE.
1. Dissolve the clottered Blood. 2. Evacuate it.

III. Burdening Pain, or a sense of gravity, made from Menstrual Blood, the
Blood be either too thick, and that may be caused by the Woman's drinking cold
drink, after any heating of her Body extraordinarily, or other Causes preceding
gave occasion to it, or the Vessels of the Uterus are less open, whereby the
Uterus is overburdened, and not speedily delivered of that burthensom excrement.

SIGN.
Signs of suppressed Menses are present, or that they observe not their legal
Course, sometimes Hysterical fits invade.

CURE.
Respect the Cause, and mitigate the Symptom, for which these are specifical;
Seeds of Piony, of Cow-parsnips, and Plantaine, a foment of Decoction of
Mugwort, Devils-bit-Seeds, of Agnus Castus, and Line-Seed; or a Bath may be
made of them for the Woman to sit in, or after Bathing with the Foment, the
residue or boiled Herbs may, being strained, be applied hot to the Region of
the Uterus, in manner of a Cataplasm.

IV. Ulcerous Pain; or of dissolved unity, from Wounds and Ulcers, here
injection of Juice of Plantane by a Syringe is best. See Wounds and Ulcers of
the Uterus.

V. Inflammatory; for which also look in its proper place.

CHAP. VI.
Of Worms of the Matrice or Uterus.

THat Worms, though of different kinds, be bred in all parts of our Body, is a
truth not to be gainsaid.

CAUSE
Is the same as of Worms of other parts, viz. viscous and cold, and raw
Humors, which by their clamminess, adhering to the O^ifice or Neck of the
Uterus, by degrees rotting, and receiving heat and nourishment, grow to living
Bodies.

SIGN.
There is great molestation, itching of the Uterus, and Belly, with inquietude
and want of sleep, hereupon ensues an inordinate Fever, whereby the sick
sometime consume; there is often moistness of the Lips of the Uterus; sometimes
the Worms themselves come forth, which unless they do, all other indications
are but doubtful.

DIET
Must be such as may not increase their Aliment, as things that breed thick,
sweet, and Phlegmatic corruptive Juices, may do; Drink may be altered with
some Antidotes against Worms steeped in a Jug, but a moistening Diet is not to
be used.

CURE.
1. We give Catharticks after Preparatives, and openers of the first Passages.

2. We come to Medicines killing the Worms, which are better injected then
taken by the Mouth; such Medicines are expressed in the general Chapter of
Worms: Clisters may be had in use also, and Emplaisters, whereby the Worms be
not only killed, but forced out by the expultrice faculty of Nature set on
work; such an Emplaister as this may seem most requisite hereto, Powder of the
Pulp of Collocinthis, j. Savin, Rhue, Tansy, Roots of Birthwort, ana. ss.
Aloes, ij. Frankincense, j. Ox Gall, as much as may be found needful for the
consistence desired, make an Emplaister or Cerot, to be applied upon the Region
of the Uterus and Privities.

It would not be amiss to use a Purgative Apozem after these, for several
mornings together.

CHAP. VII.
Of Stones of the Matrice.

CAUSES.
CAuses be Internal, the same as the Stone of the Reins is caused by, viz.

1. A Material, as crude, slow and tough Humors, sticking to the Tunicles of
the Uterus, otherwise they would easily be cast forth. Hippocrates says, Pus
remaining in the Uterus, is dried, hardened and concrete into a Stone: Many
Histories do tell us of these Stones bred in the Matrice, and by some the
Uterus has been found stony.

2. Efficient, as great heat of the Uterus.

Feeding or suppeditating Causes, be ill Diet, increasing crude and viscous
pitutious Matter, as Cheese, Milk, Fish, Pulse, and gross Nutriments, and bad
Air.

SIGN.
There is pain in the Region of the Uterus, which being crushed, it is much
exacerbated; it hinders Conception, and causes immoderate flux of Menses.
Aetius discovered them by putting his Fingers up the Fundament.

PROGNOSTICS.
If too long delayed ere Cured, the Uterus being the common sink of gross and
vitiated Menstruous Blood, it may be so increased, that the whole Uterus may be
made stony.

Nicholas Fontanus says, That he has known it fill the whole capacity of the
Uterus, and totally suppress the Menstrua, therefrom being made corrupt and
purulent Ulcers.

CURE.
A good order of Diet set. 1. Preparation by Saxifraga's is to be instituted.
2. Evacuation of the Antecedent and Suppeditating Matter. 3. Solution of the
Stone, and lenition or appeasing of Pain, with slippery making Medicines, may
pass all under one; Juice of Mallows, of Pellitory of the Wall, Bisinallows,
Liquorish, Fenugreek-Seeds, Line-Seeds, Oil of Sweet Almonds, Broth of Licers,
etc. Clisters also of those Herbs, and the like, may be often injected, only
to mollisie and lenify.

Insessions also, Half-Tubs, Foments, and other Applications, are not
altogether to be slighted.

After these, Extraction is to be made by the Midwife, putting up her Finger
into the Fundament, and pressing down the Belly upon the Bones adjoining near
the Privities, that the place the Stone is seated in may be lifted up; then
with a Crows Bill, or Nippers, artificially drawing it out.

This done, a Prophylactick Method is to be kept for some while after.

CHAP. VIII.
Of a Cancer of the Uterus.

DEFINITION.
CArcinoma Uteri, or a Cancer of the Uterus, is an uneven, sublivid, and
painful swelling, made from Atrabilis and adust Melancholy; sometime from the
matter sharper ulcerating, and of bad curation.

CAUSES.
Causes be, first and chiefly a Scirrh, for a Scirrhous Cause is only
Melancholy thickened, and not yet adust, but receiving adustion, it turns a
Cancer, and is called Scirrhus Carcinodes: Cancers often follow Scirrhs of the
Uterus, being ill cured; for then they easily degenerate cancerous.

2. Its Original Cause is an atrabilarious Humor, menstruous Blood is sometime
detained, and afterward made dry, and acquires adustion.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
1. It Is a Tumor hard and renitent, bluish, uneven, and very painful, in the
Capacity or Neck of the Uterus.

2. The Tumor may sometimes be seen by Speculum Matrices.

3. There is pungent pain about the Share, Abdomen, and Loins.

Signs of a Scirrh degenerating into a Cancer, be, If before, because the
matter was more cold and dry, there was no pain; and now from the matter
growing more acrimonious and hot, it begins to pain, but hardness remains as
did in a Scirrh, without effecting a Disease of extraordinary magnitude; yet
Riolanus says, The magnitude of the Uterus is greatly increased thereby, so
that sometime it has been seen as big as an infants Head.

PROGNOSTICS.
1. At first it might be remedied, but then, because it brings not much
molestation, it is disregarded.

2. Grown, it is incurable; and so much the worse, because feculent
excrementitious Blood is always nourishing it.

DIFFERENCES.
Differences are twofold: 1. Not ulcerated, made from a milder Humor, whereof
we have hitherto treated.

2. Ulcerated, from a more sharp Humor; Adustion and Putrefaction make Humors
sharp; it has more sordid Lips than a Non-ulcerate, from whence efflow a thin,
yellow, or black stinking Humor; nor is its pain gentler, but of harder
curation than a Non-ulcerate-Cancer, called by some notwithstanding, An hidden
Ulcer.

CURE.
Cure is treble: 1. To stop its generation in a Scirrhous matter.

2. For a whole Cancer.

3. For an ulcerated one.

First, To prohibit the turning cancerous of Scirrhs, or mutation of the
scirrhous matter into a Cancer.

1. Letting Blood is thought very conducible; it may be made in Ham or Arm,
chiefly in Haemorrhoids, for they vent out gross feculent parts of the Blood,
and avert: Bleeding is best in Spring and Fall; if she have not her Menstrua,
choose the Saphena-Vein.

2. Such Simples as purge Melancholy are to be prescribed, of not too heating
Purgers; this must be frequently done, and better it is to take two too weak,
then one too strong; Senna, Epithimum, Myrobalans, and the like, conveniently
mixed, both in quantity, and with due Correcters, steeped in Whey, in form of a
Nodulus for half an hour, the Whey being first made scalding hot, then lightly
pressed out and drunk; the force of the Nodulus may last four or five times for
so using.

3. All Substracters from the antecedent Cause, are to be used, of which the
aforementioned are not to be neglected.

4. Topics, which are to be applied to the Privities, being moderately cold,
and drying, and mild; an Ointment of Oil of Roses, and Yolks of Eggs, with
Camphir, prepared in a Leaden Mortar, is most excellent. 2. Juyces may be
injected into the Uterus, as of Herb- Robert, Milfoil, and Mullein, which are
commended; or Decoction of green Coriander, Nimphea, and Poppies boiled in
Milk; or Unguents dissolved in Milk, or suitable Decoctions, may be injected.

Riverius says, With the following Receipt, the cancrous swelling of the Paps
have been healed; of the Oil of the Yolks of Eggs, ij. Juice of Nightshade,
Paul's Betony, and Housleek, ana iij. crude Mercury, ij. let them be beat in a
Leaden Mortar, with a Leaden Pestil, till they attain to the thickness of a
Liniment; Foments also for the washing of the parts affected, of the precedent
things, or their like, may be made very useful.

Secondly, If the matter be already made cancerous, and the Cancer has
received growth, though not brought to perfection, there is little hope of
Cure; if confirmed, there is none: Here, if there be any hope of Cure, (after
using of Generals, as in the Direction for preventing its growth, is
instituted) we must flee to Specificals, but mild, for it is apt easily to be
enraged, and pain to exacerbate; therefore injections of Saccarum Saturni, beat
in a Leaden Mortar, with Juice of River-Crabs, are specifical; Decoction of
Frogs, or Herb- Robert so injected, Ointments of Pompholix, Ceruss, Camphir,
Saccarum Saturni, Oil of Roses, etc. with a Cataplasm of Frogs boiled, are
specifical.

If it be consumed, we must only use Palliatives, that misery may be the less,
and life the longer; the part being now hardened, it is most difficult to
mollify it, and restore it to its former sanity; therefore the chief thing now
must be mittigation of the pain; Injections of emollient Anodine Simples, with
Sperm of Frogs, Foments and Insessions, are to be had in use; Narcoticks and
great Dallers of the pain, in more urging Torments, are allowable.

Thirdly, If ulcerate, we must accommodate Medicines to it, as Metals,
Mineral-Waters, Dryers, Dullers of Acrimony, and Protracters of its
augmentation, the Ashes of River-Crabs washed in Nightshade-Water, mixed with
Lead, or Antimony, is much trusted to by some in an ulcerate Cancer.

If much Blood flow from the ulcered Cancer, as often do, the best is Juice of
Plantane and F^ankinsence injected into the U^erus.

Lastly, If it may be hindered or cured, a Prophylactick Method is to be
observed, lest a Relapse should happen afterward.

CHAP. IX.
Of a Dropsy of the Uterus.

DEFINITION.
A Dropsy of the Uterus is a repletion and distention of it from Water
collected in it, either from fault in it self, or other parts, inducing a
swelling and impotency.

CAUSE.
Cause is either essential, where, 1. The stopping of their wonted Menstrua, by
a close closure of the Uterus, and the presence of waterish Humors in the
Uterus, which not having passage out, because of the close shutting up of the
Orifice, but heaping up more and more, do effect a Dropsy.

2. As a stopping of the Menstrua, and of the Uterus induces it, so also a
weakness in the Uterus; native heat being very weak, and not able to make good
digestion, nor expulsion of Humors that are gathered thither.

Causes inducing a weaknese of the Uterus, are either, 1. Abortion. 2.
Laborious Births. 3. Immoderate flowing of Menses dilating that heat. Or, 4.
Suppression of them, suffocating and choking that heat. 5. Or windiness of it.
6. A Mola.

3. It Is made from copulation with one that has an Ascites and Tympany of the
Belly.

Secondly, By Consent: As,

1. From the Liver, which cooled overmuch, and weakened, Dropsies generally
spread over all the Body: Yet, as Hippocrates says, Dropsies of particular
parts may be made without any defect in the Liver: From the Liver comes forth
the increase of pure Blood, if its Sanguification be not spoiled; which if it
be, instead of pure Blood, Water is made and distributed in the Body, in great
quantity.

2. From the Spleen, which is contumaciously obstructed, but is the most seldom
cause of all.

3. Distilling of a serous Humor from the Vena Cava into the Uterus.

SUBJECT.
Subject is the Uterus, Water being either collected and retained in its
Capacity through close closure and shutting of it up, (Primrose denies this,
saying, It Is not made in the Cavity; for if so, Water would flow out, as out of
the mouth of a Vessel) or made in little Bladders within the Uterus, like
Hydata, out of the which the Water comes not into the Capacity of the Uterus,
or it is included in a Membrane.

SIGNS.
Signs of it are a swelling of the Uterus, so that they are often thought to be
with Child; it dints, if the fingers do crush the Region of the Uterus; it is
very discernable by sight; the Woman perceives a squabling of the water upon
turning of her in her Bed from one side to another.

2. There is difficulty in fetching her Breath.

3. There is Nausea, and disdain of Food. But

4. Great thirst from thin and salt Phlegm, though seated in the Uterus, yet
communicating its vice to the Stomach, by the common Vessels and Ways.

5. Softness of the Paps, and want of Milk.

6. Shakings, Heart-pains, and Feverish fits often afflict her.

7. The Menstrua are stopped, or if they do flow, they are very few, or like
washings of flesh.

8. Smallness and leanness of the Neck of the Uterus.

DIFFERENCES.
First, As to its Causes: 1. Essential, and then some Distemper or Disease of
the Uterus went before, and there be signs of the Uterus being hurt: 2. By
Communication, as from the Liver; then there be Signs of the Liver affected,
the Blood is waterish, and there be Signs of great coldness and weakness of the
Principal Bowels.

Secondly, As to the Subject or Part: 1. It Is made in the Capacity or Orifice
of the Uterus; then by touch the Vterus is felt close shut, a great loose
swelling is perceived, and the fluctation of Water there; sometimes it happens
in Childbearing, and is not cast out till the Birth, which is destroyed by so
much stinking water. 2. It Is contained in certain Bladders and Vesicles
adhering to the substance of the Uterus, in which the Orifice of the Uterus
seems to be fallen together; there be greater Pains, there is less fluctuation
and rumbling of the Water.

DIFFERENCES betwixt it and other Diseases.
1. It differs from an Ascites, 1. By less fluctuation: 2. By situation of the
Tumor: 3. By signs of the Uterus only affected: 4. An Ascites also rises from
superior parts, and goes down to lower parts, and poflesses the Legs. 5. There
is also a bad color of the Face.

2. It differs from Gravidity, or Great-Belliedness, because, 1. The motion of
the Infant is felt: 2. The Breasts are made more solid and full of Milk: 3. In a
Dropsy there is a swelling of the Uterus according to the amplitude of the
Belly and Uterus; but in conception it is more round and heavy. 4. There is a
bad bloody Humor flows from the Uterus, soon ended, and comes not orderly
again, which is not so from the birth.

3. It differs from an Inflammation of the Matrice, because in that there is, 1.
A great burning and continual Fever. 2. The Region of the Uterus feels harder.
3. Nor is there so much of waterish slimy stinking Excrements flowing away from
the Uterus, as is made in a Dropsy.

4. It differs from Inflammation of the Uterus, for then there is present, 1. A
Sounding, specially if the Vterus be struck. 2. Tension, or stretching out of
the Uterus. 3. There is not so great a burden and heaviness as in a Dropsy.

5. It Is distinguished from a Mola, because herein are, 1. A greater weight in
the bottom of the Belly. 2. The Paps at birth time do swell.

6. From a Scirrh of the Uterus, for in that is great hardness, but a shining,
softness and lankness of the flesh in Dropsies.

PROGNOSTICS.
1. If it be in the whole Orifice of the Uterus, the Child growing bigger, the
Woman grows better; it is cast out at time of delivery, the Uterus all the while
before being close shut.

2. If Water be shut up in Blisters and little Bladders adhering to the Uterus,
it is harder to cure.

3. In general it is a Cronical Disease, not quickly killing, or quickly
forsaking the Diseased.

4. If the Water be not corrupted nor sharp, in time it is cured.

5. If it be not Essential, if obstructions be present, there is great fear of
an Universal Dropsy.

6. If it comes before, it hinders Conception; if after Conception, it causes
Abortion.

DIET
Must be hot and dry, all moist things must be avoided; she may drink pure
Wine, or rather some pleasant Dyet-drink.

Air must also be hot and dry, either naturally or artificially, according to
Galenists; see further direction for Regiment in the Chapter of the Dropsy-
Ascites.

CURE.
In Cure, 1. Blood-letting is to be superseded, unless, 1. The Party be
Phlethorick and Sanguine-coloured, young, lusty, and in the Spring time (for
letting Blood weakens the inbred heat, and extinguisheth the Spirits.) 2. If
the Diseased wants her accustomed Evacuation by the Uterus, a Vein of the Ankle
may be opened, with repetition. Or, 3. if the Haemorrhoids be suppressed, Nature
having used to make a vent that way, are to be opened by Leeches.

2. Purging (to which some premise Preparets, which unless there be thick
Humors present, are useless; for Water neither concocts nor is made thick)
which says Hartman, Does little good, unless when the vice proceeds from Liver
or Spleen, then Antimonial Pills show their efficacy.

3. Diuretics excel Purgers, but are not so excellent as in General Dropsies;
the best are the Roots of Flower-de-luce, Bark of Eldern, and of the Roots of
Danewort, Saldonellas, Horse-Radish-Roots, Juniper and Broom burnt to Ashes,
and steeped in White Wind, and the Wine drunk: Medicines also from their
specifical affinity to the part, are rather to be chosen, being good for
Dropsies, than those that respect the part not at all.

4. Education of the Water by Injections, by Semi-Cups, or Half-Tubs, by
Foments, or a Pultis of Saldonella to the Privities, are commendable; Issues
are not good, but Pessaries, Clisters, and Emplaisters, such as are prescribed
in the general Cure of Dropsies, are helpful: the skin of a Sheep new killed,
and being yet warm, sprinkled with Wine, and applied to the Belly, is commended.

5. Openers and Movers of the monthly Menstrua, if they be stopped, or flow not
rightly, are chiefly to be insisted upon; Chalybrate Pills, and Histericks,
having also a diuretic force and drying, are to be chosen.

6. Carminatives, either by the Mouth, or in Fomentations, or in Clisters, are
to be used, because commonly there is great plenty of windiness, which disturbs
much.

If the Water stick fast in little Bladders and Skins, and be not eductible, or
to be brought forth, Clisters are often to be given, and Vomiting, with
Emeticks, may chance to break those Pellicles by its tearing, and plucking
working; great and strong exercise also, leaping, jumping, and the like, may
sometime break-them, and cause them to send forth their Water.

Riverius also, to break these, commends this Bole to be taken twice a week,
Mineral Borax, ss. Saffron, ss. with Juice of Savine, make a Bolus.

If the Vena Cava does distill a Watery Matter, Hartman commends for a rare
secret, Vitriol of Mars.

Lastly, The Uterus is to be strengthened and reduced to its right temper
again, to perform its duty in due measure and manner.

CHAP. X.
Of Inflammation of the Uterus.

Inflammation of the Uterus, is a preternatural Tumor risen from hot Blood
gathered there and putrified, infesting with many Symptoms, and terminated in a
Scirrh or Botch.

CAUSE
Is Blood which is hot and boiling, fallen by the Vessels into the substance of
the Uterus, either from an hot Liver, or plenitude of the whole Body, attracted
and moved thither by violent Causes. As,

1. Falls and Blows.

2. Retention of the Menstrua.

3. From cold Air, after a Woman's Delivery unwarily taken in, it happens often,
the Loches being suppressed thereupon.

4. Hard Travel and Abortion, where the great pain, heat, and opening of the
Vessels, causes the afflux of much Blood.

5. Violent drawing forth of the Secundine.

6. Exulceration.

7. Immoderate use of Venery.

8. Too swift diambulations, and overmuch painful journying, specially in time
of bearing, or when their Mestrua are flowing.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
Be generally taken, 1. From the Uterus it self, which is, first, Swelled,
which is discerned by sight upon the Region of the Uterus. Secondly, Pained,
which is as from an Inflammation or burning heat. Thirdly, Shut up, and drawn
back toward the inward parts.

2. From the Symptoms which are present herein, and are, 1. An acute Fever,
constant and burning, from the Heart consenting with the Uterus by the Arteries
and great Vessels; sometimes a Lypiria, wherein inwardly they are very
Feverish and hot, but outwardly cold, from tension of the Humors toward the
inward parts.

2. Headache, which vexes most in the hinder part, and reaches to the Roots of
the Eyes, from Vapors arising from the Uterus.

3. Pains of the Share and Loins, of the Middriff also, and Cannel Bones of the
Neck.

4. A suppression of the Excrements of the Belly from heat and dryness of the
Uterus, and thrusting together of the Passages by the Uterus, stretched out.

5. Menstrua do suddenly sometimes go forth, but few in quantity and prave in
quality.

6. The Pulse is small and often.

7. The Stomach is evil affected, from consent and bad exhalations.

8. Cramps and Convulsions in the Arms, Fingers and Neck.

9. A Delirium, and talking idley.

10. A fainting and failing of Spirits from the violence of the Disease, and
Symptoms concomitant herewith.

PROGNOSTICS.
Cure is hardly to be attained, if it has gotten the Nature of an Erysipela,
which kills the Child, and causes Abortion, nor if it be Gangraened; it is very
doubtful if all the Uterus be affected, if Symptoms be many and great, if it
turn to rotting, and break, for then there is an incureable Ulcer made, whence
noysom Vapors are carried upwards, and affect the principal parts by consent,
and at last may kill the Sick with a slow Fever.

DIFFERENCES
Are either, 1. from the part; whereas, 1. It is of the whole Uterus, wherein
is pain all over. 2. Of one of the sides, where the privy parts on that side
are most hot and pained, and the Leg on that side is badly moved. 3. Or of the
back part, in which pain urges more toward the Loins and Back, and retention
of Excrements is greater from its lying upon and straitening the Rectum
Intestinum. 4. Of the forepart, in which, because it coheres with the Bladder,
there is hurt of making Water, or a Strangury, and there is greater pain about
the Secrets. 5. Of its Neck, where heat, swelling and pain are most felt, it is
to be discerned red, and its Veins like Spiders Webs filled with Blood.

Or, 2. From the Humor; where, 1. It is made of pure Blood, wherein all
Symptoms are more remiss. 2. Of Chollerick or Atrabilarious Blood, wherein all
things are more cruel and dangerous.

Or, 3. From the Events; whenas, 1. It degenerates into a Scirrh: Symptoms are
here more mild; a sense of gravity is perceived in the Womb, the evil lasts
long, and at last a Dropsy of the Womb is frequently made. 2. Into an Abscess,
then Pain, Fever, and all Symptoms are increased; Horrors about evening
especially do invade; there is a sense of somewhat fluctuating; it being broke,
the Matter is sometimes poured out into the Capacity of the Womb, sometime into
Vicine Parts.

CURE.
Cure is begun with letting Blood in the Veins of the Arm, whereby Evacuation,
Revulsion and Interception of that hot and Chollerick Blood is made, and they
derive better from the Liver, then the Saphaena, which some appoint chiefly to
be cut, because by reason of its vicinity and neerness to the Uterus, they
think it draws Blood from thence most immediately; but opening of the Leg-Veins
are condemned by others, because in a deficiency the opening of them draws
Blood to the Vterus, but the Ham-Veins are better approved then the Feet-Veins
for Derivation; and letting Blood is frequently to be performed according to
the constitution, strength and age of the Sick, and condition also; if that she
be not with Child, and so abortion may be endangered, or if it comes not after
abortion, wherein the Woman voided blood very largly, and is faint: Blood also
is to be drawn forth more largely or penuriously, according as the Fever
remains more intense or remiss, which is chiefly respected in opening the
Cubit-Vein; and when as the turgent and redundant Blood is emptied, the cutting
of the Saphaena is more effectual, and less hurtful.

2. See that the Belly be not Bound or Costive, if it be, give cooling and
Emolient Clisters.

3. For Revulsion, apply Cupping-glasses to the Shoulder-Blades and Loins, and
with Scarification to the Hips, binding of the upper parts, etc.

4. Choler and sharp Humors are to be purged from the Blood, and though
strong Purgatives are not allowed, because they irritate too much and move
Humors to fall upon a part weakened, and not able to repel them, yet gentle
benign Medicines do not hurt, but help and bring ease, as Cassia extract with
Syrup of Violets, Manna dissolved in Broth, etc.

Avicen, Fontanus, etc. think Clisters more conducible for Evacuation of the
peccant Humors, but if they be very strong, so as to evacuate and carry
Humors to any purpose, they exacerbate much, and may increase the Inflammation;
if they be gentle and emollient only, they evacuate not the Humors, but
Excrements of the Guts only, and are proper, if the Belly be Costive as
abovesaid.

5. Topicals are in the mean while to be applied, as Epithemes, and
Fomentations, Cataplasms, Insessions, Pessaries, etc. which are to be made of
things that cool and moisten without any astriction; yet we must observe that
things things that are too cold, or too long adhere to the part, are inimical
to the Vterus, that being the place of Conception. Secondly, Things too cooling
and repelling, may harden the Matter, and cause it to turn Scirrhous, for fear
of which, some Resolvents and Emolients are to be mixed.

of Plantane, Nightshade, Water Lillies, Lettice, Endive, and Violet Leaves,
boil rhem in Water for an half Tub, or foment the Region of the Uterus
therewith.

of Plantane, Purslane, Red-Rose-Leaves, and Water Lillies, boil them in Milk
and Barley-Water, for a Cataplasm.

Dip a Sponge in Vinegar of Roses, and lay to the bottom of her Belly, betwixt
her Navil and Share.

of Juice of Plantane, Sengreen or Purslane, and therein dip Wool, and put it
up for a Pessary.

Juice of Plantane, inject it by a Syringe. Or,

of Oil of the Balsom-Tree, Juice of Plantane, of Purslane, of each equal
parts, for an Injection.

A Decoction of the Roots of Endive and Cichory, or of Plantane-Leaves in Whey
is held specifical, to be drunk for Inflammation of the Uterus.

Hartman and Johnstonus are highly opinioned of Mother of Time, boild in
Steeled Water and drunk, or the Decoction applied by Sponges.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Mola in the Matrice.

DEFINITION.
A Mola is a shapeless lump of flesh, without Bones or Bowels, growing in the
Uterus from an imperfect Conception, from fault of the Seed, belying a true
Birth, and gotten instead thereof.

Galen defines it to be a mass of flesh without form.

Aetius and Paulu^, An hard Swelling.

Platerus says, It is an immovable and insensible Body of soft flesh, that is
void of a certain Figure.

CAUSE.
The Cause is, first from faulty Seed, and that as well masculine as feminine
together, (others only allow the Woman's Seed to be the cause hereof) which
wanting a forming quality, and being drowned in menstruous, thick and humourous
Blood, a shapeless mass is made, and by heat hardened.

SIGNS.
It is a Mass of Flesh, void of a certain form, immovable and insensible,
lying like a stone, with a great sense of weight.

1. It belies or counterfeits a true Birth, because, 1. Herein is longing. 2.
Loss of Appetite. 3. Swelling of the Breasts. 4. Stopping of the Menstrua. 5. A
bad color.

2. It is distinguished, First, From a true birth, because in this is, 1. No
perceivance of its Body for many months, and then an hard senseless and
immovable Body, is perceived. 2. There sometimes follows a pricking pain, which
is not in a true Conception. 3. The Woman perceives a motion like trembling and
panting, distinct from that of the Infant. 4. Though the Breasts swell, there is
no Milk, it is from suppressed Menstrua, and they flag afterward. 5. It differs
in the bulk and figure of the Uterus, for in a true Conception it is chiefly
lifted up toward the Navil, and softly straitened toward the sides; but in
this the Belly is lifted up into all its dimensions. Secondly, From a Dropsy
of the Uterus, for in that there is a soft swelling, it yields to pression of
the Hand and Fingers, and the dints made therefrom, rise again in height, there
is a rumbling and sense of water; which things are not so in a Mola, though a
Dropsy may follow, and be conjoined with it in time.

DIFFERENCES.
Some are more soft, watery, slimy and bloody; and some more feculent and hard;
some flatulent, or puffed up, and spongy: They are not known to be in the
Uterus of Bruits, they not abounding with Menstrua, as Women do.

Sometime they grow in the Neck, sometime also in the Bosom of the Uterus.

PROGNOSTICS.
It is dangerous, 1. Because in time the Liver sometimes is weakened, and a
Dropsy ensues.

2. They carry it in their Vterus two or three years sometimes, and sometimes
is incurable if not looked to at the beginning.

3. It is sometimes very great, and is expelled with a very doubtful Erysis,
and large fluxes of Blood accompany its egress, so that sometimes the Spirits
being exhausted, and an Inflammation, Fever and Delirium being raised, she dies
in the act of ejecting it.

It is excluded sometimes before, sometimes with the Birth, and sometimes
without it.

CURE.
In Cure we are, 1. To hinder its growth and increase, and take away its
aliment, for which Blood is to be drawn forth by the Arm and Ankles;
Copulation, adding more weak Seed, is to be shunned; the Menstrua are to flow,
and we must purge tenacious and vicious Humors from the Uterus: In Diet, all
fat, cold, gross, viscous, windy Meats are to be shunned; let her drink
Wormwood Beer or Wine: Exercise is not so good here, as for Expulsion, if the
growth of it may not be hindered; for it rather moves flux of Humors that
increase its growth; but moderate and gentle exercises are not to be abandoned.

2. If grown, to expel it: Here such as are for ejection of the dead Child, and
moving of the Menstrua, are useful; and such things as are contrary to those
used for preservation of the Child in the Vterus, are to be instituted: In
Meats, Openers, Attenuaters, and Dissolvers of concreted matter, are good;
Exercise, as leaping, jumping, running, etc. that were for the dead Birth, are
good.

Then after Preparation, give Purgers, and things that move the Menstrua,
whereof take this for an Example: of Borax, Savin, Cinnamon, and Diptamy of
Creet, of each j. Motherwort, Nigella Romana-Seeds, Assafoetida, Saint
John's-Wort, of each ss. take j. for a dose in sugared White Wind.

The Juice of the Leaves of Lovage drunk in Mugwort-water, is held a secret.

Hartmannus says, A Secret is not more happily given for exterminating this,
than the Powder of Secundines, which is to be given more often, (if the Mola
has continued long) in Mugwort, Gentian, Pennyroyal, or Nettle-Water, some
Cinamon-Water being always added; and that hereby he cured many generous Women,
which by learned Physicians were thought desperate.

Externally are many things to be used to relax the parts, and discuss and
shake off the impacted matter, as are Insessions, Fomentations, Cataplasms,
Ointments, Pessaries, etc. of emollient and resolvent Medicines, as Chamomile,
Mallows, marish Mallows, Mellilot, Mugwort, Dill, Rheu, Motherwort, etc.

Natural Bathes also, and such as have force of rarifying and dissolving, are
good.

Some apply dry Cupping-glasses, and painful Ligatures about the Calves of the
Legs for attraction sake.

If all Medicines fail, and the Woman is like to miscarry therefrom, Platerus
advises, That it be taken away by Manual Operation, or in extreme peril, by
Section made by the Abdomen into the Uterus.

SYMPTOMS.
Symptoms happening herein are to be respected.

As, 1. A Dysentery, that commonly goes before the expelling of the Mola, and
is to be cured as other Dysenteries.

2. Windiness, which causes great rumbling and distention, and is taken away
after preparation and purging of the Humors, by Clisters, Pessaries of Juice
of Mercury, and Cardamoms, Insesses, and Unction of the Pecten, with Oil of
Dill, Cummin-Seeds and Castorium.

3. Fainting and Swounding fits, that follow upon the great Haemorrhages that
happens in the Expulsion of the Mola, and are helped by Cordials, and such as
strengthen the forces, and uphold Nature.

4. Clotted and congealed Blood, for whose Cure, if there be need, see the
Chapter of Blood clotted in the Bladder.

CHAP. XII.
Of Condiloma Uteri.

COndylomata, are swellings of the Rinkles in the Neck of the Uterus, rising in
height, and inflicting pain and heat there.

CAUSES
Are thick and adust Humors, or Humors that have flowen thither and are
become rotten; they are often made after some Exulceration there.

SIGN.
They are like Hyposarcoses, they appear to the Eyes, they are Taberculous and
Membranous, they are rather lifted up while the Menses flow out, they are often
joined with Rhagades.

CURE.
A good order of Diet prescribed. We must take away the Cause, we must
repercuss and dry; if there be Inflammation, we must correct that by Anodines
and Coolers, as by Ointments, Insessions and Perfumes; if old and inveterate,
it is good to use first Emolients, and then Digesters and Driers.

Rondeletius advises to this Powder, which is to be sprinkled upon the parts,
Savine, j. Burnt Hermodactils, and Mirtil Ashes, ana iij. Chalcitis, Allom,
ana. ij. Red Orpment, j. mix them all into a Powder; this is rather to be used
when they are hardened by long continuance, for then Consumption by Causticks,
or a pair of Pincers, are to be ordained to take away the Tumid Flesh, and an
Astringent Powder presently sprinkled on the place that is nipt by the Pincers
of Steel, Powder of Egg-shells, and Mulleint Leaves.

Much more might have been spoken of this affect, but seeing they are caused
and cured much after the same manner as Condylomata of the Fundament, we refer
it thither.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Itching, or Itching Pushes in the Uterus.

PUshes of the Uterus, are Tubercles risen in the Neck, and effecting by their
sharpness great Itching and Pain.

CAUSE.
Cause is sharp, bilious, and sometimes adust Humors insinuated there, and
producing their effects.

SIGN.
There is great itching, which is sometime more painful; sometime scaley matter
falls off; they are best discerned by Speculum Matricis.

PROGNOSTIC.
By increasing it may degenerate into Ulcers; they are sometime very hard to
cure, specially if they be Malign or Venerial, which often happen in Womb-Fury,
yet may be made when that is not; and Womb-Fury may be caused without the
conjunction of this.

CURE.
Preparation is made by Endive, Hops, Fumitary, Borrage, Lettice, Cichory, etc.
then we must correct the quantity and quality of Peccant Humors.

Topics used in Bathes and Insessions, a washing of the part with Wine and
Niter, and such things as prohibit Itching; for which see Chapter of Itching.

If they be Venerious and Contagious, a Lotion of Plantane and Rose Water, with
Aloes, and a little Erugo Aeris artificially dissolved therein, is to be used.

CHAP. XIV. Of Womb Melancholy.
DEFINITION.
Melancholy of Women is a Delirium, and sadness, with perturbation of the Mind
and Senses, coming by Intervals, and without a Fever; made from base
exhalations from the Uterus, affected with a Melancholy Humor, dulling the
Animal Spirits.

CAUSE.
Cause is Melancholy, and an earthly gross feculent Humor seated in the
Uterus, and there exhaling to the Brain fuliginous melancholy Vapors, which
deprave the Animal Spirits, and sensitive Faculty, drawing the original of its
growth from natural and dry Evacuation in the Uterus impedited, as either
suppression of the Menstrua, or retention of the Seed, or both, which thereby
putrify.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
1. There is fearfulness, sadness, unsatisfiedness in every thing, dejection of
mind, and sometime raging, anxiety and weeping, they sleep little.

They laugh, dote, talk idley, and are most garrulous at such time that the
Menstrua might be expected.

2. Distemper of the principal parts, from the Vapors sent to them and
afflicting. As, 1. to the Heart there is made anxiety, sadness, the Arteries of
it beat vehemently about the Milt and Back. 2. To the Stomach there is made
loathing of Meat, and want of Appetite, so that sometime the Sick thereby are
greatly wasted. 3. To the Thorax are made great Pains from Vapors transmitted
by the intercostal Arteries, and vellicating the Membranes of the Thorax; the
side also, from the Region of the Heart to the left Pap, is often pained. 4. To
the Jaws there is made a Sense of Choking, and they are much vexed with
dryness there.

PROGNOSTICS.
It Is a Disease of some difficulty to cure, both in respect, 1. Of the Symptoms
it has with it. 2. Of the parts thereby Afflicted. 3. By reason of the
stubbornness, being a cold and dry affect. 4. Of the great danger there is of
the Brain being primarily affected, through long continuance of this Disease,
whenas it is very hard (if at all curable) to be removed.

CURE.
Bleeding is first to be instituted (after an orderly Diet, as is prescribed in
the General Chapter of Melancholy) by Bleeding, open the Cubit-Vein first;
then, if the Menstrua be stopped, open the Ankle-Vein some days before they are
to come down: If Blood be more hot and black according to the Galenical Rule,
we may more freely draw it out.

2. Preparation, and Alteration of the melancholy Humor, is to be made, by
Cordials and Specificals for Melancholy; Borage, Bugloss, Dodder of Time, Balm,
Rosemary, Archangel, Woodroof, Violet-Leaves, Vipers Bugloss, Fumitary,
Featherfew, etc. boild in Whey clarified, and drunk; or Syrups of the Juice of
Apples, of Dodder of Time, of Borage, and the like, or Julaps of those Syrups
and White Wind, or Cordial distilled Waters are good for variety and change,
which sometimes greatly pleases the Sick.

3. Purge with such as properly purge Melancholy, and are made friendly to the
Uterus, by the mixing therewith Specificals to carry the force of the Medicine
to operate more specifically upon the Uterus.

If she be Costive, help that by often Clisters. Medicines in substance, as in
Pills, do dry too much, therefore Potions, or purging Julaps are preferred;
Extract of black Hellebore, of Lapis Lazuli, etc. are Medicinal.

Venery is very helpful for her, acted moderately and seasonably.

Emollient and moistening Bathes are good, both to moisten and temper, and
hinder thick and dry Evaporations, and appease watching; for which, if it be
immoderate, we must use somnoriferous Emulsions, Julaps and Applications to her
Head, Pomanders to smell to; and in extremity of watching, Laudanum to two or
three Grains, may be given.

Comforters of the Heart, and Cherishers of the Spirits, are continually to be
given, and whatever may avert and turn away Melancholy, and make her cheerful.

CHAP. XV.
Of Symptoms affecting Great-Bellied-Women.

MAny, various and great are the Diseases and Symptoms that arise to Women
during the time of their going with Child: The first, and that happen in the
first times of her going with Child, is,

1. A Spasm or Cramp, chiefly vexing the Calf of the Leg, which is eased by
anointing with Oil of Bays by the fire, and wrapping an hot woollen Cloth
thereupon.

2. A Diarrhaea or Lientery, wherein the Meat passes through the Body just as
it was chewed, no alteration being made.

3. Illiack Passion, wherein are great Torments and Belly-pains from the Guts
inflamed, and involved one within another, called by some Convolvulus; and
whatsoever here is swallowed down, is presently cast up again by Vomit, either
because it cannot pass, or because Vapors arising herefrom disturb and evert
the Stomach.

Cure it as a common Illiack-Passion, respecting the Fruit in the Uterus, and
condition of the Woman.

4. Nausea, and Vomiting; This, as in Childbearing, so also after Delivery, is
very molestuous, and sometime Food, sometimes only Humors, if the Stomach be
empty, are cast out.

Disdain of Food is often concomitant herewith, and the Woman neither affects
the thing she eats, nor eaten, does she keep it, or not without great offense.

The Stomach is to be strengthened: a clensing Potion premised, give Decoction
of Wormwood, Centuary, Mint, Cinnamon, Enula-Roots, etc. but if a Decoction be
too strong, steep them, being aptly prepared, in her Beer; if she dislike them
so, from great Weakness of her Stomach, compose them into a mass, to be
swallowed in Pills: give her every night going to Bed the quantity of a Nutmeg,
of this or the like Electuary, Marmalade of Quinces, ij. Conserve of Roses, j.
Cinnamon, Mace, of each j. with Syrup of Mint, make it into a due form;
Strengtheners and astringent Ointments also for the Stomach, for External Use,
are to be used.

5. Women's Longings, and coveting of diverse and strange Aliments. See the Cure
in the Chapter of Women's Longings.

6. Belly-ach, from Wind and bad Vapors. It Is taken away with Carminatives,
and as is directed in the Chapter of Wind from the Uterus.

7. Toothach.

8. Headache and Vertigo, which also are made from filthy exhalations, and
unwholsom vapors sent from the Uterus to the Head. See their Cure in the
Chapter of them; particularly, 1. Respect the Cause; 2. The part from whence
they arise.

II. In the middle time of her going with Child, are,

1. A Cough; This arises, 1. From compressure of parts. 2. Suppression of
Humors, which putrify and send molestuous and irritating vapors to the parts
destinated for breathing; this sometime in the last Months does urge most; and
the reason may very well be, because then a greater quantity of noxious Humors
are heaped up, than were at first.

PROGNOSTICS.
It Is bad in Women with Child, because thereby the Vessels of the Uterus are
sometime broke, and therefrom ensues Abortion.

CURE.
In Cure avoid all sharp and irritating things, give Ptysans, and sweet Wine,
avoid such meats as stop the Pipes of the Lungs, and increase an aliment apt to
turn a pituitous Excrement: If the matter be more tenaciously seated in the
Lungs, give expectorating Syrups, Lohochs, Decoctions, and Ptysans; Oil of
sweet Almonds is very helpful; anoint the Breast with loosening pectoral
Unctions.

2. Fainting, panting of the Heart, and Lipothimy, from fuliginous and
malignant Vapors communicated from the Uterus, whereby the Heart striving to
expel those exhalations, does frequently stretch and contract it self.

SYMPTOMS.
Symptoms hereunto annexed, are, Tremblings, want of sleep, Despair, Leanness,
and a wasting condition.

CURE.
In Cure, Diversion of the Vapors, after a Lenitive, is to be endeavored;
Frictions of the lower parts, Ligatures, Cuppers, etc. are convenient; give her
Balm-Water, Syrup of Mint, with other Cordials: If this does no good, breathing
the Basilick Vein is sometimes very helpful, both to refresh the Heart, and the
Infant too, being almost strangled from the great quantity and bad quality of
humorous Blood; yet we do it with some moderation, and supposing the Woman be
young, fleshy and strong.

3. Pain of the Loins and Hips. See its Cure in the general Chapter of Pain, in
our Chyrurgery.

4. Swelling of the Legs; this proceeds from abundance of gross cold Humors,
through redundancy of them in the Body, being thrust down thither; this happens
also in the last Months of her going with Child, they are scarce perfectly
healed till they be delivered; yet in the mean time we are not to procrastinate
the Cure, lest from the part too much weakened, and the Humor by long being
seated there, growing more contumacious, a worse Case befall afterward, and it
be harder to be cured. 1. We must go about Discussion, and Dissolution of the
Humors and swelling. 2. Strengthen the part. If by the coldness of the part we
fear a Gangrene, it is prevented by scarifying of the part, for so it is
ventilated, and putrefaction impedited.

5. An Haemorrage of the Uterus, or Haemorrhoid-Veins, sending out Blood either
from too great plenty of it, made from abounding of it in the whole Body, or
weakness of the Birth, not attracting that that is sent thither for its
nourishment, or prave Humors stimulating the expultrice force of the Uterus.

CURE.
Here we must, 1. Respect the Cause, which is either to lessen or amend the
Blood, or to tame the acrimony of it: 2. The Effects, which is an Haemorrage,
which indicates a suppression; that is done by Astringents and Medicines that
thicken the Humors, and fix them, and make the parts rough.

III. In the last months of her going with Child, is,

1. Costiveness, and hard Signs made from the Uterus, compressing the strait
Gut; or secondly, from the dryness of the faeces, the moisture of the
alimentary matter being sent to the Uterus.

PROG.
By hard striving to go to stool, the Cotyledons and Vessels of the Uterus are
sometime loosened, and there is fear of Abortion.

CURE.
Clisters are not now so good to be used, the Child being come to such a
growth, but Suppositories in their stead; fat Broaths with Mallows, Syrup of
Prunes, or Prunes first stewed, then pricked, and steeped in Infusion of Senna,
then eaten, are very good; moistening and slippery food is best for her. See
more in the Chapter of Costiveness.

2. Stopping of Urine, made also from largeness of the Uterus crushing the
Bladder; or it may be made from other Causes, which, and whose Cure, see in the
Chapter of an Iscury.

3. Swelling and puffing up of the Veins from gross and flatulent Blood;
Phlebotomy, or opening a Vein, because it detracts nourishment from the Child,
is not allowed: We must palliate, and keep a good Diet till time of Delivery,
for then these Affects are wont to be dissolved.

4. An effusion or pouring out of water from the Uterus, which was gathered in
the time of their going with Child 'twixt the Membranes comprehending the
Birth, and being now heaved up in great plenty (specially in such as have lived
an idle and sedentary life) Nature casts it out after this manner: It has with
it paleness of face, lankness of the skin, windiness, and are like to those in,
Dropsies, there is fear of it turning to a Dropsy, the retentive faculty is
weakened, and the Child not free from danger; nor may such a proper Cure as
ought, be administered; she must use a drying Diet, roasted Meats, Biscuit made
with Aniseeds, Sarsaperilla-Drink, and Fruits that are dry, and have some
Astringency.

Emplaisters may be applied to the Pudendum, and some gentle laxative Apozem
cannot bring any great prejudice, being discreetly administered.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Abortion.

DEFINITION.
ABortion is a depraved action of the Uterus, the Infant being immaturely and
before its legitimate time cast out, unperfected and violently being excerned,
caused from weakness of the retentive or too great force in the expulsive
faculty of the Uterus.

The Seed not as yet conformed, is called Seminis effluvium, that is, Cast out:
for whenas Nature propagates greedily its own Sex, in reference hereto the
propensity in Man to ejaculate Sperm, is not greater than the greedy coveting
in the Woman to suck it in, and Nature is as industrious now to keep it, and
cherish it; the Uterus after the act being close shut, as before covetous of
receiving it, the Uterus then gaping; but from impotency in it, or provocation,
made from their several Causes, it cannot keep it, or is forced to cast it out
before it be formed.

CAUSES.
The Causes of Abortion are either Internal or External:

I. Internal; which is either, First, From vice of the expulsive faculty, made
to act either from acute Diseases, or sharp Humors, from winds, Inflation, and
Inflammation of the Womb, whereby the parts are forish, and cannot well endure
to be crushed: 2. From great astriction of the Belly, so that great straining
is made to cast out the hard Excrements: And Hippocrates says, The Tenasmus,
or a Disease moving many and troublesome Stools, coming upon Women with Child,
causes them to abort. 3. Violent Causes, as strong Vomits, and purging
Medicines, or a natural Flux, exceeding in quantity, and too frequent in
motion, from shard (...) may stimulate the expultrice. 4. From great weight of
Humors, and burden, so that Nature is forced to abort, or cast out, to ease
her self.

Secondly, From vice in the retentive faculty, which arises, 1. From abundance
of moisture, and slippery Humors, or phlegmatic and loose, whereby the
Ligaments are laxated, and the Child slides away. 2. From two or more Children,
which the Uterus cannot well contain. 3. From often use of Venery, whereby the
Uterus is made slippery, and more open. 4. Fatness of the Uterus, whose Bodies
also usually are fat.

Thirdly, From weakness; which is made, 1. From bad Affects and Symptoms, so
that it has force no longer to retain the birth, as are Convulsions,
Swoonings. 2. Looseness of the Ligaments, from long lasting, waterish fluxes,
and moisture. 3. From Distempers, as too great heat, cold, dryness, or moisture.

Fourthly, From Diseases of magnitude, as, 1. A Mole. 2. Scirrhs, or great
fleshy Substances, so that the Child is crushed, wants room, and is sometimes
suffocated, and dies. 3. From Apostems in the Uterus.

Fifthly, From Nourishment: And first, From want of it, the Infant dies, and
abortion follows; that is, 1. From letting her Blood too much in the time of
her going with Child; 2. From a Tabes or Consumption that the Woman labors
under. Secondly, From too great plenty of it, as surfeiting of too much Meat
and Drink, strangles it. Thirdly, From bad quality in the Nourishment, and
Medicines, moving the Menstrua, poisons. etc.

Sixthly, From evil Conformation of the Uterus; as, 1. Very great and bulky, so
that the Child is not fitly closed and comprehended in it, but is loose and
slips out upon any light occasion. 2. From too great straitness of it, whereby
both the Child is killed, and not having room, is forced out also: as
straitness of the Stomach may cause vomiting.

II. External Causes are either, First, In the Air; which is hurting either, 1.
Naturally, as is hot and moist; Hippocr. Aph. 12. Sect. 3. says, If Winter was
Austral and Rainy, or dry, and a North Wind blow, Women, to whom their Birth
happens in the Spring, upon every light occasion do abort. 2. Artificially made
unwholesome, as stinking, made from Bogs, Jaques, or fumes of Assafoetida,
Galbanum, Castorium, the snuff of a Candle, or the like evil Stenches; for the
Uterus flies stinking things, and embraces sweet.

Secondly, In Diet; which belongs to external Causes; but of that we have
already spoken.

Thirdly, From violent Causes; which, 1. Either cause solution of continuity,
or too great concussion and shaking of the Uterus, as is sneezing, jumping,
leaping, running, dancing, blows, falls, and the like.

Fourthly, Vehement vexings, disquietings, chidings, anger, wrath, perturbation
of the Mind and Senses.

Fifthly, Sudden frightings, swooning, failing of the Spirits, the noise of a
Gun, clap of Thunder, and the like, do sometime cause, and much further
abortion.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
Signs preceding Abortion, are, 1. A lessening of the Nipples and Paps
extenuated, which shows the want of Blood in the Veins of the Uterus, and of
the Paps, or that through violence of the Birth, or rupture of the Vessels, the
Blood is rushed into the Uterus, from the Veins of the Paps; for then the Paps
that were full and plump before, slack, and become lank and small: Hippocrates
says, If a Woman has Twins, and one be a Wench, and the other a Boy; if the
right Breast is suddenly diminished, she loses her Boy; and if the left, her
Girl.

2. Much Milk flowing from the Nipples.

3. Pains about the Belly and Loins, which end about the Share, and Os Sacrum;
2. About the Region of the Reins, descending to the Hypogaster, chiefly arising
from Cold; 3. Painful Throes.

4. The Child is fallen down lower then duly it ought, and the expultrice
faculty is mightily provoked to cast it forth.

5. There flows out a thin watery and bloody evacuation from the Uterus; or
Menstrua being black, and Throes accompanying, certainly denote Abortion near.

6. If in acute and dangerous Diseases she happens to be in Travel, both she
and the Child too, are usually killed thereby.

7. Shakings of the parts, and trembling motion, and redness of the Face, and a
disturbance in her Body, are sometimes Foretellers and Forerunners of Abortion.

PROGNOSTICS.
1. Abortion is most dangerous, or they are most apt to abort in the sixth,
seventh and eighth months.

2. Frequent Abortion causes Barrenness.

3. From violence and disturbance in Nature, acting contrary to its mutual
Harmony, Abortion is far worse than a legitimate and natural Birth.

4. Sometimes Abortion threatened, by Medicines is stayed or deferred for a
while, and then returns again.

CURE.
Cure is altogether preventive, in which, 1. We must respect the Cause, which
if it be from Phlethory, letting Blood is rather to be done then refused.
Fernelius asserting, that unless a sufficient quantity of Blood be drawn out
before that she looks for Delivery, the Child will be overwhelmed and
suffocated with plenty of Blood, which may fall out of the Veins into the
Uterns, they opening through fullness: some bid a Vein to be cut before
Conception. 2. If Cacochymy offends, we must purge, and take away the
irritating Cause, and temper Acrimony. 3. The Bowels must be corroborated, the
retentive faculty confirmed, Distemper corrected, and things hurtful avoided;
all which prevent well, if used before conception.

Zacutus Lusitanus found Cauteries of exceeding excellency for Derivation and
Evacuation of Humors; which if they be too thick, we must thin them, if too
thin and waterish, thicken them.

In too great moisture, Sweating and Dryers are useful; in Dryness, Moistners
and Nourishers. Precaution before Conception, by fitting the Body, and freeing
it from all infirmities, is as useful as defending it, when it is conceived,
from Death and Miscarriage.

Before Abortion is nigh, these Medicines are good Preservatives. 1. Sage-Ale
drunk every morning, or Cinnamon boild in Beer. 2. Aurum Potabile, which
strengthening Nature in her Center, fortifies all Parts. 3. Juice of Lobsters
given twice a Month in Wine, or the Salt of them, are good Preservatives
against Abortion.

These are held for Secrets, and if the Child be not yet divulsed from the
Cotyledon, certainly prevent Abortion; of the Leaves of Gold, xii. Spodium, ss.
Mastich, Roots of Tormentil and Bistort, of each j. mix them; give j for a Dose
every morning in Plantane-Water, or rather in a draught of Ale wherein Tansy is
steeped, for Tansy by a Magnetic Quality draws the Child, keeps it in its
natural place and order. 2. The Stone Aetitis, or Lapis Praegnans, so called,
because there is one within another, and signifying the Stone with Child; this
if hung about a Woman's Neck, so as it touch the Skin, will the most surely,
among helps, preserve the Child in the Uterus till time of delivery. 3.
Garden-Tansy bruised, sprinkled with Muskadine, and applied to her Navil: Also
the Lodestone applied to the Navil, or Coral, Emeraulds, and Jasper-Stones; or
Bones of a Stags Heart worn about the Neck, or under the Arm-holes, are held
Specifical. Zach. Lusitanus commends a Girdle of Sea-Horse-Skin, or Wolf-Skin.
These following Pouders are also proper against Abortion, Roots of Bistort,
shavings of Ivory, ana. ij. Red-Coral, Amber, Borax, ana. iss. Coriander-Seeds,
iij. Cristal, Kermes-Berries, Magister of Pearl, and Coral, of each ss. mix
them into a Powder. Or, Shavings of Ivory, Date-Stones, Mastich, Roots of
Bistort, ana. ij. Manus Christi Perlatae, ss. Leaves of Gold, no. vi. make a
Powder. Or, Cochineal, Coral, Roots of Bistort, Plantane Seeds, ana. j.
Cinnamon, Red-Rose-Leaves, ana. ss. Leaves of Gold, no. iv. cut small, and
mixed with the rest in Powder; Astringents in several forms are outwardly to be
used: together with the use of these the Laboring Woman must beware of too
violent motion. Sit in rest and quiet, fly all molestations, and whatever may
enrage the Humors. Copulation must be shunned, for in taking in new Seed, the
young Birth not well firmed, is loofened and ready to fall out; a good Diet
must be kept, and not apt to engender Wind.

SYMPTOMS.
Symptoms, as vehement pain, etc. are to be lenified, and the forces upheld by
all means we can devise, and the Heart is to be comforted by Cordials.

If Abortion cannot be prevented, then we must promote the coming forth of the
Child; dispose all things to its easy and orderly coming forth, taking
direction from the Chapter of a Legitimate and Mature Birth.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Dead Child.

THE Child dies in the Uterus, sometime sooner, sometime in the last Month,
from defect or bad quality of nourishment, from violent Causes, Internal or
External, or about time of Delivery, from hard labor, etc.

CAUSES.
I. Defect of Aliment is made, 1. From the Woman's small nourishment. Or, 2.
from the Nourishment extracted, as is made in letting Blood in great
Haemorrhages, whereby Nature sends all the Nourishment from the Child, to make
good Blood to fill up the Veins that are empty in the Woman.

II. The badness of Alimentary Juice, or redundancy of Vicious Humors that
kill the Child, the Woman's Body being Cacochymick; or it is made bad from other
Causes.

III. From Violent Causes. 1. Inward, as violent strong and inimical Cathartick
Medicines. 2. The falling down of abundance of slippery moist Humors, that
loosen the Ligaments, and slacken the Vessels. 3. Violent Fevers, wherein are
bad and dangerous Symptoms concomitant.

2. External. As, 1. a Blow, Riverius Obs. 34. Cent. 3. by too great Exercise
after a Blow. 2. Forcible Percussion, or Excussion, as Coughing vehemently,
loud crying, and earnest Vociferations, Sneezing, etc.

3. Frights, and sudden and dreadful scares and terrors.

Lastly, It dies by hard labor, by indisposition in the Woman, made from
several Causes, or unskilfulness in the Midwife in delivering it.

SIGNS.
Signs are, 1. A sudden falling and slacking of the Breasts, so soon as the
Infant is dead. 2. Coldness of the Navil, and also Belly. 3. No motion of the
Child is perceived, but she perceives a kind of fixed and unmovable Body in her
Uterus. 4. Wet your Hand in warm Water, and lay it on her Belly, and the Child,
if alive, will stir thereby. 5. Her Urine is thick, stinking, and full of base
Sedementary Matter. 6. There be Dreams of dead Men, and frightings out of
sleep. 7. She covets strange Aliments, not ordained to be eaten. 8. She looks
scurvily. 9. Her Breath stinks. 10. She wants her usual mirth. 11. She
perceives a distaste of Spittle coming to her Mouth. 12. The Child is apt to
swag and sway to this side or that, as she turns her, more then it did when it
was alive: Yet when Children are alive, but misplaced in the Uterus, they are
apt upon the stirring of the Woman to have a preposterous swaying to this side
or that; but some advise to hold the Stone Aetites, or the Herb Tansy, to the
Navil, which will remedy that swarving, if the Child be alive, but not if dead.
13. Half a point of White Wine burnt with ss. of Cinnamon, and Drunk, if
Child-pains come then upon the Woman, the Child is dead; if not, it may be weak
or sick in the Uterus.

CURE.
As Soon as we are certain of its being dead, we must bring it away, with
Medicines Internal and External; Internal are such as are set down for bringing
away the Birth, and expelling the Secundine. 1. Therefore in form of Pouders
most efficacious Simples may be reduced and composed. Riverius has two
excellent Pouders, the first is this, of the dry Leaves of Savine-Roots, of
Birthwort, Myrrh, Castoreum, of each, j. Cinnamon, ss. Saffron, j. mix them all
into a Powder, give j. for a Dose in Savine-Water; or take of Diptamy of Creet,
Savine Borax, of each, j. mix them into Powder.

Prevotius sets down, as excellent, this Powder, of Mineral Crysocolla, ij. or
Borax, j. Cinnamon and Saffron, ana. j. make a Powder, give a dram in
White Wind or Mugwort Water.

The Powder of Diptamy alone is very prevalent.

Angelus Sala greatly applauds Mercurius Vitae for its force, in sending out
the dead Child, given to four or five Grains.

2. Potions also as well as Pouders are prepared, and of as great efficacy for
expelling the dead Child. Where, 1. a strong Decoction of Hyssop drunk hot, or
its Juice, when it may be had, obtains the chiefest place. 2. The Juice of
Lovage, or in Winter, if that may not be had, the Seeds of Lovage in
Mugwort-Water, are held a singular secret. 3. Fontanus his Powder of
Euphorbium, Diptamny, of each, j. Borax, ss. Cantharades prepared five Grains,
taken in iij. of Decoction of Savine, for a Draught or Potion, is exceeding
strong, and is warily to be given. 4. Juice of Scordium, ss. with Saffron. 5.
The Milk of a Bitch, newly having pupped, is commended.

In External things, or Topics. 1. The Stone Aetites, being held to the
Privities, by a magnettick virtue draws away the Child. 2. Hartman says, The
Eyes of an Hair dried, and with Pepper bound to the Crown, forces out the Child
dead or alive.

Clisters, Suppositories, and Pessaries, of proper and irritating Simples, are
convenient.

Foments and Unctions of those parts appertaining to the Uterus, to make
slippery, mollify, and dilate the Passage, and provoke the Expultrice Faculty
of the Uterus, are not to be neglected; Oil of Tansy, or the Juice of it, to
anoint the Privities, is principal.

Suffumes of Galbanum, of Asses-Hoofs, (by a Funnel, of the cast Skin of a
Serpent) and of Brimstone, are Medicinable.

Things also applied to the Thighs, as was directed to facilitate the Birth,
are useful.

If yet by all these it be not avoided (as it will hardly but be) and be very
hurtful to the Woman: Chyrurgery must be exercised, the Child must be drawn out
with Instruments, considering the strength of the Woman, and the disposition of
the Pulse, that it may be done with more safety.

Riverius, after the use of all inward Medicines, advises a good strong (...)
to be taken, whereby sometime, with the abundance of Humors in the Uterus that
are evacuated by it, the Child also is sent out.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of a Fever happening after Delivery, or a Fever of Milk.

HIppocrates says, Diseases happening after Delivery are very baed, vehement,
and dangerous, in respect of the feculent bad matter they are made of, which is
sometimes kept long, and putrified; all the purest part being sucked by the
Infant, the dreggy, thick, black and melancholy gross Blood, is retained still
in the Veins of the Uterus (being very large) from suppression of the Loches,
or a vicious habit of the Menses retained longer then due, and corruption of
them does induce a continual putrid Fever. Errors in Diet do often add fuel
to fire, and where the Cause is often times of it self too weak to raise a
Fever, eating of bad meats put on a vicious apparelling of the Humors, whence
the matter is provoked to action, and Nature is impedited in digesting it
otherwise.

2. As Fevers arise, 1. from the ill quality of the Humors, 2. from
suppression of them, so 3. from redundancy of milk, which are Fevers of one
day, and called Fevers of Milk.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
1. From Milk, wherein is great swelling of the Breasts from fullness of it,
there is great pain of the Back and Shoulder-Blades, the Loches rightly flow,
and unless the Paps be inflamed, or milk coagulated, are wont to cease the
third or fourth day, and to be without danger.

2. From suppression of the Loches, or evil disposition of feculent humorous
Blood; there went before a bad Diet; there be Signs of the Humors corrupted,
the wonted evacuation Nature used to have after the Delivery, is stopped, whence
a putrid and continual Fever arises.

PROG.
That made from Milk is of lesser danger, and shorter continuance then that
that is made from stopping of the Loches, or vicious appareling of the Humors
in the Vterus; that from Milk commonly ends the third or fourth day, and is a
kind of Ephemera, or a Fever of one day, as it is called; it is for the most
part without danger, and is to be committed to Nature, a good Diet being kept;
and is wont to be terminated by sweat.

CURE.
In Cure thereof we are only to use Remedies to such as are caused from
Humors; where,

First, If the Loches be stopped, cut a Vein of the Ankle; if that bleed not
sufficiently, apply Cupping-Glasses with Sacrification to the Legs and Thighs;
if time of the Flux be gone, and the Fever still persevere, the Cubit-Vein may
be opened, for this draws the Blood upwards, as the Ankle-Vein opened drew it
downward; yet Galen says, If a Vein be opened in any part of the Body, it will
empty and draw from the Vessels of all parts. Astringents are to be shunned.

Secondly, From an evil state of the Humors, or corruption of them, we may use
gentle Purgatives; the Humors must be altered, sharp and too cold things are
specially to be avoided.

The Fever, if vehement, is to be respected; Cordials and Coolers for the
Heart and Spirits, are to be given to the sick Woman, and Nature is to be
strengthened with Electuaries, Julaps, Confections, Lozenges, Ptysans, or what
else the Sick best affects, made of such things as are generally prescribed for
Fevers.

CHAP. XIX.
Of a Looseness following a Fever, after Women's Delivery.

A Looseness often supervenes the Fever, and is sometime and most commonly void
of pain and acrimony, and flows healthfully, if not immoderate, chiefly in long
lasting, for so it may weaken much, and lessen the vigor of the Spirits; and
then it is to be restrained by strengthening Nature and the parts, by gentle and
wary means.

CURE.
It will not be amiss first to prescribe a gentle Purge, made of Infusion of
Rhubarb, Myrobalans, etc. in Plantane-Water; to the strained Liquors convenient
Syrups to sweeten, as for a Julap, being added: Fallopins says, Rhubarb dries
up superfluous moisture in the Vessels of the Uterus; but whether it dries so
much, or no, it purges, and leaves behind a binding quality, and strengthening
to the parts, and therefore best of all Purgatives in fluxes; and Astringents
are not to be used till the irritating or abounding Humors be evacuated, both
which, Rhubarb does effectually and methodically: After the parts are eased of
the burdening Humors, the retentive faculty is to be restored and confirmed,
which is done by moderate Astringents that have not a glewing force, but are
friendly to the Bowels by correcting their slippery and non-retaining
Distemper: they may be used in several forms most convenient both for internal
and external use.

To this sometimes succeeds, and of it is made a Dysentery, or Bloody Flux,
which brings with it a Fever, cruel Torments, Watchings, and frequent Seighs.
Here we may use the aforegoing Direction, only adding the use of Clisters made
of Plantane, Cinckfoil, Mallows, Pimpinella, or Burnet, Red Rose-Leaves, etc.
boiled in Milk; yet the premising of a clensing Clister before one absolutely
binding, is not altogether irrational.

Opening a Vein also, specially if the Liver be distempered, is very needful;
choice is made of the Basilick or Salvatella-Vein in the Arm.

Many more might be added, but if need be, recourse may be had to the Chapter
of a Dysentery, whence may be had ample Directions, and many Medicines very
suitable hereto; so that Reiteration seems needless, and double labor, where
single will serve, is to be avoided.

CHAP. XX.
Of Monstrous Births, or Imperfect Children.

MAny and very differing are the forms of deformed and monstrous Births; some
being either ill conformed, as double-Bodied, a double Brain, when other Limbs
are single; some parts placed upwards, as sometimes are the Genitals in the
Forehead, that should be below; and sometime a single Body downwards, whenas
it is double upwards; some are maimed, and some want Limbs and Parts; some are
altered in respect of Sex, as Hermophrodites; some have Bestial forms; some in
form of Birds, others four-footed, Diabolical and cruel, made of the seed of
the Devil; some are an Ell long.

CAUSES.
1. The Cause is not certainly natural, say Divines, but the Hand of GOD
miraculously effecting it, as sometimes it is; One Woman complaining of the
many Mouths she had to feed, viz. her Children, brought forth a Child without a
Mouth.

2. Astrologers refer it to the Stars, and position of the Moon in deficient
degrees at time of Conception.

3. The Cause is Imagination of the Woman at time of Conception, diligently
applying the sight of those things she saw, to her self: Hence it is that some,
having looked and pondered upon the fight of a ravenous Bird called Harpa, have
brought forth such a one: Another brought forth a Negro, looking upon the
Picture of a Negro that hung in her Chamber at time of Conception: A Woman at
Pisa is reported to have brought forth a Child all hairy, like a Camel, because
she used to bow every day to the Image of John Baptist clothed in Camels Hair:
Some Women in seeing an Hare, bring forth a Child with an Hare-Lip: One Woman
seeing a Boy at time of Conception with two Thumbs, brought forth a Boy also on
both hands double Thumb'd, as was the Boy she saw: Another Woman at time of
Conception seeing a Child that had a great Head, from Water gathered in it,
called Hydrocephalus, or a Dropsy of the Head, brought forth a Child with a
great Head also, that was spongy, and the skin puffed up, but not filled with
Water. As Women, so also Sheep are thus affected from the strength of the
imaginatrice faculty at time of Conception; for Jacob laying peeled Rods in the
Gutter where they were to drink, they brought forth parti-colored Lambs: Women
that seriously and deeply think of the ill-shapen Members they see in others,
conceive and bring forth Children so mis-figured; also it is very bad for Women
at time of Conception to see Pictures on a wall, or Images, for fear they bring
forth Children of like conformation. Some think that Children are like the
Mothers true Husband, that are got by another, because the Woman was in fear
when they were got, and so conceived by the imagination alike: But, say they,
If the same man get them when the Woman is not in fear, but secure, and her
Husband far from home, the Child will have the likeness of its true Father or
Begetter, because the Mothers Mind does the Child dispose.

Moreover, some, according to the Vulgar Stories, having been struck with a
piece of Flesh, the Child has had the Mark of that piece of meat in the same
place that the Woman was struck in; and some having struck a Woman with a Mouse
on the Cheek, she has brought forth a Child representing the figure of a Mouse
on its Cheek: And why may not feeling, as well as seeing, move the imaginatrice
faculty to effect these?

4. A Cause of many being born Crook-Back'd, great-Headed, from abundance of
Humors, or full of running sores, or leprous, may be from the Act of
copulation done at such time as she had her Menstrua on her.

5. Monsters are either made, 1. By the Devil, or also by the imagination of
the Woman; or begotten by Beasts coupling with Women, the seed of the Beast, or
bruit Animal, mixed with the Woman's seed; so that the Birth participates of the
likeness of both Getter and Bearer, Nature striving always to beget her like:
So Men coupling with Bruits beget Monsters, half a Man, and half a Beast; and
hence perhaps it came that some People are horned, wild, and live on Grass,
Herbs, etc. whose forms most show them to be Men; some also have Tails as
Beasts, and many are variously formed, as if there was a form made equally
concurring to Man's and Beasts; sometimes the fore parts are like a Man, and the
hinder represent a Beastial Form. 2. Or by natural ill conformation in the
Vterus, as where there was a deficiency in Nature, in making two distinct
Bodies of matter so prepared and disposed, that is, confused and crushed all
into one, so that double-Bodied-Infants with their Members displaced, are
herefrom made. Also such as want full Limbs, or deficiency either in quantity
or number of Members, may be from a simple fault in the Seed and Uterus, or
some hidden quality making a deviation from Natures accustomed course in
forming.

See more in our Book of Philosophy, called Physiology, Jatrosophy, and
Pneumatography, in diverse places; in our Book of Generation, the first of the
Twelve Books of that Book; in our Book of the necessary parts God gave to all
Creatures according to their knowledge, or the necessary Knowledge God gave to
all Creatures, according to the Parts and Bodies He gave them; and also in our
Chapter of diverse shapes of Men.

CHAP. XXI.
Of following Symptoms, or Diseases of delivered Women, as fault in quantity
and quality of Loches, or Child-Bedpurgations; of Throes, or After-pains; of
stopped Secundines, or After-Burdens staid.

I. AN Inflammation of the Matrice, caused from hot and boiling Blood retained
in the Vessels, and putrefying.

It Is known by the Signs of Inflammation of the Matrice in general, and cured so.

II. Fissures or Wrinkles, which are raised from the stretching in bringing
forth the Child, and flux of Menstrua.

They are cured with gentle astringent, and contracting Medicines, Injections
by a Syringe of Comfrey-Roots, Bramble-Buds, Balaustians, Sumach,
Pomegranate-Rinds, Cypress-Nuts, and the like, or a Pessary of them, or
Ointments, are effectual.

III. Gaping of the Matrice, and looseness of the Privy Parts; they are to be
seasonably contracted, else they may possibly hinder the Woman for having any
more Children.

Here the foregoing Remedies may be used, adding stronger Astringents, as
Decoctions and Baths of Oak-Buds, dry Sloes, Acatia, Hypochistis, Roots of
yellow Water-flag, Medlars, Mastick, and Madder-Roots, or Ointments of Dragons
Blood, Gum Tragacanth, extract of Comfrey-Roots, Powder of Tobacco Pipes, Oil
of Myrtles, of Mastick, etc. Natures work in contracting those parts that were
before so dilated, is admirable.

IV. Excoriation of the Uterus after Delivery, being excoriated in the lower
part.

Oil of Saint John's-Wort for Unction, is most excellent; and a vulgar Remedy
is Oil of sweet Almonds taken inwardly.

V. Haemorrhoids or Piles do happen to Women that bring forth frequently, and
with difficulty straining to force out the Birth; the inward Piles are most
often opened.

They are cured by Pollipody-Drink (after the Saphaena-Vein in the foot is
opened, and some lenitive Medicine to keep her Body soluble) by a roasted Onyon
beat with Oil, and applied Plaister-wise; or, if too hot a Medicine, Oil of
Snails, or Hodmondods excels; or a Pulteis of Wood-lice, bruised and mixed with
Oil, is incomparable good.

VI. There arises a Fever from laborious and hard labor, and great pains.

VII. The Genitals swell from irritation by hard labor, and striving to thrust
forth the Infant.

VIII. Sometime Convulsions arise: then draw Blood from the Arm and from the
Foot; foment with Emollients, and laxative Medicines. Hippocrates says, They
are very dangerous, because they argue a great weakness, and exceeding torments
are wont to follow.

IX. An immoderate flowing down of the Menstrua, or monthly Courses: this
infirmity seldom happens to Women after their Delivery, but when they do flow
after Delivery so immoderately, we must stop them.

A thickning and binding Diet inclining to cooling, is most expedite; Broaths
made of Comfrey and Knotgrass, are transcendent; or Shepherds-purse boiled, or
taken in Medicine by a specifical Virtue to the Privities; or Leaves on Flowers
of Bramble so taken, do cure them; Foments also, and Ointments of Astringents,
and Epithemes to the Liver (if that be distempered) are not to be neglected:
Nicholas Fontanus says, If the Woman's strength will bear it, there is not a
surer Remedy than letting Blood, which is to be done twice or thrice in the
Basilick- Vein; binding of the upper parts, rubbing of the Extremities, and
Cupping-Glasses to the Breasts, are also by some used.

X. Sometimes an illegitimate stoppage of them follows, and then they are
cautiously to be provoked to their due and orderly efflux, for which take
advise with the Chapters of deficiency of Menstrua, or of their not duly and
ample flowing.

XI. The immoderate flowing of Loches after the Birth; after the Child is
brought forth, the spaciosity and thickness of the Uterus is gradually lessened
by the effusion of Loches, which are nothing else but the Relics of Blood
gathered in Childbearing between the fungous Conditories of the Uterus.

CAUSE.
The Cause is, 1. From immoderate opening of the Vessels.

2. From breaking of them.

3. From heat of the Blood, made from hot and sharp Medicines in painful
Travail, to cause Delivery.

PROGNOSTICS.
They are sometimes, both after a legitimate Birth, and Abortion also, so
abundant, and flow with such an unbridled rashness, that often times therefrom
is not a little danger of perishing; they are wont to cease within forty days,
sometimes sooner.

CURE.
Cure is as for Menstrua immoderately flowing; this flux is not to be stopped,
but moderated, and that with great wariness; for if by Astringents they be
stopped, many and cruel Symptoms arise thereupon; Aliments must thicken, and
have some astrictive force to restrain the violence of the Blood; Yolks of
Eggs, Panatels, Rice Broth, Gellies, Meats sprinkled or dipped in Sawces
effectual to this purpose; steeled Water, or wherein Gold has been quenched,
for ordinary Beer: Draw Blood by Revulsers to the superior parts; bind the
Belly up gently with a swaddling Cloth, for so the vessels be compressed;
Clothes dipped in Oxicrate are to be laid to the Loins. To temper the Blood in
the Vena Cava, Internals may be given, as Julaps, Electuaries, Conserves,
Syrups, etc. Aarum Potabile cures a flux, and provokes it where it is not,
doing all things as Nature her self would have it. Externals also, as
Ointments, Foments, Injections; for which Gallen praises Juice of Plantane cast
in by a Syringe. If after these, clots of Blood remain in the Uterus, causing
pain and tension, and other evils, by evaporations therefrom, they must be
avoided.

XII. Suppression of the Loches, whereby that Blood that is heaped up in
Childbearing, is not evacuated after Delivery of the Birth, as it is naturally
accustomed to be, and the amplitude of the Uterus is thereby not lessened; they
may either be lessened, or quite suppressed; whereupon do follow to the Woman
in Childbed most grievous Diseases.

CAUSE.
Cause is either evil Dyer, or taking cold, or other Causes that cause
suppression of the Menstrua.

SIGNS.
Signs are evident from relation of the Sick, who has not had that accustomed
and natural evacuation, the Uterus will remain stretched out and hard, as if it
did still contain the Child in it.

PROGNOSTICS.
Many Diseases and grievous Symptoms do arise herefrom, there is Inflammation of
the Uterus, from the Blood putrefying that is stopped, and at last a Gangrene
arises, which brings Death inevitably.

CURE.
We must not delay, we must draw down the Blood to the Womb, and open the
vessels. 1. Give laxative and emollient Clisters: 2. Ligatures and Frictions;
Cuppers to the Share and Hips are to be applied. 3. Open the Haemorrhoids, if
they used to flow; if not, the Saphena, or both Ankle-Veins. 4. Foment the
bottom of the Belly, and Region of the Pudendum, to which add Perfumes and
Pessaries, beginning with mildest Simples first. 5. Internals, to open the
mouths of the Vessels, and render the Blood apter to flow, and stir up the
expultrice faculty in Nature: Aurum Potabile, where Nature is burdened, moves a
flux, and stays it again, when all the oppressing and hurtful Humors are
avoided, strengthening Nature in her Center, and performing all things, as it is
the duty of Nature to do: Forestus gives successively Decoction of Squinanth in
Broth. Lastly, We may give a lenitive Purge or two, nine or ten days after
Delivery, of Infusion of Senna, Rhubarb, Agarick, Epithimum, and Mechoacan, as
may seem most requisite. More Remedies may be sought out of the Chapter of
suppressed Menstrua.

XIII. After-Pains or Throes do grievously torment some Women, and few are free
therefrom after delivery of the Birth; but because within two or three days
they usually cease, they do not desire the help of the Physician.

CAUSE.
The Cause is oftenest flatulent from taking cold, whereby wind from Distemper
of the parts is raised, and mightily molests. Wind also may be made from
Humors; without an outward distemper from the ambient cold Air.

2. The sharpness of Blood is reckoned as a great Cause hereof: Fontanus says,
It is from a multitude of thick menstruous Blood retained: Others say, From
Clots of Blood, or Blood concreted: Johnstonus says, They come from too great
narrowness of the Vessels.

3. From Meats then taken, cold and windy in quality, as Fruits, Custards,
Cream, cold Drink, etc.

SIGNS.
Signs are easily known from the relation of the Woman in Childbed.

PROGNOSTICS.
Hippocrates thought Women to be most afflicted with Throes at birth of their
first Child, but Experience shows that it is not an allowable Saying; few but
are more or less troubled herewith after Delivery, but commonly after three
days, of their own accord they are assuaged, unless some of the aforegoing
Causes be in fault.

CURE.
In Cure we must respect the Cause: Sennertus omits Purges; if a cold distemper
and wind offend, we must use Heaters and Carminatives, as well outwardly as
inwardly, as in Chollical pains; but they are first to be prevented, if they
may be, for which this Powder is held of great worth, given presently after the
Birth, Roots of the greater Confound, j. Peach Kernels, Nutmegs, of each ij.
Amber, ss. Ambergriese, ss. give one dram of it in Wine, or in Broth, if a
Fever be present.

If they cannot be prevented, they must be cured; the Belly must gently be
bound up, that the Uterus stir not out of its place: Clisters are to be
injected of Oil of Almonds, Cammomile, Bays, etc. that are anodine, emollient,
and carminative. Internals are, Cinnamon Water, ss. with two grains of
Amber-griese, or ss. of Bay Berries taken in Muskadel, Decoction of Vervain,
Decoction of the Grass of Pernassus, Oil of sweet Almonds, all which excel;
also Decoction of Cammomileflowers, in white Wine, which Forestus holds for a
Secret.

Riverius sets down this Powder for After-Pains, of Date-Stones and
Peach-Kernels, of each ss. Nutmegs, iv. Diamargariton calid, ij. Aniseeds, j.
Cinnamon, iij. Saffron, ss. take one Dram in White Wine and Sugar once or twice
a day: Or the following Powder excels, Seeds of Carrots, Cinnamon, of each j.
Bay Berries, Datestones, of each ss. Amber-griese, gr. iv. reduce all into a
Powder.

Topicals that help against these Torments, or After-pains, are Anodines, or
such as operate by an hidden quality.

Anodines, or the choicest of them, are, 1. An Emplaister of Tar, Grease, and
Doves-Dung, to be applied to the Region of the Kidneys. 2. An Emplaister of
Onyons boiled well in Water, wherein, 1. Line, and Cummin-seed, and
Cammomile-flowers have boiled, then being quashed together, mix therewith some
Oil and Powder of Cinnamon, to be applied to the Region of the Uterus.

Anointings also with Carminative and Anodine Oils, and Foments of Hysteric
Herbs are helpful, wherewith the Abdomen and whole region of the Uterus is to
be bathed.

Also the Skin of a Weather, being yet hot, the Weather having been newly
killed, makes mild the Pain.

Suffumigations also, are not a little useful, as of Bay Berries cast upon
Coals, the fume of which the Woman is to receive by her Privities.

Things that help by an hidden quality, are these, recorded by Johannes
Prevotius, Aetites, or the Eagles stone tied close to the Thigh, or the
Jasper-stone, or Coral so used, and the Loadstone held in the left hand.

If these pains proceed from sharp and Chollerick Humors, they may be cured as
a bilious Chollick; lenifying Julaps are to be given, and Clisters of Mallows,
Marish Mallows, Pelletory of the Wall, Linseed and Violet Leaves boiled in
Milk, or Posset Drink, adding to lbj. of the strained Liquor, Oil of sweet
Almonds, and fresh Butter, of each j. Syrup of Violets, jss.

Oil of sweet Almonds is to be taken inwardly to vj. in urgent pain.

If Blood be clottered in the Uterus, and therefrom pain be effected, it is to
be cured as Blood clottered in the Bladder, where is sufficient direction.

Sometimes pain is in the Groin, from the Uterus conglobated there; then an
Emplaister of Galbanum, and Assafoetida, with some Grains of Mosch in the
middle, is to be applied to the Navil.

XIV. The Afterbirth, After-Burden, or Secundine, is sometimes retained, and
sticks still in the Vterus, that ought to come forth with, or presently after
the Birth.

CAUSES
The Causes of it are ascribed, 1. To fears, terrors, and passions of the
Mind, that detract Nature from her work and duty, and molest her in her Center.

2. Taking cold, specially drinking cold Beer or Water, etc. that are Causes of
hard labor.

3. Aromatic Drinks, or sweet, spicy, and odoriferous things taken and smelt
to, are thought to draw the Mattice upwards, and retain it there.

4. Straitness of the mouth of the Uterus, and close closure, so that passage
of it out is impedited therefrom.

5. Or if none of these Causes, or others that cause hard labor, be present;
yet sometime the Secundine is fixed to the Womb, and so adheres to it that it is
hardly pulled away.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
The Secundine, which is only else but a membranous Cake, wherein the Child is
invested and involved, wherein are many Vessels and Rivolets that the Child
draws in Nourishment by, and Air; at time of coming forth of the birth, this
membranous Skin is broke, from motion of the Child downwards, and comes out for
the most part either with or presently after the Child; but sometimes the
Vessels of it are so bound to the Cotyledons of the Uterus, that it sticks fast
after the birth, and comes not forth, but is only broke with violence of the
coming forth of the Child; and pains in travail are thought to be chiefly from
breaking of the Vessels of the Chorion, or Secundine, from the Cotyledons of
the Uterus; and if such pains preceded not, there is fear the Secundine is
still affixt: If there be more children then one, there is so many Secundines
as there be Children.

PROG.
If it be left behind, and be not extracted till it putrify, or rot, it brings
many cruel Diseases, and direful Symptoms, communicating noisome Exhalations
to the Head and Stomach, and principal parts, causing Fevers, Convulsions,
Head-pains, Apostems, etc. which many times bring Death at last.

If it will not come forth, it will rot in time, and then it may easily be
taken forth, or will come forth of it self, if it produce not many evils in the
in terim: So dead Children have rotted in the Uterus, and all their flesh
consumed, and come out by piece-meals, the Bones staying still behind in the
Woman's Uterus, for long time after.

CURE.
Cure varies according to the Cause: If it astick fast to the Uterus, the
Matrice being open, then putting in of the Hand, being warmed, the Nails
paired, and anointed with Grease, and loosening of the Secundine by gentle
writhing of it this way and that way, lest the Uterus also be torn or pulled
away, is to be done.

Secondly, Hippocrates advises to sneezing, some Pouders being put in to the
Nostrils, and let her hold her breath, which forces a ruption of the vessels
from the violent excussion that is made by sneezing.

If these may not thus be done by reason of too strait affixion of it to the
Vterus, and weakness of the Woman, Suppuraters to make it rot sooner, are to be
used, and then it may easily be brought forth by the hand put in as aforesaid.

Among Medicines, Internals of greatest virtue and efficacy, are these that
follow, to expel the Secundine: As,

1. The Juice of Vervain, taken to j. or the Decoction of it boiled in Wine.

2. Decoction of Alisander so made.

3. Decoction of Mugwort and Featherfew.

4. Juice or Decoction of Sage.

5. This Composition or Powder, of Thyme, Centuary, Pennyroyal, of each j.
Roots of Angellica, Masterwort, sweet Chervil, and Cicely, of each j. ss. make
a Powder.

Dr. John Smith says, It is a wonderful Secret to drink the Juice of Lovage in
Wine, or Mugwort-Water, to drive out the Secundine.

Forestus speaks of the same, saying, A certain Midwife received it of a Jewish
Physician, whereof a Cyath is to be taken in Renish Wine.

Seeds of Lovage, Savin, Borax, Juice of an Onyon, and Diptamny, are commended.

Gesnerus and Augenius greatly commend the stones of a gelded Horse, taken
often in Powder, in Broth, to the weight of a Scruple.

Prevotius praises the same, but adds to them Powder of Diptamny.

Rulandus gave ss. of Oil of Juniper, with good success.

Hartman praises the Powder of Secundines, and Angelus Sala, Mercurius Vitae.

Externals are either thick and embodied substances applied, as Mugwort boiled
very soft in Water, and applied hot to the Navil and Thighs, which Rogerius
says, will also draw the Uterus after it, if not timely removed after the
Birth, and after Birth be come away.

Or Sage so applied, or Tansy applied to the Privities, is of great force, and
Lapis Aetites, which readily draws forth the Birth and Afterbirth, and Uterus
too, if not timely removed.

Or thinner, as Foments of Decoction of Bay Berries, and Leaves, with Vinegar
of Roses, of Oxe-Dung boiled in Wine.

Or Suffumiges, as that Miraldus so praises, of Marigold-flowers; which, says
he, does easily bring forth the Secundine, although the Midwife has lost her
hold.

If other Causes be in fault, as closure of the Uterus, the foregoing Foment,
and this Suffume, are very available to open it, and then the Midwife must
gently dilate the pastage more, and pluck out the Secundine that lies on an
heap at bottom of the Uterus.

Other Causes must be put away, as Fears and Sorrows: If cold be taken, we must
heat, and remove all Causes that seem to bring damage herein.

OF FEVERS.
IN these four Chapters of Fevers are many things, according to the Method and
Matter of the Ancients, as in the rest of the Chapters of the Second Part,
(Written some Years since) which all, or most of the Moderns in their Practices
have hitherto retained, with some Correction and Additions, which we have
selected as beneficially as we could: and the Readers may take these as the
most general Rule or Method in Nature; but there is great variety, we can
scarce find two exactly alike in any one Distemper: some have the Causes here
set down, and not those Signs; and some have those Signs, but cannot be cured
by that Rule, and those Medicines; and some are handled in a far different
manner from this Description; and others differ also from them: and those that
do not differ in Kind, may in Degree; Every Quartane must not be just so as
Practicks have delivered, nor always in that manner, nor is every Ague a
Tertian, or every Tertian such an one; but sometimes a Quartane turns a
Tertian, and sometimes a Tertian, a Quartane, or Quotidian. There is in one or
other, at one time or other, as much variety and difference as almost is
imaginable; some have all heat, without any sensible cold, and some have all
cold without succeeding heat; some have sometimes two fits in one day, and
other times two days without one fit: in such like respects, and as to the
Causes, they are writ somewhat defectively, but we have from our own
Observations (comprised into a Practical Method) delivered a clearer and fuller
Description of all Agues or intermitting Fevers in Latin.

No Tradition ought to be rejected as it is Tradition, but as it is not Truth;
or if so, defective or superfluous Truth.

CHAP. I.
Of a Quotidian Fever.

A Quotidian intermitting Fever, is an Ague made from putrified phlegm,
invading every day; the Greeks call it Amphimerina, and the Latins, Quotidiana
Febris, because it makes a Fit every day.

CAUSES.
Causes of Quotidian Agues is ascribed to Phlegm putrified or rotted in the
Miseraick Veins, or first Region of the Body. Others allot the place of
putrefaction in Intermitting Fevers, to be in the Vena Portae, and Bowels
nourished therefrom.

All things that cause increase of phlegm, may be cause hereof, chiefly a weak
heat of the Stomach and Bowels, cold and moist Aliments, or too great plenty of
them, together with long sleep, a Sedentary Life, Idleness, Winter time, old
Age, and Childhood, wherein it chiefly happens.

SIGNS.
Signs hereof are, 1. and chiefly, its daily invasion, and thence called a
Quotidian.

2. Signs of phlegm abounding, and a going before of such things that engendered
Phlegm. Signs of a phlegmatic or pituitous habit of Body be, a bulky fat Body, a
sluggish Disposition, and dull Senses; Dreams of Waters, and dull Actions,
white and pale color of Face, profound sleeps, weak Memory, etc.

3. From the time of its invasion, which is chiefly on Nights, which is the
worse, because that time is designed by Nature for rest and refreshment.

4. From the manner of the fit, wherein cold is not felt great in the first
fits, but increases by degrees, and comes like a cooling without shaking,
sometimes a light horror, whenas the matter is more benign, only troubles:
Heat at first appears not sharp but airy, and augments but slowly, not is it
called back with force and violence to the inward parts, as in a Tertian
Fever; and sometimes cold, sometimes heat is perceived, but with holding their
hand on them longer, in their heat sharpness is also perceived.

5. From the Urine, which in the beginning is white, thin and crude, but in the
process more thick and troubled, and often ruddy, when as the matter is
concocted.

6. From the Pulse, which in the beginning is inordinate, and inequal, weak and
slow, nor in the augmentation and increase of the Ague is the Pulse changed
much, either in celerity or strength.

7. From Sweats, which in the first fits is scarce reckonable, nor is it much
afterward.

8. From Symptoms: Where observe, 1. that Thirst is not intense, but very
little or none. 2. Difflation and puffing up of the Middriff. 3. Decoloration
of the Face, which is not red, but duskish, and puffed up. 4. Their Vomitings,
Stools, sleeping and inappetence, argue the redundancy of Phlegm. 5. They do not
cease in a perfect intermission, for sometimes the fit lasts twelve hours, and
sometimes twenty four hours, and it appears continual.

DIFFERENCES.
It differs from variety of the Nature of phlegm putrified, for if phlegm be
glazen, or vitreat, or acid, then they have invasions with rigor, and the sick
is Feverish and cold both together; because half the offending Humor is
putrified, whence comes the heat, and the other half is not putrified, and
thence cold shaking molests, and this is called, Epiala Febria.

2. If phlegm be salt, it stirs up a kind of hot Fever with thirst.

3. If sweet, they are made sleepy.

4. If acid, hungry.

5. If unsavory or insipid, without taste, they want appetite.

6. Thick, and then the Urine is white and thick, but afterward grows redder
with a Sediment.

PROGNOSTICS.
This Fever is very seldom, and some deny it to be, saying, That Fevers
invading every day, are either double Tertians, or treble Quartanes; and the
reason it is most seldom of intermitting Fevers, is, because phlegm is scarcely
ever inflamed.

2. It never invades young Men, or such as are hot, dry, and Chollerick by
Nature, but those that are of a moist and phlegmatic Temper, that use Drinking,
Bathing, and Idleness; old Men and Children are most taken with Quotidian Agues.

3. It lasts long, sometimes it is finished in forty days, sometimes not
before three or four months. 1. Because of the thickness and contumacity of the
Morbisick Humor. 2. Because there is a defect of heat.

4. It is dangerous, because from the Liver and Stomach being illaffected,
therefrom a Dropsy, Cachexy, Lethargy, or the like, may arise; and by reason
of the Stomach offended, there often happens Swoonding; it easily obstructs the
Spleen and Bowels in old Men and Children.

5. We may judge of it, according as we see concoction by the Urine, according
to the strength of Nature maturely acting for its expulsion, and according to
the quality of the matter; and other indications showing the shortness or
length of the Ague.

CURE.
Cure is performed, 1. by preparation, which is done, first, by opening of the
first passages, and loosening the Body; as by Clisters, or a Vomit to clear and
free the Stomach: Some, for this purpose, advise to Radish-Vomites; some highly
extol Aqua Benedicta, for extinguishing the Ague also; yet premise
strengtheners of the Stomach before evacuating and purging of it: Others advise
the use of Stomachical Corroboraters to be after Purging of it by Vomit, which
is most generally liked.

2. By Concocters of phlegm, and a thick matter, that have an attenuating and
cutting force, and fit the matter for expulsion; preparers of phlegm are these,
which also by a propriety resist the Fever, and open the Conduits ordained by
Nature, for the passage of such Excrementitious Humors, viz. Squills, or this
Oxymel, Simple Oxymel taken to ij. in quantity for once, or a Compound Oxymel
of Smallage, Mother of Time, Seseli of Peteponesus, with Aromaticalls, or an
Apozem of Fumitaty, Bettony, Agrimony, Mirobalans, Calamint, Smallage, and
Rhue-Seeds.

3. Purge, the Humor being thus prepared, with Phlegmagogues, Agarick;
Antimonial and Tartarial Pills are most commendable.

4. If salt pituit be the cause, some open the Liver-Vein of the right Arm,
else not.

5. Diuretics, and Sudoristicks, Sassafras, a Decoction of Cammomile-Flowers,
and Wormwood, or a Decoction of China, and Guaicum, continued for twenty five
days, is praised by Zachully Lusitanus.

The Salt of Masterwort given in weight of five Grains, or a. of Salt of
Wormwood taken in Tobacco-Water, or decoction of Camomile in White Wind before
the fit, is applauded by Ernestus.

Lastly, The Stomach and Bowels must be strengthened, a Cerot of Oil of
Quinces, and Wax, with Aromaticks, or Cataplasms of Mint and Wormwood, are to
be applied to the Stomach; Water, Cheese, Milk, Fish, Olives, unripe and
corruptive Fruits, Custards; reesed, salted, and Meats of ill digestion, and
the like, are not to be eaten, but Aromatized Meats, and Flesh Roasted;
Bisket-Bread, and Wine, are most wholesome.

See more in the Chapter of a Bastard Tertian, or Hemitritaean Ague, whose
curation little varies from this.

CHAP. II.
Of an Hemitrice Fever, or Semi-tertian.

AN Hemitritaeus is a Compound Fever, made of a continual Quotidian and an
intermitting Tertian, having a permixtion of Phlegm and Choler, and has its
continuity from Phlegm, and its horror from the intermitting Tertian, whence
they are called Horrid Fevers; for if it was made of two Continuals, it would
not be partaker of Horror, and if of two Intermittents, it would not be
continual.

CAUSE.
The Cause is a mixed Portion of Phlegm and Choler putrified in the Vena Cava,
and Meseraick-Veins, which sometimes are equal in quantity; sometimes Choler
super-abounds, and sometimes the greater part is Phlegm; yellow Choler
putrifies without the Vessels, and thence comes the intermission; and Phlegm, or
a pituitous matter within the Vessels, and thence has its continuity; or an
intermitting Quotidian may be joined with a continual Quartane, and both are
called Hemitritaeans; the Antecedent Cause is attributed to obstruction, whence
the Humors be prohibited going forth, and being so retained, putrify.

2. They arise from inflammation of some Bowel, as of the Liver, Guts, Stomach,
and Vicine Bowels, whence a Symptomatical Fever joined with a Continual
Tertian, causes a kind of Hemitritaean; sometimes they are inordinate from Pus
being made; sometimes because they are partakers of malignity, which are
sometimes popular.

SIGNS.
Signs are mean twixt a Tertian and Quotidian; for its invasion is with horror,
which is greater then that of a Quotidian, and less then that of a Quartane;
and its manner of invasion is twofold, for either two fits come together in the
beginning, and invade the Patients both at once, or else come severally, and if
Phlegm exsuperates, and be the more predominant, there is Horrors and Coldness
of the Ex^remities, then Choler overcoming, there is heat, and the Fever
seems to come to its State; there is vomiting of Choler, Rigor, Sweat and
Thirst, if Choler be more regent and overpouring.

The fits come also, one on one day, and two on another, because the Quotidian
causes a fit every day, and the Tertian every other day.

If there be Malignity present, it is known by its proper Signs, and if it
arises from inflammation of the Bowels, that may be discerned by Signs of those
Bowels inflamed.

PROGNOSTICS.
This Fever is dangerous; 1. Because it makes an ill Stomach, a Lethargy, and
Syncope; a Delirium, watching, thirst, dryness of the Tongue; it is Cronical,
by reason of Phlegm, and may be prolonged to six or seven Months, and then end
in Hecticks, Chollicks, or Fluxes of the Belly; it hurts the Nervous parts, and
is difficultly cured.

CURE.
Cure is varied according to the concition of the Fever: for if it be
Legitimate, wherein there is an equality of Choler and Phlegm putrified, then
Medicines meet for a Tertian and Quotidian are to be mixed, and equally divided.

Vomits, of the Root of Azarum, which equally purges Choler and Phlegm, given
in Powder to ij. or Mountain-Dwarf, Cherry of Ciesner, to six or seven in
number taken, and Broth taken after them, so does Juice of Tobacco taken from
j. to ij.

If Choler be predominant, Medicines more proper for a Tertian; and that
evacuate Choler; are to be given; If Phlegm, those for a Quotidian are to be
used in greater quantity: Agarick is good for Purging; Alterers also must be
accommodated to the (...) of the Humors, either equally mixed, or either one
super-regent.

If it arises from fault of any Bowel inflamed, that is diligently to be
considered, and cured before the Fever that depends thereupon (...).

If there be malignity mixed therewith, or it is Epidemical, we must resist that
by Alexiteries, by Aurum Potabile, by Angelica-Roots, Masterwort, Sorrel-Seeds,
Tormentil-Roots, Camphir, etc. to respect all intentions, we must have
Medicines have diverse qualities.

Specificals for this as well as other Agues, both Simple and Compound, are
Cinkfoil or Five-leaved-Grass (which given to j. in Powder for thrice before
the fits, is an infallible Cure) Featherfew, whose original name was Febrifuge,
from its virtue in driving away Agues, taken in Powder, or Decoction, before
the fits; Rhue or Herb-de-grace, Calamine, Oil of Myrrh, Salt of Tartar, of
Masterwort and Wormwood, Roots of Masterwort, Onions, Garlic, Laserpice,
Natural Balsam, Saint- John's Wort, Trefoil, or three-leaved-Grass, the greater
Saxifrage of Mathiolus, Meadsweet, or Queen of the Meadows, etc. which are to
be taken either in Decoction, or Powder, to a sufficient quantity, for three or
four times before the fits: For better advice herein, see the Chapters of a
Tertian and Quotidian Ague, of which this is only a composition.

CHAP. III.
Of Quartane Agues, and Tertian.

EVery Ague is a Fever, but every Fever is not an Ague; every Ague has Fits,
but every Disease that has Fits is not an Ague. Every sickness that has
Periodick Fits, with chilness and heat supervening, may be an Ague, but unless
they come every fourth day, not a Quartane-Ague; the name of a thing is only a
titular Attribute, and does not constitute the Nature, but the Nature the Name;
but every Disease that may first be proved an Ague, and secondly, to come every
fourth day, may properly be called a Quartane-Ague; but the extreme of one
kind, is the beginning of another, and some Quartanes are sometimes Tertians,
and some Tertians sometimes Quartanes, and then perhaps another while
Quotidians; neither are all Agues Quotidians, Quartanes, Haemitriteans and
Tertians, nor all Distempers that have Quotidian, Quartane, Haemitritean or
Tertian day-fits, Agues.

But the nature of the Disease, as well as its manner of proceeding, must go
to the making of a thing; for some are Aguish to day, and otherwise distempered
to morrow; and some are otherwise distempered to day, and Aguish to morrow; and
we must distinguish betwixt Essential Sicknesses, and Accidental Symptoms:
Neither are all Tertians hot Agues, nor all Quartanes or Quotidians cold; but
some participate of the nature of both, and some of neither: and some of one,
at one time, and of another at another: nor is Nature tied up to one Rule or
Method, for some Agues are Symptomatical to other Distempers, and other
Distempers are often Symptomatical to Agues; sometimes Agues cause
Labefactation of the Inward Bowels, and sometimes Labefactation of the Inward
Bowels brings Agues; and sometimes they mutually depend upon each other; and
sometimes Agues are without Labefactation of the Inward Bowels, and
Labefactation of the Inward Bowels without Agues; the quality corrupting is
more significant here, then the quantity corrupted.

Sometimes outward Causes bring Agues without inward, and sometimes Inward
Causes produce Agues without the progress of Outward, Obvious, and
Procatarctick Causes; but commonly Agues are made by some outward Cause,
operating upon the inward, and where in any Bowel, there is a previous
consimiler Disposition, a slight outward Cause does more, then in a firm
constitution of the Inward Bowels great outward Causes may do; unless the
Patient is fit to receive the operation of the Agent, and the Agent in all
things able and apposite to operate upon the Patient, little or nothing is
done: Some catch Agues, specially Quartanes, at fall of the Leaf, commonly by
leaving off Garments, standing in Water, or eating Apples, or cold Drink and
Water, or otherwise by taking cold; and some do all these, and they do cause in
them another Distemper different from these, and perhaps from each other; and
others wade in cold Water, drink cold Water, eat Apples, go naked Breasted,
Wet-shod, etc. and feel no harm at all; and some are so by Nature, more or
less, and some by custom, and some by both; and he that will know Truth, all
the Truth, and no other or more then the Truth, must come to Critical
Distinctions, for we shall rarely find two alike; yet commonly they that have
Agues alike every fourth day (which the Vulgar call Third-day-Agues, not
reckoning the two Fit-dayes, but one) have commonly Symptoms more alike one
another, then like those that have Agues every other or, each day: And as these
things we have written differ one from another, so some other things we have
not written may differ from these.

And there be many things to be considered: the course of the Stars at each
man's first sicking, and the alteration of them; and that Planet that was upon
the Ascendent at a Nativity, has great signification; and the Moon which
causes great alteration, greatly alters in Place and Aspect. Also the natural
constitution of our Bodies, Clymates, and Soil, Age, Diet, season of the Year,
Gender, and other accidents are various to diverse persons, and so the Diseases
vary; but we can hardly foresee what a Disease will be by any of these, except
by Astrology, and that is sometime uncertain.

Nor for the Cure of Agues is one Method or Medicine alike successful, or at
all successful to all kinds, or to all of one kind; but that that cures this
Quartane, may not cure the other Quartane. But quoad intermissionem, all having
affinity, may be cured by one; but Quotidians for the most part are more
stubborn then Tertians, and Quartanes then either; yet some Quartanes are less
contumacious then some Quotidians, and some Quotidians shorter then some
Tertians; yet commonly such a Medicine as Camphir hung about the Neck, or
Jesuits Bark, or Quinque Fool took inwardly, will cure more Quotidians or
Tertians then Quartanes, yet not quoad Tertians or Quotidians; but as they are
from a thinner Humor, lying more overly, and less pertinaciously seated in the
Bowels; neither are all Tertians cureable, nor all Quartanes incureable, some
die of either, but most of neither; sometime a Medicine that cures a Tertian,
will not cure in another Tertian, and yet cures a Quartane; Vomiting is more
proper in Tertians, yet if the Stomach be offended, more in Quartanes; it may
be better there, then in Tertians where that is not; sometimes they are
easiliest at the first Fits, sometimes at the last, when the Fits are small and
gentle, and the Seeds of the infected matter are almost dead.

Bleeding is not good for an Ague, quatenus an Ague, but in every Disease where
the Body is hot, the Arteries beat, Color is great, and Diet has been
generous, Nihil non obstante, it is good; so is purging, if there be fit
indications for it in any Disease, and if not, it is not good in any, which
includes Agues, as every greater does its less: Sweating opens the pores of the
Skin, and melts by the heat that causes it, thick Humors, and expells them by
the Habit and Circumference of the Body; therefore good in Agues, especially
when Nature spontaniously offers it, for we are Natures Servants to observe her
Dictates, and as every like applies to its like, and shuns its enemy, so she
endeavors to retain what is friendly and homogenious to her, and to expel what
is adverse and heterogenious, unless in striving to expel one, through weakness
of the part, or a depraved habit, the other follows. The best Sweaters are Holy
Thistle, Antimonium, Diaphoreticum, Salt of Carduus, of Wormwood, Spirit of
Salt, Treacle-Water, Tincture of Saffron, Featherfew, etc. But some are
general, as Sweaters, and special, as Sweaters for Agues.

CHAP. IV.
Of Hectical Fevers, and others.

VVHere-ever there is a Fever equal, not violent, seated in the habit of the
Body, I suppose it proper to be called an Hectic. The question in most
Diseases is chiefly what one or two or three Symptoms do of necessity concur to
make it properly so called, without which it is improper so to call it; for
some have lingering Fevers with some sensible fits, and some have violent
Fevers without them; some are almost constantly distempered with heat like
Fevers, and yet have now and than cold fits, like Agues; some that have
Feverish Distempers, have no other concomitant Symptoms of an Hectic; and
some have the wasting and dryness ascribed to Hecticks, and yet no sensible
Fever, and if not sensible, not to be called so; and some have a thirst
without dryness, and dryness without thirst; and some seem dry in one part or
particular, and moist in another part or particular; so that Nature varies
somewhat in all, and much in most: and almost all Sickness has some changes,
but scarce any all; neither is wasting of the Lungs always attended with a
wasting of the Flesh; or if it be, it is not always in the same measure and
manner; nor is the wasting of the Lungs alone the cause of the wasting of the
Flesh, but the wasting of other Bowels also may waste the Flesh; but it is
sometimes hard to say whether a part wasted causes wasting of the Body; or
that that caused wasting of the Body, caused also the wasting of that part or
parts: Nor are all Hecticks (if it is proper to call any so) mild at first, and
hotter in process of time, but some naturally grow cooler, that used to be hot;
and some naturally grow hot, some by fits, and some more constantly, some less,
and some more, that used to be always cool: There is scarce any thing, a
staidjudgmented-man and well read, can imagine, but he may find or read of in
some: There is nothing may happen to all, but every thing happens to some;
every thing was ordained to keep its order, as well to the frequency, as
violence of its actions; but from the one extreme of a thing to the other, is
much variety; and complicated Causes produce complicated Effects: All things
were contrived methodically of GOD, but fall out in an accidental and various
manner, as to our Knowledge, and merely contingent, as to our Foreknowledge.

Some Hecticks are incurable, and some be curable; and amongst those one is
cured the first month, another the second, and so onward; one the first year,
another in the second, another in the third, and so may the variety of Nature
in other things be guessed; one is cured by Nature, another by Medicine; one by
a Method of Physic, another with one or two Specificals; and of these, one
with Snails, another with Frogs boiled in Milk or Broth; One with Gellies,
another with Emulsions, and some with Syrup of Walnuts, and some with Asses;
and some use all these things, and are not cured; and some none, and yet are;
yet GOD commonly appoints the Effects, by ordering the Cause: But in many
Medicines we give, we are not sure which does it, or whether Nature might not
have done the like, or whether this and the other cured alike, had their
Disease caused alike in the inward parts.

And in this manner does Nature proceed in other Sicknesses; and as these vary
from one another, so probably may others vary from these; but we endeavored to
write all such things as experience, and men may prove them by what they shall
see clearly and plainly in their Practices. What we writ from Authors, may be
justified by their Authority amongst Physicians. Multi multa sciunt, sed nulli
omnia.

OF Diseases and Affects OF THE HAIR: And of OUTWARD ERUPTIONS.
THese Chapters of outward Ails and Affects being writ in the year 1658, and
1659, We have experienced and read many Experiences since, of the variety of
these Affects, and many things differing from these; yet We thought good to
put these to public View, being drawn from the best of the Moderns, as
Sennertus, Platerus, Johnstonus, Rondeletius, Paraeus, etc. and writ from
oculate Experience in one or other, by one or other.

Diverse Chapters are omitted, that are in many Practical Authors; and most of
those the Moderns followed the Ancients too superstitiously in, and were more
deceived than in these we wrote of.

It is supposed few will buy this Book, that have not other Practick Books by
them, wherein are the Chapters that may be here omitted: And many of those
Books are wanting as to these Diseases and Affects We have writ of, so that
they may be commodiously compared and joined.

It is supposed that most will read the first part of this Book first, so that
these Diseases may be read with the better understanding: What we ^ound
defective in one, We supplied out of another; and where We found any thing
superfluous, We omitted it.

We strove to digest all into a clear Method, with Heads and Distinctions; and
wrote (besides the best Medicines extant in Authors) diverse of our own using
and experiencing.

It must not be supposed We can write by one how all must be, there is such
variety; therefore if these be never so truly writ, yet the Practitioner must
look to find many outward Ails differing from these, and from each other.

We are now in a little differing Opinion (in some of these) concerning the
Causes, as to what we was when they were first writ: But the first part of this
Book will give the Reader insight thereinto: having since studied more
Philosophy and Astrology.

CHAP. I.
Of Defluvium Capillorum, or a general falling off of Hairs.

DEFINITION.
A Defluvium Pilorum, or Capillorum, is a sheding of Hair, from Head, Beard,
and all parts of the Body, without danger; some here and there remaining very
thin and sprinklingly, from an Hectical state of the Cut is Capillata, or Skin
of the Head.

CAUSE.
Cause, 1. is want of nourishment, as in Tabids or Consumptions. 2. Laxity of
the Skin from Humors, or the Serosity of a Pituitous and Chollerick Matter, or
an hot and moist Distemper; or Bathes, Sweats and Unguents may make the Skin
loose; sometimes scalding makes Hair fall off.

SIGN.
The Skin is thin from a Consumptive State, or loose from infinuating of
Humors there, and then though the Hair falls off, yet it is not extenuated, but
from defect of Aliment it is extenuated; there went before Causes of Emptiness
and Tabes, and often it attends Malignant Fevers.

DIFFERENCE.
It differs from Alopecia and Ophiasis, from a larger signification.

PROGNOSTIC.
In Consumptions it is hardly cured, but is an evil Sign, specially with a
Diarrhaea.

DIET.
Diet must be Analeptick, and Restorative, to make good Humors.

CURE.
1. In Consumptive or Tabid states, we may neither Purge nor Bleed.

2. Topics must heat and bind very moderately, that Nutriment by them may be
brought to the part; too great heat may resolve too much, and too great
Astriction repel Nourishment: a Laviment of Strengtheners for the Head, of
Capillary Herbs, is first to be used; for Fomentation, after the Head is shaved
and rubbed, thickners of the Skin, if it be made very thin, as Oil of the
Mastick Tree, of Mirtles, of Burdock-Seed, are good. 2. From Laxity of the
Skin, or pravity of ill Humors that are inimical to the Roots of the Hair; 1.
Purging and Bleeding are allowed. 2. Some gentle Discutients.

Medicines that generally help, may be divided into such as, 1. Hinder the
falling off of Hair, as Juice of Milfoil, or a Lee of Wall-Rhue. 2. Others
restore it, and make it grow again, as an Emplaister of Lineseed and its Oil,
with Flower boild to a consistence to spread upon Leather all over the Head,
for three days or more, with renewing; Labdanum boild to an Oynment in Oil,
Sheeps Suet, and Honey-Water: Many more are set down in the Chapter of
Alopecia, which may be referred hither.

If the falling off of Hair be from a Scald, Oil of Tartar, per Deliquium, to
wash the place, used warm for seven or eight or more days, is commended.

CHAP. II.
Psilothra, or Medicines taking away superfluous Hair.

PSilothra, or a taking away of Hairs where they grow indecently and out of due
order and place, is done by Medicines, having a force Septick, Caustic, or by
Propriety.

1. By a force Septick or Caustic; the Juice of Tithimale, anointed, makes the
Hair to fall off; a little bag of quick Lime, two parts Ormakes one part first
poudered, then tied up in a little Rag, boild in Water, and the part rubbed
therewith (the Hairs being first cut off) does the like; Bay Salt in fine
Powder, reduced into an Emplaister, with Gum of old Ivy Trunks and fasting
Spittle, does take away Hairs by a Caustic force, though more weak then the
former; Aqua Fort is, by its Caustic force, if it may be suffered alone, is
the strongest.

2. By Propriety, the Ashes of Horse-Leeches mixed with Vinegar; and the part
rubbed therewith, where we would not have Hair to grow, causes both a falling
off of the Hair, and also hinders the growing of it again; so the Blood of a
Bat so takes it away by the Roots, or poisons the place that it will never more
bear Hair; but whether clear from a Caustic force or no may be questioned; and
it may be thought to do it by a bad quality in it; as also the Ashes of
Horse-Leeches, an Ointment of Pigeons Dung, Gum Hederae, or Gum of the Ivy
Tree, and Oil, does it most innocently by a Propriety: if weaker will not
avail, which are first to be tried, we must proceed to stronger; and if through
using these hot inflaming sharp Medicines, inflammation be raised, we must cool
with convenient Ointments of Lead, Ceruss, Camphir, and with Opium, etc. as
need shall require.

CHAP. III.
Of Baldness.

BAldness is a defect of Hair from old age, or a privation of it from want of
good Humors, or an Hectic dry state, or fuliginous Excrements, chiefly
happening in the forepart of the Head, the Skin there sticking to the bare Bone.

CAUSE.
Cause is in old men, and others too, from defect of Aliment, a dry Distemper
of the Brain, and hairy faculty of the Skin; therefore whatever things do dry,
may effect it, as Watchings, Cares, Venery, etc. Hence Eunuchs, because they
are more moist, never are bald, nor are Women commonly so bald as Men, because
not of so dry a Temperature.

2. An hard consistence of the flesh. And 3. Fuliginous Excrements do seldomer
cause it.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
It Is best discovered by the sight, and the Causes too, and by the pregress of
drying Causes.

PROGNOSTIC.
It Is hard to cure it, yet there is hopes to stay its spreading greater.

CURE.
Cure, Is first by a good Diet, wherein we must avoid all salt sharp binding
things; exercising of Venery is very bad, and also Wine. 2. Respecting the
Cause, correct bad Aliment. 3. Medicines moistning are to be used for dryness.
4. Attracters of the good Humors mixed with Astringents to fortify the Skin,
both bringing a good Nutritive Humor, and making good the faculty of the Skin,
producing Hair.

An Unguent of Labdanum, Oil of Mastick, and Puple of Fenugreek-Seeds may serve
to these intentions; cutting of the Hair often is very good, for so being
shorter, it requires the less moisture, and grows thicker.

Medicines by a Propriety avail against Baldness, and bring again Hairs where
they are wanting; as Froath of the Sea is said, by washing of a bald Head
decently and comelity, to deck it with Hairs; the Offscouring of a Whetstone
mixed with Oil, is good; the Juice of Onions, anointed for many times together
(in the Sun, say some) upon the bald place, is very effectual to bring the Hair
again; the Roots of Jacinths are said to procure Hair in Beardless Men; as also
that the Ashes of Southernwood, mixed with Oil of Radish or Organy, will quickly
cause the Beard to grow.

See for more Remedies that may be very available here, in the Chapter of
Alopecia.

CHAP. IV.
Of Ophiasis.

OPhiasis, is a falling off of the Hair Obliquely, retaining a certain Figure,
and therefore called so from Ophis a Serpent, which it imitates in creeping,
proceeding from the hinder part of the Head in the latitude of not above two
Fingers, creeping in two Heads to each Ear, sometimes even to the Forehead, and
there the two divided Heads sometimes do meet, the Hair still growing betwixt
them, and on either side of them. Moreover Ophiasis possesses altogether the
Head, is more familiar to Children, and disposed to the Leprosy; Ophiasis also
often ceases spontaneously of its own accord, all which happen not so in
Alopecia, though the Causes differ not; and they are both to be cured after one
way and Method, and by the same Medicines; and therefore refer you to the
Chapter of Alopecia.

CHAP. V.
Of Platting of the Hair, of Cleaving of the Hair, of Worms in the Hair.

1. Of Platting the Hair.
PLica, is a folding or complication of the Hair into Tufts or Locks, risen
from a matter unprofitable to nourish the Hairs, troubling Men and Horses, and
bringing along with it many Symptoms.

CAUSE.
Cause is guessed to be an Alimentary Juice carried to the Roots of the Hair,
offending both in quantity and quality, to which being communicated, an
infection from a peculiar Vice in the place, Air, and Waters, and comes
hereditarily.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
The Hair Tufts, pains infest the Joints and Bones; there be convulsive
wreathings, plenty of Lice, and the Toe Nails are black and rough, like Goats
Horns.

PROGNOSTIC.
If the Platting be cut off, the poisonous quality which was before dispersed in
the Hairs creeps in again, and the forces are more oppressed; if there be no
pain, it is more hopeful, because then we may guess absence of the Humor, and
that it is spent in the Hair; yet we have little hope, unless by foreseeing the
Cause, the cutting off of the Tufts that soak up the Sweating Humor sometime
bring dangerous effects.

CURE.
Evacuation by Bleeding and Catharticks, are useless, and are likely to
irritate more the Humor, the Cure is hidden; some use Decoction of Barefoot;
some have been cured by Bathing, which caused a certain roughness, after which
the Hairs were cut off, and they were clearly delivered.

2. Of Cleaving of the Hairs.
This is much like the former, the ends of the Hairs cleaving together,
occasioned from some adust Humors, and is curable, a good and regular Diet
being kept; that Humor being purged by Black Helebore, Senna, Epithimum, Lapis
Lazuli, etc. that Purge; Atrabilis, and the Head bathed with Decoctions of
Emolient things.

3. Of Worms in the Hair.
Tinea is a Disease, wherein the ends of the Hairs are eaten by Worms, and fall
off in peice-meals, and so greatly shortened.

CAUSE.
The Cause is in the nourishment of the Hair, which by heat is turned into
Worms.

SIGN.
1. We may discern (though hardly from their smallness) little Worms sticking
in the end of them, which are described by few.

2. The Hairs are made shorter, and break away by bits.

3. The Hair is infected with an Ashey Color.

CURE.
Universals premised, they are killed by Decoction of the greater Nettle Seed
in Vinegar; Also by Decoction or Juice of Scabious, the lesser Centuary, or
Southernwood, to which a Portion of Vinegar may be put, and the Hair therewith
be washed and fomented.

CHAP. VI.
Of Alopecia.

DEFINITION.
ALopecia is a general falling off of the Hair from all parts, differing from
Ophiasis in figure, and a Desluvium by quantity, made from a prave and
corrupted Humor, eroding the roots of the Hair.

SUBJECT.
Subject is the Head, Beard, and Eyebrows, and all other hairy parts of the
Body.

CAUSE.
Cause is a Vice of the Humor, salt, pituitous, adust and putrified; produced
from a more hot Liver, and ill habit of the Brain, and eroding the roots of the
Hair; eating of bad Nourishment, as Mushrooms, etc. also may produce it.

Also sharpness of an humor, and dryness of the pores, looseness of their roots
from the outward skin being made dead, and the hairy faculty fails, because of
bad nourishment, and the roots being eaten up.

SIGNS.
It keeps one certain figure. 2. The Hair generally falls off. 3. The skin
pricked, the Blood will be watery. 4. Sometimes it waxes not red by rubbing. 5.
The Hairs from the Beard, Eyebrows, Arm-holes, etc. do fall off, as well as
from the Head. 6. It possesses any Age.

DIFFERENCES.
Differences as to it self, are taken from the Humors, which are shown by the
color of the skin of the Head: As,

1. Whiteness of it shows the occupying and redundancy of a phlegmatic Humor.

2. Pale yellow color of it shows Choler.

3. Black shows Melancholy.

4. Scurf and Itch shows the saltness of phlegm.

5. Diet generating such Humors also went before.

Differences of the falling off of Hair are diverse; it differs from Ophiasis in
figure, not in Cause. See the Chapter of Ophiasis.

2. From a falling off of the Hair; for there the Hair falls off not so
generally, and chiefly from the Head alone, from penury of Aliment.

3. It differs from badness, for that happens chiefly to old Men, from want of
nourishment, also from dryness, and looseness of the Hairy Skin, and a
deficiency in the retentive faculty of it.

4. It differs from that falling off of Hairs that is made in Leprosies, for
there, besides general notes of the Leprosy, be Wheals and crusty Scabs and
Scurf both in the Head and Chin.

5. From the French POX, for then the Hair soonest falls from the Eyebrows and
Beard; many Symptoms to show the French POX, are present.

PROGNOSTICS.
In general, it is hard to cure, but worst, if, 1. It happens to old Age. 2. If
the Skin be fat, thick, and smooth, and wholly peeled. 3. If by rubbing, it wax
not red, and by pricking, sends forth Water. 4. If it follow Elephantiasis or
the French POX.

2. It Is better, and there is more hopes of Cure, if it be made, 1. In young
and flourishing Ages. 2. If it fell off suddenly from the aforegoing of some
acute Diseases, and be fresh. 3. If it be made from Whoredom only, not
Venerous nor Leprous. 4. If the place by chafing or somenting suddenly wax red.
5. If the bordering extremities of the Head begin to send forth Hair again,
some still remaining.

CURE.
1. We must respect Cachochymy, or a common corruption of Humors generally;
here we must use various Pargers, and strong, as the variety of the Humors
most abounding require; Galen praises Pills of Collocinthis and Scammony.

2. Letting Blood also, specially in Pnlethory, and redundancy of a Serous
Blood; some after opening the Cephallick Vein in the Arm, advise a Vein of the
Forehead to be opened, and the Skin of the Head, after rubbing, to be pricked in
various places, and Leeches to be set to suck out the vicious Blood.

3. Also for Evacuation sake, Apophlegmatisms, Masticatories and Errhines are
useful.

1. Topics; Here, 1. we must repel the Humor while it is in fluxion. 2. Digest
it, being impact in the Skin, for which we must use Medicines of thin parts and
hot, but not too dry; also we must diligently beware, least by the use of too
hot things, the Skin be burnt and dried, and nourishment will be discussed and
consumed; more moist and liquid Medicines are to be used at first, and
continued, while we perceive they have made some alteration in the Skin, as
Bathes, Oils, Ointments, etc. that open the Pores, melt and let out thick and
viscous Humors, and add nourishment to the Skin and Hairy faculty; these by
way of precept.

Medicines are such as, 1. Prevent its falling off, as Ashes of the Roots of
Reeds, or Sugar-Cane with Vinegar; an Unguent of Labdanum, and Bears Grease,
Juice of Mallows, and the Ashes of the Kernels of Wallnuts mixed with Red Wine,
Juyces of Quinces, Pelletory and Carduus.

2. Restore it again being fallen off; among such, most excellent is,

1. The Juice of an Onion. 2. The Ashes of Asphodel, with Ducks Grease,
commended by Galen. 3. Honey-Water. 4. An Ointment of Oil of Tartar, Honey and
Ox-Suet. 5. Mice Dung, with the Ashes of Wasps and Hazel-Nuts burnt, and
Vinegar of Roses brought to an Ointment. 6. Oil of Frogs, and of the Yolks of
Eggs; with the Brain of an Hair made also into an Ointment. 7. Many good
Medicines, but of less note are made of Maidenhair, Southern-wood,
Male-Asphodel, Oil of the Kidney, Bean of Malacca, of the Kernels of Peaches
and Wallnuts, and of bitter Almonds, Froath of the Sea, Watercresses; also an
Ointment of the Froath of the Roots of the Elm Tree boild in Wine, and Oil of
Frogs, with Powder of Bees, to bring Hair again suddenly, is commended.

Among Authors these are extolled.

Monavius extols Labdanum.

Johnstonus commends an Ointment made of the Ashes of Bears Hairs, and Oil of
the Mastick Tree.

Dioscorides, Oil of Euphorbium.

Forestus found a Liniment of Bees-Ashes, and Oil of Mirtles, Emplaisters of
Bees, of Flies beaten with Turpentine, the Liquor of Snails, the place first
sharply rubbed, the Fat of Green Frogs, Goats-Dung, and Mice burnt to Ashes,
and VValnut-shels burnt with Honey, to be very effectual.

Johannes Baptista commends the Ashes of Bees, and Mice-dung, mixed with Oil of
Roses, to an Ointment.

Nostredamus praises an Ointment of the Ashes of Bees, Swans blood and Honey.

Lebotius, The Excrements of a red Haired Man, distilled into a Water, to wash
the part.

Others commends, the Fat of Frogs used for Unction, after the use of a Lee of
the Ashes of Frogs, first to the part, wherewith Hairs are produced every
where, even in those that are Lepers; and the Ashes of Nigella-Seeds, with
Goldsmiths Water, wherewith they that have been made bald from Quicksilver,
have been recovered.

Bees, VVasps, Flies, Frogs, Mice and Snails, their Fat, Ashes, or Excrements,
are most commended by the later Physicians.

And left, when the Hair comes again, it should turn white, Nostredamus advises
often to wash the place with the Milk of a Bitch.

CHAP. VII.
Of Medicines hindering the growth of superfluous Hair.

THis succeeds to Psilothra, or Medicines that take away superfluous Hair; and
sometime these Medicines that hinder the coming forth of Hair too thick, or in
inconvenient places, may be used before Psilothra, the Hair not yet being
grown; for if it be grown, then Medicines taking it away, or Psilothra, are to
be used, and after those, these that hinder the regeneration of the Hair again,
after it is taken away; to both these intentions (if the Hair be already sprung
up) as we said of Psilothra Medicines, the Blood of a Bat, and the Ashes of
Horsleeches mixed with Vinegar, do both take away the Hairs by the roots, so as
they will never grow more in that part: those do it rather by a sceptick
quality, or poisonous inimical force.

But Medicines that only hinder the regeneration of superfluous Hairs, do it
by a cold and dry force, because they thicken the skin, and repel Nourishment,
as is an Ointment of Ceruse and Henbane: Or this, recited by Primrose, of the
Blood of Frogs, Sumach, Terra Sigillata, po^der them all, and being equalized
in weight, mix them with Vinegar and Juice of Henbane.

Dioscorides says, If they that have the Hair of their Eyelids come off, do
bathe them with Juice of Fumitary, and Gum Tragacanth, they will never grow
again.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Curling, or coloring the Hair, to take away gray Hair, etc.

1. Of Curling the Hair.
THe Hair is made to curl, if it be wet in Sallet Oil, and rubbed with
Hartshorn, or they both may be mixed into form of a Liniment, and so used
together; also to wash the Hair in a Decoction of the Root of Dwarf-Elder, is
said to make it to curl.

2. To make the Hair yellow.
Medicines that have a dying faculty, and of a yellow color, do this; a
washing of the Head with Decoction of Rhubarb, of the Root of Box and
Chelidone, with Saffron, is effectual; washed with a Lixive, or Lee of the
ashes of the Wood of the Barbery Tree, is very effectual to turn the Hair
yellow. A Lee of the ashes of old Colworts, with shavings of the Box-Tree,
Liquorish, and Saffron, the Decoction of Broom-flowers also, and of the yellow
flowers of Mullein, do the same; as also Citron Peels, Water and Oil of Honey,
Decoction of Alkanet-Roots, and the like.

These and suchlike Medicines are chiefly required whenas the Hair grows g^ay,
or whenas its color is meet to be changed into another.

3. Gray Hairs, or Gray Headed.
Canities is a changing of the Hair to white, which oftenest happens through
old Age, but sometimes is greatly furthered by Griefs, Sorrow, solicitude of
Mind, and Cares, which be the efficient Causes of it.

The material Cause is, a pituitous Humor coupling with a fuliginous matter,
not much adust.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK are discerned best by seeing.

PROGNOSTICS.
The Cause may be taken away, or hindered, though the Affect may not; many that
have had their Hair changed in color after their falling into some Disease,
being recovered of that Disease, and their Body restored to health, their Hair
afterward also has come to its natural color again.

CURE.
After respect had to the Cause, we must strive to make the Hair change from
its gray color; that is done chiefly by Paints, by Astringents, Alkanet-Roots,
Allom, Galls, Cypress-Nuts, etc. boild for a Lotion of the Head and Beard, an
Ointment of Ol de Been, Galls, burnt Iron, Indian Myrobalans, Litharge,
Dwarf-Eldern, etc. to anoint the Hair with Oleum Costinam, hinders its turning
gray, a Comb of Lead for the Head and the Beard, does obscure the grains of the
Hair; to these may be added Medicines that are taken inwardly to restore and
conserve Youth, and keep off the gray Head; such is the Powder of
Eldern-flowers taken in Borrage-Water every Morning; three drops of Oil of Salt
taken every morning in any convenient Liquor; Senna also is commended by Mesue,
for keeping back gray Age.

4. To make the Hair Black.
The Hairs are made black by Decoctions of astringent things, by Phlegmagogues,
or Purgers of Phlegm; Topicals are the Juice of Danewort, or Dwarf-Elder for
Lotion; Myrobalans inwardly and outwardly, Cadmia, Labdanum, Lead, Cloves,
Bean-stalks, green shells of Walnuts, a Lead Comb, etc. set down by Authors:
these are to be used chiefly, whenas we are forced in gray Heads to give some
other Tincture to the Hair, to take away the gray color; and as other things
are colored by things that have a dying force, so also may the Hairs be
painted with them, as the Party affected best approves of.

CHAP. IX.
Of Scurfiness in Hair.

It Is called Pitoriasis by the Greeks, Porrigo chiefly, Furfur and Furfuratio by
the Latins; and is an Ulcerous disposition of the topmost Cuticle, not deep,
not moist, but scaley, dry, loose, and Brun-like, which Scurfey matter by any
light Scratching or Combing falls off, though from its cause, yet resident, it
grows again.

CAUSE.
Cause is an hot and dry Distemper of the Skin, which converts a sharp and thin
Humor that insinuates it self, and breaths through it into scurf.

A second Opinion is, That the Cause is in Ichorus Juice, which eroding the
thin Skin, and drying, does stir up certain Scales and Scurf.

A third Opinion is, That they are Humors, either Serous, Chollick or
Phlegmatic, carried with the nourishment of the Hairs thither, and the thinner
Parts being discust, the thicker remain about the Roots of the Hair, and turn
to a scurfey matter, being attracted by a more hot Brain.

A fourth Opinion is, That they are made, 1. From thickness and astriction of
the Parts. 2. From an Humor adust, and therefore getten a drying and eroding
quality, and therefore cleaves and dries the Cuticle or outward Skin, effecting
an Ulcerous temper of it, and solution of continuity; for from an Humor must
needs be moisture; from Erosion, Ulcers; and from Drying, Scurfs; but these
Humors are made from bad Nourishment aforegoing.

SUBJECT.
Subject is the whole Skin, but chiefly the Head and Beard, and parts where
Hairs grow, as Eyebrows, etc.

SIGNS.
Signs are the going before of an evil Diet, engendering a corrupt and
unwholesome Juice; the Scurfs are best discovered by sight, they fall off by
Scratching or Combing; the Skin is uneven, rough, with a white color.

DIFFERENCES.
It differs from that Scaley and Scurfey affect that happens to those that have
the French POX, sticking in the Palms of the Hands, and Soles of the Feet, nor
does it easily fall off, unless by great tearing and pulling it off by the
Nails, and is greater (and like a continued Scale) then those Scurfs that be in
other hairy parts of the Body.

DIET.
Here we must beware of Toad-stools, Fungous things, Bulbs, and windy Meats,
filling the Head, and causing Crudity.

CURE.
After Evacuation and rectifying of the Blood by Internals, we must use
abstersive and discussive Topicals; which either may be, 1. To wash, as a Lee
of Vine Branches, Draconts, Briony, VVild Cucumers, Fumitary, Lupines, Aron,
sharp-pointed Dock, etc. or a Lotion of Soap, or Baths of salt Water, or an
Ointment of Oil of bitter Almonds, and of the Kernels of Rank Nuts, with
Sulphur and Vitriol. 2. Or for Friction, as with Niter Salt, Ashes of a Lee;
the Hands being anointed with Oil of Bitter Almonds, for so the serous Humors
are drawn forth and consumed; Cataplasms also of Soot, Ink, Oil, Sulphur,
Allom, Mallows, and Cicers, with Vinegar.

Among others, these following are of greatest efficacy and most helpful; of
the Juice of Tithimale or Spurge, viij. Juice of Garlic, vj. Water found in
the hollow places of old Beech Trees, one pound, mix them, and boil therein of
the Ashes of Common Reed, or Sugar-Cane, of the Ashes of the Bark of the Ash,
of the Ashes also of Figtree-Leaves, of each, as much as may be convenient;
after a little boiling, strain them for a Lotion of the parts diseased.

Or an effectual Water may be made of the Roots of Aron, Draconts, VVall-^ue,
Scabious, VVillow-Leaves and Fig Tree, well digested in Vinegar and distilled.

Unguents also of slippery things, as of extract of Fenugreek-Seeds in Juice of
Mallows, with Bears Grease, and Oil of Nigella Seeds, excel though they be of
another quality to corroding and sharp Medicines, yet they deterge kindly, and
loosen the Scurf, and render the Skin smooth and whole; Euphorbium, with Bears
Grease, and Orobus, Gum Laserpice, with VVine-Vinegar and Pepper, Darnel Meal
boild in Vinegar, with wild-Radish-Roots and Brimstone, are commended by
Dioseorides and others, not only for the ordinary Scurf, but that that is made
from the French POX, Alopecia or Leprosy.

CHAP. X.
Of Phtheiriasis, or the Lousie-Evil.

DEFINITION.
PHtheiriasis in Greek, in Latin Morbus Pedicularis, in English it may be
called the Lousie Disease, is a Symptom of excretion made in the superficies of
the Skin, either throughout the whole Body, or in hairy parts; made from a
putrified, but not sharp Humor, and hot and moist distemper of the part,
chiefly afflicting Children.

CAUSE.
Cause is, 1. Putrid Humors collected 'twixt the Cuticle, and true Skin, not
very sharp, and residing most in the Emunctories, and hot moist places that
have hair to cover them, and for them to abide in.

2. The frequent use of Figs is condemned by many; the reason is thought to be
from a quality in them turning to such an Excrement that the Lice are bred of;
the frequent use of Vipers are also thought by their tenuity to effect the
breeding of Lice, thereby expelling many Humors to the Skin; also other bad
things, as Fruits, that are apt to corrupt much further.

3. Though a good Diet be kept, and the Parties be not of phlegmatic and moist
tempers, for in such they chiefly breed, and therefore more in Childhood than
in elder Age; yet to such as lie in Camps long with their Clothes unshifted,
abundance of them are bred; and those that are of such apter tempers to breed
them, by often shifting, and keeping their Clothes clean, and combing, do
preserve themselves from them.

4. They grow exceedingly by the immoderate use of Waters, says Aristotle, or
by moistening Causes; therefore Children are most troubled, and Women more than
Men, excepted the Head, for Women's Heads being close bound up always, Nourishes
them not so much.

5. The fifth Cause is, by catching; one lousie Body may infect a whole
Company, as One scabbed Sheep infects a whole Flock: The Vulgar say they fly in
May, which thing Experience has verified to some; yet are no Wings to be
perceived, unless they grow then.

SUBJECT.
Subject is the whole Skin, but chiefly that covered with Hair, as is the Head,
which is fullest, and therein only for the most part they live; also in the
Beard, under the Arm-holes, and in the Privities, and Emunctories, because
there is most moist and hot matter breathed out.

SIGNS are evident to the sight. PROGNOSTICS.
1. They do good in young Children, and others too, feeding upon, and sucking
superfluous excrementitious matter; and it is thought the scurfie matter, and
the pores by them are kept more open for hurtful exhalations; whence it is that
Children much frequented with them, are not so subject to the Headache or
Falling Sickness. Also in phlegmatic old persons they are wholesome.

2. The Skin is sometimes totally and so immoderately affected with them, that
sometimes they bring death, therefore are not altogether to be slighted:
Several Nobles have died under this Affect, as Herod King of Judea, Sylla a
great Roman Captain, but a Glutton, Pherisides a famous Philosopher, and others.

3. They leave Dead Bodies, whereby may be gueffed they accompany healthful
Bodies; and to those that have entered into Quartane Agues, all the Lice in the
Body and Head have died, and not one living (that were wont to have abundance
before their Sickness) all the while the Ague has lasted; and it is very
probable those excrementitious Humors were spent by the Ague.

4. If they exceedingly multiply, it may foretell the Morphew or Leprosy to
succeed from weakness of natural heat, which cannot digest the Excrements that
are sent to the Skin, and breed them.

DIET.
Let them use a good drying and attenuating Diet; in the Meats, let them eat
Sorrel, Organy, Leeks, VVater-Cresses, Salt, Oranges and Lemmons, Mustard,
Verjuyce; use Calamint and Garlic boild inwardly, says Avicen.

All things engendring cold, moist and phlegmatic corrupt Humors, are to be
avoided, and the Body is to be well dressed and shifted.

CURE.
Cure, Depends, 1. upon evacuation of the Cause, where Phlegmagogues have the
chiefest place.

2. Internal Dryers, because from plenty of humidity they arise.

3. Topics, are either to be drying and cleansing, or discussing and drying,
as others will; here Baths, Tubs and Lotions of the whole Body and Head are
conducible, made of bitter things, and Relaxers or Opners of the Pores, that
the Humors, the matter of which Lice are made, may breath forth, therefore add
some Penetraters; yet some fear there is, lest by too much and too long
Bathing, Excrements should be more gathered to the Skin; whenas Lice proceed
from the whole Body, else bathing of the whole Body is not useable; let a Tub
or Bath be prepared of Niter, Hellebore, Cal-mint, Salt, Collocinthis,
Staphesacre, the Berry of India, called Coculus Indi, and other bitter and salt
things boiled in Seawater.

A Lee of the Flower of Golden Staechas, or Cedar-wood, Tamarisk, Broom,
Hyssop, and English Tobacco boild in salt water, by a propriety kill all manner
of Lice and Nits; the distilled water of the Bead-Tree of Capadocia, also does
the like.

The Oil made by Decoction or Insolation of the Flowers of the Broom Bush, the
stronger it is made, the more effectual it is to kill Lice in all parts of the
Body.

Or a Liniment of the Oil extracted from Mustard Seed, Oil of Tobacco, ana ss.
Powder of the white Roots of Hellebore, of the Inward Bark of the black Alder
Tree, ana ss. Hyssop, j. Vinegar, as much as may suffice; the vulgar remedy for
Lice is Coculus Indi.

The Emunctories also are to be anointed, because there by reason of the Veins
more frequenting, more of the matter and heat is present; an Ointment of
Olibanum and Barrows Grease is greatly commended, both to kill them, and hinder
their breeding again.

The Garments also are to be washed in proper Lee, as in the Lee of the Ashes
of Broom, and Flowers of Stachados of a Golden Color, or sprinkled with the
Powder of Staphesacre and Saffron; if they be only in the Head, Pouders there
may be sprinkled, where Ointments sometimes are not so commodious or
convenient, by reason of daubing the Hair; this then among others may serve for
a special Example, Ashes of Broom, of Coculus Indi Berries, white Hellebore and
Staphesacre, ana. j. Tobacco, Cudweed, Tamarisk, Fenugreek-Seeds, ana. ss. make
of all a Powder.

The Vulgar do use, when withal in Childrens Heads, there be Sores or Ulcers,
the Juice of Sage, with Butter and Pepper, or Tobacco, and Coculus Indi, or
Staphesacre with Butter; but in Ulcers, such sharp things exasperate much.

DIFFERENCE.
Difference is fourfold. 1. Lice, which are white, bred externally in all
parts of the Body, creeping, and by biting, moving a little Itch, and are not
very hurtful, unless the parts be ulcerated, or they exceed in number, of which
we have treated largely; they are called Pediculi, from their many Feet.

2. Morpiones, are more flat, commonly bred in the Share, called by Aristotle,
Ferum Ahimale; and by the Vulgar Latins, Pedicolatae, Pessolatae and Morpiones,
they wander not as the Lice do, but stick fast to the Skin, and gnaw much; of
their Cause and Cure, see the precedent Cause and Cure of Lice in General.

3. Chirones, which never break forth of the Skin, but always lie hid within
the Skin and Flesh, and there Corrode; chiefly they are in the Hands, and
through negligence breed there, are caused of a more dry Humor then Lice, that
penetrates and breathes not forth through the Pores of the Skin: some Women use
to pull these Chirones out of the Flesh with a Needle, but the Cause not being
taken away, they return again. Stupifying things that hinder the sense, and
dull their biting, are good, as is Juice of Henbane; but lest that should bring
trembling to the Hands, the Oil of the Seed is more wholfom; Also it is very
good to dip the Hand in Salt and Vinegar, and rub the part where they are,
which kills them, and their Itching is taken away; Also Foments of salt water,
or Vinegar of Henbane and Salt are effectual. But of all Remedies, the most
effectual is Quicksilver for Unction of the Parts affected, rightly killed and
mixed into an Ointment with Grease, Oil of Bays and Soap: for all Remedies
failing, this sometimes alone will destroy all kinds of Lice, Morpions,
Chyrones, Nits, and Fleas that suck the Body for nourishment, but it is not so
safe as others, specially for the Head, to be anointed on the Sutures or
Ulcers, for therefrom come dangerous effects oftentimes, specially to Children.

Some have found these Chirones in the Membranes of the Eyes, or Adnata, which
are very aptly with a fine Needle to be picked out, and the Eye washed with
healing Eye-Waters, and that ease the pain and itching caused by them.

4. Nits, called Leudes by the Latins, there is a near familiarity 'twixt them
and Lice; for Heads that are very lousie, are also very full of Nits, they are
least of all the kinds, sticking very fast to the Hair, and are confined to the
Head, or very seldom elsewhere; yet sometimes are found under the Skin, and
then they cause much itch and troubling pricking; they are destroyed as Lice,
and what are proper for them, are proper for these; the Hair is preserved from
nourishing Nits, or their generation is prohibited by a Lee made of the Ashes
of Cudweed, or Cottenwood, and of Tamarisk.

OF EVILS AND Outward Ails.
CHAP. I.
Of the Kings Evil.

STrumae or Scrophulae, in Latin; in English, the Kings Evil; Are Tumors in
the Throat, made in glandulous parts, from alimentary Juice hardened, or viscous
slow Phlegm, and included in a peculiar Skin or Membrane.

NAMES.
The Greeks call it Cheiros, the Latins Scrophula Struma, and Morbus Regius,
the English call at the Kings Evil, and some the Queens Evil.

SUBJECT.
Is the Glandules, sometimes they are in the Throat, and nigh the Aspera
Arteria, or rough Artery, or in the Neck; sometimes also, but more seldom, they
are found in the Arm-holes and Groin, Breast and Paps.

TIME.
Hippocrates says, They are made from the fourteenth to the two and fortieth
year; but (says he) from that time to sixty three years of age, they are not
made: Yet Sennertus says, After the two and fortieth year, the People of the
Alps, from drinking vicious Water, have had it.

CAUSE.
The Cause is held by some to be a pituitous viscous matter, by others a
mixtion of thick Phlegm and Melancholy, by others a phlegmatic or melancholy
Humor hardened: Platerus says, It Is an Earthy Juice hardened; Riolanus says,
A portion of the fat being hardened in some places, make a Scirrhous Tumor,
and sometime Strumons: Sennertus says, They are made of slow and thick matter,
vulgarly termed Phlegm, to which Melancholy is adjoined; and if otherwise they
were caused from other Humors, they would not be so durable, but would rot.
These Humors are carried with the proper Juice destinated for the Nourishment
of the Glandules, which is thought by quantity to offend, as well as quality;
whenas the Glandules have more then sufficient, the rest becomes
excrementitious, and acquires a peculiar nature. In quality that matter may
offend, as Phlegmatic, Melancholic, and Faeculent, which excrementitiously
sent (and cast off by Nature, as unfit Nourishment) to those parts, Nature
there provides a Bag, or Membrane, as her Storehouse, for laying up such
Excrements that do her hurt, if she should make use of.

The primitive and antecedent Cause is more certain, as crude and thick Meats,
unwholesome Waters, as those of the Alps, those also that are in Syria and
Carinthia, containing Mercury in them; crude Aliments, Snow-Water, etc. taken,
are sometimes pregressive; but Mine-Waters, especially of Quicksilver, are
thought to endue the Humor with so peculiar a quality; and the admixtion of
Melancholy herewith, sometimes make it degenerate cancrous; Contusion sometimes
gives occasion to it.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICKS.
The Kings Evil is a scirrhous Tumor of the Glandules, shut up in a peculiar
Skin or Membrane; these Tumors are many, and take deep root; this Humor
sometimes possesses all the Kernels, whereby they are all tumified; it
sometimes is found in the inward Bowels; they are round and pendulous, yiedling
not to touch, but moveable, and sometimes painful.

They are sometimes only in the two Glandules under the inferior Jaw Bone,
sometime in the Arm-holes, and sometimes throughout the whole Body where there
be Glandules: Some say, If it be the Kings Evil, lay a live Earth-worm
overnight upon it, and lay upon her a Burdock-Leaf; and if in the morning she
be dead, it is; else not the Kings Evil.

Secondly, The Membrane or Bladder it is included in, is like that of Atheroma,
and Steatoma; from its formatrix faculty it is never idle: for when it is
filled, distended, and then has poured out matter, as if the Tumor was
suppurated, it does attain a certain knitting up, contexture, or composure
again, as if a new Membrane; some take it for subalbescent Flesh, distending
and increasing from a matter soaked in, having a forming faculty from a
peculiar quality.

DIFFERENCES.
Differences of it are, First as to its self:

1. Some are benign, well-qualitied, round, without great pain, hardness, or
inflammation.

2. Others are contrary to these, and of a malignant quality, very painful,
hard, pulsant, and inflamed.

3. Some are Cancrous, possessing all the Glandules.

4. Some are more deep, others more superficial.

5. Some are accidental, others hereditary from Seed, and the formatrix faculty
in the Uterus, according to Platerus his opinion.

6. Some more dangerous, others more slight and extern.

7. Some are movable, others immovable.

8. Some are outward, possessing sometimes the great, sometimes the less
Vessels; some have been found in the Bowels and inward parts, seventy in the
Mesentery together; but whether these Tumors possess the Bowels as they do the
outward Glandules, is doubtful, and seems not to be credited.

Secondly, It differs from Bronchocele, or Hernia Gutturis, for that sticks out
in the forepart of the Neck, or is a swelling forth in the large space of the
Throat; struck, it gives a sound; and crushed by the fingers, it sinks, and
suddenly rises again, which is not so in Struma; yet the the Causes and Cures
of a Throat-Rupture and the Kings Evil, are often the same.

Platerus makes a difference between Scrofula and Struma, saying, That
Scrofulae sticks out like Grapes, two or three in one Glandule; but Struma, he
says, be great and pendent Tumors in the Throat, often deeply founded and
raise short breathing or impediment therein, and hoarsness.

PROG.
It Is more curable in Children, and most frequent in them.

If folded in no Vessel, if benign, not malignant, nor cancrous, nor
hereditary, if more fresh and superficiary, moveable, and few in number, if
small, and in smaller Vessels, and more remote from the rough Artery, or
Windpipe, or in the posterior parts, then there is more hopes of Cure, and
less danger.

But contrarily, if they be hard, malign, cancrous, and immovable, seated
among the Vessels, and more anteriorly and deeply, if great, and many in
number, possessing many places, the worse, hard to cure if curable, and
dangerous.

They are not cured by cutting out, without danger, by reason of the Nerves,
which sometimes being hurt, the Voice has been lost, and if the Nerves
recurrents there be cut, the Sick either is made dumb, or molested with a great
hoarsness; and therefore such as are near the Windpipe are dangerous to be
cut; as also in other places, for fear of Haemorrage from incision of the Veins.

CURE.
Cure is first internal, where we must strive to take away the antecedent and
suppeditating Cause: 2. The quality and infection of the Blood and Juyces.

For the first, Catharticks are frequently to be had in use; we must purge
Phlegm, and let Blood: Some premise preparation of the Humor.

A good Diet must be used, Meats that engender good Juice, and of easy
digestion.

To the second, a Drink for ordinary taking, is very commodious and helpful;
and so sometimes Scrofula's are cured, that are not by outward application; for
so long as the Blood and Juyces are universally, and so peculiarly affected, a
suppeditation of matter is ever made, and the Disease is protracted thereby:
Such a Drink for common use, is thus most effectually made, of Figwort-Roots,
or Scrophulary, ij. Roots of Gentian, j. Roots of Dropwort, the lesser
Chelidone, or Pilewort, of each vj. let all be prepared in a right manner, to
be hung in a Bag in Wort.

Hartman says, Strumae are easily cured, if a man drink often of the Powder of
a Man's Skull that has been buried.

Also if six Ounces of Sponges, with half an Ounce of their Stones, be calcined
in a close Pot, and of this Powder one Dram be given every morning in White
Wine, fasting two hours after it, it cures Struma, says he.

A third Specifical of the same Authors, is the Ashes of a Mole given every day
in Wine of Scrophulary, which he says most perfectly cures Scrophula's, if yet
not exulcerated: Their Dose is half a Scruple, or more.

Fallopius praises one Dram of Roots of Ruscus, or Butchers-Broom, taken every
day in Wine.

Arnoldus de villa Nova highly applauds the sequent, saying it cures all; of
Cinnamon, Sea-Sponges, and Palea Marina, Bone of the Fish Cepia, or Cuttlebone,
long and black Pepper, Ginger, Pelletory of Spain, Sal Gem, Oak Buds, Galls,
Cypress-Leaves, Roses, of each ij. mix all into a Powder, which is to be
swallowed very leasurably and often held in the Mouth.

An Electuary may be made for the Patients taking often, grateful, and
efficacious, of the following Specificals, Conserve of the Flowers of Dead
Nettles, ij. Roots of Orris, of Gladiol, or Sword-Grass, of Dropwort, of each
ss. Troches of Vipers, j. with Syrup made of a strong Decoction of
Scrophulary-Roots, as much as may suffice to make it up into form of an
Electuary. These Specificks are held to operate by sucking up and drying the
strumous matter.

2. External: Where first Authors speak of insensible consumption of the Matter
and Tumor, which is most effectually done by Leaves of Libanotis, Root Xyris,
Leaves of Bupleurum, with Salt, Vermicularis, or Wall-Pepper, Figwort, lesser
Chelidone, Roots of stinking Gladon, Fox-Gloves, Mugwort, Dasies, Valerian,
Couslips, Orchis, Water-Penny-royal, wild Mint. etc. which applied, by a
specifical force, cause solution of the Humors; of which such an Ointment may
be composed, of great force, of Branch Ursine, Fox-Gloves, Pilewort, Roots of
Scrophulary, of each j. Leaves of Libanotis, ij. Mugwort, Roots of Eringo,
Balm, Leaves of Bupleurum, Couslips, of each ss. Wax, ss. Oil of milk, of
Hartman, made by a Bladder of putrified milk, as much as may seem sufficient
for due consistence of an Ointment.

Rondeletius sets down this Specifical; which he thinks not to be effectual
from an occult property, as most think, but from a drying faculty; of the Ashes
of Agnus Castus, with the blew flower, the Skin of a Snake cast off, of each j.
with Oil of bitter Almonds, and a little Wax, make an Unguent.

2. We must discuss by stronger Discutients, and specifical Resolvers, if the
former intention may not be to purpose; Topicals that resolve fcirrhous
swellings, an Emplaister of Amoniacum and Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar, and a
portion of Quicksilver added, is very effectual. 2. The Leaves of the Cypress
Tree, are said in three days to dissolve strumous Swellings. 3. The Root of
Gladiol, or Sword-Grass, Leaves of Libanotis, Ashes of Vipers, and stinking
Gladony made into an Emplaister, excels. 4. All these following may be reckoned
for specifical Resolvers, Vipers-Grass, Pilewort, Crowsor, Figwort, Garlic,
Root of Xyris, Mugwort, Foxgloves, Savine, Wall-Pepper, Monks-Rubarb, Horsmint,
Ashes of Snailes, of Goats Dung, dead Nettles.

3. If Resolvers and Discutients do no good, it must be supperated. The lesser
Chelidone or Pilewort has drawn out ^ij. of Corruption in one week, and cured:
Roots of Althea, of White-Lillies, an Union roasted in the Embers, are useful.

Suppuration is dangerous if the matter should turn inwardly, and fall upon the
Lungs; unless all the matter be changed into Pus, we may not open it, cut it;
and if they cannot well endure that, use a potential Cautery, or burn it.

Some cut it in pieces, then sprinkle on it Devils-bit, Orpement, Vitriol,
Vermilion, etc. and then take off all the dead flesh, the Ulcer is then to be
healed.

Also it is to be taken away with Ligature of Thread, or rather Horshair, tied
about the bottom of the Tumor, and every day tied hardder and harder, till it
fall off; which is chiefly to be done in those that have slender roots, and be
hanging.

Some apply Causticks and Septicks, and Corrodent Medicines, and seem very rash
therein: the parts about the Tumor are then diligently to be bewared, lest
those strong Medicines should hurt and inflame them, being sound.

Gargarisms of the Juice of James-Wort, called Jacobaea, are commended; also of
the Juice of Spibed Loostrife.

Amulets of the Roots of Scrophulary, or Figwort, hung about the Neck, are also
good.

Guordonius says, The Feet of a great Toad, being cut off when the Moon is
void of course, and hastens to conjunction of the Sun, being hung about the
Neck, cures the Kings Evil.

Rondeletius says, To prick Struma, with the Root of a Parsnipt, cures, and
prohibites those that are growing hereto. Pliny says, To do so with the bone
of the tail of a Sea-Frog-Fish, performs the same.

If they be ulcered, Hartmannus says, They are most happily cured with the
ashes of Salamanders calcined in a pot, and sprinkled thereupon.

An Unguent then to anoint them of greatest efficacy may thus be prepared to
consume and dry up the strumous matter, and correct its quality.

of the lesser Chelidone or Pilewort, ashes of Vipers, ashes of Snails, of each
j. Burnt-lead ij. Roots of Scrophulary, of dead Nettles, of each ij. with Oil
and Wax make an Ointment, and lay thereupon a Plate of Lead.

The Kings of France especially, and the Kings of England, cure this Evil with
touching; which Virtue is said to be given to Clodoveus, the first of that
name, and of the Christian Kings of France, as soon as he was baptized, and
turned Christian, and so it lineally continued to all his Successors; of which
the Kings of England were descended. The manner of healing is to lay their
hands upon it, saying in French, Te Royte touch, et dieu te garrie, or guarit;
Rex te Tangit, and Deus te Sanat; In English, The King touches thee, but God
makes thee whole.

CHAP. II.
Of Corns.

COrns (called by the Latins, Clavus, Gemursa, and Morticini) are hard and
callous Tumors, bred in the Toes and Soals of the Feet, from congestion of
thick humors, and pressure of the shoe.

SUBJECT.
The Subject is the Soals of the Feet, and Toes, especially the little Toe:
sometimes they possess the Joints, and are under the Nails.

CAUSE.
The Cause is galling, compressure, and straightness of the Shoe, whereby gross
humors by congestion, are retained there, and hardened.

SIGNS.
Signs are evident to the fight, They are very molestnous in going, and
sometimes have a very vehement pain, sometimes a Contusion preceded.

FROG.
They are uncautulous Exterpation; sometimes brings a Gangreen, and sometimes
Inflammation and Convulsion, from cutting too deep among the Ligaments and
Tendones.

DIFFERENCES.
Those in the Toes are called, Clavi, or Corns; Those in the Soals of the Feet,
Calli, or hard brawny fleshy Tumors.

CURE
Cure Is by preparation of it for cutting, which is done by Emolients, and
renderers of it soft; as raw Flesh laid to it for 24 hours.

If they fall in, they are raised high again with Dogs Urine, an Emplaister of
red Wax, Eeles Blood, Oil of Mercury of Snailes.

After preparation is made for Incision, and the Corn extracted by the Root, we
must fill up the hole with the Sand left at the bottom of a Chamber Pot, to
hinder the regeneration of it again.

MEDICINES.
Medicines that take it away without Excision, is, 1. The Juice of Housleek,
which is to be bathed on it several times, and a leaf of the same Housleek worn
to the Corn. 2. A second Specifical is the Powder of the Root of Rest-harrow,
mixed into an Ointment, with Grease, for Unction of the Corn, which in three
days is said to fall therefrom. 3. A third is a black Snaile put into a linen
Rag, and torrified by the Fire, and laid hot to the Corn, and so worn;
somentation also of the Juice of Rhue, Marigolds, and Plantane, are recited by
some.

Rulandus holds this for a Sectet to take away Corns, of the Oil of Brimstone
ss.; the Corrosive Stone ij; Seeds of Henbane j.; Opium j. mix them.

Dioscorides says, The Bark of the Willow-Tree burnt to Ashes, and mixed with
Vinegar, takes them away.

Lebotius commends the Gall of a Cow applied in like manner, which causes its
extirpation by the Root.

The Prophylaxis is then to be instituted, which is done by Application of
Corrodent Medicines; The Medicine of Rulandus before rehearsed, Coperas, etc.
mixed in Emplaisters, or the Sand of Urine, may serve to fill up the hole, and
hinder regeneration of the Corn.

CHAP. III.
Of Bronchocele, or a Throat Rupture.

DEFINITION.
BRonchocele is a Tumor in the Throat, swelling out to a large space betwixt
the Trachea Arteria, and the Skin, frow wind, or a flow thick humor, made by
Congestion.

NAMES.
It has its Name from the Greek word, Bronchos, signifying the Throat, and
Cele signifying a Rupture: The Latins call it Ramex, or Hernia Gutturis, or
Gatturosa; The Arabians, Botium; The Barbarians, Crepatuna and Ruptura; In
English it may most fitly be called, A Throat Rupture.

SUBJECT.
The Subject is the space in the forepart of the Throat, close to the Trochea
Arteria, or Windpipe, under the Skin and general Membrane: And betwixt the
Trochea Arteria, and Muscles of the Neck, some doubt whether the Matter be
contained betwixt the broad Muscle and the Skin, or hid under the broad Muscle.

It is fourfold divided.

1. One is a Pneumatocele, or a Rupture from Wind, whose Causes are Wind; as
happened to such as puff out their Cheeks vehemently with Wind, and to such as
void Excrements difficultly, to Women in a difficult ejection of the Birth, and
great clammours, whereby the subjected Skin and Membrane are distended, and
violently rent from the Larinx, or the broad Muscle it self is separated from
the subjected Parts; hence a space being effected (viz. by the aforesaid, or
others, that cause such a violent distention of that part) from Fuga Vaoui, a
flatulent matter breaks in violently, and elevates the Skin, and puffs it up
into a tumor.

SIGNS.
Whose Signs are these; It is a tumor stretched forth, exercising a large
capacity, struck, it gives a sound, gives place to pressing of the Fingers, but
rises to its wonted height again suddenly, which is not so in the following
Differences; but herein a coherence of the Differences is made, for that the
Original of a Bronchocele, is allowed to be an eary matter, first insinuating
it self there, and distending; to which other humors are gathered, which are
known by proper Signs.

As, 2. A Phlegmatocele, or Rupture from a phlegmatic Juice, or mixed with
Melancholy; which is familiar to the People of Piedmont, and the Alps, from
unwholsom Waters there, specially from large drinking of Snow Water, because
most they drink at sometimes is melted Snow. Sometimes its most apparent
Original is from stop of Natural Excretions, as Menses or Hemorrhoids, which
things either increasing or heaping up a gross Pituitous, or commixt
Melancholy matter, Nature expels it by degrees from the Head to the Larinx, or
space of the Throat under the Chin, by the hinder parts of the Ears, according
to Fernelius.

SIGNS.
It grows by degrees, and takes increment from a nourishment communicated by
certain Conduites (and not by the Veins) which Nature has destinated to such
an use; it is hard, and by touch may be discerned not to be Wind; which
Platerus only allows to be the Cause of Bronchocele, whom Sennertus reproves.

DIFFERENCES.
Of this also be several Differences, for one is like Steatoma, wherein, with
the fatty or honey like matter, be sometimes Hairs; this as the most tractable
kind may be opened by a Cautery or Launcet, eschewing the Veins, but where the
matter is insinuated into the space of the Muscles, there is no eradicating of
it by Chyrurgery, which unless, here is very dangerous, also if the tumor be
more internal.

Another refers a kind of Anenrism, which is uncureable; so are those that come
from the Birth and Infancy, those that are great Scirrhous and Cancrous,
repleat with many great melancholy Veins, are dangerous, and not to be meddled
withal.

A third kind is Sarcocele, or a fleshly Rupture, Sirrhous, and remains all the
life time, unless maturely helped, which it is very hard to be; the Causes may
be such as caused Phlegmatocele; it is Cronical, and discerned by touch and
sight.

A fourth is, Hydrocele, or a Dropsy of the Throat, which is sometimes both
Internally and Externally affected, from a waterish matter collected there.
Montanus cured it by Incision.

CURE General.
The Cure varies as the Causes; but generally observe, 1. That in the
beginning, to stop the increase of the Tumor, and repel its nourishment,
Astringents are convenient to be applied. 2. To respect the Head from whence
the matter is transmitted; which is, 1. To be purged with general Catharticks.
2. Dried and strengthened.

If it has already taken its full growth, and is confirmed, we must use
Discussers, and Resolvers; for a thick and hardened matter, Foment, with Water
of Nitrous Baths, or Sulphur; an Ointment of Goosegrease, beaten with
Hog's Grease, and applied; a Cataplasm of Barley Meal, with Oil of Lillies,
applied hot; an Emplaister of Diasulphur, may do good, applied upon a Plate of
Lead besmeared with Quicksilver, after friction of it, till it wax red; the
Roots of Garden O^rach and Devils-bit, whether inwardly, by way of Gargarism,
if the Tumor be more inwardly, or outwardly used, are held to have a propriety
against inveterate and old Tumors in the Throat.

For a windy Matter, Carminative Discussers are most fitting, as an Emplai^^er
of Cummin-Seeds, Bay Berries, Brimstone, Goats-Dung and Honey.

See more for the Cure hereof, in the Chapter of Scrophula, or the Kings Evil,
for this many times is cured by the same that Scrophula's are.

CHAP. IV.
Of Warts.

VVArts, called by the Greeks Acheochordines, Myrmecia and Thymia, by the
Latins, Verrucae, and Arabians, Boterale, are little risings, or fleshy
Excrescent Tumors, from a thick viscous matter insinuated there, and chiefly
possessing the Hands.

CAUSE.
The general Cause of all kinds of them, is a thick melancholy pituitous
Blood, or from a Juice destinated to the Skin and Cuticle to be nourished by.

SIGNS.
They chiefly infest the Hands or Feet, sometimes the Thighs, Seat, and
Privities; they are sometimes livid, and rough, and have a pticking pain, and
sometimes Ulcerate; sometimes they are Malignant and Cancerous.

CURE.
Medicines that are destinated to take away Warts, and held very effectual and
propet hereto, are very many and almost innumerable.

The choicest and best approved, of which we here recite.

Johannes Hartmanus says, The Water swiming upon the Trunk of an Oak, after it
is cut, Cures, or takes away all manner of Warts.

Rondeletius commends the Root of Chelidone, beaten with Hog's Grease, and
applied, to consume and take them away; or the Blood of a Lizard destilled,
says he, dries them. He also commends Agrimony applied with strong Vinegar,
for taking them away.

Baptista Porta advises to rub them with the Head of an Eel that is very
bloody.

Fallopius commends rubbing of them with Willow Leaves, being first bathed with
the Juice.

Paulus Aegineta, Reckons up abundance of Medicines that abolish Warts, as
Elatory, or the Juice of Wild Cucumers mixed with Salt, for bathing; Juice of
Tithimales, Water issuing from the Green Twig of the Vine, being laid in the
Fire; Niter, with the Urine of a Boy that never yet exercised the sports of
Venus; Bark of Frankincense with Vinegar, and the like, too tedious, and not
worth the time and pains to rehearse them.

Rosellus praises Fomenting, with a Red Onion beaten with Salt.

Among Specificals, Zazintha, or Cichorea Verrucaria, so called, from its
Specific force and virtue against Warts, is most excellent, and j. of the
Seeds thereof given inwardly, in decrease of the Moon, are held to extirpate
and take away all kind of Warts, and excrescences of Flesh whatsoever.

Miraldus says, If they be rubbed with Leaves of the Fig Tree, and afterward
those Leaves be buried in a Durghill to rot, so the Warts will insensibly
vanish away.

Others say the like of a piece of Raw Beef so used.

Proper also, and very effectual to take away Warts, are Leaves of Agremone,
Turnsoil, Chelidone, Marigolds, Purslane, Oleum Anacardij; stronger Medicines,
and more sharp, which hurt the adjacent tender Skin, unless it has some
defensatives, are, the Spurges, Pephi. Tithimale, Aquafortis, with which
Jacobus Primerose says, He cured himself, whenas many other things were
ineffectual, Sulphur Vivum.

Others extol unslaked Lime and Lixivium; or unslaked Lime and black Soap, is
held transcendent.

Rondeletius has this Water, of Salt of Amoniacum, Roman Vitriol, Rust of
Brass, of each, ij. Alum, j. unslaked Lime, ss. let them be destilled in an
Alembick, (Vinegar, or some quantity of other Liquors being put thereto) throw
away the first Water, and reserve the second for use.

Herba Stellaria, or Starwort, is said to consume them in a very short time;
the like is also said of the Juice of Eldern Berries.

DIFFERENCES of VVarts are three fold.
1. The Greeks call some Acrochordones, having a more thin and small Root, and
a broader at the top, and higher; it is so called, because it appears as if it
hung by a small Cord.

Celsus says, They often grow up many together, most troubling Children,
sometimes falling again of their own accord, they are sometimes thought to be
contagious.

CURE.
Their Cure is by Excision, which where it may be done, does quickly Cure,
says Primerose, and is more safe then the actual Cautery: In Galens time, some
plucked them up with their Teeth, which put them to much pain, but if they be
clearly cut off, they have no root reserved for growing again: some hold it the
best to tie them with an Horse Hair, or a Silk wet in Oil of Brimstone, and
tied every day harder, till they fall off of themselves; some when they are
thus tied hard about at the Root with an Horse Hair, anoint their tops with an
unguent of Honey Vinegar, Juice of Agrimony, of Purslane, with Doves Dung, and
Rust of Brass, or the Powder of Savine, and Yellow Ocre, with Vinegar, and all
the Medicines before generally proposed may (or most of them) be useful here.

2. Myrmeciae or common Warts, they have a broader Basis; the Roots going
deeply out, they are lower, hard, and scarce bigger then a Lupine; some be very
flat: when they are felt on hard, they have a painful sense, like unto the bite
of a Pismire or Ant, whence some call them Formical; they are sometimes
painful; they seldom cease of their own accord, and being cut, often grow again.

Some Counsel to cut them up by the Roots with a sharp Razor, and let them
bleed, and then apply Bole, Allom, and sealed earth thereupon; others are
rather against it, fearing thereby great Ulceration, they having such broad
roots.

If they be very hard, and not so sensible of feeling, Causticks to consume
them, are appr^ved; also close tying of them by the Roots with Horse Hair, as
before directed for Achrochordon.

3. Thymon or Thymia, so called, because it represents in color the tops of
the Herb Thyme; they are less than Achrochordones, but higher than Myrmiciae;
they have a narrow foundation, and basis, but are reddish, rough, hard, and
growing with a larger head, and are called Figs, or Fig-Warts; they are not
easily taken away by cutting the roots, yet being inward: The rest is to be
referred to Thymus, or the Fig of the Fundament.

CHAP. V.
Of Swellings or Apostems that they call Atheroma, Steatoma, and Meliceris.

1. ATheroma is a Tumor contained in a Follicle, or proper Membrane, and so
called from the Greek word Ather^, showing the quality of the Humor it
consists of, viz. like Pap or Frumenty.

CAUSE.
The Cause is primary, as violent Causes, bruising, etc. or secundary, as a
pi^uitous Humor, and alimentary Juice, or strange Bodies, as Stones, Bones,
Hair, or commixtion of various Bodies into one Follicle, or Bladder.

SIGNS.
In figure it is long, it is harder then Meliceris to touch; and in crushing or
pressing of it with the singer, it returns or rises up again very slowly: It
is not hard, nor paining, nor is the natural color of the Skin changed
thereby. These Tumors grow from small beginnings to great Abscesses.

CURE.
In Cure, it is hard to digest Humors that are comprehended in a Cystis, or
Bladder: Suppuration and Excision is to be made by a Launcet or potential
Cautery, or Lapis infernalis, not purging out all the Humor together; the bag
wherein the matter is, is to be artificially drawn out, the Veins, Nerves and
Arteries being specially bewared in the operation; if the Bag or Follicle be
left, or not consumed, more matter like the former will be gathered there; then
the wound is to be healed and cicatriced.

II. Steatoma is the same, as to the Membrane or Follicle that the Humor is
contained in, and as to the cause; only the mat^er of Steatoma is like Suet,
whence it had its name from the Greek word Stear, signifying Suet.

SIGNS.
It Is softer for the most part than the rest, it has a larger Basis or bottom;
pressure made by the finger rises not up easily; it is rounder than Atheroma,
and its substance is more thin.

CURE.
The Cure is the same with that of Atheroma.

III. Meliceris differs from Atheroma and Steatoma, because in Meliceris the
Humor contained in the Bag is like Honey, so called from Meli, Honey; it is
round as Steatoma, yields to pressing of the fingers, it looks more clear;
sometimes there is in it a gravelly hard matter.

CURE.
In Cure use Resolvers and Suppuraters; if they do no good, then use
Chyrurgery, as is directed for Atheroma.

CHAP. VI.
Of Kibes, or Chilblanes.

KIbes or Chilblanes, called by the Greeks Chimethla, by the Latins Perniones,
are Tumors or Inflammations possessing the Hands or Feet, arising in
Wintertime, and chiefly to Children.

SUBJECT.
Subject is the Heel, or other parts of the Foot, the Fingers, or sometimes the
back of the Hand.

CAUSE.
Cause is Winter-coldness, going in the Snow, too great straitness of the Shoo,
and whetting and galling of the Heel, therefrom attracting Blood by painfulness.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
Signs Diagnostick are first from the Tumor and redness, with great itching
that is present; sometimes they come to an head, turn ulcerous, and pour out a
little Sanies; sometimes they possess all the Fingers, and part of the hand,
are very troublesome, and loathing the sight.

DIFFERENCES.
One is not ulcerated, but an hard red itching Tumor, most troubling at night,
and is called a Chilblane.

Another is ulcerated, and very soar and smarting, and is called a Kibe.

PROGNOSTIC.
The evil is diuturn, and though it ceases in Summer, yet it recurs in Winter;
beating, or laceration of the Heel, is bad, for there is fear of hurt of the
thick Tendone that comes thither, which effects a Convulsion, and therefrom
Death.

CURE.
Cure is double; first for the Tumor, secondly for the Ulcer: for the Tumor
also Cure is twofold, 1. Preservative, 2. Curative.

Preservation is made by keeping of the Feet warm, by wearing of Socks wet in
Aqua-Vitae, Foments of Salt Water, Decoction of Turnips, Brine, Allom,
Litharge, Oil of Myrtels, etc.

Cure is done by putting into cold Water the diseased Member, which drives away
cold, even as we do to Apples and Eggs congealed; and so the cold being drawn
sorth, which is manifested from abatement of the pricking pain, we must foment
the part with Bay Berries and Rosemary boiled in Milk.

Specifical, are Decoction of Turnips that are frozen, or the Liquor of them,
and Bay Salt baked first in an Oven, Tobacco-Leaves applied, Oil of Wax, a Bath
of Brine most hot for friction and bathing of the kibed Part; an Emplaister of
Galbanum, Neats Suet, and Gum Tragacaenth, the Juice of Beets, of
Water-Pennyroyal, of Venus Navil, Lentils, Orobus, Roots of Burdocks, Ashes of
the Wood of the Figtree, with Grease, Oil of Roses baked in an hollow Turnep,
and a Cataplasm made thereof; a Liniment of Sulphur Vivum, and Oil of Garlic,
the Feet or Hands held over for long time, and as hot as may be, to endure the
fume or smoke of Henbane half dry, and burnt, does admirably cure bloody falls,
and the falling down of such humourous Blood into those parts; Typha, or
Cats-Tail also applied, greatly helps, and Toadstools: If the Humors will not
be discust, but ulcerate, after Mundificatives, use Oil of Roses baked in a
Radish, Oil of Tobacco, an Ointment of Cats-Tail, Gum Tragacanth and Oil of
Eggs; some are cured by holding their Feet over coals, as hot as they can
endure, for several times, and then they come not to maturation. When the part
becomes in a manner mortified, we must use such Medicines as are prevalent in
Gangrenes.

CHAP. VII.
Of Ancomes, or Paronychia in Greek.

DEFINITION.
PAronychia is an hot and paining Tumor risen in the ends of the Fingers to
the Nails.

NAMES.
The Greeks call these Apostems Paronychia, and Paneris; but Riolanus says,
it is Panaritium Arabum that affects the Tendons and Nerves at the fingers end;
and that Paronychia of the Greeks is a light Affect, viz. only a fissure to
the root of the Nail; the Latins call it Reduvia, the vulgar English have many
Names for it, as an Andicome, Fellone, Whitlow, or Nail-Wheal.

CAUSE.
Cause is adust Blood and Melancholy, very hot, and participating of a malign
quality, sent thither by Nature, and afflicting the Nerves and Tendons.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICK.
They are known by sight; there is great pain from the nervous parts being
affected, that it sometimes extends it self throughout the whole Arm, and makes
the Affected very impatient; there is inflammation, and sometimes a Fever.

PROGNOSTICS.
From greatness of pain there is sometimes made so great Symptoms and
disquietings of Nature, that death has ensued to some.

It sometimes comes to Suppuration, and breaks; sometimes the matter being kept
within, corrupts and rotteth both Bones, Ligaments, and Membranes; and then
if this be already done, we must use cutting.

CURE.
Cure is to begin from evacuation of hurtful Humors, which is done by
Pnlebotomy, and Catharticks.

2. We must respect the Symptom, and lenify the fierceness of pain, for which a
Cataplasm of the Leaves of Mandrakes and Henbane boiled and mixed with
Hog's Grease.

3. Suppuraters are to be insisted upon, to bring it to maturation as soon as
may be; Repellers are to be shunned, lest pain should be exasperated therefrom,
and the Humors impacted in the part.

Oleum Saturni is helpful, and Bay Salt with Yolks of Eggs applied,
Whitlow-Grass, and Roots of Briony; of which may Oils, Ointments and
Emplaisters be made, or Ear-Wax, with the Skin of an Eel.

If these avail not, nor will it yet break, it must be opened with a Penknife,
and all the matter thoroughly purged out; then the Ulcer must be cleansed, and
healed with fit Topicals.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Ecchymoma in Greek, Sugillatio, or Livor, in Latin; in English signifying
black and blew Marks, or Discoloration of the Skin, from Bruises, or other
ways.

ECchymoma with the Greeks, Sugillatio or Livor with the Latins, is an effusion
of Blood to the outward Skin, effecting a blackish blew color, or livid, in
that part.

CAUSE.
Causes are blows, causing the effusion of Blood, which being sent to the Skin,
there becomes of a livid color; also from Anastamosis, Diapedesis, and
Diaeresis of the Veins.

SIGNS.
It Is discerned best by sight; it happens commonly from a blow upon the tender
flesh, betwixt the Eye and Nose.

CURE.
If the Affect be great, lest Inflammation should be stirred up, we must let
Blood.

2. Use Repellers mixed with Discutients.

3. Digesters, the Root of Solomon's Seal, Leaves of Argemone, Scurvy Grass,
black Briony, hot Arsmart, fresh Flower-de-luce-roots, Avens, Daysie-roots,
Seeds of Ammy, or Bishops-Weed, Sopewort, Ashes of Bean Stalks, stinking
Gladon, etc. are most excellent to take away the black and blew Marks made from
eruption of Blood or Humors, whether by Bruises or otherwise.

If it be greater, and Digesters profit not, we must use Medicines tending to
maturate, and Cupping-Glasses are sometimes useful; and open it, lest the
matter corrupt the part, or a Fistula or hollow Ulcer be made.

If a Gangrene be suspected, the part is to be scarrified, and washed with hot
Vinegar.

FINIS.

