THE Long Parliament REVIVED: OR, An Act for continuation, and the not
dissolving the Long Parliament (called by King Charles the First, in the year
1640.) but by an Act of Parliament.

With undeniable Reasons deduced from the said Act to prove that that
Parliament is not yet dissolved.

ALSO, Mr. William Prin his five Arguments fully answered: whereby he
endeavors to prove it to be dissolved by the Kings Death, etc.

By Tho. Phillips Gentleman, a sincere Lover of his King and Country.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the Castle and Lion in
St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXI.

Anno 17. Caroli Regis.
An Act to prevent inconveniences which may happen by the untimely adjourning,
proroguing, or dissolving of this present Parliament.
WHereas great Sum: of money must of necessity be speedily advanced and
provided for relief of his Majesty's Army and people in the Northern parts of
this Realm, and for preventing the immanent danger this Kingdom is in, and for
supply of other his Majesty's present and urgent occasions, which cannot be so
^^^ely effected, as is (...) without Credit for raising the said moneys: Which
Credit cannot be obtained until such obstacles be first removed, as are
occasioned by fears, jealousies, and apprehensions of diverse His Majesty's
Loyal Subjects, that this present Parliament may be adjourned, prorogued, or
dissolved before Justice shall be duly executed upon Delinquents; public
grievances redressed; a firm Peace between the two Nations of England and
Scotland concluded, and before sufficient provision be made for the repayment
of the said moneys so to be raised. All which the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled having duly considered, do therefore humbly beseech your
most excellent Majesty that it may be declared, and Enacted.

And be it Declared and Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the assent
of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same that this present Parliament now assembled shall not be
dissolved unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose. Nor
shall be at any time or times, during the continuance thereof, prorogued, or
adjourned, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be likewise passed for that
purpose. And that the House of Peers shall not at any time, or times, during
this present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by themselves, or by their
own Order: And in like manner, that the House of Commons shall not at any time,
or times, during this present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by
themselves, or by their own Order. And that all, and every thing, and things,
whatsoever done, or to be done, for the adjournment, proroguing, or dissolving
of this present Parliament, contrary to this Act, shall be utterly voi^, and of
none effect.

The Long Parliament revived.
TO the end the Peace of this Nation may be established upon a firm and lasting
Foundation, and that after one shipwreck, hardly escaped, we run not blindfold
again upon a more fatal, and irrecoverable Rock of confusion: The Author of
this small Paper (out of tender compassion to his native Country, and with all
humble respects of due allegiance, and honor to his Royal Majesty that now is)
has thought fit (with the premi^ed Act of Parliament) to offer some few
Arguments to the World naturally flowing from the authority and reason of it:
Which if timously harkened to, may yet prove a healing remedy against the sad
breaches of this shattered Kingdom; and prevent those other mischiefs, which
the obstinacy of injudicious and self-willed persons will inevitably bring upon
themselves and us. And if convincing reason may bear the sway in this perverse
Age, wherein every man would make his petty private designs to be his Law,
rather than common equity, or the established Law of the Nation, he doubts not
of the desired success he aims at, with Gods blessing, in this ensuing
Discourse.

That the safety and happiness of this Kingdom lies in Parliaments rightly
constituted, and in the preservation of their just and lawful Privileges, I
suppose there are none, of what different judgments soever in other things,
who are Subjects of this Nation, and of sober principles, but will re^dily
grant it. And if so, the contrary thereunto will then without doubt as easily
be concluded.

Which Maxim being yielded in reference to other Parliaments; it must by
proportion hold as true in relation to the Long Parliament called by the late
King Charles the first, of blessed memory in the year 1640. Whose being and
Legal Authority is still so visibly existent by virtue of the forementioned
Act; that when the Subjects of this Nation have seriously considered of it,
they will doubtless see they have no reason to hold themselves safe in their
Lives, Liberties, and Estates, till it have made provision in that behalf, and
it be legally dissolved according to the Tenor of the said Act by Act of
Parliament for that purpose.

And therefore, being that so great a dissecurity to the Subjects, and the
Peace of the Kingdom is incumbent hereupon (as who does not evidently perceive
it, in case that Parliament is yet in its legal force and being) how much does
it concern every Subject of this Nation to be groundedly satisfied in this
particular, by a solid answering of those objections that seem to militate
against the verity of this assertion: That men's minds may be settled, together
with the Peace of the Nation upon a sure Foundation of Law and righteousness;
and we may not, like the waves of the Sea, be still fluctuating too and fro in
doubts and uncertainties by the diverse winds of men's contrary judgments and
opinions, to the continual hazard of our dearest concernments.

To evidence the still legal being of that foresaid Parliament, the Act speaks
sufficiently for it self in plain and express terms: Yet to make it more
clear, these following Arguments, from the Act it self and the Title of it, do
more apparently evince it.

1. To begin with the Title: Which is, An Act to prevent inconveniences that
may happen by the untimely adjourning, proroguing, or dissolving of this
present Parliament: Which inconveniences are specified in the following
preamble of the said Act, whereof chiefly one is this. Lest Credit should not
be obtained for raising of Moneys for relief of his Majesty's Army, and people
in the North, and for supply of other his Majesty's present and urgent
occasions through the continued fears of the Subjects, lest the Parliament may
be adjourned, prorogued, or dissolved, before sufficient provision be made for
repayment of the said moneys to be raised.

In which words there are two things principally to be considered in reference
to the intent and meaning of this Act, why it was made.

First, For the obtaining of Credit, in order to the raising of considerable
Sums of money for supply of the Kings, and Kingdoms great necessities: which
could never have been done, (as by the Act it self is supposed) had not this
Act been made: It being the only ground and foundation of encouragement for the
Credit which was to be given in order to the raising of the said moneys; and
did accordingly effect it.

Secondly, The Parliament could not without this be in any secure condition to
make provision for the repayment of the said money so to be raised, in regard
that through defect of such an Act, the Parliament might be in continual danger
to be untimely dissolved, (and by the clear scope of the Act, it is accounted an
untimely dissolution, if dissolved before the said provision be made) therefore
the dissolution of the said Parliament before such provision made for repayment
of the said moneys, which is not yet done, is expressly contrary to the true
meaning and intention of this Act.

And if this Act were made purposely to prevent the untimely dissolution of the
Parliament, (as it stands express in the Title) then it cannot but have respect
to the Kings Death, as well as to any other means of untimely dissolution: The
Parliament well knowing the Kings life was as uncertain, yea, in some respects
more uncertain than the life of other men: And therefore could not choose but
so understand it, if they intended this Act to be any security for the moneys
borrowed, or to be borrowed upon their Credit.

Secondly. In the substance and body of the Act it is delivered in express
terms, That this present Parliament shall not be dissolved, but by an Act of
Parliament. Whence it follows, that if not dissolvable, unless by an Act of
Parliament, then it is exclusive to all other ways and means of dissolution
(as the interruption by armed violence, the forcible omission of days of
adjournment, the violent, or natural death of the King) or whatsoever else
might be done or have happened legally to dissolve it, had not this Act been
made or constituted.

Thirdly, and lastly, To make all clear, without any exception, in the close of
the said Act it is expressed, That all, and every thing, and things, whatsoever
done, or to be done, for the adjourning, proroguing, or dissolving of this
present Parliament, contrary to this Act, shall be utterly void and of none
effect. Which clause you see looks backward, and forwards in reference to
whatsoever had a legal power and tendency before this Act to dissolve the
Parliament. Against which this Act has now fully provided, that neither what
has been done for the time past, nor whatsoever shall be done for time to
come, shall dissolve this Parliament, excepting an Act of the said Parliament.
Whence I argue, That all those things that otherwise legally would or might
have dissolved this Parliament, had not this Act been made, have no force or
efficacy to dissolve this, but only an Act of this present Parliament. All
other Parliaments having no legal capacity till this be legally dissolved:
unless it be granted that two Parliaments may have both of them legal capacity
at one and the same time. Which I believe there are none so absurd as to aver;
no more, then that two Kings may have a legal capacity at one time in the same
Kingdom.

But because there are diverse objections, that seem to oppose the premises, and
the legal being and capacity of the said Parliament, I shall endeavor to
answer them as strongly, and yet as briefly as I may to every ordinary Readers
understanding.

The first, and grand Objection of all is the death of the late See his true
and perfect narrative of what was done and spoken by and between Mr. Prin and
the old, and newly forcibly secluded members, beginning fol. 24. and so
forwards, Printed in the year 1659.
King that summoned this Parliament in the year 1640. and is argued by Mr. Will.
Prin. Because, says he, it has been frequently resolved by Parliaments
themselves, the reverend Judges, and our Law Books, by King Charles his own
Declaration, and his Judges, and Council, that the deposition and death of the
King does actually dissolve the Parliament, etc.

To which I answer by way of Concession, that the Death of the King does
legally, or according to Custom, dissolve a Parliament that is only called and
constituted by the Kings Writ; but not a Parliament constituted and confirmed
by an Act of the three Estates. Let Mr. Prin, or any other Lawyer show me any
Law or president to that purpose, and I will presently yield the Cause.

If Mr. Prin would have spoken home to this Case, he should have made it appear
where, or when it had been resolved by Parliament, the Judges, and our Law
Books, etc. that in case of an Act of Parliament made for the Session, and
continuance of a Parliament, till they should dissolve themselves by an Act,
that such a Parliament has been, or shall nevertheless be dissolved by the
Kings death, which it is believed he will find a very hard task to prove.

Secondly, He objects, the Parliament is no standing Court, sitting at certain
seasons by positive Laws, but summoned and constituted by the Kings Writ of
Summons, and Royal Prerogative, when, and where he pleases, and adjourned,
prorogued, and dissolved by his Writ alone in point of Law, etc.

I answer again, by way of Concession; that Parliaments, according to their
wonted and bypast Customs, were no certain Courts, sitting at certain seasons
by positive Laws. But yet may be made such by Act of the three Estates. Witness
the Triennial Parliament.

And further, By an extraordinary grant of his late Majesty, this Parliament
was made a standing Court to sit constantly by a positive Law, till they should
please to dissolve themselves. He having been pleased by the said grant, for
the better security of his Subjects, to wave his Royal Prerogative and power of
dissolution; and to give his consent for the nulling of all other means tending
thereunto.

And for what Mr. Prin intimates further in the said Objection: That because
all Writs of Summons are actually abated by the Kings death, as well as all
other Commissions, and Patents of all Judges, Justices, etc. That therefore
this Parliament must needs be dissolved.

I answer: That does not at all follow, till he can make it appear, that there
is no more validity in an Act of Parliament of the three Estates, than there is
in a mere Writ of Summons, or a Commission or Patent granted only by the King:
For though this Parliament was summoned by the King Writ, yet it is manifest,
its continuance and confirmation did not at all depend upon that (for then he
might still have dissolved it when he ple^sed) but upon the Act of the three
Estates, who had established it by Law, and so was now no more dissolvable by
the Kings Death than any other Statute Law, or Act of Parliament whatsoever.
And therefore is not depending on so fickle a thing as a Writ of Summons, or a
Patent, or Commission given the Judges, and which the King may take away and
repeal again at his own pleasure.

And to illustrate this more by an instance, I shall desire to ask Mr. Prin
this Question. Put case that there are certain urgent necessities (as before
specified in the Act) that the Parliament has of great Sums of Money for
preserving the Peace of the Kingdom. This money they must take-up upon their
Credits: But they see no ways how to raise, or repay it, unless their Session
be continued for seven years. Therefore to get Credit for raising the said
Money, and time to reimburse, or give security to the Lenders, they obtain the
Kings consent to an Act for their continuance during the said term (with this
Proviso inserted) though the King by any accident should happen to die before
the said security were given, or the moneys paid. Whether does the Parliament
in this case continue in force and efficacy after the Kings Death, or is it
then actually dissolved?

If Mr. Prin grant it a Parliament in force after the Kings Death upon this
consideration (as I conceive he cannot deny it) then it is apparent, that it is
not the Kings Death barely that does of it self dissolve a Parliament, viz. I
say, a Parliament stablished by a Law: and consequently then not this
Parliament, the reasonbeing alike for the one as for the other.

But if he shall aver, (which to me is incredible) that notwithstanding such an
Act, yet by the Kings Death it is legally dissolved. Then it will necessarily
follow, that Parliament security (which was ever looked upon till now as
inviolable) is most dangerous, and of all others least to be trusted, and the
Subjects had need be warned to take heed of it; seeing it must wholly depend
upon so uncertain a thing as the Kings Life; which as it throws no small
dishonor upon that High Court, So it will be no little prejudice to public
emergencies. For if the King die half a year after the Moneys borrowed, and
before the security be given (and he has no surer or longer a lease of his
life than other men) all the said moneys must absolutely be lost, and so the
Subjects defrauded: No future Parliament being bound to make good the Acts and
Deeds of a Former, further than they will or please themselves: And it is to be
wish, that the Kingdom may not now too sadly have experience of it.

Thirdly, Mr. Prin objects, the Kings name in which the Writs for Election are
issued forth: That because they go out in the name of the King reigning, and so
calls the persons elected to advise with him personally; and the Parliament to
be convened is called his Parliament, and is (...) cons(...) of the arduous
businesses of the Kingdom concerning him etc. Therefore when the King dies who
called the Parliament to advise and consult with himself, the Parliament must
necessarily be dissolved, unless they could be supposed to consult and advise
with him of the weighty affairs of his Kingdom after his decease.

To this I answer first, That though the Writs of Summons run, to consult with
the King personally or by name, yet they say not, to consult with him only, and
so are not so exclusive (having respect to the reason and equity of the Law)
but that the same Parliament may also consult with his Successor, of the Peace
and safety of the Kingdom do require: Granting this Maxim to be undeniably
true, that the safety of the people is the supreme Law.

And though the Parliament summoned by the Kings Writs be called his
Parliament, yet his death does no more vacate it (being established by Law)
than it does other Laws by the same King made, which are most properly called
his Laws, because enacted with his personal consent: and yet we know that they
are not so his, but that they are also the Laws of his Successors, and are so
commonly called.

Besides, By con^ituting the Parliament to dure till they dissolve themselves
by an: Act, the King virtually waved the authority of his Writs of Summons, in
which Writs the Parliament is expressed to be called to consult with him by name:
No such thing being in the least said or expressed in the Act by which this
Parliament is now confirmed to continue, etc. Therefore it matters not, neither
is it at all to the purpose in this case, how, or in what name the Writs of
Summons, whereby this Parliament was first called, were issued forth: Forasmuch
as this Parliament consists no longer by any authority derivative from those
Writs, (that Foundation being wholly taken away) but only by Act of the three
Estates, as is evident in that the King could not now dissolve it by his
personal Authority any more. And if his personal Authority, he being living
(which is affirmative) could not dissolve it; then his death, which is but
negative, or a cessation of the influence of his personal Authority, can much
less do it.

And farther, By way of interrogation I would ask Mr. Prin, Whether he will
grant any more privilege (in the case of the Kings Death) to a Parliament
stablished by a Law, then he will do to a Parliament only called and
constituted by the Kings Writs, (between which he cannot surely but say there
is a very wide difference.) And if he yields the privilege does excel (as he
must needs) on the side of that Parliament that is established by a Law: In
what sense can he conceive it to be, as the case here put, unless by the
duration of its Authority after the Kings Death who called it: Of which
Privilege the Parliament only constituted by the Kings Wrics comes fhort, and
fails, as before acknowledged, by the Kings Death.

And I would fain know what reason there is, that a strained exposition of a
Statute Law as this is (that this Parliament should be dissolved by the Kings
Death) should take place against the express litteral sense of it, which is,
(that it shall not be dissolved, but by an Act:) When as the strained sense
also is evidently dangerous, unsafe, and prejudicial to the public, but the
litteral exceeding beneficial.

The calling of Parliaments, in this or that Kings name, to consult or advise
with this or that King, these are but circumstantial things, and done for
orders sake, and nothing of the substantials and essence of the Government and
Kingdoms welfare. And therefore if Parliaments, called in this or that Kings
name, to advise with this or that King, should continue in force (though there
were no Act for it) after this or that Kings Death, there were no danger or
inconvenience in it (how much less when an Act, as now, implicitly passed to
that purpose) but rather the contrary. They may consult with as much safety and
advantage to the Kingdom with the Successor, as they did with the deceased King.

But to dissolve Parliaments rashly and untimely may throw a well-setled
Kingdom into very great and hazardous difficulties: And how sad a thing were
it, and how contrary to the general rule of the peoples safety (which in the
Government of a Nation ought to be valued before any thing, and is the end of
Government) if for circumstances the general welfare and Peace of the Kingdom
must be hazarded.

Fourthly, As to what M. Prin objects concerning a man by his Will or Deed, or
the King by his Commission, or the Parliament by special Act and Order
authorizing and impowring any three persons jointly to sell Land, give Livery
and seisin, execute any Commission, etc. and that in case any of them die, the
two survivers jointly, or severally can do nothing; because their authority and
trust was joint and not several, etc. Applying this to the Parliament, which
being (as he now expresses it) a Corporation compacted jointly of the King,
Lords, and Commons House, and three Estates, that therefore the Death of the
King necessarily dissolves it notwithstanding this Act.

I answer, This does no more prove it than any of his former Arguments. For
this similitude does not hold proportion, nor come up to our present Case.

For we have not here to do with one Estate or more that has absolute power in
it self (and intends to execute it) to constitute other persons for any office
or trust, as a single person, etc. that makes a Will or Deed does constitute
three or more persons in trust for the execution of his Will or Deed, whose
joint power being expressed in the said Will or Deed, it necessarily fails upon
the death of any one of them, because jointly and not severally entrusted.

But with a Parliament, Who have voluntarily engaged themselves upon a trust
and Credit received from the people for their security, with the consent of the
King making a Law to preserve their Session, and establish their own Authority
against all means of their untimely dissolution till they had honorably
discharged their trust, and given security and satisfaction to those that gave
them Credit: Which nothing concerns any Power or Authority to be given to
others, whether three or more persons (according to Mr. Prins instance) to be
executed jointly, wherein a failer may be through any one of their deaths.

But because there seems something still to be unanswered to this Objection in
reference to the conjunctive power of the Parliament consisting of three
Estates. Therefore this also is fully resolved in the following answer to what
Mr. Prin intimates concerning the Kings being a part of the Parliament: Who
says,

That because the King is a part of the Parliament: Therefore if the King dies,
the Parliament must needs be dissolved.

To which I answer, That the King is rather a part of the Parliament in his
Politic than in his personal capacity, which is always subject to death, but
his Politic never. With this agrees that famous Lawyer Sir Edward Cook, (see
the third part of his Institutes, Chapter the first) where speaking of the High
Court of Parliament, and of what persons it consists, says in the first
place, and in express words: That it consists of the Kings Majesty sitting
there, as in his Royal Politic capacity, etc. And if so, then the Parliament
dies not in all cases when the King dies: (and if this holds good in any case,
then surely in case of an Act to that purpose.) For though his person be dead,
yet his Royal Authority lives, as is sufficiently evident by the Force and
Authority of all our Laws till repealed by Act of Parliament.

But besides, it may thus farther be argued clearly. The Members of the two
Houses of Parliament, though many of them die (as often times it comes to pass,
and it is possible they may all die by degrees before the Parliament rise) yet
the Parliament is not dissolved, because they are not now the very same
individual persons that were chosen first by the Kings Writs of Summons. It Is
sufficient that there have been new Writs issued forth from that House, or
Estate of Parliament whereof they were Members, whereby new Elections, etc.
have been made, and so other Members returned to supply the places of the dead
ones. And if this be good in the case of the two Houses of Parliament, etc.
(which no man that understands Law, and the usage of Parliaments will deny)
then it is much more good in the case of the Kings Majesty's Person: Whose
Royal Estate and Authority is so evident, that it is a declared, undeniable
Maxim in our Laws, He never dies. So that what new Writs do legally for supply
of the places of the dead Members to continue the Estate and Authority of the
two Houses of Parliament: that, and much more eminently the Kings immediate
succession to the Crown after his Fathers, or Predecessors death does do, by
virtue of his Royal birthright and Title of Inheritance. There being this
grand difference, between Members of Parliament dying, and the King. They so
die, that their Authority cannot be revived, but by new Elect^ons, or Writs of
Summons. But the King so dies, that his Authority still lives by immediate
succession. Whence it is that the Royal Seat is never vacant, that there should
be a failer to make good the Royal Actions of the Predecessor. And thus the
third Estate in Parliament always Living, the joint power still continues, and
so there is no necessity the Parliament should dissolve, as Mr. Prin affirms,
due circumstances and actions being weighed, and the necessities of the Kingdom
well considered.

Fifthly, Therefore by what has been said already, Mr. Prins fifth and last
Argument must needs be out of doors, which is this, That because the end of
Parliaments is to enact new Laws, and repeal others, etc. which cannot be done
but by the Kings assent: And this Parliament being to be dissolved by an Act,
and an Act being now impossible to be made by that King for the dissolution of
it, he being dead; therefore his Death must needs dissolve the Parliament
notwithstanding this Act.

I answer in the Negative, In no wise. For though he be dead, as aforesaid in
his personal, (which Mr. Prin seems to answer too weakly in his following
objection) yet not in his Politic capacity. And therefore if the dead King
cannot enact Laws by the Parliament, yet his Successor can, who comes
immediately to the Crown after his Fathers death. And as has been showed, it is
no ways inconvenient, but may many ways be advantageous to the Public; That
should the King chance any ways untimely to be taken away, the Parliament
should continue after the Kings death. Whose death if it should necessarily, as
Mr. Prin affirms, dissolve the Parliament; so untimely a dissolution, as the
case might stand, might prove very dangerous, and pernicious to the Kingdom.

Besides, The Act does not limit the Parliaments dissolution as lawful only, if
it be done by an Act of that King then living, when the Act was made: But in
the general it limits it to an Act of Parliament: that it shall not be
dissolved but by an Act of Parliament. And why the Predecessors authority and
consent should not be as binding to his Successor in this case, till so
dissolved, as in case of any other Law made with his consent, I would very
gladly know a solid reason for it: Being that to all intents and purposes an
Act for confirmation, or dissolution may be as virtual and efficacious without
any prejudice by the consent and authority of the Successor, as of the Father.

And further, the Act is also herein express, that by no other way or means,
but by an Act of Parliament, it shall be dissolved. Which being it cannot be
done by the dead King, but may be done by the Successor, it ought so to be
dissolved, or else it must and does by virtue of this Act still remain legally
in full being and authority.

Sixthly, As to what may be objected concerning the dissolution of this
Parliament by an Act, when the secluded Members were lately admitted. The
Argument is so weak, that I thought wholly to have omitted the least mention of
it. Yet in regard it is objected by some, who seem to receive satisfaction by
it, and there to acquiesce, I shall give this answer in brief to it.

First, That at the best that was but an Act (so called) of the House of
Commons; and so consequently far short of the authority of an Act of
Parliament, or any legal pretense of it: which only consists of King, Lords,
and Commons. And therefore by any such appellative Act, this Parliament can no
ways be dissolvable.

And further, The utmost authority that the House of Commons has given them by
the foresaid Act (for the continuation of this Parliament till they dissolve
themselves by an Act) is but to adjourn themselves by an Order of their own
House, as is express in the said Act. By which it is evident, they have no power
to dissolve themselves; much less, by any Act they can do to dissolve the
Parliament.

And here it is worth the observing, (before I pass over this Act of the House
of Commons, whereby it was endeavored to dissolve the Parliament) That in
their judgments and consciences there was need of an Act to dissolve the
Parliament: And therefore by this Act of theirs they did implicitly grant, that
before the passing of the said Act the Parliament was not then dissolved: (and
so consequently did acknowledge it not to be dissolved by the Kings Death,
which happened many years before,) and if not dissolved by the Kings Death:
then much less by the said Act of the House of Commons, (which carries not the
least shadow of legal Authority with it, as aforesaid, for the dissolution of
it) and therefore by the judgment of the said House, rightly understood, it is
still legally in force and being.

But because some do Object, that in regard the Lords spiritual (to wit) the
Bishops, were oured the House of Peers before the passing this Act for
continuation of the Parliament, whereby their Votes and Consents were never had
in the Case, that therefore it was an illegal Act, and so fell void in it se^f.

I answer briefly, That the Abbots and Priors (29. in number, See Sir Edw. Cook
in his third part of Instit of the High Court of Parliament, how the Lords give
their Voices, Pa 35.
who were formerly Lords of Parliament, and held per Baroniam from the King,
and had their Seats and Votes in the House of Peers as well as the Temporal
Lords) were dissolved in the Reign of King Henry the 8th. And yet all
Parliaments since, with all their Acts, have been held for Legal and Authentic
without the least question or contradiction of their Authority, and therefore
is as little to be scrupled here in our present Case, which is the same; The
Bishops Privilege and right to sit in Parliament being also null and made
void, as well as theirs by Act of Parliament. Whereunto much more might here be
said to this purpose, but that I would not be tedious.

Seventhly, I have but one word more, which answers most fully and
unquestionably all Mr. Prins Objections at once, or what else may be said for
the dissolution of this Parliament by the Kings Death. And that is taken from
the supreme legislative authority under God, that the three Estates, viz. King,
Lords, and Commons, legally called, have over all persons and Causes in the
whole Nation: By virtue whereof they have power to do the highest actions the
Nation is capable of, See Sir Edw. Cook the third part of his Institutes of the
H^gh Court of Parl. of the power and Jurisdict. of the Parl. fol. 36. who
says, That the Power and jurisdiction of the Parl. for making of Laws, in
proceeding by Bill, is so transcendent and absolute, as it cannot be confined
either for causes or persons within any bounds, etc.
though it be even to the dismembring of the Parliament it self, and dissolving
a considerable part of it, or altering any other Fundamental Constitutions they
please, so they see it necessary for the public good (as particularly in the
Case of the Bishops, called the spiritual Lords, and by some affirmed to be the
third Estate in Parliament, who nevertheless have been excluded by an Act of
the King, Lords, and Commons, from their ancient right of sitting and voting in
Parliament, when in their wisdoms their Session there appeared hurtful to
Church and State,) For who may question or control the Actions of a lawful
Parliament, while none in the Kingdom can so much as pretend to be above them.
And if their authority be of so large an extent, even in matters of greatest
weight and moment: then much more in things of far inferior, and much less
concernment, as is the confirmation of a Parliament to continue after the Kings
death who called it, if the three Estates shall see good to pass an Act, as now
they have done to that purpose, (implicitly, though not in express terms) the
King happening to die before it has been dissolved by an Act of Parliament, as
by the three Estates has been firmly enacted, it should be so dissolved, and
no otherwise.

By this time it may be hoped the legal being and Authority of the Long
Parliament is sufficiently evident; The truth whereof being so clearly proved
both by Law and Reason, how much does it unfold to us the sad and dangerous
estate of the Kingdom, whilst under the Constitution of such powers as neither
in Estate, Liberty, or Life, (though otherwise of good Inclinations to the
Public) can give the Nation any legal security.

For though many excellent things have been done by the singular wisdom of
this present Parliament, now sitting, that are of special tendency in
themselves for the good and safety of the Nation through his Majesty's most
gracious condiscention, for which we have infinite cause to bless God; Yet
herein the great unhappiness; That whilst their Authority is not legally
founded, the Nation can promise themselves no assurance for Vide Postscript
the lasting enjoyment of those benefits and securities they have given it,
being, it is to be feared, and too justly, they fall void of themselves by
virtue of the said Parliaments illegal Policy and Constitution.

Therefore how much were it to be wished, that the Supreme Legislative
Authority of the Nation might again revert into that Channel by which the Peace
and Settlement of the Nation, through His Majesty's most Gracious Influence,
might durably, and without question, be provided for, and preserved.

In reference to which I shall humbly take the boldness to offer it as a
weighty and serious consideration to this present Parliament now sitting,
whether they should not do well (for their own safety as well as the Nations)
to advise his Majesty in this particular; (They only having the privilege and
opportunity now effectually to do it) their case in point of safety or danger
being the same with the rest of the peoples, when once they shall come to be
dissolved.

But now here, because the fears and scruples which at first apprehension are
apt to arise in the hearts of the Generality of the Kingdom, may seem a great
Obstruction in Prudence against the return of that Parliament to sit again, in
reference to the danger of perpetuating of it, Who therefore may be ready to
say, By so doing me may inslave King and Kingdom to such a yoke of Bondage as
we may never be able to break off our own necks, or the necks of our Posterity
any more.

I shall give hereunto this closing answer; That the scruple is very rational;
and though such a thing there is a possibility they might do or attempt,
(though very improbably effect) if they should so wickedly abuse their trust;
yet those fears will soon be removed from wise and discreet persons, if we do
but seriously consider, That the far greater number of the Members surviving
are of the secluded Party, who were thrust and forced out of the House for
their Loyalty to the King: Or of those that withdrew themselves upon the
offense given by occasion of the Armies violence against King and Parliament;
and have been the chief Instruments of his present Majesty's happy restoration.
And therefore, being persons so qualified, we may easily believe they will not
be very willing to draw such an Odium upon their unstained Credits, as will
inevitably follow, besides the further mischiefs will be apt to ensue to
themselves, and the Nation by renewed discontents) should they go about to
ingross the Authority of the Nation any longer in their own hands than will be
necessary for public safety with his present Majesty's Approbation? Who for
further security against those fears may easily summon them together by his
Proclamation to Whitehall, or where else he pleases, before their Session
again in Parliament, and there receive their personal promise, and engagement
to confirm the Acts of this present Parliament, and to prepare a Bill the first
thing they do at a certain time to be agreed on betwixt his Majesty and them to
dissolve themselves, and for his Majesty's issuing out Writs for the summoning
of a new Parliament, that so things may sweetly return again without violence
or injury done either to his Majesty's Prerogative, or his Peoples Liberties
into a regular and legal way of proceeding to the general security and
satisfaction of the whole.

POSTSCRIPT.
BEcause there are great and general dissatisfactions concerning this present
Parliament, so called, now sitting, in question of its legal right and
authority,, (being the Authors design is nothing else but the peace and
security of his native Country,) and a through healing of our wounds and
breaches) he humbly desires further to offer these few following particulars to
the grave and serious consideration of those that are more learned in the Laws,
in hopes that some eminent person of that profession will give a solid and
judicious resolution to them.

First, Sir Edward Cook in the third Part of his Institutes, writing of the
High Court of Parliament, and of what persons that Court consists, speaking of
the Temporal Lords, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, who sit
there by reason of their dignities which they hold by descent or Creation,
says, that every one of these being of full Age ought to have a Writ of
Summons ex debito Iustitia.

Where note, two things are required to the legality of their Session in
Parliament.

First, That they be of full Age. And if that be a quallification leg^lly
required of Peers (for it will easily be granted to be most absurd and unjust,
that they that have not power by Law (as all Infants under age have not) o
dispose of any part of their own Estates, or to make one legal act to that
purpose) that such should have a share in the supreme power to judge, vote, and
dispose of the Estate and Authority of the whole Kingdom.) I say then by rule
of proportion, that it is a qualification as necessarily required of the
Commons upon the said consideration. And it were happy for this Nation
therefore that it were better looked after for the future, that so those
mischiefs may be prevented which too often ensue to the Public by bringing
such green heads into so wise and grave a Council.

Secondly, It Is required to their legal Session in Parliament, that the said
Lords have Writs of Summons; which these now sitting in this present Parliament
never had.

Next, The said Sir Edward Cook in the forecited place says, that the Commons,
which he calls there the third Estate of the Realm, consisting of Knights of
Shires for Counties, Citizens of Cities, and Burgesses of Buroughs, they all
are respectively to be elected by the Shires or Counties, Cities and Buroughs,
by force of the Kings Writ ex debito Iustitia. But the Commons of this present
Parliament were not so chosen; but by force of a Writ in the name of the
Keepers of the Liberties of England.

Thirdly, He says, that at the return of the Writs the Parliament cannot begin
but by the Royal presence of the King; either in person, or by representation.
By representation two ways: Either by a Guardian of England by Letters Patents
under the Great Seal, when the King is in remote parts out of the Realm. Or by
Commission under the Great Seal of England to certain Lords of Parliament,
representing the Person of the King, he being within the Realm in respect of
some infirmity, See Sir Edward Cook in his third Part of Institutes of the High
Court of Parliament concerning the beginnings of Parliaments, Page 6.) But this
Parliament began without the Royal presence of the King either in Person or by
Representation.

Fourthly, That the substance of the Writs of Summons must continue in their
original Essence without any alteration or addition, unless it be by Act of
Parliament. (See the same Sir Edward Cook in his third Part of Institutes of
the High Court of Parliament concerning Writs of Summons of Parliament, Page
10.) But how great an alteration and addition to the substance of the Writs of
Summons is this, to issue them forth in the name of the Keepers of the
Liberties of England without the least authority of Parliament, which by the
express Statute ought only to be issued forth in the name of the King.

And therefore if there be any weight in Mr. Prins foresaid Argument to null a
Parliament because of the Kings Death who called it, in regard the Writs of
Summons were issued forth in the name of that King deceased, with whom by name
the Members of Parliament were called to consult and advise, but now cannot: It
will, I conceive, be no hard question to resolve, (and it were good Mr. Prin
would undertake it without partiality, or affection) Whether the Parliament
does not ipso facto fall void, and all the Acts of it, further than they shall
be confirmed by a lawful Parliament, which is not called by any Writs of the
Kings at all: But only by Writs, as aforesaid, in the name of the Keepers of
the Liberties of England, (and by those Writs, none but the Commons) with whom
they are summoned to consult too about the businesses of a Commonwealth,
(which these times have sufficiently taught us the meaning of) and not with the
King about the arduous businesses of His Kingdom.

These premised illegalities considered, in reference to this present
Parliament (the legal being and capacity, as premised, of the Long Parliament
being supposed to be here totally waved) Whether is this a lawful Parliament,
and capable to make legal and binding Acts? Or having been declared a lawful
Parliament by an Act by themselves made since their Session with the Kings
consent, Whether can the Kings consent make them such, though otherwise
unlawful in their Call, Principle, and Foundation?

For I would put the case the King should have come in while Oliver, or
Richards Parliaments had been sitting, (to which the Lords, as now, should have
presented themselves without Writs of Summons) and his Majesty, under that
constitution, should have consented to a Bill to grant them a lawful
Parliament: Would that at all have made them so, under such a Constitution? Can
that which is unlawful in it self, and contrary to the Fundamental
Constitutions of the Nation be made lawful barely by the Kings Consent?

Which if it shall be pleaded in the affirmative (though I very much question
whether any understanding Lawyer will venture his reputation on it) I shall
desire then to be instructed in a better Argument to make good the lawful being
and authority of the Long Parliament. For surely, if a Parliament be lawful
merely because of the Kings consent, passing an Act to that purpose, though
otherwise utterly unlawful in its Call and Foundation: Then doubtless that
Parliament is much more lawful, and in its legal being that was founded upon a
lawful Call, and had the Kings consent to an Act to authorize it to continue
till they dissolve themselves by an Act. And if that be still a lawful
Parliament, then I am sure upon that account this can be none, nor no other,
till that be legally dissolved.

To which there is this further to be added concerning the intentions generally
of the whole Nation in reference to this Parl. by the best information I can
gather: That it was never in the least meant that these should sit to pass Acts
as a lawful Parl. (which was only like to prove a snare to the people as other
Parl. of the like nature, so called, have done through the disputableness and
unwarrantableness of their Authority.) But only, that for the present necessity
they might bear the face of Parliamentary Authority for preserving the Peace of
the Nation till his Royal Majesty, that now is, might be happily restored, (the
Kingdom panting after him as their only means of settlement) and so soon as
that was effected then to dissolve in order to the sending forth his Majesty's
Royal Writs of Summons for calling a Parliament according to the ancient
Custom and Fundamental Constitution, (the old Parliament being first legally
dissolved) that so all things might return again into a legal and
uncontrovertible way of proceedings, to the quiet of all men's minds, and
satisfaction of the whole Kingdom, who are sufficiently weary of the mischiefs
of irregular actings by illegal Authorities.

Conclusion.
IF the power of the Sword, or other arbitrary proceedings do not interpose to
interrupt free debates, and the course of Law and Justice: which the Author
hopes there is now no cause to fear as formerly (all Estates and Degrees in the
Nation having sufficiently seen the inconvenience, and tasted the smart of such
unrighteous actings) he doubts not (upon a serious consideration of the
foregoing Arguments, if men will lay aside passion and self Interest) but that
right foundations will shortly again be restored, that knowing our groundwork
to be sure and unquestionable; the Subjects of all sorts in the Kingdom may
with all safety and cheerfulness submit too, and act under the lawful powers in
being, every one sitting in Peace under his own Vine and Fig Tree, blessing the
God of his Salvation: Which is daily the Authors earnest and most hearty prayer.

FINIS.

