SEVERAL VISIONS AND REVELATIONS OF Drabricius, As they were Discovered and
Given-forth unto him, in the Years, 1651, 1652, 1653, 1654, 1655, 1656, 1657,
1662, 1663, 1664.

Translated into English for public satisfaction.

London, Printed in the Year, 1664.

Of the sixty seventh Revelation of Drabricius, October. 16. Anno 1651.
AGain, the Word of the Lord came unto me, when I was awake, being sad, about
the Epistle, 1. Chapter But the Lord answering, said, That men do not understand
how delightful to him it is, to destroy the Wicked from the Earth, and to lay
waste and overthrow Kingdoms and Cities filled with the briars of impieties:
and on the contrary, to defend his own, and free them from Oppressors, although
he also suffers some of these to be overwhelmed by the same, and through those
occasions does bring them into Heaven to himself. But that men will not
consider, that all things are brought to pass by his only disposure and
determination of all events; bidding me be of good cheer, and not be moved at
the rash judgments of men; that his Favor did remain toward me and others, as
his Sons and Brethren: for so he, while living on the Earth, called his
Friends, who loved him, that he accounted them for the Treasure of his heart,
unto whom he is wont to reveal his Secrets, not to the World: that even he
himself being delighted in them, and they being delighted in him, may enjoy
pleasure, the manner of which thing, and how he deals with me, that none did
understand beside he and me. -- both temporal and eternal; for he did not
reveal his hidden Treasures promiscuously to all, but to those for whom they
are meet, and to whom he pleases to reveal them: for the which I having given
thanks unto the Lord Jesus, requested to fall asleep; And the Lord said, Sleep
thou my Beloved, I will show thee singular things. I slept soundly therefore in
a moment, and I saw my self by a narrow winding passage, being exceeding
strait, yet very smooth; I entered it with labor, going up and down, until I
came unto a company of men of both sexes, being clothed in plain raiment,
talking together in silence, and dwelling together with delight, some of whom
notwithstanding were, as it were, fearful, and as they seemed to me, much
trembling: But as soon as I awaked, the Lord said; Lo, these are they whom I
have chosen out of the world, being unseen, without deceit, also taking
pleasure in them in the time of storms, in the midst of whom I walking, do
protect them, having a care of them here on Earth; and the Angels my Servants
do minister unto them, of which administering Spirits, what Troops there are, I
will show unto thee at another time, only do thou trust in me. I praised God
therefore, with the 103 d Psalm; and having ended my prayer, I wrought these
things. Hallelujah.

Of the 99th Revelation, Febr. 19. 1652.
And the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying; I will now have Unanimity, or
oneness of mind in Worship, among all that serve me, the which is performed to
me the living God with one heart. I will no longer bear Sects and Discords in
any Nation of the World. Let the beginning of my Reformation be wrought in the
Idolatrous Ministers of the Whore, who (as I said before, and do yet say) let
all the refractory ones be slain indifferently without mercy: For I will have
no root of Popish Doctrine left in any Nation.

Of the 114th Revelation, March 23. 1652.
About the second hour a dream befell me, wherein I saw a youth coming unto me,
in a somewhat long but plain garment, yet exceeding comely, he talking with me
most courteously: after I awook, and mused who it was that I had seen, the Lord
answered, I have shown my self unto thee in my habit, in which I walked up and
down on the Earth from the twelfth year of my age: the which my age ye
restoring, do sing, O fill us with thy Spirit thou Lord Jesus Christ.

April 4. 1652.
The day appearing, the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying; Know thou that
my Work is to go on, and thou shall hear the Voice of my Consolation, wherewith
I will comfort the Woman that fled into the Wilderness from the face of the
flood, which the Dragon poured-forth after her upon the Earth, who is my
delight, the Church afflicted and slain by Deaths, by Pharaoh, unto whom I have
now put an end according to my determinate Counsel.

July 2. 1652.
The Lord said unto me: Behold my House, the House of the World, is filled with
defilements, throughout all the corners of diverse and remote Nations, that
inhabit my House; who although they all have part of the light natural from
Adam; yet my other Light, which I have kindled in my Soliloquies with men, with
many Patriarchs, and in the promulgation of my Law with terror and horror, they
know not, neither will they know, because I have not afforded them means
whereby they might attain a full Light.

August 27. 1652.
The Lord said unto me; Behold the times that I have appointed for my work, are
come, that the Nations as it were, impure stones, may be repurged, for the
building of my House in the whole world, which Satan has defiled through the
multiplicity of Religions, according to the variety of the opinions of man's
reasoning, and of the inventions of humane trifles, which are contrary to me
and my Law.

Revelation the 149. October. 24. 1652.
Early in the morning after my prayers were ended, I slept again, and lo a
young man of a beautiful shape, and having comely hair, bearing Ensigns or
Trophies in his hand; the which being beheld, I wondered what it should be. And
presently in that Buckler I saw a Lion, with his two feet raised upright, and
over against us a Vail spread, being very beautifully painted. The which when I
beheld what it would betoken, I observed that I was not asleep: and I saw there
a very pleasant Field, through which diverse Nations did go with Horses, with
great familiarity among themselves. Which Vision, as soon as it vanished, I
betaking my self to prayer, and meditating what those things might signify, I
fell into sleep, but I soon again awaked: And the Lord said unto me, Thou have
seen the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David, whose Strength and Arm
shall be revealed to the Nations of the Earth, which thou have seen from all
the corners of the world, after that I shall have destroyed the multitude of
those that dwell on the Earth, that will not acknowledge my Name. For I the
Governor of the Earth, will perform my New Work, in renewing my Laws
throughout the Nations, that Sion may triumph, and Jerusalem may be rebuilt:
where my Sons shall serve me without Idols and Idolaters, the which I will
beget in the room of those, who do now blaspheme me and my Name, committing
Abomination with the Whore, those Kings of the Earth who have begotten
Heathenish Abominations upon the Earth. For the Waters of the Flood that toss
the Ark shall depart, in which I will keep you my beloved Ones, being a small
number, until a day of Peace, unto which there has not been the like since the
beginning of things: For my Sons shall come from far, the which I will beget
unto my self upon the face of the Earth, the which ye shall admire at, whence
these should come, they being Children begotten by a Man without a Woman, being
nursed up without a Mother. Do thou my Servant seal what my mouth has spoken
to thee to day. But do ye who wait for me, watch and pray, trusting on me your
Creator, being single and sincere one toward another. I will preserve you, but
I will overthrow those, both mine and your enemies, with the Flood. Arise and
write these things.

Of the 153 Revelation, November. 15. 1652.
And the Lord said; Behold a Woman having a Beard, counterfeiting the male sex,
which has stretched forth her hands; in the one holding a Sword, wherewith she
slew, and in the other Fire, wherewith she burnt the Nations. Setting Crowns
upon the heads of those who brought their Treasures unto her, the which she
casting at their feet, made Images thereof without life, and gave them honor
and virtue, the which she her self had not: Breathing forth of her mouth
Terrors, Sword and Fire, against the People that were disobedient to her words,
and casting down the Mighty from their seats, who refused to bear her Mark in
their foreheads, the which she sold for Gold and Silver throughout all Europe:
upon whom I do open a Door to the Nations, which no power or prudence of man
shall shut; but that they having taken her, may turn her heels upwards, that
her shame may appear to the people, and she may become an Abomination to all
the Nations of the Earth. My Southern-Armour-bearer, together with my Eastern,
shall withdraw from her the Vizard of her Manly-habit: my Northern one shall
strike a Dart into her Heart; but my Western one shall throw her down from her
Seat with a great noise, the which shall sorely affrighten the Inhabitants of
the Earth, and being astonished, they shall run unto Me sitting on the Throne,
enquiring after my Light and my Power, who sitting on my Seat, do with the one
hand show Grace and Love, together with Blessing; with the other hand I show
Power, with Eternal Justice, against those who will not acknowledge Me and my
Name [Jesus of Nazereth the Governor of the Earth!] who revealed my Self, and
manifested my Will to Patriarchs, Prophets, and Kings, the wisest whereof built
me a most glorious Temple upon Earth, of Wood, Stone, precious Stones, Gold and
Silver; but it passed away: but I the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, will
even now build my New-Jerusalem of Nations, unto whom, I, through Evangelists
and Apostles, have set seven Stars in the Temple of my Church, for a Sign, the
which my Servants have already known, and do show to the Inhabitants of the
Earth, they working out their Salvation with fear and trembling; but by reason
of the darkness which the Whore disperseth from her, there are few that do walk
in the Light of my Stars.

Febr. 8. 1653.
I having passed away almost the whole night, with great disturbances of mind;
the day appearing, the Lord (after other things) said unto me; Behold, I am
weary of bearing the Nations, who are ignorant of Me and my Name, who bring
reproach on me and my Name. I will therefore now at length, in these last
days, have all Heresies, worshipping of Idols, and all erroneous Worship to be
rooted out, and that indeed first in Christendom it self, I bringing it so to
pass, that there may be my Ark (that of Noah) whereinto I, before the end of
the World, will bring souls out of all Nations, by my Light, and by men chosen
to this end, whom the World as yet knows not.

Febr. 27. 1653.
When I called to remembrance what it was which I had seen in a Dream, a
Shepherd or Pastor of a Church, with his Wife, in a most plain habit, yet being
clean, and covered, and distributing Breadcorn among their Children; the Lord
answered: Thou have seen Me and my Wife in my ancient unseen simplicity, which
the vain and proud Idolatrous Teachers in all Ages will neither know nor
understand, that I am he who resists the proud, but do distribnte my Gifts to
the humble, and that freely, as a Father to his Children. Which Gift, whosoever
rightly uses, with an imitating of my Life, he shall dwell with me for ever.
But how is it, whenas my Worshippers are, as they have always been, so now
oppressed by Idolaters, as if there were no God, and no Justice in the World,
as if all things were left free to Violence and Tyranny.

Of the 237 Revelation, May 28. 1654.
After my morning-prayer, the Lord having talked with me, said; Dismiss thou
Grief, my Servant, thou shall receive Comfort in these days. But I thought
with my self that the words of Samuelwere not wont to fall to the ground: and
the Lord presently answered; Is there any cause of that thing, except because
that my Words have been received with simple faith and obedience? Ah! if my
Words had been thus heard by Sodom and Gomorrah, they had more readily done my
Will with Repentance: But have I ever spoken otherwise by my Servants the
Prophets, than thus? than after such a manner, I say, as I have spoken, and do
as yet speak by thee? Do thou only fear me, my care is of thee. But behold! on
the very same day, there came unto me from the Lord Petroces (a Noble
Hungarian) two bushels of Bread-corn; the which I received with astonishment,
wondering that it should come from that place, where I was almost unknown, after
that not so much as one pugil or small handful of Meal was remaining in my
house.

July 12. 1654.
When I had ended my sighs, the Lord showed me a certain Light, and it flashed
twice in mine eyes, the which I wondered at: And the Lord said; I will loose the
Nations of the Earth from the Fetters and hard Yoaks of men, who have Spiritual
Titles and Carnal Works, and through false Doctrine, passing away their Life
without Virtue. They bear about only a mask of Christianity, seeking thereby
to deceive Me and my People, and in the mean time living most lavishly,
teaching and doing all things to the disgrace of my Cross, and of my Doctrine,
and of true Christianity. Kindle a Fire, and cast those Vizards into the Flame,
and take up my Cross, of the true imitation of me in Spirit and Truth. And do
not kill with the Sword, those who as yet know me not, but offer unto them the
right hand of Charity, and send ye the Light of my Law unto them, by men that
are enlightened by Me, which ye have now in Europe.

Of the 263 Revelation, September. 4. 1654.
Thus said the Lord; Thou have seen the House of the World, and the Streets
thereof, and men of diverse ranks enlightened by Me, who do now write after what
manner the world may be helped, being inhabited by many and diverse Nations,
that they may hasten to return from whence they have departed, they being sent
forth by Me into the House of the World, not to this end that they should
remain here for ever, but that certain services being here performed to me, and
one another, they might return unto Me, as good Dispensers of the manifold
Grace of God: many of whom are carried forth in the Chariots of diverse
Occasions, as it has pleased me here to educate every one, young man, or old
man of ripe age. Thou have seen also, the Chariots and Coaches wherein many do
sit, they being ready to depart (although the Horses are not yet joined to the
Chariots) that I may take them to my self, who notwithstanding do still write,
and perfect their Counsels, with a desire of moving the Nations forward to the
True Light, that they may acknowledge me to be the eternal living Bridegroom of
the Wedding. Write ye therefore, write ye, O ye whosoever and wheresoever ye
are, who have known me, and known the sound of my Trumpet, that now is the time
for the enlightening, thorow-purging, and thorow-healing of the House of the
World, and for the threshing of the Floor of my Bread-corn, and for the
repurging it from the chaff, and sweepings, and tares, and that my
Vine-branches may be thoroughly pruned, for to bring forth the fruit of true
Faith, of fervent Love, and of living Hope throughout all the Countries of the
World: for now is the time. But I will gird my self, and minister unto you, not
in such a manner as your earthly reason can apprehend, but in such a manner as
all things are without their care, endeavor and expectation (for neither are
ye able to understand it) prepared and disposed of by my Father; where I ought
to place every one of you, and in what company, to serve me for ever, among the
Quires of my Angels, who do invisibly serve you.

June 1. 1655.
Again, The Word of the Lord came unto me after my morning-prayers, being the
more frequently uttered, saying; My Servant, the knowledge of my Work has
already pierced unto many pious souls, they do now gird themselves to perform
my Work, because it is hard to struggle with me. The Lion roaring, who may not
be afraid? And I the Lord commanding, who shall not work?

Of the 314th Revelation, July 1. 1655.
And the Lord said, All things must needs wax ripe, for the time of Harvest and
Vintage of the clusters of Grapes within the walls of the hardest Rocks,
between which they have remained, and do remain, in the ignorance of me and my
Eternal Will. Ah! the great Stones do hardly suffer themselves to be cleft, for
the building of the new Spiritual Jerusalem, my beloved Church. But the Hammer,
my Word, that dasheth the Rock in pieces, shall effect that: For know thou,
that all do not pierce unto me through the narrow way and strait gate, but
those only whom my Aid does help, it being required of me by Faith.

Of the 315th Revelation, July 4. 1655.
And the Lord said, I will triumph in the Nations, when I shall work a renewing
of my Temple, defiled with Errors and Discords, and shall set up true Worship
for my Name, wherein is Salvation for all you, O ye People, who have known and
do celebrate that Name: And I will say, Rejoice exceedingly O Earth! I will
fill the world with Comforts, when I shall reduce you that are spread
throughout the Nations, into one, to serve Me who lives for ever. For the which
prepare your selves, O ye my Witnesses in Christianity, who are separated from
each in body, but near to one another in spirit. Now it is sufficient, it is
sufficient, that many have erred in that forepast time of darkness, as Sheep
without a Shepherd, even Me the Root of Life. Behold, I did long since cry, and
do cry, but they unto whom I speak have not heard; and I commanded to speak, by
reason of unbelief and hardness of heart. But now indeed, I have given unto
many, eyes to see, and ears to hear, and I have filled the world with this cry,
Babylon is fallen, is fallen! for the miserable Harlot is fallen with me, and
she shall fall amongst you also, while her work shall stand without power. O
thou Babylon, Babylon, drink thou, drink thou, and thou shall drink the Cup of
my Wrath, which thou have filled for thy self, thou have given Nations, Kings,
Princes and Lords, Secular and Ecclesiastical, to drink of thy Poison; and
people, that are wretched and ignorant of the Name and Power of Him, whom the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Kings knew, they having life and breath from Him, as
ye now have. Bear, and thoroughly bear, both thou thy self, and also thy Kings,
and also thy Clergy, the Fire of mine Anger for a time, rather than to bear it
for ever. Let go, let go now at length your Errors, O ye erring People and
Nations, and catch hold of the Word of my Truth, even of Me the Root of Life
for ever, and ye shall have Honor and Glory both in Heaven and in Earth.

August 15. 1655.
There a little after offered themselves to my sight, first, an Old Man, of a
reverend countenance; then a Young Man, of a comely countenance and garment;
whom I beholding, rejoiced and wept. As Soon as I ceased, the Lord said, Now my
Laborers do work, toward the North, and toward the West. Thou shall hear in a
short time, etc.

Of the 329th Revelation, August 16. 1655.
It came into my mind concerning the English, and I wondered within my self that
the Lord had hitherto spoken nothing concerning them, where the most great Lord
Cromwell, a man of blood, etc. Do thou think that any thing will otherwise
come to pass than as I spoke long since? for they do already take one another
by the hand, (saying) Come, let us work a Work in our days, while it is called
to day. These words being spoken, the Lord showed me the Faces of Men, of old
and young, of a comely countenance; and he said, These are Englishmen, in whom
my Words have already taken a deep hold. Those fair ones do perform my
Commandment, of gathering unto me those that know me not.

September. 20. 1655.
On the fourth day in the morning, while it was yet dark, the Lord said unto
me; Behold my day is now at hand, which ye shall see, but after a different
manner: for some shall see it with joy, others with trembling. A Terrible
Reward shall ye receive, ye abominable Idolaters, ye evil-workers, who do
always spoil me of mine Honor, whose Work is not of a violent compulsion unto
good, but it is wrought, and ought to be performed by the virtue of Love, as it
were a sweet Odor from that Food which perishes not.

Of the 339 Revelation, September. 20. 1655.
And the Lord said, Even now shall come unto you the time of your Reward, the
which I have both merited for, and promised to you that truly believe in me:
But not unto you only, but also to those who through ignorance reproached me,
yet after a diverse manner. Some through mere ignorance, as I have said: others
through obstinacy, by reason of the transitory gain of Honor and Riches of the
World, they undeservedly hating you my Worshippers; for this cause only,
because ye did cast a burning Spear into their eyes, the Truth of my holy Law,
and of my Life: Ye serving my Sheep freely out of Love, after my example, and
the example of my ancient Witnesses. They could not upbraid you, that ye had
eat the fat, and clothed your selves with the wool, in feeding my Flock: and
therefore they have hated you without a cause, says the Lord.

Of the 342 Revelation, October. 3. 1655.
And the Lord said, Arise and be attentive in thy self, go thou seldom forth
any whither: let thy delight be with Me, and thou shall be my beloved Servant,
nourished with the words of Faith, and shall draw Virtue from Me, let my
Protection be with thee.

Of a Revelation, May 15. 1656.
The Lord showed me two Barrels, out of which they drew Wine: But out of one of
them, the bigger, did flow forth clear Wine; but out of the less, exceeding
thick or troubled, with a narrow pipe. The which as it passed through, the
Voice of the Lord spoke unto me; My Servant, I have shown thee two Barrels:
That bigger, with the Wine already refined, is England, where I have already
ordained Quietness and the Order of my Worship. The other Barrel is Poland,
being most full of the turbulent dregs of discord, deceits, lies, and all kind
of confusion; it must needs be purged, after the manner that I have denounced,
as also this part of Hungary. As long as the Palatinate, the Jesuits, and the
Archbishop are not thrown down, this Land will remain unquiet. Do thou labor,
and send Letters to him that is near thee, the day after thou shall receive a
sorrowful message.

May 31. 1657.
I have set a Crown of Tyle on the head of the Pope, and the like Crown will I
put on the head of the King of Spain, when I shall have rent his Kingdom from
him, a part whereof the English also, my faithful ones, shall receive, the
which neither they themselves can think, nor the World.

December. 14. 1662.
The Lord said, Lo there has already fallen a Stone out of my hand, which none
of the sons of men shall remove, nor any of the Electors of the Empire, who do
in vain consult of stopping it: For a change of things in the whole World is at
hand, and is already come, that all the Nations of the Earth should depart out
of Darkness into Light, after that the Flood is come upon a great multitude of
men. But do ye prepare your hands to gather.

March 8. 1663.
The Lord showed me two Temples, toward the East and toward the North, with
Tables hanging on both sides of them: on the Northern Table was written in
great Letters, LIGHT, LIGHT, LIGHT; but on the Eastern Table toward the South,
WOE, WOE, WOE.

June 18. 1663.
Again, The Word of the Lord came unto me, when the Lord had shown me a great
and sumptuous City, which a great River did flow by, being adorned on its banks
with pleasant Gardens and Mills; diverse men known and unknown, beholding those
things with me. And lo a vehement Wind rushed on it, together with the Flood,
overturning the Walls and Houses, and taking away the Gardens and Mills with a
great noise, it being a most sad spectacle to me, and a great grief of heart,
concerning the destruction of the City and the men, because very few were
delivered therefrom: but I praised God for the Preservation of us. I awakening,
prayed unto God, and my prayer being ended, the Voice of the Lord sounded
within me; My Beloved, All my Words are in my remembrance, which I spoke from
the beginning of things by my Witnesses, also in this last Age by Cotterus,
Christiana, and others to thee unknown, by thee also at length I have uttered
what I was about to do before the end of things: For lo the age of the
Patriarchs, Judges, Kings and Prophets are passed away, and the age of my
dwelling upon the Earth and of my Apostles; and the age of Cyprian, Athanasius,
Augustine, and of others unto Wickliff, Hus, Luther, and the more ancient men
of the Brotherly Unity. But behold the Sixth Age is now at hand, wherein I the
Governor of the Earth, will make an end of the Beast, and of the Whore that
rides the Beast. And I will cast down that great Stone, to beat down Vienna
that seat of Tyrants to my People, for an Abominable Spectacle to the World, to
Turks and other Nations, unto whom the shining light of my Light did not shine,
that they might receive Illumination, to the acknowledgement of me, who Alone
am the Light of the World, illuminating every man that comes into this World.

December 17. 1663.
The Voice of my roaring unto the People, and their Kings, of France, Portugal,
England (where I have many diligent ones) and to the Inhabitants of the Empire
of Germany, its Electors and Princes; as also to the Polonians, Muscovites,
Tartars, Turks, I will have my formerly and now denounced Will performed, that
ye being made unanimous, do throw down from its lofty seat, the Power of the
Pope of Rome, exercising Idolatry and Tyranny, whereby the whole Earth may
become as a mowed Meadow, repurged from Errors and filthy Idolatry, and that
all Nations may be brought and be converted unto me, who Alone am the Light of
the World, enlightening every man that comes into this World. For I the
Governor of the Earth do will, that before the end of the World there be One
Faith, and One Baptism.

March 20. 1664.
And the Lord said, I wish that ye Christians, who have known my Name, and who
perform the more weighty Offices in Church and State, would be all one in Me,
without the rentings asunder into so many names (unacceptable to me) as
Waldenses, Hussites, Lutherans, Calvinists, etc. I therefore cry out, Be ye All
even now at length, a little before Sunsetting, One in Me, with the Father and
Holy-Spirit, all of you indifferently, with all who desire Salvation. O I wish
that ye sons of men would remember, how that I before my Death, prayed my
Father and your Father, my God and your God, for you; that all ye, whose
Natures I assumed, a Body like unto you, sin only excepted, might be One.

Nicholas Drabicius, being a Minister of the Church in Bohemia, which is called
by the name of the Brotherly Unity, is commended for singleness of mind,
without any deceit, and for the love of Justice and Zeal, enduring no Iniquity
(but he either reproved it, or showed displeasure against it.) Lastly, being
ready to succor the necessities of any neighbor whatsoever, almost beyond
example, as is wont to be said of him by good men that are yet alive, in an
extraordinary manner; and it may be most truly said of him, That he was ready
even to divide his heart with any one. The Church being afterward dispersed
through the persecutions of the Sea of Rome, when he saw that he was not
banished far off, he betook himself to the employment of Clothing, for which
cause especially the rest of his Brethren suspended him from the Office of the
Ministry, as a Traitor or Apostate. In this state of Exile, and as it were of
Excommunication, first the Word of the Lord came unto him in the year 1638, and
so until 1664, he now being 77 years of age: he has the place of his abode in
Moravia.

As concerning the question, Whether or no these Prophecies, or the like, ought
to be published? Mark, The said Prophecies will prove either false or true: If
false, then there will, when published, come of it two notable profits: one is,
that thereby Kings and Princes will be the more sure, and prove good; because,
if bad, false Prophets would never stir against their Government. The second
is, that the Subjects will henceforth beware of false Prophets, and so keep to
more firm obedience. But if the said Prophecies should prove true, then there
would, when suppressed, come of it two irrepairable damages: One is, that such
who kick against the pricks, will be arraigned at the Bar of the Lord
Omnipotent, and be found guilty of Suppression of the Lord's Voice, when he
roareth like a Lion, to warn the Nations and Rulers thereof that they might not
perish unawares, but save themselves according to his direction. The second is,
that they will be found guilty of High Treason, both to the King, and the
Subjects or People, like one that knew they should be murdered and destroyed,
and yet hid it. Therefore whatsoever those Prophecies might be, false or true,
they ought not to be kept under a bushel; but let them be set forth as a
Candle, that every one may take notice of them, either to Salvation, or to
beware of false Prophets: Or else, some might be ready to think, that men
suppressing the publication thereof, were convinced of something, and afraid in
their consciences of something which they sought to prevent the Lord's Judgment
upon: even as if humane craftiness were able to prevail with the Power of the
Lord of Hosts, and stop it: which is but a pitiful wisdom, to be laughed and
mocked at by him that sits in the Heavens, viz. the Lord and his Anointed,
Psalm. 2.

THE END.

