THE Proviso or Condition OF THE PROMISES, The Strait, but the Straightway
that leads unto Happiness. Being the Substance of Two SERMONS Preached at
Wilton, March the First. 1656. Upon 2 COR. 7.1. Now published at the request of
some of the Parishioners and Auditors then present:

BY Tho. Drayton, Dr in Divinity.

LONDON; Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1657.

THE Proviso or Condition OF THE PROMISES: The Strait, but the Straightway
that leads unto Happiness.
2 COR. 7.1. Having therefore these promises, dearly Beloved, let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting Holiness in the
fear of God.


THat this Text is a Conclusion or Inference, out of the Apostles former
Conference or Discourse, none that observe that Illative note (...), or
therefore, will deny. And as the three last Verses of the former Chapter, are
an Introduction to this; so it is a Genuine Deduction therefrom, in which (the
Illative Particle set apart) we have two general parts.

The first is a loving and a winning compellation in the word (...), Beloved,
or Dearly Beloved.

The other is an Apostolical Imposition or Charge, Having therefore these
promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh, and of
the spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

To begin with the first of these; It is said of Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.19. That the
Lord did let none of his words fall to the ground; so will I not pass over any
one word in the Text untouched.

Dearly Beloved: This title the Apostle uses not complementally nor formally,
but in reality and truth; for these Corinthians were entirely beloved of St.
Paul, not with the common love only, which we ow to all men, but with a
special affection; and that upon a threefold account.

1. As they were born and begotten from above.

2. As they were his Spiritual Brethren, and Fellow Members in Christ. And

3. As they were his own Offspring, and the Fruits of his labor in the Lord, 1
Cor. 4.15. For in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.

Whence we have two Instructions.

1. That there are not only Natural but Spiritual Relations to be found among
men, especially in the Church and Congregation of the Saints, 1 Cor. 4.14. I
write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you.

2. That this Spiritual Consanguinity, is or should be as effectual to beget
mutual and reciprocal affection, as the natural affinity is, yea, far more
forcible. 1 John 3.1. Every one that loves him that begat, loves him that is
begotten of him.

And here he says, Dearly Beloved, but pass we now from the Compellation to
the Imposition, wherein the Apostle does evidence the truth of his love unto
them in two things.

1. In minding them of the antecedent promises, set down in the close of the
foregoing Chapter, Having therefore these promises.

2. In exciting them to eye, observe, and fulfill the condition of the same,
lest they should come short of them in the end; Let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of the flesh, and of the spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear
of God. Our Apostle, Chap. 4.10. of his former Epistle, tells us, That
according to the grace of God which was given unto him he as a wise
Master Builder had laid the Foundation, and that another builds thereupon:
But let every man take heed how he builds thereupon. The former part of that
Verse he has verified as elsewhere, so in this Text; the latter part which is
the Caution, lies upon my self, and all other Ministers in these days, to look
unto it; namely, what, and how, we build upon this Foundation.

In this part of the Text then we have two subordinate Members; the Apostles
groundwork, Having therefore these promises; and then his superstructure, Let
us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh, and of the spirit; or
these two. A true supposition, Having therefore these promises; and then an
advice, imposition, and injunction, Let us cleanse our selves, etc. Or in plain
terms, the Apostle's Doctrine, and the use which he makes of it; the former
being matter of Grace and Promise; the latter, matter of Command and Duty. Of
which, the groundwork is first to be surveyed, (...). This part of the Text we
may call the Believers Patrimony, or rather his evidence for that which he
hops for, and is to seek after, Heb. 11.1. Faith is said to be the ground or
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence or demonstration of things not
seen; which is especially ratione objecti, in regard of the promises on which
it is built. In this then are three particulars to be seriously viewed.

1. The interest of Believers, or of the young itinerant Saints, (...), these
promises. And

2. The persons that have special interest in them, to wit, Converts and
Believing Saints; such as these Corinthians were.

3. What interest these have therein for the present.

For the first of these, we may here take notice,

1. That the best interest that the young Saints have for all manner of
blessings, not yet enjoyed, are the rich, precious, and most infallible
promises of God. Heb. 11.13. These all died in the Faith, not having received
the promises; but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them.

And 2. whereas the promises of God are of two sorts, concerning either
Corporal or Spiritual things, 1 Timothy 4.8. But godliness is profitable unto all
things, having a promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.
We may note, that the Spiritual promises (such as these are, to which St. Paul
relates) are the greatest promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious promises, that by them we should or might be made
partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the
world through lust.

3. Observe, that among many Spiritual promises (those to which our Apostle
here refers us) are not the meanest or the least, as is implied in the word
(...), which is here not only a Relative, but a Demonstrative Noune or
Pronoune. Now then to take them in the order of nature; first, it carries us
back to the promise of Reception. Verse. 17. of the former Chapter, And I will
receive you; Where the Apostle seems to look back to Jere 3.14. and other
such like places. Secondly, He transmits us to Verse 16. where the Lord says,
That he will be our God, and we shall be his people; according to Levit. 26.12.
Jere. 31.33. and many other places of that import: Thirdly, He leads us back to
the 18 Verse, where the Lord promises to be our Father, and to take us for his
Sons and Daughters, according to Isai. 43.6. Hos. 1.10. This word (...), or
these, is also Signal or Demonstrative, and sets forth the transcendency of the
phrases in these particulars. First, In the Author of them, who is said to be
Almighty, Verse 18. and therefore able to perform; and in Verse 17. he is
styled Jehovah, or the Lord that changes not. Secondly, In regard of the great
things promised, or the contents of the promises, of which you heard before:
Unto which, two great Dignities and Prerogatives more are to be added out of
Verse 16. That God has promised to set his Sanctuary in us, and to make us his
Temple, according to Levit. 26.11. And secondly, to make us his Garden Eden or
Paradise, in that he has promised to walk in us: A third remarkable thing is,
the extent of these promises, That they are made not only to the Males, but
the Females also; Verse 18. and the last thing not to be passed over without
due observation and regard, is the condition of the promises, upon which they
were made: Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you; which is the sum
of Paul's injunction and charge here in our Text.

Thus of the Interest it self, these promises; the persons interested are, as
you see, the Corinthian Saints, and all such as were converted to God, believed
in his Son, and were baptized and washed through him inwardly, as well as
outwardly: For the promise is made to you and your children, and to all that
are afar of, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. For the third, the
kind, measure, or degree of Interest, which these persons have; it is not for
the most part actual possession, and sense or feeling grounded thereupon; but a
true claim and title thereunto, and a suitable hope, so far as they do or
intend to observe the conditions of the promises, Romans 8.24,25. 2 Cor. 5.7.
Phil: 3.12. Not as though I had already attained, Heb. 11.13. before alleged.

Thus of the groundwork; now of the Apostles superstructure, Let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh, etc. From which words we may in
the general learn these three things.

First, That the promises of God are not only a foundation of our Faith, Hope,
and Comfort; but are, or should be, a groundwork of our obedience, and a most
effectual incentive or motive unto duty, as Ephesians. 6.2. Honor thy Father and
Mother, which is the first Commandment with promise.

Secondly, That in Gods promises, which are conditional (as all these are) we
must not only have an eye upon what is promised, but a sharp regard also upon
what is required. The condition as well as the donation of the promises must be
heeded, regarded, and observed.

Thirdly, Whereas this charge here tends unto, and ends in the work of
Sanctification, let us take notice, That the great exigence and requiring of
the promises at our hands, is the carrying on, and finishing of the great,
holy, and most necessary work of our Sanctication, 1 These. 4.4. For this is the
Will of God, even your Sanctification. It is that whereunto we were elected,
Ephesians. 1.4. and called, 1 These. 4.7. But to come to a more particular
consideration of the condition, which is the main thing insisted upon in this
Text; in it we have a twofold Christian duty, and both of the greatest
importance, enjoined unto us, and charged upon us; the first in these words,
Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit: The second
in these, Perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Of which, we shall crave
leave to speak in this order; First, by way of Analysis and Exposition;
Secondly, by way of Doctrine and Proposition; and thirdly, by way of
Transposition to our selves, or of Use and Application. All which shall be
grounded upon clear and evident testimony of Scripture.

For the first of these injunctions or charges laid upon us; in it are four
things to be opened, the first is the evil which is to be removed, All
filthiness of the flesh, and of the spirit; the second is the persons from whom
it is to be separated, Our selves; the third is by what kind of act, By
cleansing the same out; and the fourth is the persons that are to be engaged in
this work, Let us.

The evil to be removed, is not the evil of punishment for sin, but the evil of
sin, the root and spring of all our misery; it is here called (...),
inquinament or pollution; By which word we are not only to understand the open
sin, but the false holiness also; which is not prescribed by the Lord, but
chosen and set up by men: All which is not only filthy in the concrete, but
filthiness in the Abstract, Isai. 64.6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and
all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade like a Leaf,
and our iniquities like the wind have taken us away This filthiness is here set
forth by a distribution of it into its species, according to a twofold subject,
The filthiness of the flesh, and of the spirit. Where we may observe, First,
That there is not only a pollution of the flesh to be found; such as lying,
swearing, cursing, gluttony, drunkenness, fornication, whoredom, coveteousness,
theft, murder, and such like gross and manifest sins are; but a filthiness of
the spirit also, whereby the Devils are denominated unclean spirits; such as
high-flying thoughts, serpentine wisdom, hypocrisy, and seeming holiness,
pride, and arrogance, self-love, self-seeking, strife and debate, factiousness,
wrath, revenge, malice, cruelty, mischievousness, persecution, and
heart-murder, spiritual whoredom, and the like. Secondly, take notice from
hence, That man consisting not only of a body which is flesh, but of an
immortal spirit, is since the fall, subject to sins of both kinds (which the
Devils themselves are not) till by. Grace they be wholly washed away. In this
evil to be removed, we are also to attend the measure and degree, in which it
is to be removed (...) all filthiness; for as Solomon speaks, Eccles. 10.1.
Dead flies cause the Apothecaries ointment to send forth a stinking savor; so
does a little folly, him that is in reputation for wisdom and honor. Thus of
the evil to be removed; the persons from whom we are to remove it, are not our
Brethren only, but our selves in the first place, Matthew. 7.5. Thou hypocrite,
first cast out the beam that is in thine own eye, and then shall thou see
clearly to cast out the mote that is in thy Brothers eye; For every one of us
must give an account of himself unto God, Romans 14.12. The act to be employed in
this removal of the evil, is the word (...), Let us cleanse or purify our
selves; whereof the legal washings, purifications, and cleansings were a type.
So that a bare confession of our sins, a bewailment of them, a loathing of
them, and a purpose to leave them; though these be good steps and degrees
toward this act and duty, yet they all fall short of what is here required,
and proposed of the true and industrious Saints, 1 John 3.3. The fourth and
last thing to be opened, is the persons who are here to be engaged, and
vigorously set on work; to wit, all that have any remainders of inward or
outward filthiness left in them, even they that in a good measure are purified
already; such as these Saints of Corinth were.

Thus far by way of Exposition; now the Proposition and Doctrine upon the
whole, is this, That all they that would have an interest and share in the
precious promises aforesaid, must Cleanse themselves of all filthiness, both of
the flesh and of the spirit. This Doctrine is not mine, but the Apostle Paul's
expressly here and elsewhere, as you will see anon; and not his only, but the
Doctrine of the Prophets, of the Apostles, and of Christ himself; witness these
ensuing Scriptures. Isai. 1.16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil. Isa. 57 11. Depart ye,
depart ye; go ye from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of
her, be ye clean ye that bear the Vessels of the Lord. Jere 4.14. Wash thine
heart, O Jerusalem, that thou may be saved: How long shall thy wicked
thoughts lodge in thee? Jere. 13.27. Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem, wilt not thou be
made clean? O when shall it once be? Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away all your
transgressions whereby you have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a
new spirit; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? 1 Pet. 2.1. Wherefore lay
aside all malice (or naughtiness) and all guile and hypocrisies, and evil
surmisings, and all evil speakings. Jam. 1.21. Wherefore laying aside all
filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, receive with meekness the ingrafted
word which is able to save your souls. Jam. 3.6. Draw nigh to God, and he will
draw nigh to you; cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye
doubleminded. Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they (and they
only) shall see God.

Nor is there less ground both of Reason and Equity, then Evidence of
Scripture, for this duty; First, in regard of the mischievousness of that which
is to be removed; Secondly, in regard of him that requires it; and thirdly, in
respect of the sufficiency of help afforded unto us by the Lord, for that
purpose; and lastly, that we of right should have a concurrent hand therein.

For the first of these; first consider what all sin and unrighteousness is in
Gods sight; it is pollution and filthiness it self. Ezekiel 24.13. Hence it is
compared to every filthy and abominable thing, as to the gorge and vomit of
drunkards. Isai. 28.8. To the scum of a Pot. Ezekiel. 24.6,12. To the mire wherein
the Sow walloweth. 2 Pet. 2.22. To the vomit of a dog, there. To the whoredoms
of a Strumpet. Jere. 13.27. Ezekiel. 22. To the abomination of Idols. Ezekiel 36.25.

Secondly, It is a superfluous thing that men may well spare. Jam. 1.21.
Wherefore put away all filthiness and superfluity of vaughtiness.

Thirdly, It is of an infectious, contagious and spreading nature. 1 Cor.
5.6,7. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?

Fourthly, It excludes us from entering into the heavenly Jerusalem. Rev. 21.27.
And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination.

Fifthly, There is no forgiveness of sin until they be left and put away from
us, whatsoever men may dream to the contrary. Isai. 1.16,17,18. Wash you, make
you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do
evil, learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
Fatherless, plead for the Widow. Come now and let us reason together, says the
Lord: Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as Snow; though they
be red as crimson, they shall be white as wool. Jere. 33.8. And I will cleanse
them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me: And I will
pardon all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have
transgressed against me; for the cause must be taken away ere the effect can
cease. See Prove. 26.13.

Sixthly, That even the Law as well as the Gospel, declares the wrath of God
against all sin whatsoever. Romans 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven against all ungadliness and unrighteousness of men who withhold the
truth in unrighteousness.

Now in the second place, he that requires this total removal of sin, is of a
contrary nature unto it, and cannot possibly have any communion with it. Psalm.
94.20. Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee? 2 Cor. 6.14,15.
[For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, and what
communion has light with darkness; and what concord has Christ with Belial?]
Hab. 1.13. [Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity]

In the third place, the Lord does not only afford us space and time to get
this work done. Rev. 2.21. [And I gave her space to repent, and she repented
not,] but sufficient means also for our thorough cleansing so. Ezekiel. 36.25.
[Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean from all
your filthiness; and from all your idols will I cleanse you:] Which promised
water is not only the pure water, and doctrine of his Word. John 15.3. [Now
are ye clean through the Word which I have spoken unto you.] Ephesians. 5.26. [That
he might sanctify and wash it with water through the Word;] but the promised
Spirit of Christ also, which sometimes is called the Blood of the Covenant,
because it was figured forth by Blood in the Old Testament, Exodus 24.6,7,8. and
29.20. Levit. 8.23,24. and 14.14. Sometimes it is compared to fire. Isai. 4.4.
[When the Lord shall have washed the filth of the Daughter of Sion, and purged
away the blood of Jerusalem by the spirit of judgment, and the spirit of
burning:] And sometimes to water, as Isai. 44.3. [I will pour water upon him
that is thirsty, and a flood upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit upon
thy Seed, and my blessing upon thine Offspring:] And sometimes to Fullers
Soap. Mal. 3.2. [For he is like the Refiners fire, and Fullers soap:] This is
expressly spoken of Christ; so that we neither want water nor soap, to make a
through cleansing or purgation of our selves from sins.

For this is the Fountain which the Lord has opened to the house of David and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. Zach. 13.1.

In the fourth place, it is but meet that we which had a hand in polluting and
defiling our selves, should be employed and engaged in the purging our selves;
and so much the rather, because it is for our own good and everlasting welfare.

Thus of the words by way of Proposition: Now by way of Transposition and Use,
the Truth and Equity of this Doctrine being thus cleared up, what remains but
that we should make our best advantage of it? For whatsoever things were
written aforetime, they were written for our instruction.

1. Then by way of Information, it is consequent from hence, That as nothing is
so offensive and contrary to God, and his Divine Nature, as sin is; so there is
no greater bar and obstruction, then iniquity and unrighteousness is, to keep
us from the benefit of all his promises, 1 Samuel 2.30. Isa. 59.23.

2. That in this point some of our Modern writers in Europe, are much
degenerated from the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles.

3. That what Paul speaks, Romans 7.14,15,16. is to be understood only of
Babes in Christ. Secondly, this Doctrine serves to confute many common errors
and mistakes; and first, that opinion or assertion, That sin cannot be wholly
subdued in the Saints, by the Grace and Truth of Christ, while they live in the
Mortal Body; for if that cannot be attained, the design of the Father, who gave
his Son, that he might destroy the workmanship of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. is
disappointed, and Christ's love toward men is made of none effect; who loved us
and gave himself for us, that he might sanctify and wash us with the washing
of water by the Word, and present us unto himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrincle, or any such thing. Ephesians. 5.24,25,26,27. Yea, the condition of
the promises being impossible to be performed, should be unjust, and the
promises made of none effect; but whereas many places in the Old Testament are
brought to plead for the continuance in sin, as 1 King. 8.46. Prove. 20.9.
Eccle. 7.20. To those we may answer with the words of the Apostle, Heb. 7.19.
That the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, by
which we draw nigh unto God. And for the Scriptures alleged out of the New
Testament, that of Romans 7.24,25. cannot be understood of Paul's present estate;
for the second Verse of Chapter eight, contradicts it, as does also 1 Cor. 4.4.
2 Cor. 5.16,17. Phil. 4.13. but must only be understood as was said before, of
the Babes and Yonglings in Christ; so must that also be understood, Gal. 5.17.
and that 1 John 1.8. as is evident, if it be compared with Verse the
thirteenth, and fourteenth of the second Chapter; or with Verse third of the
third Chapter; and with Verse the seventeenth of the fourth Chapter; lastly,
That of Jam. 3.2. can in reason be no more understood of him, and his
Fellow-Apostles, where he says, That in many things we offend all, then that
which he speaks plurally also Verse 9. Therewith bless we God, even the Father,
(to wit, with the tongue) and therewith curse we men which are made after the
similitude of God.

Secondly, This gives a check to their Error, who say, That in death (when we
put off the Body of Clay) all sin shall be put off and mortified, and not
before: For first it is by the Spirit, that the deeds of the body or flesh must
be mortified, and not the sinful deeds of the spirit by the flesh, Romans 8.13.
Secondly, If the natural death healed all sins, none would die in their sins,
as our Savior threatens, that the unbelieving Jews should do, John 8.21,24.
Lastly, We are commanded to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh, and of the spirit; and this is to be done in our life time, and not to
be done in our days of our death: And by this opinion, Corporal death should
effect more, then the Spirit of Grace could do all our life long, in the final
mortification of our sins.

Thirdly, This may confute them, who affirm, That Christ came to take away the
guilt of our sins by his death, and suffering before the act or corruption is
taken away; for the cause must be taken away before the effect, as we said
before and proved out of Isai. 1.16,17,18. Jere. 33.8. to which you may add,
Chap. 31, 32, 33, 34. Acts 26.18. Heb. 10.14. For through the Blood of his
Cross, in due time he takes away the guilt of sins repented of, left, and put
away; yet the Spirit of Grace, which is the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
must first sanctify us, and cleanse us therefrom, Heb. 9.14. also Chap. 10.29.
and 13.20,21. Revel. 7.14.

Fourthly, This may stop the mouths of them which say, we do not read, That
ever any man yet was cleansed wholly from sin; to which we Reply, That if this
were not, men themselves, and not the Grace of God, were in default; but there
is an Israel, who are of a clean heart, Psalm 73.1. Who are crucified to the
world, and the world to them, Gal. 6.14,15,16. In whose Spirit there is no
guile, and consequently no sin, for all sin is deceitful; so Psalm. 32.2. Ephesians.
4.22. Yea, John saw a numberless number of those, Rev. 7.9,10,14. So also
Revel. 14.4. These are the Israel, of which we read Number. 23.21. and Zeph.
3.14,15.

Lastly, It meets with that distinction more common then commendable; that
though sin must not reign in us, yet it must remain in us while we are here:
For first, as long as it remains in us, it will oppose the work of God, and get
the victory at times, if not with our will, yet against our will. Secondly, If
all filthiness of flesh and spirit must be purged out of us, how can it remain?
do the spots or filth remain in clothes, when they are cleansed there from? did
not Christ come to sanctify and wash us, that he might present us without spot
or wrincle, or any such thing unto himself? Surely this and other distinctions,
that plead for the necessary continuance of sin in us, cannot come from above;
but since they hinder the work of the Lord, must needs originally come from
Hell, and the Devil; though some persons otherwise zealous and virtuously
minded, have at unawares, received and used the same, without considering the
hurt and mischief that follows thereupon. See Jere. 50.20. In those days, and
in that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and
there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I
will spare them which are left. Mic. 7.19. Shows how God will deal with the
sins and iniquities of his people, as he did with the Egyptians; he will first
subdue, and then drown them: Also Zeph. 3.13. he promises, That the remnant of
Israel shall not utter iniquity, nor speak lies: And Mal. 3.3. That Christ
shall sit as a refiner and a purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons
of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto him an
offering in righteousness.

But thus much of the Use of Confutation; now by way of Correction.

This Proposition or Doctrine serves to reprove four sorts of men among others:
First, Those who have cleansed themselves from many outward sins of the flesh,
but are not purified from the sins of the spirit; as spiritual pride, wrath,
uncharitable censuring, envy, and the like. Prove. 30.12. There is a generation
that is pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthiness:
So Matthew 23.25,26. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye make
clean the outside of the cup, and of the platter, but within, they are full of
extortion and excess.

Secondly, It reprehends those yet more secretly who rely upon the promise of
God, and look to have their share therein, and yet wittingly and willingly
continue in the filthiness both of flesh and spirit: See Jere. 7.8,9,13, also
27. To these it may be said, as Peter spoke to Simon Magus, Acts 8.21,22. Thou
have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in the
sight of the Lord.

This yet more condemns their folly; who knowing that they must repent, and be
cleansed, ere they can be saved; yet not only protract the time for so great a
work, but daily pollute and defile themselves, contracting more filthiness then
that which they had before, and making their stains and spots of a deeper dye,
and harder to be washed out.

Finally, This may serve for the horror or terror of those who having for a
time begun to reform themselves, and put away their sins, yet return again with
the Dog to the vomit, and with the Sow to her wallowing in the mire; see 2 Pet.
^.18,19,20. Ezekiel. 24.13. In thy filthiness is leudness, because I have purged
thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness
any more, until I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.

The fourth Use of this Doctrine, is for Exhortation: First, To all seriously
to consider this first condition of the promises, so clearly set down, Verse
17. of the former Chapter, and here in the Text, and what is required thereby.

Secondly, To examine how far we have proceeded in fulfilling the same. Prove.
20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sins? I fear
very few.

Thirdly, To those that have begun the work, that they go on forward to finish
it. Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is
filthy, let him be filthy still; but he that is righteous, let him be righteous
still; that is more and more. 1 John 3.2,3. Beloved, now are we the children of
God, yet it does not appear what we shall be; but we know, That when he shall
appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is: For every man that
has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is pure.

Lastly, To those that have not begun this great important and most necessary
work, to fall upon it forthwith: O wash you, make you clean, says Isai.
1.16,17,18. otherwise you cannot have your sins forgiven you; yea, Wash your
hearts, that ye may be saved, Jere. 4.14. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and
purify your hearts, ye double minded; be afflicted and mourn, and weep; for
your laughter shall be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness:
Humble your selves in the sight of God, and he shall lift you up, Jam 4.8,9,10.
Ye say that ye rely upon Christ, but what part has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor.
6.15. Therefore let every one that names the Lord Jesus Christ, depart from
iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. See what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 24.3,4,5. Who shall
ascend into the Hill of the Lord? And who shall stand in his holy place? He
that has clean hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift up his soul to
vanity, nor sworn deceitfully: He (and he only) shall receive the blessing
from the Lord, even righteousness from the God of his salvation. Therefore
mortify your members upon earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate,
affection, evil-concupiscence and covetousness, which is idolatry; for which
things sake, the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience; see
Gal. 5.19,20,21. Ephesians. 4.21.

Take to you the Water, the Water of the Word, Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith shall a
young man cleanse his way, by taking heed thereunto, according to thy Word. Seek
Soap of Christ, yea, Fullers soap, to be baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with
fire, Mal 3.2. Walk in the Light, as Christ is in the Light, and the Blood of
Jesus Christ shall purge you from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Let us follow the
practice of Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 29. who caused all the filth of the Temple to be
carried out, and that house to be purged and sanctified, that the holy Service
of God might be renewed therein.

Thus of the first duty or Christian course, required in the Condition or
Proviso of the Promises; now follows the other in these words, (...),
Perfecting holiness in the fear of God. In which, by way of Analysis, we have
two parts; first, a work of renovation or perfection, perfecting holiness: The
second is the kind of holiness, the posture or principle, in which and out of
which it must be done, (...), in the fear of God. For the former of these, in
it are these particulars to be explained, ere we come to the Doctrine or
Proposition it self.

First, The object or subject thing to be perfected, holiness.

The second is the act required at our hands, in relation thereunto, perfecting.

Thirdly, The persons to be engaged in that act likewise, let us.

For the first of these, It is not here the Sanctification of flesh and blood,
which is proud of its self, and contemptuous of others. Isai. 65.5. Which say,
Stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am holier then thou. Which how
specious soever it may seem, it is but hypocrisy before the Lord, and an
abomination in his sight, Prove. 14.12. also 16.25. Luke 16.15. For that which
is esteemed highly among men, is an abomination before the Lord; for this
holiness may be changed for a better, but cannot any way be perfected: Nor is
this holiness a ceremonial holiness, which was but a figure of the true; but in
short, it is that which is called Gods own holiness, Isai. 65.18. Heb. 12.10.
Not only because he commands it, but it is that way wherein he walks, the
holiness which he communicates, and whereby the Saints are denominated holy
ones; of which Isaiah speaks, Chap. 35.8. And an highway shall be there, and
a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass
over it, but it shall be for those; the wayfaring-men, though fools, shall not
err therein. This is that holiness that becomes the House of God for ever,
Psalm. 93.5. Which holiness is either a way and race, to wit, an holy course of
obedience in fulfilling the Will of God, Romans 6.22. But now ye have your fruits
unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. Heb. 10.36. Or else it is the
inward holiness of Gods Image and Kingdom, from whence that obedience
proceeds. Ephesians. 4.34. And that ye put on the new man, which is created after
God in righteousness and holiness of truth. Both which, if they be not
coincident, yet concur to one effect, the purging out of all iniquity. So that
this last duty seems to be required in order to the former, and both in respect
of the promises.

For the second particular, the act here required (...), signifies not only to
go about a thing, Luke 13.32. and to execute it, 2 Cor. 8.6,11. but to finish
and to add the end to the beginning. Phil. 1.6. And so here the Participle
here used, signifies a profection with a tendency to a perfection. As for the
word perfection, it is variously used, and there is a manifold perfection
spoken of among men; one of profession and outward state among the Papists; and
so they will have their religious men, especially those in orders, to be termed
perfect men, if any will indulge them that honor and dignity; and another of
the inward state, which we are here to understand; that again is manifold; one
of sincerity and uprightness: So King Hezekiah pleads for himself, That he had
walked before the Lord in truth, and with a perfect heart, Isai. 38.3. But this
perfection is not sufficient, or always to be rested in. 1 Pet. 1.22. Seeing ye
have purified your souls in obeying the truth, through the spirit, unto
unfeigned or sincere love of the Brethren: See that ye love one another with a
pure heart fervently. See 1 These. 3.12.

A second perfection there is of parts, when all the several graces of Gods
sanctifying spirit are found in a man. This is conceived to be in every Convert
or Believer. But the truth thereof may be justly questioned; for some want
humility, some meekness, some patience, and the like; And why does St. Peter
command us to add to our Faith. Virtue; to Virtue, Knowledge; to Knowledge,
Temperance; to Temperance, Patience; to Patience, Godliness; to Godliness,
Brotherly kindness; to Brotherly kindness, Love. If we have all these at our
first conversion? 2 Pet. 1.5,6,7.

A third is the perfection of degrees, when holiness in a full degree is by us
attained answerable to the Law of God: And this is threefold, according to a
threefold estate or dispensation. The first is of love to God above all, and to
our Neighbor as to our selves, which is the sum and fulfilling of the Law and
the Prophets; to the putting down of all contrary dispositions: This is a
perfection enjoined by the Apostle, Col 3.14. and above all put on Love, which
is the Bond of perfection. 1 Pet. 4.8. This is called perfectio viae, and
allowed of by all the Schoolmen. The second is a greater perfection and power
in all love and goodness, when Christ in the power of his Resurrection, arises
in the Saints, after they are wholly dead with him to sin. Romans 6.5. For if we
have been planted into Christ, with the likeness of his death, we shall also in
the likeness of his Resurrection. This is that which Paul says he had not
attained unto, when he wrote to the Philippiane, Chap. 3.11,12. And yet even
then he was able to do all things, viz. that were commanded through Christ
which strengthens him, Chap. 4.12,13. Howbeit he hoped for the other, even
while he was viator, or in the body.

The third is perfectio patriae, the highest perfection of the Saints, of which
the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12.23. And to the spirits of just men made perfect.
Here in the Text, we understand the first of these three last named, which is
an imperfect estate gradually in comparison of the second, as the second is
being paralleled with the third; yet some there be who in this Text understand
the second also; which without doubt we should both hope for, and pray for,
preparing our selves thereunto. By the first perfection, and by both the
former, we should seek after the third; in all which, the righteousness of the
Law is fulfilled through Christ, but according to several dispensations and
degrees: For in the first, we have communion with Christ, according to the
flesh, or in a lower and weaker way: In the second with Christ according to the
Spirit, in a more lively and powerful way in the similitude of his
Resurrection, wherein he walked with his Disciples forty days upon Earth: And
in the third, with Christ after his Ascension and Glorification; yet the least
of these is an holy Perfection.

For the persons to be engaged, they are all those that have not yet attained
to that state; for he that made us without our selves, will not save us without
our best endeavors and concurrences; we have also had a hand in fulfilling the
measure of our disobedience and depravation; and the Lord may justly engage us
in the work of new obedience, and the renewing of his Image and Kingdom in us;
as he does here and elsewhere frequently.

The whole Proposition or Doctrine then is this, That those who would be made
heirs and partakers of the Divine Promises, must perfect the race of holy
Obedience set before them, and the holy Image of God, which is to be renewed in
them, or they must put on that love which is the Bond of perfection, and the
fulfilling of the Law, as has been said: Nor is our Apostle herein singular
and precise above other his Fellow-ministers, the Messengers of God; nor goes
he higher then Christ himself did in his express Commands: For as Moses
witnesses, the Lord required this of Abraham, the Father of the Believers,
Genesis 17.1. And when Abraham was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared
unto Abraham, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God, walk thou before me,
and be persect. And Deuteronomy. 10.12. Moses himself requires as much of all Israel.
And now, O Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the
Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul? And Levit 19.18.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; I am the Lord. And Deuteronomy. 18.13. Thou
shall be perfect with the Lord thy God. So our Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.9. And this
we wish, even your perfection. Yea, he injoyneth perfection unto them in his
farewell, Verse 11. Finally, Brethren farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort,
be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with
you: So Heb. 6.1. Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ,
let us go on to perfection. Jam. 1.4. But let patience have her perfect work in
you, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. Chap. 2.8. If ye shall
fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self, you do well. Yea, Christ himself does not only commend love to
God and men, unto us as the fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets, Matthew.
22.36,37,38,39. but he expressly commands us to be perfect as our heavenly
Father is perfect, Matthew. 5.48.

Nor is there less reason or equity for this part of the Charge and Condition,
then there was for the former; For first, God who is holy, and love it self,
and perfect in holiness and love, has predestined us to be made conformable
unto the Image of his Son, Romans 8.29. Who is the brightness of his glory, and
the express Image of his person, Heb. 1.3. And the genuine Son of the Father,
in Truth and Love, 2 Epist. John 3.

Secondly, He has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4.

Thirdly, This holiness in love, is that whereunto we are called; 1 These. 4.7.
For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness, Col. 3.14. 1
Pet. 4.8.

Fourthly, Holy love to God and men, is that which we ow to him for his love
unto us in Christ, Psalm. 31.23. and 116.1. I love the Lord, etc. 2 Cor. 5.14.
For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died
for all, then were all dead, 1 John 3. to 16.

Fifthly, It is through holiness and love, that all sin must be overcome and
buried in us. Romans 12.21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.
1 Pet. 4.8. And above all things, have fervent love among your selves; for love
shall cover the multitude of sins; yea, all sins whatsoever, as Solomon
testifies in these words, Prove. 10.12. Hatred stirs up strife, but love
covers all sin; and that in a burying way first, or in mortification.

Sixthly, The Law of God (whose fulfiling and accomplishment stands in love)
is established in Heaven for ever, Psalm. 78.5,6,7,8. and 119.89. insomuch, That
Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away, then one jot or tittle of the Law
shall go unfulfilled, Matthew. 5.18. Which fulfilling must be accomplished, not
only by Christ for us, but by him and us jointly. Also Matthew. 3.15. For he
says unto John, Thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness.

Seventhly, There is no other way left unto us in Christ, that leads to life,
but the keeping of the Commandments through his grace and help. Matthew. 7.21.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. Matthew.
19,17. But if thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. Rev. 22.14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree
of Life, and enter through the Gates into the City.

Eighthly, God has not left us destitute, either of outward or inward means,
for the fulfilling and accomplishment of the Law; and the love, holiness and
righteousness which it requires: For first, as to outward means, the Apostle
speaks thus. 2 Timothy 3.16,17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and
is profitable for doctrine, for redargution, for correction, and for
instruction in righteousness; That the man of God may be perfected and
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Ephesians. 4.11,12,13. [And he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and
Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and
for the edifying of the Body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the
Faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.] And for inward means, [Christ
is the end of the Law for Righteousness sake, to every one that believes, Romans
10.4.] And that as otherwife, so that through his Grace and Spirit [the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8,4.]

Ninthly, God has not only promised to put his Law into our inward parts, and
to write it in our hearts, Jere. 31.33,34. Ezekiel 36.25,26,27. but has expressly
engaged himself to work so much love in us, as the Law any where requires.
Deuteronomy. 30.6. [And the Lord thy God shall circumcise thy heart, and the heart of
thy Seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
that thou may live.]

Tenthly, God is willing and ready to perfect his work unto the end, Phil.
1.6,7.

Eleventhly, Christ has not only taught us to pray for a perfect obedience to
Gods will in this Petition, Thy will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven; but
he himself (who in all things was heard of his Father) has prayed for our
perfection in love. John 17.20,21,22,23. [Neither pray I for these alone, but
for them also that shall believe on me through their word: That they all may be
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us:
That the world may believe, that thou have sent me; and the glory which thou
gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one; I in
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that the world
may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me.]

Lastly, The work which God has given us to do, must be perfected and finished
in this life. See Eccles. 9.10. Tit. 2.12. That we should live soberly,
righteously and godly, in this present world; looking for the blessed Hope, etc.

Much more might be alleged upon this account: Sed, Vivitur exigno si quis
been noverit uti.

Come we then to the Transposition and Application of this Proposition; where
first by way of Information, we may learn these Consequents.

1. That as the Spiritual Promises aforesaid, are precious and
sweet-conditioned Covenants, so they are to flesh and blood, without assisting
Grace, difficult and hard-conditioned Promises. But our blessed Savior told us
aforehand, Matthew. 7.14. That strait is the way, and narrow is the Gate, which
leads unto life, and that there be few that enter in thereat; as did also his
Apostle Peter, who says, 1 Pet. 4.18. That the righteous shall scarcely (that
is, with much difficulty) be saved; where then shall the ungodly and sinner
appear?

2. We may observe what need we have of a Savior, that should be God as well
as Man; and that as in other regards, so to redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify or renew us unto himself, a peculiar people, zealous of good works,
Tit. 2.14. See also the end for which he gave himself, not only to sanctify
and wash us with water through the Word; but also, that he might present us to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrincle, but that we should be
holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. Hence it is that Moses speaks thus, Deuteronomy.
33.29. Happy art thou, O Israel; who is like unto thee, O people! saved by the
Lord, the shield of thine help; and who is the sword of thine excellency.

Secondly, By way of Redargution, this first serves to control their mistake,
who conceive that it is sufficient unto Salvation, for us to be holy and
religious with any kind or in any degree of holiness; For Paul speaks thus,
Gal. 3.3. [Are ye so foolish? having begun in the spirit, are ye made perfect
in the flesh?] Heb. 12.10. He says, That the Lord chastneth us to make us
partakers of his own holiness; and the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.16. commanding us to
be holy, as the Lord is holy, does prescribe both the true kind and right
degree of holiness, for which we should labor; at which also the Apostle aims
when he prays thus, 1 These. 3.12,13. [And the Lord make you to increase and
abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward
you; to the end he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before
God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his
Saints.] Yea, the eternal life it self, to which we are chosen in Christ Jesus,
is principally the perfection of holy love, as we heard before out of Ephesians.
1.4. Which thing also David affirms, Psalm. 133.3. For there he commanded the
blessing, and life for evermore. Secondly, If any Athenians in our days, should
ask as those did in former times, Acts 17.19. [May we know what this new
Doctrine, whereof thou speak, is?] St John the Beloved Disciple will give
them satisfaction therein, 1 John 2.7,8. [Brethren, I write no new Commandment
unto you, but an old Commandment which ye had from the beginning; the old
Commandment is the Word which ye have heard from the beginning. Again, a new
Commandment I write unto you, which is true in him and in you, because the
darkness is past and the true light now shines,] 2 John Verse. 5, 6. [Now I
beseech thee Lady, not as though I wrote a new Commandment unto thee; but that
which we had from the beginning, namely, that we love one another. And this is
love, that we walk after his Commandments: This is the Commandment, that as ye
have heard from the beginning, ye should walk in it.] Thirdly, It serves to
answer many Cavils and Objections made by scrupulous men.

As first, Is not this Popery, because the Papists hold Perfection? Answer.
Though the Papists want no Errors, yet they hold there is one God, a Trinity of
Persons, Two Natures in Christ's own Person, his Threefold Office, his Twofold
Estate of Humiliation and Exaltation, and many more Orthodox and Primitive
Heads of Doctrine: But nothing ought to be called or accounted Popish, which
was taught by the Prophets, the Apostles, and Christ himself, as this Doctrine
was both clearly and frequently held forth by all of them.

But is it not Pelogian Doctrine? Indeed Pelagius taught, That man could of
himself fulfill the Law of God; to whom Augustine answers, Let him add these
words, That he can do it by the Grace of God, and we consent.

But is it not Arminianism? No; for Arminius held the contrary, and herein are
they Arminions who are otherwise minded.

Fourthly, It serves to check and overthrow their Error, who affirm the Law of
God to be impossible to be fulfilled by the Saints in this life, though
assisted by the Grace and Spirit of Christ; who also do usually for that end
affix and attribute such a rigor to the Law, as the Lord has no where ascribed
unto it. For not only the Apostles, but Christ himself does affirm, That the
whole requiring of the Law, yea, and of the Prophets also, is fulfilled in the
love aforesaid, see Matthew. 22.38,39. Romans 13.8,9. [Ow no man any thing, but to
love one another; for he that loves another has fulfilled the Law. For this,
Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou
shall not bear false witness, Thou not covet; and if there be any other
Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self: Therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law.] See Gal.
5.13,14. Nor let any Reply that here the Apostle speaks only of the
Commandments of the second Table; for the true love of our Neighbor, is always
founded in the love of God. And as this last presupposes the former, so the
love of God is accompanied with the love of our Neighbor. 1 John 2.5. [But
whosoever keeps the Word of God, in him is the love of God perfected.] 1 John
5.1,2. [Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God; and every
one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. By
this we know, that we love the Children of God, when we love God and keep his
Commandments.] Now if this were imposble to be done, the Law of God were eo
nomine unjust and tyrannical: For Pharaoh is condemned by God and man, for
laying such commands upon the Israelites, as they could not possibly perform,
Exodus 5.6,7.

For the further refuting of this opinion, we might produce the contrary
judgment of all the Greek and Latin Fathers; of which take these few for the
present, Justin Martyr, in Quaest. and Respons, ad Orthodoxos. But what is the
total Justice or Universal Righteousness according to the Law? To love God
above himself, and his neighbor as himself, which is not impossible to men who
apply their hearts thereunto; for that saying, By the works of the Law, shall
no flesh be justified; The Apostle does not therefore allege it, because we
cannot do impossible things, but because we will not do that which is possible.
Do not blame the Lord, for he demands nothing impossible, says Chrysostom de
Paenit. Hom. 8 See Basil upon Psalm. 118. Hieronymus in Expos. Symbol. ad
Damasum. August. in Psalm. 56. Nor would God command this, if it were impossible
to be done of man: Idem de tempore, Sermon. 61. Neither could God command any
thing which is impossible, because he is just; nor will he condemn any man for
that he could not do, because he is pious and good. Idem de tempore, Sermon. 191.
We detest their Blasphemy, who say, That God has commanded any thing that is
impossible to man. Concilium Arausicanum, according to the Catholic Faith we
believe, That all who are baptized, having received Grace, may and ought, by
the help and the cooperation of Christ, to fulfill all things that belong to
Salvation, if they will faithfully endeavor or labor thereunto.

Thirdly, By way of Correction, this serves first to reprove all unbelief that
is found in men to the contrary, see what the Lord says of the unbelieving
Israelites, who were rendered unbelieving persons, who were indisposed to enter
upon the holy Land of Promise, being deterred by the pretenders of
impossibility to overcome the Canaanites, and scale and beat down their Cities,
Numbers 13 and 14 Chapters. Unto whom swear the Lord, that they should not
enter into his rest, but to them who believed not? So then they could not enter
in, because of unbelief, Heb. 3.18,19.

Secondly, This serves to reprehend them who look for Life and the blessing of
the Promises, and yet stand at a stay, and make not progress toward
perfection. Revel. 3.2. Be watchful and strengthen the things that remain, that
are ready to die; for I have not sound thy works perfect before God.

Thirdly, It rebukes them that go backward rather then forward. Revel. 2.4,5.
Nevertheless, I have something against thee, because thou have left thy first
love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and do thy first works, or
I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his
place, except thou repent.

Fourthly, They are here condemned who expect the blessings of Gods Promises
and Covenants, and yet are so far from perfecting their Obedience and
Sanctification, that they never as yet did set one foot forward in that way; to
those the Lord speaks, Psalm. 50.16. What have thou to do to take my Covenant
into thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction and castest my words behind
thee? These although they happily call Christ their Lord and Savior, and plead
that they have eaten and drank at his Table, and that he has taught in their
streets, yea that they have prophesied in his Name, will have this answer
returned by him, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know or own you not,
Matthew. 7.24,25. Luke 13.26,27. For unto those that are contentious, and do not
obey the truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath,
Tribulation and anguish upon overy soul that does evil, upon the Jew first, and
also upon the Gentile, Romans 2.8,9.

Lastly, This sharply smites all those of Michals spirit, who was a mocker at
Perfection, as the name fignifieth, viz. Who is perfect? For she not only
despised David in her heart, for wearing the emblem of Righteousness, but for
dancing and rejoicing before the Ark; wherefore she is punished with
barrenness, as all they shall be with sterility of Grace, who remain such
scoffers of goodness, and mockers of perfection, see 2 Samuel 6.20,21,22,23.

In the fourth place, this Doctrine may serve for Exhortation; First, To those
who have made some beginnings of progress toward Perfection, that they be
careful to proceed on in that way, even unto Perfection. Heb. 6.1. Therefore
leaving the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection.
Moses witnesses that the work of the Lord is perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4. And we are
commanded to be perfect, as he is perfect, Matthew. 5.48. The path of the just is
as the shining light that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove.
4.18. Wherefore let all that have obtained like precious Faith with the Apostle
and Saints of God; giving all diligence to add to their Faith, Virtue; and to
Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience;
and to Patience, Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly kindness; and to
Brotherly kindness, Love; for if these things be in you, and abound, they shall
make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ. See Revel. 22.11. He that is righteous, let him be righteous
still; and he that is holy, holy still. Phil. 2.12. Wherefore my Beloved, as ye
have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my
absence, work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Heb. 6.11,12. And we
desire that every one of you do show the same diligence to the full assurance
of Hope unto the end: That ye be not slothful, but followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the Promises.

Secondly, To excite those who never yet begun any advance toward holiness, to
consider these things. First, Whether the Jewels held forth in the precedent
Promises, be not rich and precious merchandise; and secondly, at what price
they must be purchased and had, if we will have them; for the Lord will speak
here unto us, as he did unto the Jews, Zach. 11.12. If ye think good, give me
my price; if not, forbear. And as the Lord did speak to some, Matthew. 20.6. Why
stand ye here idle all the day? So will he say to those, Awake to
righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God; I speak
this to your shame.

Confider, I pray you, what a deal of business you have to do, ere you can
enjoy the Promises, and how little time some of you may have to do it in. And
therefore pray with David, Psalm. 39.13. O spare me, that I may recover strength
before I go hence, and be no more. And with Moses, Psalm. 90.12. So teach us to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Is it a time to
receive money, and to receive Garments, and Oliveyards, and Vineyards, and
Sheep, and Oxen, and Menservants, and Maidservants? 2 King. 5.16. [Wherefore
he says, Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, and Christ shall
give thee light. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be ye not
unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is,] Ephesians. 5.14,15,16,17.
[Repent therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the
time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord,] Acts 3.19.
[Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with all thy might; for there is no
work, nor devise, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go,]
Eccles. 9.10. [Little children, let no man deceive you; he that does
righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous; he that commits sin, is of
the Devil; for the Devil sinned from the beginning. For this purpose was the
Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the work of the Devil,] 1 John
3.7,8. [This I say therefore and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk
not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, having their
understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, through the hardness of their hearts; who being past
feeling, have given over themselves unto lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness: But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that
ye have heard him, and have been taught by him as the truth is in Christ, That
ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man which is corrupt (or
destroying) according to the deceitful lusts, and be ye renewed in the spirit
of your mind; and that ye put on the new man which is created after the Image
of God in righteousness, and holiness of truth.] Ephesians. 4.17,18,19,20,21,22.

In the last place, This may serve for the comfort and encouragement of those
that desire to obtain the Promises, and apply themselves with all diligence to
fulfill the Conditions of the same. For first it is certain, That the Conditions
are feasible, otherwise the Promises were made void: Secondly, Christ has
promised two things unto us of the greatest consequence and encouragemen^:
First, That if we find our selves weary with striving against sin, and heavy
laden therewith, that he will ease us by helping us to shake it off, and remove
it. Secondly, That we shall find his yoke easy, and his burden light; only
he requires of us, That we should learn of him, that he is lowly and meek, and
then we shall find rest unto our souls. See Matthew. 11.28,29,30. Whereunto his
beloved Disciple bears witness out of his own experience, saying, For this is
the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not
grievous. For whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world; and this is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith. Who is he that overcomes
the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Christ? 1 John 5.3,4,5.
There is then no bar or let to the keeping of Gods Commandments, but the wicked
world of sin, which may be overcome by Faith in the Son of God; and then Gods
Commandments shall not be grievous, but delightful unto us: For what is easier
or more delightful then to love? and therefore this burden of Christ's which he
lays upon us, is both light and sweet in general, Psalm. 19.10. also 119.103.
There is nothing that unites us more closely to God then love. Romans
8.35,36,37,38. Nothing is stronger and more victorious, Cant. 8.6,7. Nothing is
crowned with more virtues, nor more omnipotent in the Lord; see 1 Cor. 13.
throughout.

Thus of the Duty to be done, Perfecting holiness; now concerning the way
wherein it is to be accomplished or acquired, (...) in the fear of God. Which
words may be three ways understood.

First, Of that Obedience to Gods Commandments which is commonly called The
fear of God. Psalm. 111.10. and 112.1. Eccles. 12.13. In which way the Lord has
promised to make us an holy people, Deuteronomy. 26.17,18,19. Thou have avouched the
Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes
and his Commandments, and his Judgments, and to hearken to his voice. And the
Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he has promised
thee; and that thou should keep all his Commandments; and to make thee high
above all Nations, which he has made in praise, in name, and in honor, that
thou may be an holy people unto the Lord thy God, as he has spoken.

Secondly, The fear of God may be understood of a reverend and awful fear of
Gods Righteousness and Judgments. And so it is the posture we should always
stand in, while we are in our Christian race toward Perfection. Phil. 2.12.
Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling: Which fear, when perfect love
is come, is set aside. 1 John 4.17,18. For perfect love casts out fear.

Thirdly, It may be taken for a filial or conjugal fear of God and his
goodness. Hos. 3.5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return and seek the
Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness
in the latter days. And this fear, as it is love in some good measure and
degree, so it is the way to that perfect love, which is the fulfiling of the
Law: For the beginning, augmenting, and perfecting whereof, I crave leave to
speak a word or two to my Reverend Brethren of the Ministry, by way of Avisa
from this Proviso; And I hope that I may say with Paul, That I my self also am
persuaded of you my Brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, filled with
all knowledge, and able also to admonish one another: Nevertheless, I have
written the more boldly unto you in some sort, as putting you in mind, because
of the Grace that is given to me of God, Romans 15.14,15. It is not unknown to
you how Phineas, the son of Eleazer, (that is, as the name imports, Confidence
of face in or from Gods help) obtained the Covenant of Peace, and of the
Everlasting Priesthood, to wit, by slaying Cozbi, the lie or lying nature of
Sin, and Zimri, or that disposition that rejoices therein. Number. 25.6,7. Psalm.
106.30,31. Nor, that if we will be Gods mouth, we must take away the precious
from the vile, Jere. 15.19. Nor, that we must stand in the Council of the Lord,
ere we can practice and hear his words, Jere. 23.18. and much more, before we
can turn men from the evil way, and from the evil of their doings, Verse 22.
Yea, that the Law of Truth was in Levi's mouth, and iniquity was not found in
his lips, and that he walked with God in peace and equity, when he turned many
away from iniquity, Mal. 2.6. Only mine earnest Prayer to God for my self and
you is, That whereas the Spies and Searchers out of the promised Land, were of
different minds, and did in conclusion run two contrary courses; Joshuah and
Caleb following the Lord fully, as himself testifies, Numb. 14.24. and
encouraging the people to obey the Lord, to stand firm in the Faith, and so to
set upon their enemies with courage, and hope of victory; but the other ten
degenerating from the Faith and Obedience of God, and drawing thousands after
them by their pretense of difficulties, yea, of impossibility to subdue the
Canaanites, and to take possession of the promised Inheritance: That none of us
may be found in the number of the last named, but all of us in the first,
though the smalest number; for our Savior says, That little of this Faith
(that God will avenge his elect on their spiritual enemies) shall be found upon
the Earth at his coming, Luke 18.6,7,8.

And mine humble suit unto you all is, first, That seeing God gives some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers for
the perfecting of the Saints, and the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we
all come in the unity of the Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; that
none of us discourage or retard the Saints in their progress, by any pretended
impossibility as those formerly did, Ephesians. 4.10,11,12.

Secondly, Whereas Verse 14. the Apostle henceforth would have no men, and
muchless us, to be children tossed too and fro with every wind of Doctrine, by
the cunning craftiness of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive: That we
take heed that we suffer not the Authors whom we read, to impose upon us in
this or any other kind: To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not
according to that, it is because there is no light nor morning in them, Isai.
8.20.

Thirdly, To remember that the Apostle wills, that we speaking the truth in
love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ, from
whom the whole Body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every
joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every
part, makes increase of the Body, to the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians.
4.15,16. For the end of the Law and Commandments, is love out of a pure heart
and a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Fourthly, That with St Paul we preach Christ in the Saints, the Hope of Glory;
warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present
every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Colos. 1.27,28.

Fifthly, That we pray earnestly under Hope, for the perfecting of the Saints,
as the Apostles, and holy Ministers of Christ did, Ephesians. 3.14,21. Phil. 1.10.
Colos. 4.12. 1 These. 5.23. 1 Pet. 5.10.

Sixthly, That neither the weak Brother may judge the strong, nor the strong
may despise the weak; seeing we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, Romans 14.10

Finally, Let us all follow the counsel of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 5.1,2,3,4. and
pray for one another, as the Apostle does, Heb. 13.20,21. for there are many
Adversaries.

FINIS.

