DAIMONOMAGEIA.

A Small TREATISE OF Sicknesses and Diseases FROM Witchcraft, AND Supernatural
Causes.

Never before, at least in this comprised Order, and general Manner, was the
like published.

Being useful to others besides Physicians, In that it Confutes Atheistical,
Sadducistical, and Skeptical Principles and Imaginations.

LONDON, Printed by I. Dover, living in St. Bartholomews-Close, 1665.

DAIMONOMAGEIA: A SMALL TREATISE OF Sicknesses and Diseases FROM Witchcraft.
DEFINITION.
A Disease of Witchcraft is a Sickness that arises from strange and
preternatural Causes, and from Diabolical Power in the use of strange and
ridiculous Ceremonies by Witches or Necromancers, afflicting with strange and
unaccustomed Symptoms, and commonly preternaturally violent, very seldom or not
at all curable by Ordinary and Natural Remedies.

SIGNS DIAGNOSTICAL.
I. If the Sick voids things that naturally cannot be bred in the Body, nor put
therein from without, distrust Witchcraft: If they void Rose-Bryars an hand
length, Sticks, Thorns, and Bones by Stool; as Thomas Bromhall of strange
Apparitions, testifies, page 122.

If after, and with violent and preternatural pains, the Sick vomits gallons of
Blood, or the like goes by Urine, and so continues day by day, and void 1200
Worms at a time, or several hundreds, and so continues, judge it Fascination:
That there have been such, see Tho. Bartholin, Historiae Anatomicae, and
Sebastianus Brand.

A Physician of my Acquaintance told me he examined strictly Eyewitnesses, in
one Town where he was, and where it was a report, that a Maid bewitched,
vomited Wool, Hair, Needles, Pins, etc. and they assured him of the Truth, that
it was so; and the like have I heard of some tried formerly at some Assizes of
this Kingdom.

One vomited Thorns of the Sloe-Tree, and Hooks, as Christoph. Rumbaus in Obs.
testifies.

Another vomited Cloth, pieces of Iron, Stones, and Bones; and a Maid voided
downwards Pitch and Soap, Stones, and pieces of Bones, which also she cast up
by vomiting, being much pained at Stomach, and made very lean, died at last,
Forestus, Obs. Med. Lib. 18. Schol. ad Observe. 26.

But, One Swallow (as the Proverb is) makes no Summer: Vis unita fortior, and
quae non prosunt singula juncta juvant; In the multitude of Witnesses there is
sure Testimony; specially they not allured by Gain, or obliged by Interest, or
superstitionated by Education, or forced by rigor of Authority, but one writ
in one place, another in another; one in one Country, another in another; one
in one Age, another in another; one the Judge, the other the Physician: so that
they held no confederacy to cheat future Ages, but writ their clear Experience;
which Experience induced them to believe such things; as indeed what can any
man know truly, but by Experience? for else it is but Imagination, Conceit, or
Fancy, which only casually, and by chance is true: And if our Country and
Age did not witness to what Authors have writ in other Countries and Ages, it
might be suspected; yet we have not one Witch to one hundred that be in other
Countries, and fewer than formerly; and therefore the fewer are bewitched: But
there are many bewitched which are not thought so, and consequently not cured,
that otherwise might; and there are diverse thought so, that are not, but their
Sickness is referable to natural Causes, and found by the Scrutinous in the
legitimate Order of Nature. We will draw up all Observations to this first
Diagnostick Sign briefly.

Those that vomit, or void by stool, with greater or less torments, Knives,
Scissars, Briars, whole Eggs, Dogs Tails, crooked Nails, Pins, Needles,
sometimes threaded, and sometimes with Hair, Bundles of Hair, pieces of Wax,
pieces of Silk, live Eels, large pieces of Flesh, Bones and Stones, and pieces
of Wood, Hooks, and pieces of Salpeter; conclude they are bewitched; and that
such have been vomited, or voided by stool, and that from Witchcraft. See
Alexander Benedictus, Lib. 7. Cap. 25. of his Practice, Tho. Bartholinus, in
Histor. Anatomicis, Antonius Benivenius, Obs. Med. Cap. 8. Cardanus de
varietate Rerum, Lib. 15. Vierus, de praestig. Daemonum, Nicolas Remigius de
Daemonolatreia, Forestus in Obs. Med. Lib. 18. Langius, Lib. 1. Epist. 38.
Cornelius Gemma, Lib. 2. de Divinis Naturae Characterisimis, Cap. 4. Laurentius
Scholtzius in Epistolis, Greg. Horstius in Epist. Iacobus Deidetius in
Epistolis, and others, Witnesses enough, and men of credit enough.

The Reader is here to be advertised, that he mistake not; He must inquire what
went before, what was eaten, and if a suspected Witch was offended: Secondly,
He must consider whether such might not be generated in the Body: Thirdly, He
must see how many such strange things they vomit or egest; none vomited all the
aforesaid things, and all vomited some of them; commonly they vomited three or
four kinds; one vomited Glass, Nails, and Hair together; another vomited often
Gobbets of Flesh, Brass Pins, with Wax and Hair folded up together, and crooked
Nails. Guess at the rest, by these.

Some died, and cold not get up nor down these things: as Alexander Benedictus
shows; some were opened, as Ulricus Newsesser, as Johannes Langius, and Vierus
affirm; there were found in his Stomach four Iron Knives, partly sharp, and
partly like Saws, long and smooth pieces of Wood, such as possibly could not be
swallowed or vomited forth; two rough Iron Tools, each a span long, and a
bundle of Hair: If Ulcers, Boiles, or Apostems, have in them any of these
preternatural things that were never swallowed, if other things correspond
therewith, suspect Witchcraft. See Ioh. Langius of a Woman of Bononia, Epist.
38. Lib. 1. and Vierus, Lib. 3. Cap. 12.

Object. There are those that go up and down, that swallow Pebbles, Coals,
Pieces of Iron, Bones, etc. and these may by use so facilitate their Stomach,
that they may vomit them when they will, and so be either admired, or pitied
and relieved.

Answ. Such have been: But, 1. Abundance of these things for their sharpness,
roughness, and largeness, could never be swallowed.

2. The Persons that voided them, and in whom such were found being dissected,
were silly Men, Women, and Maids; and then they would not have been so sick,
and vomited them so difficultly, and so long together, and have lain so long
miserably tormented, yea, and to die at last.

II. Strange and wonderful Convulsions, indomitable and inexpressible Torments,
with other things preceding, or supervening, gives suspicion of Witchcraft: One
Judith, a religious Maid, was bewitched, as Vierus, Lib. 3. Cap. 13. relates;
Her Jaws were contorted, and clave together, and sometimes her Gullet, that she
could not swallow, and sometimes her Tongue was so convulsed that she could not
speak.

A convulsion of the whole Body by intervals, shaking of the Head, pains in all
the Joints and Limbs most vehement, stoppings of the Ears, blaring out of the
Tongue, with hideous clamours adjoined, with noise therein, like barking of
Dogs, supervened with vomiting of Chestnuts, Balls of Hair, large pieces of raw
Flesh, and Bones, or like to this, which Iacobus Seildelius in his Observations
experienced, you may be sure there is Fascination.

Whosoever after long and violent pains vomits or ejects things preternatural
to be bred in the Body, or unlikely to be received thereinto, suspect
Witchcraft.

III. If the Sick complains of such a Woman or Man suspected for a Witch, and
faith, There he (or she) stands; or, Now he (or she) comes, though no Body else
see any thing; for such is the power and cunning of the Devil, and consequently
of his Agents (as Bodinus, Vierus, Grillandus, Remigius, Peter de Loier, now
rendered in English, and Others, do demonstrate) that some may see a Spirit,
others in the same Room, at the same time, shall not; and some that had very
good skill in Magic would undertake by the Physiognomy to tell who should see
Visions of Spirits, or Angels, which are only distinguished from other Spirits
by their Office; for (...) comes from (...), to declare, or be sent on a
Message; so that one Spirit may be an Angel at one time, and another at
another; also they will undertake to discover who shall never see Apparitions,
though they be in the Room with others that see them: If as soon as the sick
Party cries out of such a one, like a Mouse, or Fly, or any other Creature,
enters into the Mouth, or goes to the Body of the Sick, which sometimes
only the Sick sees, and the Sick is raised, and hoven up in his Body, and
Breast moves high and laboriously, and somewhat seems to rise up to suffocate
him, with or without, the noise of Dogs barking, Cats mewing, Hogs grunting,
Cows lowing, or their like, heard in him; for these are more common to one
peculiarly possessed of the Devil, as also is the long lying in a trance
thereupon, as if the party was dead, and then with leaping and raving the fit
may go off; Judge this certainly to be by the power of the Devil, and commonly
to be administered by Witches through malice, by the performance of foolish
Ceremonies.

These things I have gathered from information of our own Country People as
well as Authors.

IV. A fourth sign of Witchcraft is, if the sick Prophesy, and foretell truly
things that afterward come to pass, and speak beyond the course of Nature (Gods
Law, beyond which no man lawfully can go) things they never heard, felt, saw,
or understood, and Languages they never learned; as diverse chiefly in some
sickness that have spoke Latin that they never learned, or other Nations
Tongues they never were taught, and afterward, for the most part, they forget
all again, if with these, or without these, for there is difference in all; the
Sick fly, or run up the Walls with their Feet uppermost, or leap from one place
to another, strongly and fiercely, at a great distance: Be sure it is not
naturally; if not naturally, preternaturally; if preternaturally, either by God
or the Devil; if of the Devil, they tend to advance his Interest or Kingdom,
and so do these Practices.

1. That several have spoke strange Tongues they never learned, we shall
endeavor to satisfy the Reader, and also that some Prophesy.

Cordanus de Rerum variet. Lib. 8. Cap. 43. Relates how Phliarius Poletanus, an
Italian, distempered in Body, spoke the Dutch Tongue perfectly that he never
learned; he by Physic voided many Worms, and could afterward speak only his
Native Language.

Sigeberti Continuator, says, Norbert of Nigella, from the Devil, did repeat
the Canticles from one end to another, in the Latin and Germane Tongue, and
afterward being cured, his new speaking strange Languages was took away.

Cedrenus and Zonarus, Tomo. 3. Report a Servant of Michael Curopalates, at an
Eclipse, or, Conjunctionem Soli cum Luna, was struck with Madness, and would
Prophesy things they found to come to pass, and in strange Tongues.

Manlius relates of a Maid, that never learnt Latin, that being asked which was
the best Verse in all Virgil, said, Discite justitiam monite and non temnere
divos.

She was apparently by other things possessed by the Devil.

Perrus Apponensis, Com. ad Problema. 1. Sect. 3. of Aristotle, Observed a
Woman in a melancholy sickness to speak Latin, which she never learned, and
as soon as her sickness was gone, she could not speak one word.

See Laevinus Hemnius, Lib. 2. Cap. 2. de Occult. Nature. Mir. and Guainerius,
Tract. 15. de Cap. dol. c. 4. and Gentilis, how many bewitched may foretell
things to come, Alexander and Rhasis mention it; but Witches leave the Body,
and their Souls go into far Countries for two or three or more days, and then
they return to their Body again, which lay all this while as dead or in a
trance; and then they make report of what is done, or to be done, before any
news can come, a week or fortnight perhaps, the way is so far for Post, or
ordinary Messengers to bring a Relation; and so they are thought to foresee or
foreknow many times, when they are not. Nic. Remigius, Peter de Loier, An
History of Naples, and Bodinus in Daemonomaniae, Lib. 2. Cap. 4. confirm it by
many Histories and Examples; and our Country Witches have testified the same:
It is preternatural indeed, and done by the Devil, to have their Souls at last
to live in Vassalage with him.

2. That Witches, or the bewitched, can fly from House to House, or leap many
yards, which naturally they cannot, nor in health could not, and run up the
Walls with their Feet uppermost, without holding, by Diabolical power, we shall
bring several Testimonies. It would be too tedious to write fully all the
Examinations and Informations I have took concerning our own Country Witches:
and also the Reader may suspect either my true Information, or Sophistication
of my delivering it; therefore I shall rather desire to satisfy by the
Authority of Authors Experience chiefly. Their Adversaries contradict their
Experience only by their Incredulity: and how slight an evincement that is, let
all judge. I would be loath to give just occasion to the Reader, to suspect me
desirous of gaining Proselites by the imposition of Lies and fained Fables; for
I have heard many Relations from sober People touching these things, that I
shall here omit describing, lest I should be charged with too great Credulity
toward the one, and a delusive Imposition toward the other.

Vierus lib. 3. cap. 9. brings several Examples of the Nunns of Ventetus in the
County of Horn, how they were molested with evil Spirits, and were sometimes
lift up above a man's height from the ground, they climbed to us like Cats, and
were sometimes carried over men's heads, and sometimes fell down again headlong;
they would sometimes go on the tips of their toes, as well as others on their
feet.

Sylvula de Historiis Mirabilibus, writes of a Woman called the Lady Rose, that
would of a sudden by Diabolical Power be snatched away, and bound to a bed, a
tree; sometimes an hair or a little flax was seen to hold her.

Magdalena Crucia, a famous Witch, whom Dr. Henry More in his Antidote against
Atheism mentions, an Abbess, in such estimation she was for her miracles, she
would sometimes in a pomp on a Festival Day, be lift up several Cubits above
ground, so staying her self, holding in her arms the Image of the Child Jesus,
her eyes pouring out tears, and her mouth counterfeiting Devotion.

But some may object, This shows not exactly, that Witches can make others fly,
or subsist in the ambient Air.

Dr. Henry More only mentions Mr. Phrockmortons Children nigh Huntington, I
suppose he meant, as I have heard, how they would fly, and run up walls, being
bewitched: Even as Elizabeth Day, (whom I well knew, as her Kindred with whom
she lived informed me) did, She would run up the walls with her feet, laying no
hand, and on the Seiling with her head downwards, which she could never do
before nor since; like a Mouse leaped from her, with a Suffumigation, a
Physician made, and some Ceremonies.

The Boy of Northwich twelve years old, that Mr. Bruen, a pious man, of Bruen
Stapleford, recorded, would fly from Bed to Table, and from Table to Window, at
a great distance, and yet his legs grown up to his Buttocks.

The carrying of Mr. Silk from his Companion, Mr. Marshall, in the Fens, on his
Horse back in the Air diverse miles, till he lighted into Sr. Oliver Cromwels
Yard, leaping over one wall, and then another, leaving here a Glove, and there
another, and elsewhere his Hat, could be no Delusion. I had it from a sober
Gentleman, who took it from their mouths. Doubtless some Witch did it.

I since heard, the last Spring at New Market, a Noble Man's Horse ran away
with a Lad, leaped an immense way each step, ran by steep Hill sides, and then
ran his head against a bank and killed himself. The Spectators never saw Horse
do so before. And some say Stakes were to be set at each leap for commemoration.

So do Pigs and Hens when bewitched, often leap and dance.

V. A fifth Sign of Witchcraft is, If the Sick is twisten, contorted, and his
Chin drawn to his Forehead, and neck turned behind him, or face rather, though
the common expression is the other, and lie long, as if dead, and the like. But
these may more particularly be termed, Possessed; Of which anon.

VI. A great Sign is, If any thing that comes from the Sick be burnt or harmed,
and the suspected Woman suffers in such manner, or comes to the House; or if
after she is so served, or scratched till blood comes, or threatened, the Sick
is eased much and clearly, suspect her for a Witch, and the Disease to be from
her, Consideratis considerandis.

Besides the many Testimonies of our own Country, Sprangerus and Nicol.
Remigius in his Daemonalatry, and Tho. Barthol in his Anatom. Histories mention
the same.

VII. All Diseases that are caused by Nature, may be caused by Witchcraft; But
all that are caused by Witchcraft, cannot be caused by Nature.

Barrenness, Lameness, Madness, Sterrility, and Impotentia Coeundi, Cholicks,
Fainting and Sweating, etc. we shall relate in the Description of Causes, how
Witches cause them.

DIFFERENCE.
Now here it remains that we make Distinction, if any is to be made, betwixt
the obsessed or possessed with evil Spirits, and the bewitched by Ceremonies.

Betwixt the extreme of Greatness in one, and the extreme of Smalness in the
other, there is little difference, even in all other Diseases; also betwixt
some kind of Obsession, and some kind of Incantation is less difference, then
betwixt some Obsession and other Obsession, or betwixt some Incantation or
Witchcraft, and other Incantation; but the Causes betwixt Possession and
Bewitching, do commonly clearly differ in Manner and Nature, the Witches using
idle Similitudes, foolish Ceremonies, and senseless Words to Inchant the
devilish Spirits, to enter the Body in shape of a Fly; yet sometimes the
Witches send their Imps, which do so; and I question whether any Evil Spirit
can enter any man, without command from some man; but with that not always,
for God gives not leave, but that is secret; sometimes on a worse man they have
no power, and yet bewitch a better, or possess the Religious.

These are more peculiar to Possession, Flying, Leaping at at huge distance,
Speaking, the Tongue of the Sick being held; and sometime they use his Tongue;
also speaking Blasphemy, Raving, and Lying, and telling things done far off at
the moment, and what will be by Vaticination; also the sick Roar like Bears,
Bark like Dogs, Mew like Cats, Grunt like Hogs, etc. They sometime lie as if
dead, stiff, their Head wreathed backward, Chin and Nose drawn together, or
whole Face drawn up like a Purse, with foaming and frothing, and raging most,
and tormenting the sick Party exceedingly when any pray or speak of God.

A young Gentlewoman told me at Ipswich, she was in Prison with a Witch, who
was exhorted to repent, and did endeavor it, and then the Devil made her fume
and sweat, and stopped her breath almost; and after half an hour she came to
her self, and being asked if the Devil did not possess her, to diverts her
from Repenting, she answered, Yea.

So Ramigius the Judge of Lotharingia observed, that at the Bench, or in
Prison, or at their Liberty, (as we have also heard Relations thereof) the
Devil would come and stop their Ears, or almost choke them, or anoy them like a
swarm of Flies, or throw them along, when they had good Counsel given, or
intended to lay hold on God's Mercy, whom they had at their
Witch-making-covenant so solemnly renounced, together with all Faith in him,
and Religion toward him. See the Story of Ann Bodenham, of the Maid she made a
Witch, that repented, in Henry More his Antidote.

Concerning the Nature of Possession, to be as we have writ, see Master Clark,
in the second part of the Marrow of Ecclesiastical History, and Life of Master
Bruen, a Pious Man, it is his relation; also the Observation of Felix Platerus,
a wise and sober Physician, which he saw, and the Relation is to be seen in his
Observations, page 20. de mentis consternatione. Also the Story of a Smiths
Daughter in the Valley Ioachim, possessed in, 1559. by Iobus Fincelius, lib. 3.
de Micaculis: See also Vierus, lib. 3. cap. 10. de praestigiis Damonum. Also
Fornelius, de abditis morborum causis, lib. 2.

DIFFERENCE.
Also we must make distinction betwixt those that are possessed and bewitched,
and those that are killed by evil spirits; I know not, but most kind of spirits
that appear will harm us, if we resist them; and it is to be doubted that God
will give them permission, if we affront them on bad grounds. A sober learned
Man, told me, His father lying at an Inn, heard some body in the Chamber,
though it a Thief, and rose to resist the Spirit, as it proved, gave him a
blow, small, but of force enough to cause Sickness, and his death. A sober and
learned, Esquire of Northamptonshire, told me his man was coming early over
New Market Heath, it was light when he felt somewhat strike him on the back, no
body there, he came home, sickened and died; they never looked to see if the
mark of the blow might be seen in his flesh.

Doctor More, lib. 3. cap. 2. of his Antidote against Atheism, says, That
Mistress Dark of Westminster told him, that her Husband very well went through
some Streets in London, and was struck on the thigh with an invisible hand; he
came home to Dinner, was sick, and dyed within three days, being dead; on the
place, he said, the Spiritual hand struck him, was clearly seen the Figure of a
Man's hand, with the four Fingers, Thumb, and Palm, looking black, and impressed
deep in the Flesh.

So Histories mention, and Doctor More quotes them, that Phillip Melanctons
Kinswomans Husband, being dead, in a few days appeared to her, being Solitary
and grief-ful, and took her by the hand and comforted her, but her hand, was
black always after.

The Barbers Boy, about 1660. that was killed in Cambridge by a Spectral woman
that haunted him, sometimes alone, and sometimes with a Man in Trunk Breeches,
adds to these; He had the exact mark in his forehead, being dead, where that
Spiritual Woman did hit him alive; he came from the Isle of Ely on purpose to
be forsaken by the Spectral woman, several Scholars took Notes in writing
thereof; but we write all as short as may be, so that some may object and
except against the Concordance and Dependence of one thing with another.

The Devil, upon some affront, dashes out the Brains: those that read conjuring
Books, or otherwise call him to jeer him; are sometimes so served.

Some that are hurt by Spirits, look strangely, their Hair stands upright,
Mouth or Cheek drawn awry, or Eyelid down to the Mouth; as the Minister of a
Neighbor Town lately told me of one of his Parish, struck by a Spirit in the
night, upon no occasion given; some are dumb, some Rave, and all almost
differing: but we shall not insist on these, though we could bring many
considerable Observations.

Of the Cause of Witchcraft.
THe first and movent Cause is, the Witch some way offended, and she does ill
by Revenging her self; but sometimes their Imps force and perswade-them, as
Sarah Boatman of Mourden confessed.

We will first relate some, ridiculous Ceremonies we have heard from learned
men, and other sober People, of Witches confession and conviction, about the
way they bewitch men and cattle.

Some take a Beast Skin or Hide, and stick it full of Thorns, or Pins, and
call it such an ones Skin, and that party is wonderfully pricked and pained in
the Superficies of his Body, but it is very like they mutter some Diabolical
words in the doing it.

Some take a wooden bowl and a knife, and dagg the knife point into the bottom
of the bowl, and it becomes full of blood, and such an Horse as they name,
pisseth blood, until he dies, or as they please, with consent of the Devil, and
Limitation of God, the first, the greatest, and the best, to be praised for
evermore.

Others to annoy Houses with Flies, or to choke People, take a Seive and put
dust in it, and sift it, and throw up this dust, with some Diabolical
Sentences, and it turns to Flies.

One bewitched her Neighbors Cows Bags to rankle, and to be knorted and to
gangrene; she sent her Child into the Field for some Briars and made like the
form of a Cow, and called it such an ones Cow, and struck the Bagg diverse
times with those Briars, and their Neighbors Cows Bagg swelled, and rankled.

But it is the Devil that does these things; for such Ceremonies do nothing, or
at least most of them, in other Peoples hands; the Devil and they make a
Bargain, he to help them to Money, or Revenge, and they to give him their Souls
at last, to live in servitude and Vassalage eternally with him.

We read how Moses and the Egyptian Magicians did many preternatural things, by
that Magic that is called Rabdomantia, or Rod-magick, and the Ceremonies both
used were much alike; so did Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Isaiah, many Ceremonies or
Similitudes, as eating of Books, setting on Pots, making like Seige, and
Leaguers, going barefoot, and the like; all Causes are Gods, and are good, but
the Devil knows them and abuses them.

The blind man in Matthew, cured with Clay and Spittle; Ezekiah cured with
Figgs of his dangerous Sickness; Naaman, washing in Jordan, cured of his
Leprosy, were but Ceremonies; but used in the Power of God, which can effect
all things.

Neither do all natural Causes produce only natural Effects; nor do all
Preternatural Effects, arise only from Preternatural Causes.

Natural Causes used by Spirits, may produce effects above the Power, merely of
those natural Causes; indeed Witches use such things but as Obsignatories.

Now let us see what Authors have set-down briefly, how Witches cause sickness,
and bring death, and what kinds of sickness.

I. First most chiefly and familiarly they use certain Ceremonies, foolish
Superstitions, and senceless words; sometimes calling on the Devil.

Duffus King of the Scots, was pined away and wasted with a sweating sickness;
by fits he sweat hugely and languished, and by fits he was cooled, and
refreshed. The Governor of Moravia, his enemy set Witches to hurt him; they
made his Image of Wax, and did roast it on a Spit; and as that began to melt,
so the King melted; removed from the fire, the King was refreshed. See Hector
Boethius, Histor. Scotorum, lib. 11. I have heard such a thing by a waxen Image
done in England, both from a Physician, and Divine; but much according to
Hector Boethius his Story.

To take away virility, and that a man and his wife should not copulate, and
though they had erection, and provocation, they could not eject Semen; or if
so, not into their own Veins, Witches use certain words, which they mumble, and
tie a knot, whiles the parties are married; or take a Lock, and as soon as the
parties are married, shoot it; they tie this knot many ways, and sometimes
hinder copulation; sometimes give leave to copulation, but hinder generation:
One was so bound by an earthen Pot, threw by a Witch into his Well, with some
Ceremonies. See of these things Tho. Barthol. hist. Anatom. the Book called
Malleus Veneficarum. cap. 7. page 2. also Bodinus, lib. 2. cap. 1. Sometimes
the Genitals are shrunk up, and scarce to be found, as Baptista Codronchius,
lib. 3. cap. 6. de morbis veneficis ac veneficijs, and Bodinus testify, with
others; Wierus, lib. 3. cap. 18. de Dam. Praestig. shows more, and Alexander
Benedictus, lib. 24. cap. 14. de medendis morbis, has an example of one made
unable by a Charm in verse, others by Characters.

A Woman of Onipontus, wonderfully tortured, was freed by taking away a waxen
Image an hands length, laid under the threshold of the door by a Witch; the
Image was bored through, and two pins stuck in each side, which so tormented
this Woman. Another laid a beast like a Toad, under the threshold of a door,
and made Barrenness to all the house.

Remigius says, The Devil gave one Woman a little Hay, which she was to put
into her Neighbors Thatch; and the house would be soon on Fire.

Their Ceremonies for raising Winds, Thunder and Lightening, Storms and Hail,
Earthquakes, and Fires, were as ridiculous and insignificant, as those whereby
they caused sickness; the Devil wished them to perform such Ceremonies, and
such effects should come to pass.

In the fifth Book of Inquisition of Witches, it is recorded, that Anna de
Mindelon and Ague went into the Field, dug an hole, put water therein,
stirred it about, and using some words, calling on the Devil-huge Storms arose,
and Thunder.

Pontanus, lib. 5. Relates of great Rains caused by Witches, by drawing about
the Crucifix in the Streets, with great Railings, and Blasphemies, and giving
the consecrated Host to an Ass, and leading him to the Church Porch.

Toward the end of the History of John Leo of Africa, of the Religion of the
Gentiles of Africa, mention is made of the Portugalls in Angolu, desirous to
see the Gaughe, or Priests, raise Storms and Thunder; In 1587. One with little
Bells, Skipps, and Trinkets, and Superstitions words, in half an hour raised
Thunder, and many black Clouds.

Henry More, chap. 3. lib. 3 says, What is casting of Flint Stones behind
their backs toward the West, or flinging a little Sand in the Air, or striking
a River with a Besome, or Rod, sprinkling the water toward Heaven, the
stirring of Urine, or water, with their finger in an hole in the ground, or
boiling of Hoggs bristles in a pot? what are these fooleries available of
themselves to gather Clouds, and cover the Air with darkness, and then to make
the ground smoke with peales of Hail and Rain, and to make the Air terrible,
with frequent Lightenings and Thunders.

II. We shall show, that the Witches send their Imps, or young Spirits, into
some, sometimes in form of Mice, sometimes of Flies, or sometimes give the
party a piece of bread to eat, or the like; But in our differencing Possession
from Effascination we have hinted some things hereof, which need not be
repeated; it will be needful to add, how many spirits may be in one: whether
they are always commissionated, or sent by Witches, we cannot Determine;
sometimes they are, as we have received information of the Maid Mary Hall, now
possessed, as the Spirits say, with two; and she said she saw two Flies come
down the Chimny to her, before she was distempered; she lives at, or nigh
Gadsden, nigh Dunstable: Elizabeth Day, who lived once in this Town, that I
knew, had one that leaped forth like a Mouse, upon suffumigation; she was
bewitched: So one at Harborough, diverse years since, Master Gibbons cured; so
another in the Isle of Ely, that a sober Ancient Man of this place well knows,
being bewitched, had a Mous like Spirit entered him. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John, testify that there may be more evil spirits then one, at once, in one;
out of Mary Magdalene was seven Devils cast; one was called Legion, because he
had so many in him; now a Legion is ten thousand or many thousands: the Boy
that Master Bruen wrote of, said he hadthree evil Spirits in him.

But whether these be, or so always, the Imps of Witches that suck their
Teats, found in several parts of their bodies, is questionable, or whether all
Witches have such Imps, and consequently Teats to be sucked by them, is
questionable; perhaps some that deny there to be any Witches, and consequently
any to be bewitched, deny only the suckling of Imps, or infernal Spirits,
acknowledging and allowing that there be Necromancers, Sorcerers, and those
that have familiar Spirits, or familiarity with Spirits; and that these act by,
and have covenanted with Diabolical Spirits, by oath to the Devil, Renuntiation
of GOD, and Bond writ in their blood, or otherwise; only denying that any have
Teats, and cann^ot sink, and give suck to Spirits, and do mischief: The chief
thing that makes a Witch, is a solemn Bargain and Covenant with infernal
Spirits; and we know, Denominatio sumitur a majori, et pars pro toto. Let but
any allow me the Thing, and they must of necessity allow the Variety and
Degrees thereof.

These Imps that the Devil commands some Witches to nourish, do instigate them
to give them command to do evil, and they have some two, some three, and
possibly some more, some fewer; one is to bewitch Cattle, another Men, a third
Plants and Fruits of the Earth; and they call them by several names: it is most
probable that Witches send these in form of Flies, or Mice, into those they
Envy, and wish Revenge. But, as Remigius well observed, they must at their
Nocturnal Conventicles acquaint the Devil, and he bids them do thus, and so;
and they boast of their wickedness there, as we do of our goodness here; Paulus
Grillandus de Sortilegiis, Bodinus, and Vierus, testify the same things; as
how also Witches are punished and jeered, when they come to the Debolical
Assemblies, if they have done no mischief.

III. Tertium causarum genus: a third kind of Cause is, how by their voice and
eyes some do bewitch; this seems strange, but some of the aforementioned
Authors testify it; some have two Pupils, and look cross; others by praise
inchant; we know some charming words will do much, not as they are words, but
Charms.

Greg. Horstius. Epist. Med. sect. 7. says, If the look will do it, in all
reason much more the touch; but that I do not know, Reason is not Reason, that
follows not Experience; for matter of doing, the Conscience is Reason; but
Experience only, for matter of knowing, is Reason; otherwise Reason is but a
pleasing fancy, which one man thinks Reason, and another not; Biermannus, and
Vierus, by their experience find neither Aspect nor Contact to bewitch; this I
do believe, many women may bewitch those they have not seen, but it is rarely
seen; sometimes they intend (as the two Spirits in Mary Hall in August 1664.
about Gadsden did express; they were sent to her father, but had not power,
given of God,) to bewitch one, and cannot, and so bewitch another of the
family. So I have been told of a Child so bewitched for another, in these parts.

IV. A Fourth kind of Cause is, a casual advantage that Witches take upon Men
nigh to some danger; as a sober Divine told me, his Brother was in a Scots
ship, when a Witch transformed her self into a Crow, and was in the Air to
raise a Wind to cast it away, out of Envy she bore to the Mariners; but her
mother, a Witch, withstood it. So Remigius relates how Witches from their own
confession, being brought before him, did intimate that they took advantage on
men's nearness to danger, as one being on a Cart, they made fall, and break his
Limbs; another going amongst Trees, they caused a rotten bough to break off,
and with a wind directed it to his Eye, and so put it out.

V. They kill some by anointing them; what these Ointments be, I know not;
there be, I suppose, no such in a Apothecaryes shops, the force is from the
Devil; nor do they use these to kill, so much as to fly withal; and whom they
anoint with this ointment, they will make to fly; indeed, as Remigius well
observed, whom they say it shall kill, but especi^ally their powder, it kills;
and whom they say it shall hurt so, it hurts in such a manner and measure: they
do often ^^tter some words, when they anoint themselves with it to fly. That
we do not speak these things only of our self, the Reader may see by reading
Remigius his Daemonolatry, Bodinus his Daemonomany, Vierus de Praestigiis,
Grillandus de Sortilegiis, John Meyerus in Historia Flandriae, and Iac.
Sprangerus.

VI. A Sixth way they have to cause sickness, and bring death, to destroy
Cattle, and fruits of the Earth, is a Powder; this they sometimes strew on men
in bed, or Children; or if they sprinkle it, they that go over it are subject
to that mischief the Witch appoints that scatters it; or they bury it in
ground, and Beasts that go over it are hurt; if they sprinkle it on fruits,
they die: they receive it of their evil spirits, and, as Remigius well
observes, it never hurts them, let them touch it how they will; and it hurts
others only as they do appoint it; Bodinus says, On the 11. of January, 1577.
a Witch was sentenced to die, that confessed she had killed three men, by
casting a Powder wrapped in Paper, in the way they were to travel; saying, IN
THE NAME OF ALL DEVILS.

At Pictavium in the year 1564. were three men and one woman condemned to be
burned; they confessed they old dust under thresholds, and Sheep-Coats, whereby
they hurt men and Beasts; that the Devil gave them this Powder thus; After they
had all anointed themselves, or flyen on Goats, Besoms, or the like, enchanted
by their Diabolical Arts to carry them either high or low, that is, on the
ground, or aloft in the Air, exceeding swift, they came into huge meetings,
where one Devil in shape of a Goat sat on a Throne, to which all did Homage and
kissed his filthiness; then they danced, had carnal Copulation with other
Devils, feasted, and last of all, the principal Devil did burn his body to
Ashes, of which every Witch took some, that she might destroy withal; the
Devils uttering these words, Revenge your selves, and stay: They did all
renounce God, and deny all Faith in him, and Obedience toward him; and if any
did not observe the Devils commands, and do mischief, they were punished; nor
durst they abstain from their Nocturnal Coventicles. Many Histories confirm
these things; we make but a brief Abstract of them, the foresaid Authors may
satisfy the Reader fully therein.

VII. Sometimes they make natural Remedies to produce preternatural Effects; as
by giving the party somewhat to eat, but that that is eaten has no power to
raise such strange Symptoms, but rather gives power to the Witch, by giving
any to, or receiving any thing from the party that is to be bewitched; and
until then, some Witches have confessed that they could not have their minds,
or power to bewitch; so a Neighbor of mine tells me concerning his Sister,
long intended to be bewitched by a Witch; and of one in the Isle of Ely, I
heard the like, who could not be bewitched until the Witch had got him to eat
meat with her: The Proverb is, It is ill meddling with edged Tools; or Bad
daring to catch a Bear by the Tooth; it is worse daring, to have to do with the
De-Dil.

VIII. Witches have another way, when these will not do, or at least so
suitably as the occasion stands, that is, to Metamorphose or transform
themselves into Cats, Rats, Flies, Bees, Wolves, etc. and sometime they lie in
lurking holes (as Remigius pathetically describes) seeking our ruin and
mischief, while we sleep securely, little distrusting any thing when we lie
down; Therefore (faith he) it is best for us to commit and commend our selves
to God in our Prayers when we lie down, and desire his Protection; for there
have been of all sorts of men, both for goodness and greatness, harmed by them:
He relates of one that confessed she transformed her self into the shape of a
Cat, and the People of the house let her run up and down, not thinking any
thing; and when they were gone out of the house with a Powder she had in the
bottom or claw of her foot, she sprinkled the face of the Child in the Cradle,
and it died.

A Lawyer told me, at an Assizes of this County, ^he heard a Witch say at
Bench, before the Judge and her Accusers; She was sure not to die yet: for all
the mischief she had done, was in transforming her self into the shape of a
Bumble Boe; and biting the Maids thread often is pieces as she spun; which Maid
came in against her. It would be too tedious here to descry how Witches can
thus alter their bodies, on in a manner annihilate them. This world was made of
nothing, by Spiritual Power, and may be resolved into nothing again by the same
Power; and we can resolve dense Bodies into Air, and coagulate Air into Water;
and the Devil, quatenus a Spirit, can do that, that a Spirit can do; but as
being the worse, and weaker then God, he varies; but by Gods permission he is
able to do much.

Lest any should doubt of the Transformation of Witches, and how they are
sensible in the shapes of Wolves, Cats, Mice, Dogs, Hoggs, etc. and act the
parts of sensitive Creatures therein, and copulate with the Creatures of the
shape they assume, and eat sometime such meat, and devour Children in the shape
of Wolves, let them read Remigius his proper chapter, Peter de Loyer, John
Tritemius, Bodinus, Herodotus, Pompolius Mela, Solinus, Master Gage of the
West Indies, and others; as Sprangerus, Vierus, and Vincentius, witnesses
enough; who also testify the ability of Witches, through Diabolical Power
given them, to transform and metamorphose any men or women they have power to
hurt into what shape they please, commonly holding similitude with some of Gods
created Animals.

And in the shape of Wolves have diverse Witches lacerated and eaten those
they thirsted to be revenged of, or those that casually fell into their hands,
I should rather say their Claws; which when Michael Verdunus, and Peter
Burgotus (as Vierus lib. 6. cap. 13. testifies) first saw, they were afraid of
their new form they had brought themselves into, thus destroying Men and
Cattle, they thought not to be found out by the secular Authority, and so to
reign securely in their Homicide.

Of the Cure of Diseases Caused by Witchcraft.
1. Of the Cure of possession, (...); some are cast out by Prayers, some by
Necromancy; one Demon commands another; there be several Charms and Rites to
which spirits are subject, and by which they are bound; as the conjuring down
those that walk into such a ground, or Sea, for such a term of years; and the
Devils are forced to live under Laws, and to be commanded by those Men that
without the Extraordinary Mercy of GOD, must serve them in Vassalage and
slavery for ever hereafter.

Herbs are boiled in a Pot, over which the bewitched do hold their heads, when
the fit approaches; Master Gibbons of Hathorough cured one so; and like a Mouse
leaped forth of her mouth, and she was absolutely freed; a Gentleman living
nigh Huntingdon, who told me, was Spectatour.

Others were with some stinking Suffumige cast on Coals; so was a Maid I knew
cured, a Mouse in similitude, leaped from her Mouth, held open when the fit
approached.

A sober Ancient Gentleman told me, he intimately knew one in the Isle of Ely,
whose name he told, but now I have forgot it; he was bewitched, and before
strange fits he had like a Mouse came to him, which none could hinder; he sent
to a white Witch, or Necromancer, Sorcerer, Magician, or what you please to
call him; he gave him an Amulet or Charm to hang about his neck, and so long as
he wore that, he was freed; he durst not leave it off: this Wizard asked if
they were wicked People, else, he said, he could not, or would not help them.

Anne Bodenham, we read in Henry More, when she raised Spirits, made a stinking
perfume on Coals, after her Circle was drawn, and conjuring Charms in her Book
read; the Devil loves, it seems, evil base Odours, and Sluttishness is
commanded, as Regmigius was told by them.

2. Of the Cure of plain Witchcraft, wherein nothing palpably enters the Sick,
or is alive within them; and first of preservation.

Diverse things are traditionally delivered, as Preservatives against
Witchcraft, wore about us, and offensive to Devils; therefore I believe came
Rosemary, Misselto, and Jvy, to be hung up in Houses, because the Ancients
judged those to defend Houses from evil Spirits; Laevinus Lemnius, in one of
his last Chapters of his Book of the Wonders of Nature, has diverse such, as he
and others, wish to wear Corral, Lapis Amianthes, Grains of Paris, Piony, and
Rhue, to defend from Witchcraft; one of London, a German Physician, highly
extolls Corral, and told a friend of mine he cured one bewitched with it.

Our best way is to desire GOD's Protection, and pray to him, and keep our
selves from wickedness; and to have nothing to do with those that have reason
to be suspected for Witches, or to do preternatural Acts; though indeed the
stupid and superstionated Vulgar, judge only that honest, many times, that is
within the reach of their Capacity and Experience only.

2ly. Concerning the Cure of Witchcraft, we shall divide it into these seven
heads, because Experience has shown they have been helped so many several
ways.

1. To punish the Witch, and that two ways, 1. Either her own Body, or 2. The
thing bewitched. 2. Call upon GOD. 3. Use Specifical Medicines, antipathetical
to Demons, if there be any such. 4. Use, or make the Witch use the Ceremonies
of ridding the Sickness. 5. Make her, if the other fail, either to take the
Disease her self, or transfer it to some Dog, or Brute. 6. Search, if there be
no Charms, or things resembling the Sick, laid about the house. 7. If the
Witch is imprisoned, she is void of hurt, and Satan leaves her.
First, Briefly to demonstrate all these, the before named Authors can justify
all these, which we need not here reiterate.

If any is troubled, as our Diagnostick Signs Demonstrate, one thing being
compared with another, and the subsequents with the Precedents,

1. Punish the Witch, threaten to hang her if she helps not the Sick: scratch
her, and fetch blood, for so, says Thomas Bartholinus, Witchcraft is held to
be dissolved; and so I heard from a sober Physician, a Child bewitched by
Magaret Bell, nigh Lutterworth in Leicestershire, was delivered.

2. Punish the thing bewitched; putting red hot Iron in the Churm. when Butter
would not come, has burned her in the Guts; burning the Excrements of one
bewitched, has made her Anus sore; tying the Fat or Cauldren of Drink hard
with Cords, that has boiled over when scarce any Fire was under, has made the
Witch be sore girt and pained; stopping up Bottles of that Drink that has been
bewitched, has made the Witch able neither to urine or deject, until they were
opened; if an Horse or Hen, etc. be bewitched to death, if they are burnt
alive, and in the fit, the Witch comes, and complains: These are all Examples
that I, by my diligent Inquisition into these things, have been informed of;
But Authors in other Ages, and other Countries, will bear me out in the truth
hereof.

2ly. Call upon GOD; pray earnestly and uncossantly; we are in no case to throw
away Faith, and not in any to take Presumption: let none think, I am better
then such an one, and GOD ought to defend me, and I am sure I shall not be hurt
if I go amongst Witches or Spirits, this is Presumption; better than thee have
suffered worse: for matter of driving out Devils, Prayer avails more than in
ordinary Witchcraft, yet some cannot be cured at all; and Remigius says, In
one the Devil answered, Because the Sick had never prayed to God for
restouration; but the Witches gave other Reasons, why they could not cure
others; such things are secret to us, yet common in the Councels of Spirits;
and Witches cannot cure, nor cure by any other way, than that their Fiends or
Familiar Spirits order and command, or at least this is most common.

Thirdly, Use Specifical Medicines, antipathetical to Demons, if any be so
qualified, and effectually so: Corral, Aetites, Emerods, Rhue, Piony, Rosemary,
Misselto, and Birch, were used by the Ancients: some of the Ancients thought
all Convulsions and Epileptick passions, Vertigoes, and Hystericks, to arise
from Demons and Spirits; and tying these about their necks, and giving them
inwardly, they were helped; so that false Foundations must needs have rotten
Superstructures.

Pliny, lib. 30. cap. 2. Relates that Cynocephalaea, an Herb that is called in
Egypt Osirites, prevails against all Witchcraft; and that the Grammarian Appion
raised the Ghost of Homtr by it, to tell him what Country man he was, but
received no answer, as he durst relate.

Matthiolus says, The Seed of the Herb True-love, i at a time drunk for
twenty days, cures Diseases caused by Fascination.

Lobelius, page 87. says, the Herb Priamis, with white Pepper and Wines,
looses Witchcraft.

Thomas Bartholin, for such as cannot copulate and eject sperme, with their own
Wives through Witchcraft, praises from others Birch Tree.

For Love-Enchantment, Skenkius, Observe. Medecinal: page 515. enjoins to take
of Unious Stones, and Saint Iohn's-wort; called Fuge Daemonum, equal parts, and
a little Balm, give them in drink, and hang the Loadstone, Amulet-like, about
their necks.

P. Droetus cap. 8. Consilii novi de pestilentia, says, An Amulet of
Quicksilver prevails against Plague and Witchcraft: An ignorant Physician I
know, lays it under the Pillow in a quill.

Marcellus Donatus in Medica Historia Mirabilis, has discussed many things
concerning Witches and Demons: amongst the rest he questions whether Galen did
believe there were any Demons or no, and he brings this Sentence in his Book
of Medicines easy to be prepared, to prove he did, Caridion, et latum cuminum,
et zochii radicem ad tertiam partem decoque, et ex vino veter, potui da, gestet
et glaneum offa, haec enim suffita Daemones abigunt. See lib. 2. cap. 1.

Greg. Horstius: Sect. 7. quaest. et Epistol. Med. writing to Hector
Schlanhovius in Answer to his, disputes the Case, Whether Natural Remedies may
cure a Disease from a Preternatural Cause, and it may sometime; Ulcers have
been cured, so writes Schlanhovius, Petrus Pomyonatius lib de Incantationibus;
and Horstius reckons two, one that had a sore Breast, out of which came a long
piece of Glass; another of an Ophthalmy, voided pieces of the Besome, and they
lost the Besomes they had newly bought, the Witch used them; but it is but
sometimes, and most in outward Ails, that common Medicines will cure.

Fourthly, Use lawful, and make the Witch use those Ceremonies she knows to
Cure the Sick. Master Culpeper relates how one tied in Pudendis Virilibus so
that he could not join with his wife, was freed by making Urine through his
Wives Wedding Ring, Barthol. mentions the like of pissing through a Birch
Besome.

One white Witch is recorded to Cure by the heads of Crows and Brains of Cats:
And if Natural Remedies can have a Preternatural force given by Witches, to
cause Diseases; why not as well, when they please, to Cure Sicknesses? As Mrs.
Bodenham of Salisbury, 1653. sent five ragged Boys (Spirits) (it seems the
Devil is poor, he can keep his servants no better clothed) with Mris. Goddards
Maid, together in Wilton-Meadow, Dill and Vervain, together with which, she
gave the paring of her Nails; some were to give in broth to rot then Guts, the
other to rub about the Pot sides, to make their Teeth fall out; these spiritual
ragged Boys were also so hungry, that Mrs. Bodenham threw them some bread, and
they eat it, and danced; they could not tell where the Herbs in the Meadow
were, till they removed the Snow, and looked about as others may do; young
Demons! from all such, and participating in their actions, the Lord deliver us
and defend; for, it is He that works in us both to will and to do, even of
his good pleasure; and it is not in man to direct his ways; for, in him we
live, move, and have our being.

Some use writ Charms, Verses, and Characters: Paracelsus had some knowledge in
such, Witches do nothing by the Stars, they are GOD's Creatures, of noble use,
and for man's use.

Fifthly, The VVitch is sometimes forced to take the Disease her self, and
sometimes is sick, as the party she afflicted was; sometimes dies; when she is
cast into Prison the Sick are sometime delivered; sometime he or she (they are
most Females, most old women, and most poor) must transfer the Disease to other
persons, sometimes to a Dog or Horse, or Cow, etc. Threaten her, and beat her,
to remove it. For the verification of these, read Authors.

Search and see if under the threshold of the Door, in the Thatch, or in the
dust of the house, as Witches Powder is laid, whether there be no Charms,
Images, writ Characters, or other Telesms; for these took away and destroyed,
the Effascination ceases; Master Lilly in his Judgment upon the twelve
Astrologieal Houses, in his Introduction to Astrology, has set down diverse
Natural Remedies against Witchcraft.

Seventhly, Get the Witch, put her in Prison, her Power then ceases, Satan
leaves her; sometimes she then acquits those she has bewitched, if Satan will
give leave; however, her bewitching of others is prevented.

I have been brief, otherwise things might have been described more clearly,
and fully: Zoilus and Momus may carp. Velle sum cuique est nec voto vivitur uno.
(...)
(...).


BEcause there be many that will not believe the manifold and manifest
Experience, many in all Ages and Countries have had of these things; yet when
they see the Scriptures (to which most, if not all, yield a reverence to, and
belief in) in plain words and Historical expressions to make out the same, they
may be convinced of their former rigid Incredulity: Wherefore we drew out these
places of Scripture, to offer to the Readers perusal and consideration;
literally they are so to all; but if they are to be interpreted, why may not I
have the liberty to interpret them to the best of my knowledge, as well as
another, for the defense of his way?

1. That there be Witches, or those that have familiarity with Spirits, or
familiar Spirits, Wizards, Conjurers, Diviners, etc. See 2 Chro. 33. 16. 2
Kings 21. 6. 2 King 23, 24. 1 Samuel 28. 7, 8, 9. Acts 8. 9, 10, 11. Exodus 22. 18.

2. That Natural Remedies expel Devils, and help the bewitched, Tobit. 6. 2,
7, 15, 16, 17. and Tob. 8. 1, 2, 3.

3. That the Power the Devil gives, is on condition of worship to him; Luke 4.
6, 7.

4. That Witches can make inanimate things Animate, turn water into blood, make
the bodies of the dead arise, foretell things to come, etc. through the Power
the Devil gives them by the permission of God, Exodus 7. 20, 22. and verse. 12.
Exodus 8. 7. Number. 23. 8, 9, 10.

5. That Spirits Immediately, as well as Mediately, by Humane Agents, may hurt
and disease: Job 2. 7. Luke 1. 19, 20, 22.

6. That the best of Men may be hurt by ill Spirits, by the permission of God:
Job 2. 6, 7. Job 1. 12, 13, 14. Matthew. 4.

7. That Spirits commonly work by stirring up Natural Causes, Job 1. 16, 19.

8. That they act by Ceremonies, the good as well as bad, Exodus 7. 11, 12, 22.
Exodus 8. 6, 7-17. Isaiah 6. 6, 7. Ierem. 13. verse. 1, to the 12. Ierem. 24.
verse. 1. to 10. Ier. 27. 2. and 28. 10. Ier. 51. verse. 60. 63, 64. Ezekiel. 4. and
5 chapters. Ezekiel. 12. 18. and chap. 24. verse. 3, to 6. chap. 37. 16, 17. Ioh.
9. 6, 7. Acts 2. 2, 3.

9. That all have not Power, as to bewitch, so not to heal, or cast out Devils,
by the means and Ceremonies that others may, Mat. 10. 1. Mark 9. 18, 19. Acts
19. 16.

10. That many Devils may be in one body; in some seven, as Mark 16. 19. or one
alone, as Tobit 8. 3. Acts 19. 15, 16. A Legion, that is, many thousands, Luke
8. 30.

11. That the Devil may possess Man, see all the aforesaid places, and also
Beasts, Luke 8. 33. compared with Matthew. 8. 28, 30.

12. That all are not possessed alike, that are alike possessed, Mar. 9. 17. to
29. Luke 8. 30. some are Dumb, as Mark 9. 17. some speak, as Luke 8. 30.

13. That the evil Spirits may torture, and would destroy Man, Mark 9. 22.

14. That the Symptoms from Preternatural Causes, are more violent and strange
then from Natural, Mark 9. 10, 20, 26. Luke 8. 30. Mar. 5. 3, 4, 5.

15. That those possessed may do Preternatural acts, often beyond the Power of
Men to do, Luke 8. 29.

16. That the evil Spirits can go no farther then God permits, Exodus 8. 18, 19.
Luke 8. 33. Job 1. 12. Job 2. 6. 1 King. 22. 19, to 23.

17. That good Spirits, and also bad, quatenus Spirits, have done, and
consequently may raise Earthquakes, and Winds, and make, and appear in Fire,
Job 1. 16, 19. and Job 31. 1. Numb. 9. 15. Exodus 24. 17. Exodus 13. 21.

18. That one Spirit may destroy an Army of men, Isai. 37. 36.

19. That Spirits can see all the world in a moment, Luke 4. 5.

20. That Spirits both good and bad can make the natural fleshy bodies of Men
to fly in the Air, Matthew. 4, 5, 8. Acts 8. 39. 1 Samuel 28. 14. and that very
swift, Luke 4. 5.

21. That there be degrees of Spirits, even as there be greater and less, so
better and worse, Matthew. 12. 24. Jude verse. 9. Revel. 12. 17.

22. That Armies of Spirits, horsed and armed, may fight and run to and fro in
the Air. 2 Maccabees 5. 2, 3.

23. That Spirits may raise Natural Bodies, and use Natural Weapons, and do
therewith Actions on Earth, 2 Maccabees 3. 24, 25, 26. 2 King. 2. 11.

24. That the good and evil Spirits may be sometimes together, Job 1. 6. Job 2.
1. Jude verse. 9. 1 King. 22. 19. to the 23.

25. That Spirits are not tied to one place, but wander up and down, Job 1. 7.
Job 2. 2. God is every where, 2 Chronicles. 7. 18.

26. That a million of Spirits may be in one room or place, Luke 8. 30.

27. That Spirits may assume Natural Bodies as ours, and put them off again, 2
Maccabees 3. 24, 25, 26. Genesis 18. 2. Genesis 19. 1. Judge. 13. 3, 19, 20. Exodus 24.
10, 11.

28. That Spirits appear after diverse manners and shapes, Dan. 5 5. Genesis 3. 1,
2. Job 4. 14, 15, 16. Ezekiel. 1. 4. to the 14. Acts 2. 2, 3. Exodus 3. 2. Acts 9.
3. to 7. Exodus 24. 9. 10, 11. and chapt. 13. 21.

29. That the Bodies and Instruments Spirits raise, when they would perform
Actions here on Earth, are sometimes so material, that they are tangible as
well as visible and audible, 2 Maccabees 3. 24, 25. Tobit 6. 5, 10. Genesis 19.
10. Luke 24. 39. Tobit 5. 6. 2 Maccabees 5. 2, 3. Ioh. 20. 20, 27. compared to
Luke 24. 39, 40.

30. That Spirits are sometimes only audible, not visible nor tangible. 1. Sam.
3. 4, 5, 6. Acts 9. 7.

31. That Spirits, with the bodies they raise, perform diverse Humane Actions,
Tobit. 3. 17. Tobit 6. 8.

32. That they sometimes eat and drink, Tobit. 6. 5. Luke 24. 41, 42, 43.
compared with John 21. verse. 5. to 15. Genesis 19. 3. Genesis 18. 5. to the 9.

33. That they be guides in Journeyes, Exodus 13. 21. Tobit 5. 6.

34. That they have washed their feet, and lain down like Men, Genesis 18. 4.
chapter 19. 2, 3.

35. And it may be construed that they use coition, and beger, from Gen, 6. 4.

36. That Spirits appear more or fewer; 2 Macc. 5. 2, 3. an army appeared; Genesis
18. 2. three Spirits, and Genesis 19. 1. two appeared, and Tobit 3. 17. but one;
and what is not in Scripture by manifest expression, may be argued from thence
by necessary Deduction; and what is said of Angels, is referable to Spirits,
for all Angels are Spirits, but all Spirits are not Angels.

The Power of Spirits is not to be compared to, nor limited by the Power of
Natural Causes; and if the motion of one natural thing cannot be solved by the
motion of another, much less may supernatual be solved by natural Causes.

And if Lightning will so soon exanimate Men, and they die suddenly, no wound
seen, but only black; and drink up Buckets of Water, not hurting the Bucket; or
contrariwise, breaking a Barrel, and fixing the Beer in it that it shall not
run forth; or melt the Sword in the Scabbard, the Sheath it is in, unhurt; or
Gold to be melted in the Chest, that being safe, or if Herb Moonwort will
unshoe the Horse and loose his ferters, or Herb Loosestrise tied about Oxens
necks make them agree; or if Herbs, or Lozenges of Roots of Ciclamen, or Caro
Bufonum will cause Love; Darnell, madness; Wine, mirth and alacrity; and
Corral, Miselto, and Wood-Nightshade, release the bewitched, and drive away
Fiends; or if the Loadstone can draw Iron, or Gold Quicksilver; or if a few
Grains of prepared Gold will blow up an house, or Wolves Guts, unseen,
astonish Horses, or the looks of the Basilisk, kill Men; or Unicorns Horn,
Spiders; or if the Ash-Tree will kill Adders or Serpents; the Remora stop the
Ship in its carrear: or Torpedo-fish, benumb the hands that holds the angle, at
the hook of which she is hung; or if an Air or sudden blast can take away all
men's Limbs, and sometimes Senses, and make Apoplectick; or the sum of
Char-coal in a close room make lethargick; if Apium Risus, or Herb Sardis,
will make Men die convulsive and laughing: if these, I say, and thousands their
like, be really true, (which our other Writings may manifest, if they come ever
to be published) let these first be solved by Reason and by the course in
Nature on other things, before supernaturals come to be compared by natural,
and to be denied to be, by reason of the impossibility of their cause.

What reason is there why some should fast diverse Months, and others Years, and
some eat twenty times as much as most Men? why should Chamelions live without
eating or drinking, and Tortoises and Salamanders diverse months, when Man and
most Beasts must feed every day? why should Flies, Swallows, Butterflies,
Caterpillars, etc. lie dead and senseless all Winter, and revive in Summer, when
most creatures either live always alike, or die for altogether? why should
some creatures live in two Elements, when most cannot? Tortoises lie covered in
Earth, or lie on Earth in the Sun, or swim in the Water; some American-Fish
come on the day time on Land and eat grass; the Sea-Calf, Crocodiles, and
Otters do the same; and why should the Salamander live in the fire, when none
else can? and Seamen, that are sometimes caught by Fishers, exactly formed like
us, can live on Land as well as in the Water: which things our Physiology,
Iatrosophy, and Pneumatography declares; how comes the Stomachs of Hens to
digest Gold, Stones, and Pearls; and Dogs Bones, the Struthiocamelus or Ostrich
digests Iron; and Tyburones Dog-fish, and Sharks concoct Clothes, Shoes, Hats,
Caps, etc. and who gave the diversity of appetites to all these creatures, and
thousands more? for as these differ one from another, so others from these: how
does the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, magnitudine et numero, differ in
diverse places? and why should the Needle touched, turn always to the
North Pole? the stony birth at Agendicum, whole Towns and Armies turned Stone
suddenly and secretly with the Air? the birth of a Child at Prague having all
its interne Bowels hanging forth, from its Mother, seeing a Calf so exenterated
three Months before her delivery? the force of Imagination, the Causes of
Sympathies and Antipathies, are difficult to find out; some swoond at Cheese
and yet eat Cheese-Curd; some sweat, and are in an Agony, when brought before a
roasted Pigg, and yet love Pork; some swoond at a Breast, and yet eat a
Shoulder of Mutton; and some swoond at Cats, and others at Eeles, that are in
the room with them, though unseen and unknown; whence is it that some long for
Posies, and Kisses, and to eat man's Flesh, and rotten Carcasses? But we must
pass by many, to speak of many: why do some Trees in America bring forth
twelve times in a Year, and Rice in Cochin China thrice, when our Fruits and
Grain come but once? and why have our Women commonly but one at a Birth, when
those of Egypt have often three or four? whence is it that many and huge Fishes
that swallow many and huge things, swallow with them no Water, and we must, it
runs in by our Nostrils? why is our meat other animals poison? and how come
some to live as well under the torrid, as others under the frozen Zone?

Thousands more of Natures Aenygma's, Problems and Phaenomena's may be
produced, but we guess by a penny how a shilling is coined; and these may
confute the Pride and Presumption of those, that will undertake to solve all by
their Imaginary Reason, and not only these but supernatural things too, or else
they will not believe them to be true: These things neglected, have been the
cause of all falsness, stubbornness, and mistakes in Learning.

1. The not making Experience (which should be manifold, as well as manifest)
the foundation of that, that Reason is made the superstructure o^.

2. The want of distinction betwixt likes.

3. The binding Nature up to one Method and Rule, and not allowing every thing
its varieties of manner, and degrees of measure.

4. The making general Rules, before particulars were truly and fully known.

5. The too great confidence and idleness, in judging all things we do not
know, by those we know.

6. The mistake of things Casual for Ominous, and Ominous for Casual.

7. The too great Superstition men yield to, and unquestioned belief they have
in, received Opinions, Traditions of Ancestors, and what ever is in popular
applause; defending their own belief, not by their own Experience, but others
conjectures.

8. The proving some things not to be true, by proving others to be false; as
Mr. Scot, etc. about Witches and Spirits have done, who think they have proved
Witches Juglers, by proving Juglers to do their tricks by slight of hand, and
deceptio visus.

9. The judging all by one, when as we should judge one by all: one shows
that another may be so, but not proves that all must be so.

10. The want of the consideration of Gods consideration in making this world;
every thing was made for another, nothing in vain; Creatures had particular
parts made for every particular office, and wisdom given to all answerable to
their parts made to be used: every thing has its extremes of little and much,
and mediocrity, and its Friends and Foes in the Creation; every place must be
filled, and every office occupied: somewhat was made for every Genius, and some
Genius's were made purposely to know and see the Mysteries and variety in the
Creation; these not well known and weighed, are the maintainers of Ignorance
and perperual Controversies: to which we might add, the putting the Cause for
the Effects, and the Effects for the Cause; and the particular Fantasies of
Men, for the general Reason of Man. Some critical distinctions needfully may
follow; neither are all Juglers, Tumblers and Trickshewers, quatenus Juglers,
Tumblers, etc. Witches, (so that those that show no such Tricks may be Witches,
and they that show such Tricks may not) nor are all that be Witches, quantenus
Witches, Juglers, Trick-shewers, etc. therefore those that deny the being of
reality in Witchcraft, because there is fraud and delusion in another thing,
prove things by mistaken and unnecessary consequents; neither have all that
have been condemned for Witches, been Witches, nor have all that were Witches,
been condemned for, or reputed the same: neither are all things that are
reported, true; nor all things that are true, are reported: the proving one
thing false, does not deny another to be true; and the proving falsness in any
one thing, does not prove there is only falsness in that thing: Shall we judge
because there be some Hypocrites in Religion, that there be none sincere? or
because one Man lied, therefore no Man may speak true? for he lied not, quoad a
Man, but quoad untrue; we must see where the distinction and stress of an
Argument lies, whether in the Thing, or its Attribute, and therein concerning
Witchcraft, many mistake themselves: if we will go about to prove in any
Profession that there be Impostors and Dissemblers, we shall sufficiently prove
thereby that there is truth in the thing, from which these Impostors and
Dissemblers do recede and deviate; else they will be proved not to be Impostors
and Dissemblers: It does not follow that because one Man lies awake with his
eyes shut, and another lies asleep with his eyes open, that all men must do so:
Witches may do all that Juglers do, but Juglers cannot do all that Witches can
do; and to condemn the fraud and impotence of the greater, by the fraud and
impotence of the less, is an impertinent proof: and also they differ more then
quoad gradum et modum; we must not prove by sleep that death is the same,
because it is like it. Somnus est mortis imago, omne simile non est idem.

Some believe concerning Witches, and not concerning Spirits; and some believe
concerning Spirits, and not concerning Witches; and some believe both, and some
neither: and as many men did commit that, that was false to writing, so many
men did omit that that was true in writing; and many things are written that
are true, that are not fully written as they are true.

But sometime there is more controversy and dispute about the word; one
speaks, Witch, as to its vulgar acceptance, another as to its genuine
signification; and perhaps both may mean one thing. I perceive many things we
have writ in this Book are not so strange to most Londoners as to Country
People; and many things are more familiar to Country People then Londoners; and
the Vulgar do commonly judge all by that little Experience they have; and I am
confident ten thousand People in the City of London, and proportionably in the
Country, can bring their Experience of these things: And the only way to
decide all controversies, is to have, as it were, a trial at an Assizes, and
all the witnesses to be sworn; many would depose upon Oath their infallible
Experience in these things, and Experience must be that that must umpire twixt
us, that is from Experior, to have tried; but opinions come only from Opinor,
to think. Quot homines,(...) sententia, velle (...); est nec unto vivitur uno,
men are ready on all sides to receive that they do in part already believe.

Now a few Syllogistical Reasons to prove there be Witches.
If Spirits ever did assume bodies, they may assume bodies: But the Scriptures,
besides multiplicity of Authors and secular witnesses, manifest that Spirits
have assumed bodies: Ergo they may.

If there ever have been Witcheries, Exorcisms, and Conjurations, there may be:
But the Scripture, and many Writers, and Modern Experience, testifies there
have been such: Ergo there may be Witcheries, etc.

If in all Professors and Professions there has been both falfity and reality,
then the Professors of Conjuration, Exorcismes, and Witchcraft may be some
false, and some true: But Scriptures, Writings, and Experience testifies, etc.
Ergo.

If the Power of the Devil can do only what Man can do, and only as man can
do it, then there be no Witches: But the Scripture, many Authors, and Vulgar
Experience, shows the Devil does higher things then Man, and in another manner
then Man can: Ergo, there may be Witches.

If there ever were such Diseases in Man that were impossible to be effected by
Natural Causes, they must be by Supernatural; and if so, by Diabolical; and if
so, by Agents: But it is clear there have been such: Ergo we conclude the Devil
has done these, and that by Agents, which we call Witches.

If there ever were any that could make Water Blood, raise the bodies of Men
buried, and make Inanimate things Animate, etc. and not by the Power of God,
nor Natural Causes, it must be from the Devil: But the Scriptures clearly show
such have been: Ergo, there are such as work by Devils.

A Relation of Mary Hall of Gadsden, reputed to be possessed of two Devils.
1664.
MAry Hall, a Maid of Woman's Stature, a Smiths Daughter of little Gadsden in
the County of Hartford, began to sicken in the fall of the Leaf, 1663. It took
her first in one foot with a trembling shaking and Convulsive motion,
afterward it possessed both; she would sit stamping very much; she had
sometimes like Epileptick, sometimes like Convulsive fits, and strange
ejaculations: she was sent to Doctor Woodhouse of Barkinsted, a Man famous in
curing bewitched persons, for so she was esteemed to be; he seeing the Water
and her, judged the like, and prepared stinking Suffumigations, over which she
held her head, and sometimes did strain to vomit, and her distemper for some
weeks seemed abated, upon Doctor Woodhouse direction; Then reinvigorating,
were heard in her strange noises, like mewing of Cats, barking of Dogs, roaring
of Bears, etc. at last a Voice spoke in her, Pus Cat, what a Cat? nothing but
mue; this was about the beginning of August, 1664. and after this the evil
Spirit spoke often, exercising the tricks and torments, convulsions, and
elevations of the Maid, as before it spoke, with some Additions.

The manner and matter of the Spirits speaking was on this wise:

If any said, Get thee out of her, Satan; the spirit replied, We are two; and
as often as any said, Satan, or Devil, it would reply, We are two; and would say,
We are only two little Imps, Gfe Harods, and Youngs; sometimes we are in the
shape of Serpents, sometimes of Flies, sometimes of Rats or Mice; and Gfe Harod
sent us to choke this Maid, Mary Hall; but we should have choked Goodman Hall,
but of him we had no Power, and so possessed his daughter; we came down the
Chimny, riding on a stick, and went first to Mary's foot, whereupon her foot
trembled first of all her distemper. At other times, upon diverse occasions,
either voluntarily, or in answer to the questions of those that came to see
her, they said, They would do more mischief if they could; yea, they would
destroy all Mankind, and be revenged on their Adversaries, but God was above,
they had not Power, yet many times they would speak Blasphemously of God; and
say, God cannot cast us out, we are above God; we are four to one, (meaning the
two Witches that sent them, and they two; against God) and do you think we
cannot deal with him well enough. When some came to pray, they would say, You
shall not cast us out, we will tire you all out; and when they had done
praying, the Spirits would say, Did we not tell you, you should not cast us
out? where is your God now? When one of Saint Albans came to pray, the Spirits
said, Get you goue, for we cannot abide you: to another they said, that spoke
to them of God, Get you gone, it is dark, it is late, you will be benighted.

Sometimes to those that came to cast them out, they would say, They would be
gone to morrow; or that they had a short time, and thereforo must be busy in
showing a few prankes more, ere they went out; at another time they would tell
them, They must choke her, and they would not out yet.

Sometimes they would bid her, Mary, choke your self, when she went to eat; and
when she went nigh water, Mary, dround your self; and when she would not do it,
and they wanted Power to make her, they would say, Ah Fool, Fool, Fool, Fool,
what will you not drowned your self? when she was nigh the Fire, they would say,
Mary, put your head into the Fire; or, Mary, put your head into the Pot, and
sometimes of a sudden they would dop down her head, as if she should put it
into the Scalding Pottage, but could not effect it.

Because many People came to her, her father, in September sent her to several
Friends Houses, five or six miles more or less distant; where Friends met to
pray; and the Spirits would say, Mary shall not ride, and would lift her up,
and make her shake, so that they were fain to hold her on the Horse; but
formerly they suffered her to ride without interruption; since they begun to
speak, when she went to read in the Bible, they would say, Mary, do not read;
or, Mary you shall not read, for Books are all against us; her father would
say, She shall read in spite of all the Devils, and so she did always without
interruption; for when she read, she was not molested, but once they did
convulse her Arms, and threw the Books far from her.

When some prayed by her, and said, At the Name of God shall all Flesh Tremble;
and at the Name of Jesus shall every knee bow, they would make her to tremble,
and her knees to bow; and when so done, laugh and sing, We know how to cheat
you, and make you believe any thing.

Yet sometimes they would say, We are Liars, and God is true; and when God
speaks the word, we must out: and at other times they would howl, and lament,
and condole their condition, and cry out, We are undone, we are undone, we are
miserable and tormented! and immediately thereupon, they would bark, or sing,
or howl, or make a jearing, and set a tune, and make Maryes feet move thereto
according.

And when any blamed them for mocking at God, who was able to make them
miserable to all Eternity, they would answer, They could be no worse then they
were, and that if they were out of Mary Hall, they must go again to service, to
the Witches that sent them in; to them they must return, and their work they
must do; and as much mischief at they can, against all that are their enemies.

Sometimes when questions were asked, they would make no answer; and sometimes,
answer to each question; sometimes indirectly, and sometimes directly;
sometimes seriously, and sometimes scoffingly; and sometimes would do nothing,
but say and gainsay themselves: one spoke to them in Latin, and they answered,
We cannot speak Latin; and presently they said, If we can, we will not: the
father thinks one speaks one thing and the other another.

They would often repeat what Doctor Woodhouse had done, and said, about their
casting out, and remember all exactly, and laugh at him, saying, Doctor
Woodhouse would have cast us out, but he could not; he is a cunning fellow, but
we are cunninger then he; let not him think a few slaps will expel Satan.

Sometimes they would Blasphemously say, God was a Bastard, let him come if he
dare: and when some good men had done praying, the Spirits would say, Where is
your God now? and before they began, they would tell them, They should weary
them out.

When Goodwife Harwood, the Witch, that sent them, (as they say) came, they
said, Oh Gfe Harwood! are you come! that is well; it is well you are come; we
were sent by you, Gfe Harwood: she denied it; Then said the Spirits, What! will
you deny us now! Gfe Harwood, you sent us to choke the Father, and having no
Power of him, we were to go to his Daughter; and we have endeavored to choke
her, but cannot: and when Gfe Harwood was going away, the Spirits cried,
saying, We will go with you, Gfe Harwood; Oh let us go with you; will you leave
us, Goodwife Harwood? but Gfe Young, the other they accused, never came to
vindicate her self.

Doctor Woodhouse got Mary Halls nails that were cut off, and with somewhat he
added, hung them up in the Chimny a reesing overnight; and by next morning Gfe
Harwood came, which they thought to be caused by the aforesaid things.

When it was talked amongst the Household that Gfe Harod should be had before a
Justice; upon the Spirits accusation, the Spirits would plead for her, and say,
Do not have Gfe Harwood before the Justice: But after she had come, and denied
them, they would say, Let Gfe Harwood be hanged, if she will, because she
denied us.

The voice these Spirits uttered, differed; the father said, he thought one had
a shrill voice, and the other a great; sometimes they would speak like a Child,
and drawling; sometimes greatly, and son^rously; sometimes they would imitate
the voices of those that were in the House.

Ere they speak, the Spectators beheld her Breast to rise, and by the gradual
lifting up of her Breasts toward her Throat, somewhat seemed to ascend; then
it came into her Throat, and distended that, so that her neck seemed at
sometimes as if a roll was in it.

Sometimes her lips in speaking were not moved, but commonly they were, and her
tongue always; for the Spirits by the pains she felt, and by the swelling of
those parts seen to the Spectators, came to the root of the Tongue, and moved
it.

Sometimes they came thus to her Throat, to try if they could choke her, and
her breath would be stopped for a while, and then be at a little more liberty;
and presently they would distend and swell her Throat again, so that she was
ready to swoond, and for a while labored for breath: sometimes she had many of
these fits, and sometimes was freed a good while; she slept well, and eat
freely, and all the while she read, the Spirits troubled her not; so that
eating, reading, and sleeping, were her immunity, or times of reprieve.

But when People prayed, they tore and tormented her; yet at sometimes they lay
still; and if she sat, on a sudden they would make her leap up a good height;
sometimes in length she would leap an Extraordinary way; sometimes as she lay
on her bed, and was fain to be held, on a sudden (while others were praying,
the Spirits lying still a good while) she would leap up and hit her head
against the Beds Testor.

Sometimes she would beat her self, sometimes with one, sometimes both hands,
chiefly on the Breast.

Sometimes her legs would go, fast and violently, kicking of the ground, and
the Spirits would say, Come, Mary, Dance; and then they would make a tune, and
make her feet to Dance it; sometimes they would say, Mary, make a mouth; and
they then convulsed her mouth, so that her lips seemed gristles, and her Nose
was sometimes drawn up; another time they should say, We will p(...) out your
Eyes; and then they would so draw together her Eyelids, that scarce any
extuberance of the Eye could be perceived.

Sometimes they would say, Come, Mary, turn round; and then they would whisk
her round; sometimes they would say, Turn half round, and she would do
accordingly.

Sometimes when the Spirits moved her Tongue, some of the House would catch
hold of it, to stay it, and it was pulled from them.

They read out of Master Culpepers Books, that Misleto of the Oak, was good
against Witchceaft; wherefore they got some Misleto, and applied about her
neck, and she trembled; and to what part soever they applied it, so as it
touched her Flesh, she trembled; by which they perceived it had prevalency
against Diabolical Incantation; but did the Maid no good as to the Expulsion of
the Cacodaemons.

When Doctor Woodhouse ordered some things to be boiled for her, affoon as they
began to boil, the Maid, or the Spirits in her, did tremble and shake, and so
continued all the while those Antidaemoniack-Medicines boiled.

Though she was for the most part most tortured and molested when any prayed by
her, yet she was willing thereto, because defirous to be rid of that
enthralment; yet commonly we cannot tell how to entertain willingly a present
misery, though it bring to us an after extraordinary happiness.

All this while she looked pretty well for color, and kept her Flesh; she was
a Civil fair-conditioned Maid, and her Friends inclined to the Anabaptists
Sect, and most that came to pray by her were of their Teachers.

She would sometimes be forced against the walls, scrabbling with her hands as
if she would run up; the Spirits would precipitate her in diverse manners, but
that they wanted Power, as sometimes they said they could not hurt an hair of
her head, and though they tortured her body, they could not damnifie her Soul;
her mind was free and unhurt, when her fits were off, and when the Spirits were
no way occasionally moved.

As Soon as Doctor Woodhouse had given her a Spoonful of some Liquor, being
scarce got down her Throat, she fell down in a swoond; so that it is apparent
some things are Antipathetick to Demons.

I told them I doubted natural Remedies would do no good, otherwise I could
have advised them to give her Powder of Coral, of Piony, of Misleto, of Herb
True-Love, and of Saint Iohns-wort, severally, now some of one, and anon some
of another; and to have hung, Rosemary, Misleto, Ivy and Coral in the house,
and about her neck, or to have given her the De^^ction of them at any time,
specially in the fits, in such manner as she could best take them.

The Evil Spirits would rarely take notice of any, or speak to them if they
stood civily in the Room, unless that they first spoke to, or concerning the
Spirits; they would sometime say, We may easily be cast out, one word will cast
us out; the standers-by would presently ask? What word Adjure, said the
Spirits: but they tried that, and many other ineffectually.

I went over to have seen her, but she was not at home, and her Father and
Uncle said, they-knew not whither she was carried by some other friends she
had, that used to pray with her; Therefore I made it my business to examine
strictly, her Father, Brother and Sister, at different times, and also her
Uncle, who were most constantly with her and saw all her changes; and also in
the Town I examined some that were present with her in her fits, and of some
Neighbor (...); who held alike in their confession.

Since, in September, October, and November, little talk has been of her, but
I hear, she is so afflicted still; but the Spirits lie still for the most part,
unless by questions, or praying, they are disturbed; sometimes they say, they
lift her upto a great height, but say, they cannot hurt one Hair of her head.

Since, on December 1. I was there, and saw the postures and carriage of the
Maid: when I went first into the house the Maid was feeding, and looked
well-bleed, seemingly she was very well: I asked the Spirits some questions,
and they answered me, but very foolishly; they said, They were sent by Gfe
Harod, who gave them her Soul to come into Mary Hall; I asked them if they were
sent by a Council of Superior Demons? they answered thus, We will not tell
you, that we will not, that we will not, that we will not. I asked them, if they did not
fear Gods punishing them to all Eternity, for these endeavors of wrong to
mankind? they answered, We do not fear God, we care not for God. I asked if
their Superior Demons, or Masters, sat in a Local Hell, to give out
commission, to such as they, to go and do their service, or whether the chiefer
Spirits also did possess any, as they did? they said, We will not tell you, that
we will not. I asked them, how they liked the Bible? they made no answer. I asked
to what purpose were their foolish, idle, unnecessary tricks, they tended not
to advance the interest of their Masters Kingdom? they answered nothing. Both
in her reading and feeding, both her fits of speaking, and convulsive fits
molested her: always when she spoke, her voice was intelligible, plain, and
modest; they spoke scarce to be understood: always before they spoke, her
Throat swelled, her Face grew red, her head shook, and was wreathed about,
until they had done; when I caused her tongue to be held out of her mouth,
their voice was more obscure; it is sometimes hoarser, sometimes shriller;
sometimes small, sometimes great; sometimes her Throat swells more, sometimes
less, and her Breast is elevated; she went to read, they told her, she should
not, yet she did; she then had a shaking of one Leg; I laid my hand upon her
knee, and then the motion ceased there, and writhed her body; in her going, one
Leg was took, as it were, with a cramp; but sometimes she goes very well;
nothing happens always, and each sometimes; sometime one member, sometime
another; sometime in one manner, and sometime in another; sometimes almost all
the members, and sometimes scarce any.

While I was there, Goodwife Hall told me, that the night before the Spirits
told her, she should not sleep, and would sometimes heave her up in bed, and
tell her, Mary, we will buy you a black Gown, Hoods, and Scarfs, and Ribbins,
Hay! Ribbins, Ribbins, Ribbins, Ribbins.

Not being satisfied with what I saw, I went over to Barkinsted to Doctor
Woodhouse, who was her Physician, and he told me he really thought she was
possessed, and he told me two able Physicians, (whose names I have now
forgotten) were with her, and told him she was Daemoniacally possessed, and
that they being very lately in France, saw there a whole Covent of Nunns so
handled as Mary Hall was, with their Abbatesse; only this Symptom was more in
Mary Hall, then any of that Covent (who were to the number of thirty possessed
with Devils) that ere when the Spirits spoke in Mary Hall, in their presence,
her Throat, on each side, was extended to the bigness of a man's fist; Also
Doctor Woodhouse said, one of her keepers told him, that he and another man
held her in her Chair, and she leaped up from them, and they thought she would
have gone out of their reach, had they not pulled her down and held her; and
another time, two men held her, and she leaped out of her Chair, and until her
fit was over, they could not force her down again: her fits commonly are very
short, especially when they are very often. When she came to be cured, with
Doctor Woodhouse, she sat very still a while in his Physic room, and on a
sudden she fell a stamping, and so continued half an hour, till she was all on
a sweat, and made the house shake.

Doctor Woodhouse, gave her a Venificifuge, a Chemical preparation, given in
the third part of a grain for one dose; Opium the strongest of all things, many
times in a Grain, makes very little alteration in the body; but this rid her,
in part for a while, of her fits; but then the Spirits had never spoke in her:
he has used that Venificifuge to other bewitched persons with good success;
and to a Child of his own Town, that the People brought information it was in
convulsion fits, he sent convulsive Remedies; they did no good: then he
questioned the Querents what fits they were, They come, said they, every day,
at six of the Clock; he went then to see it, and found it to begin its fit,
with pulling off its headcloaths; then it fell a pulling off its Hair, and then
scratching the skin off its face; Mr. Sanders, the Astrologer and Chiromancer,
was there who told Dr. Woodhouse, It was bewitched, and accordingly, with other
Rem(...) it was cured; but the chief thing he trusts to, is a Sigil to hang
a(...) their Necks: He cured one in Barkamsted also, that two leaned Physicians
(many there be, that know Greek and Latin, though perhaps nothing else truly,
and as they ought, which many a Boy of twelve or fourteen years old knows)
said, had Hysteric Fits; said he, You will not believe that there be Witches,
but you shall see that the Party is not handled as you imagine, for Hysteric
Medicines will do her no good; but I will cure her with one thing, once given
in the third part of a Grain; which was accomplished.

A Friend of his, used Amara Dulcis, a Mercury Placit, gathered when Mercury
was strong, essentially and accidentially, and applied about the parties Neck,
when Mercury was well posited in House, and aspected friendly by the Fortunes,
and most significant Planets.

And Tragus says, The People in Germany used to hang Amara Dulcis, or
Wood-night-shade about their Cattels Necks, when they feared Witchcraeft.

The Spirits in Mary Hall told them, That if they would go to Redman of
Amersom, (whom some say is a Conjurer, others say, He is an honest and able
Physician, and does abundance of good) he would cast them out.

This Redman, by relation, is unlearned in the Languages, but has abundance of
Practice, and is much talked of in remote parts; he was once sent to Prison for
these things.

A Child being very sick, likely to die, Redman bids them, Take the length of
the Child with a Stick, and measure so much ground in the Churchyard, and there
dig, and bury the Stick of the Child's length, and the Child suddenly recovered.

Another troubled with an Ague, he bid go into the Meadow, and where two Cart
ruts crossed one another, just there to dig an hole with his stick and make
water therein; and the party thus doing, was freed of his ague.

A third was wished to boil an Egg in his Urine, and bury it in an Ant-hill,
where were many Ants, or Pismires; and he presently recovered of his distemper.

But the Judge could not for these things do any thing to him, and set him
free; these do not deny but he may be Witch (or Wizard as some will have men to
be called) but do not prove he must be so; and I have in my Observations,
collected from the Vulgar, diverse of their practices of this kind, ridding
their selves thereby of diverse distempers, especially Agues, which we have
shown in our Puretology, or Treatise of Agues, writ in Latin, and in the
chapter of Transplantation.

Redman, as I am informed, pretends to do these, and the like feats by
Astrology; much indeed may be done lawfully by Astrology, but there be many
that make that their pretense and defense, and probably use other Arts that may
be unlawful, that go beyond Astrology.

Goodwife Hall told me, that her Daughter was worse when the Spirits lay still,
and did not actuate her parts, for then she was heavy, and Melancholy, and like
a weight lay at her Stomach.

The Maid is very young, and seems bashful, and modest; her Parents and Kindred
are held by all very conscientious and honest People, and wealthy; so that they
need use no such impostures to get money, nor would use such blasphemies and
abuses of God to gain pity or admiration.

Indeed many a Jugler, or Tumbler, may by use come nigh to imitate these
things, but what can such a silly, young, bashful well-disposed, and
religiously-educated Maid do in these things?

Since one told me, that a Minister that was with Mary Hall told her, that when
he came in presence, the Spirits said, What do you do with that little Book in
your Pocket? he wondered, when as he knew none saw or heard of it; if this be
true, it is Praecognition, and that is not Natural; it was a little Pious Book,
that troubled them.

We think it necessary here to write down some discoveries of Witches,
according to the manifold examination we have took of experienced People.

1. Is from their swiming. 2. From their Teats. 3. From their non-ability to
call upon God as others do.

A friend of mine saw two suspected persons ducked at Baldock, diverse years
since; one sunk presently downright; the other, though tied Toes and Thumbs
together, could not be made to sink. Domina (...) hujus oppidi, some years
since, saw a Witch ducked at Saint Albans, and could not be made sink, though
she strove, by putting her head under the Water, and was thrust down with
Poles; and she confessed, One of her Imps leaped upon her Breast in the Water,
and she could not sink: She and another man in Prison did show their Teats; the
Man had like a Breast on his side, and I suppose it was this party that Dom.
(...) de Saint Albans told me of, (...) she confessed, She did exactly all
those things that were alleged against her: Both these persons were
Eyewitnesses, and Ear-witnesses; and also that the Maid could not say Our
Father, but Your Father, as often as they demanded her to say the Lord's Prayer:
And the like I have heard from diverse, that they cannot call upon and own God,
and renounce the Devil; and call God to Witness, that they disclaim him, and
all his Service, as others can, Mary by (...), (so nicknamed) it is here
publicly known how she swam, and could not sink with all the means she could
use; and some say, She (...) Iron next her to make her sink. (...) hujus
oppidi, a very honest Man told me, (he saw it) That about the year, 1637. Gfe.
Rose of Bedf ^^^ (for bewitching a Maid's Pease (that had denied her some) to
be (...) and each, worm-eaten; and another-fellow to be always lousy though
shifted every day, and never was before) was ducked, and could by no means sink;
the Maid that she bewitched, as to her Pease, offered to be ducked with her, to
make the other the more willing, and the sank presently, and they could scarce
bring her to life with all their have and Arts.

We must make these distinctions, The Devil can cause all Diseases that are
Natural, but Nature cannot cause all Diseases that are Diabolical; the Devil,
quatenus a Spirit, can do all manner of mischief; but Quatenus Inferior, he
cannot do all the evil he will; and Quatenus Evil, he will not do all the good
he can. (...)


They that leap five or six yards; that speak Tongues they never learned; that
foretell things to come; that are stronger then four or five men; that fly, or
stand in the Air; or run up Walls without use of their Hands; or have their
Face bent quite behind them, so long remaining, Consideratis considerandis,
must be possessed of Spirits: but they that are not thus handled, may be
possessed of Spirits.

Those that were in the Evangelists possessed, were not alike possessed.

Different kinds and degrees of a thing, show it may, but do not prove that it
must be another thing.

It is best judging what may be, by what has been; but Histories mention
diverse that have been so possessed, therefore diverse may be so possessed.

Some are thought to be bewitched, that are not; and some are thought not to be
bewitched, that are.

If Mary Hall is falsely possessed, it does not prove another not to be truly
possessed; or if Mary Hall be truly possessed, it does not prove that there are
no such counterfeits.

Neither have the Imps, or Inferior D(...), the power and Knowledge of the
Superior, to exercise; nor (...) the Superior always exercise the power and
knowledge they have.

Neither are all Diseases natural, cureable by Natural Remedies; nor are all
Diseases Supernatural, incureable by Natural Remedies.

There is nothing in the Will of God, that is not in his Power; and if his Will
did restrain Witchcraft, it were in his power to do it: But his Will is
twofold.

1. Of Ordination. 2. Of Permission.
He ordains Good, and suffers Evil.

It is lawful to use all the means ordained of God to cure VVitchcraft, but all
the means that are used to cure VVitchcraft, are not ordained of God; and cure
only by his permission, who brings good out of all evil.

Neither have the Demons license from God to hurt whom they please, not have
the Witches license from their Demons to cure whom they will.

All that are bewitched, are handled after some extreme or strange way, or
both; but all that are handled after some extreme and strange way, are not
bewitched.

All that cause Preternatural Sickness, through the power of the Devil, be
Witches; but not all the Witches that be, for some cause Diabolical
Sicknesses, and some cure them (called White Witches) and some both.

Spirits frequently work without, but sometimes by, but then commonly above the
power of Natural Causes, or means.

Those that deny any powers or influences, to be here in or upon Natural
things, from any other then natural and common Causes, deny any thing to be
supernatural; and consequently must conclude that God could make the order,
progress, and nature of this World, and its contents, no otherwise then what it
is; and to go on, act and alter by no other Causes, Methods, or VVayes, then
what we see commonly to be.

Therefore whatsoever Supernatural and Spiritual may be proved to arise from
the common force, and usual order of natural things, is thereby proved to be
Natural; and whatsoever cannot be solved by the ordinary force, and usual
course of any Natural Causes, is thereby proved Supernatural and Spiritual.

There was Printed last year, about two sheets of Paper, concerning two
possessed or bewitched the one was James Barrow of Olaves Southwark, whose
condition was writ by his Father, to whom did diverse in witness accord: He was
almost two years possessed, of five Evil Spirits, and was at last dispossessed
by constant prayer, at which the Devils roared, and were tormented, so that
they went out of him, not in any visible shape, but as it were with Belches,
and like Suffocation: He was sometimes dumb for long time, sometimes stark mad,
sometimes beat himself, and endeavored to make himself away; strange noises
were heard in him, singing and cursing were sometimes present; He said, at
first like a Rat came to him; the Imp of the Witch, or the VVitch her self
might so transform her self: And some imagine, that Nebuchadnezzar was
transformed into the shape of an Ox, (see Dan. 4. 33. 36.) and that, that
saying, He eat Grass like an Ox, should be Translated, He eat Grass, being like
an Ox, or in the likeness of an Ox.

The other Relation, in that Paper of Hannah Crump of Warwick, had nothing
extraordinary, but the Symptoms of madness, yet might be bewitched: They went
to one in Winchester Park in Southwark, to unbewitch her, he asked, Five pound;
for (said he) I am not sure to cure her, and if I do, if I cannot be strong
enough for the Witch, after I have taken the affliction from the Maid, I must
bear it my self; but if I can be strong enough for the Witch, she must bear it,
until she dispose of it to some other, for none of her Familiars will bear it:
Doubtless Spirits are loath to go out of the possessed; and the Evangelists
shows some reason, saying, When the unclean Spirit goes out of any man, he
wandreth up and down, seeking rest, and finds none; and then he takes
counsel of a greater number of foul Spirits, and they possess the same party
again, or others, more grievously.

VALE.
Non gens sed men's, non genus sed genius; virtus nobilitat, and Ratio homines a
brutis and inter se discriminat, Symboli Aemiliani and Claudij Imperatorum. Deo
Gloria, Homini pax.
FINIS

