A SPEECH Made to HIS GRACE THE DUKE of ORMOND LORD LIEUTENANT OF IRELAND, AND
To the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.

To return the humble Thanks Of the FRENCH PROTESTANTS lately arrived in this
Kingdom; and graciously relieved by them.

By P. DRELINCOVRT Domestic Chaplain to His Grace the Duke of Ormond, and
Chantor of Christ-Church.

Published by special Command,

DVBLIN, Printed by Joseph Ray, for William Mendey Bookseller in the Exchange.
1682.

May it please your Grace and your Lordships,
I Should not presume to take up any part of that time, which Your Grace so
happily employs in the Government and Conservation of a whole Nation; nor to
divert the rest of this honorable Board from those important Affairs, which
usually call your Lordships hither; were I not under an Obligation both of
Gratitude and Duty, to be an Interpreter for those poor Protestants, lately
come out of France, to take Sanctuary with you: and to express for them and in
their names, as they have earnestly desired me, a part of that grateful sense,
which they have, and will for ever preserve, of your Lordships Christian
Charity and Generosity toward them: This they have often, I assure you,
acknowledged to Heaven in their Prayers, but could not be satisfied, till they
had made their solemn and public Acknowledgments to their Noble Benefactors.

Life and Religion are the two things most dear and valuable of all upon earth:
Life is the ground of all the Good and Happiness we enjoy in this world, and
Religion is the foundation of all the Felicities we hope for in that to come;
so that those persons that are deprived both of the comforts of Life, and the
Profession and Exercise of their Religion, may justly be looked upon as the
truest objects of pity that we can meet with in this world; and by the same
rule, those that have a lively sympathy with such, have the true principle of a
Christian Spirit, and are the true examples of a Christian Practice.

What extreme Hardships and Sufferings those Protestants were under in their
own Country, both as to their Livelihood and Religion, is too sad and too
notorious a truth, as well as too big a Subject for me now to enlarge upon. The
many Proclamations which their Prince made against them, for pulling down and
demolishing most of their Churches, and excluding them from all Trades and
Preferments, are well known, they could neither serve God, nor enjoy
themselves; They are forbidden to quit their Country, and yet by their hard
usage, and persecution, in effect, not suffered to stay.

The Cry of that Egyptian-like Bondage and Slavery, they groaned under, that
entered into the ears of the Lord of Hosts, entered also into your noble and
charitable Hearts, and there has met with Compassion and Pity; and by your
Christian Example and Charity you have set your selves Patterns to this whole
Nation: By it you have excited the general Beneficence of all; and by it, no
less than by your Orders, you have already influenced this great City (and I
hope will shortly after, the whole Kingdom) into an Obedience to that truly
Christian, and royal Law of Beneficence and Mercy.

And although this be eminent, and extraordinary in its kind, yet it is no wonder
that that Illustrious Person, who began as early to be good, as to be great,
whose matchless Courtesy and Generosity are not only known to his Friends, to
his Servants, to Strangers, but even to his greatest Enemies; who has learned
by a long experience, what it is to suffer for Righteousness sake, and to
forsake all, rather than his Honor and Religion; no wonder, I say, that He
should be ready and zealous to relieve those that suffer innocently, and for a
good Conscience, and who forsake their All, rather than forsake their God.

Nor is it strange, that that most eminent Prelate the Churches Primate in
Piety and Learning as well as in Rank and Dignity, on whom comes daily the Care
of all the Churches, should take care of that small part of the Flock of
Christ, that are forced from their own Sheepfold, to seek Food and Protection
under so great a Shepherd.

Or that He, whose Tribunal is a common Sanctuary to all injured persons,
should relieve those that are oppressed and persecuted, only for their
obedience to God, his Gospel, and their Conscience.

Such a noble and charitable act as this, becomes indeed all this honorable
Company whom the King has chosen for his great Council: You do not only
imitate your Royal Patron, and act like the best of men, but this is truly to
act God-like; for nothing makes us more conformable to the Divine Nature, nor
better resemble his actions, than doing good, and being merciful, as our
Heavenly Father is merciful. We cannot imitate God in many of his Attributes, we
cannot command the Wind, nor still the raging of the Sea; but we can relieve the
ship wrackt, and those that are in misery, according to our abilities; in this
we imitate our great Maker, the God of all Comfort and the mighty one to save;
and sure it is our happiness as well as our duty so to do.

There are some that make long Prayers and devour Widows houses, and would be
thought religious too; but St. James tells us that pure Religion and undefiled
before God and the Father, is this, to help the fatherless and the widow. And
there is no sort of Duty more highly Christian, none so beneficial to those
that practice it: For we dare affirm that the stretching out of our hands
toward our poor Brother, will call down more Blessings upon us, than the
lifting them up in Prayer all day long.

Nay, there are no actions, nor perfections, that get us more true love and
respect in the world, than Charity and Beneficence. The renown of Power and
Greatness, of Wit and Learning, and the like, may perhapsd well for a while in
the fancies and memories of men with some admiration, and often with fear and
envy too; but the remembrance of Goodness and Bounty reigns in the heart, with
pure affection, without any mixture or allay of contrary passion; and when the
great ones are either forgotten, or ill spoken of, the memory of the charitable
and bountiful lives and triumphs over Death and Envy it self.

And what great Reward does attend this religious Duty in this world and in
that to come, we are sufficiently assured by the sacred Word of God. For God is
not unrighteous to forget the work and the labor of your love which you have
showed toward his Name, in that you have ministered to the necessities of the
Saints, and do still minister.

They have received and felt the kind effects of your Charity, they have
received it, as an odor of sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well
pleasing to God, and I hope God also will supply all your need according to his
Riches and Glory.

In the mean while, Noble Benefactors, give leave to those whose Bowels you
have refreshed, to offer up to you their humble and hearty thanks, not to say
themselves. They come with their Lives you have so generously preserved; but I
cannot say, with their Fortunes, alas! most of them have none other, but a part
of your own. But they come with honest Hearts, full of Gratitude toward their
Benefactors; full of Loyalty toward the King, the Defender of their Faith, and
of their Persons; of Obedience and Conformity to the best Christian settled
Church: Full of Love and Meekness, of a peaceable temper and disposition
toward their new fellow Citizens; and full of Prayers and devout wishes for
the prosperity and welfare of this Church and State.

But however grateful now they be, yet no other return can they yet make for
your signal Favors vouchsafed unto them, but that usual one of the poor and
needy, Blessing, Prayers and Thanksgiving.

May he that ministers seed unto the sower, whose is the earth and the fullness
thereof, that great Creator, whom by your Charity you have made your debtor,
and who is able to make all Grace abound toward you, multiply the seed of your
Charity sown, and increase your substance and the fruits of your Righteousness,
that you having an All Sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good
work, being enriched to every good thing.

May the Lord be for ever gracious unto this good Land. Let Mercy and Truth
always meet here together. Let Righteousness, Peace and Plenty, wise and steady
Government long continue to kiss each other.

And when the righteous and merciful Judge shall appear with his Reward with
him, to crown Charity (that Queen and greatest of all Christian virtues) with
eternal Bliss, may every one of your Lordships hear these joyful words, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the World, for I was an hungered, and you gave me meat, I was thirsty, and
you gave me drink, naked, and you clothed me: I was a stranger and you took me
in. Which mighty Reward, that every one of your Lordships may be partakers of,
shall always be my humble and hearty Prayer.

FINIS.

