DE CAVSA DEI: OR, A VINDICATION Of the Common Doctrine of Protestant DIVINES,
Concerning Predetermination: ( i. e. The Interest of God as the first Cause, in
all the Actions, as such, of all Rational Creatures:)

From the invidious Consequences with which it is burdened by Mr. JOHN HOW, In
a late Letter and Postscript, of GOD'S PRESCIENCE.

By T. D.

LONDON, Printed for R. Roberts, and are to be sold by Walter Davis at his
House in Amen-Corner, 1678.

To the Reverend Mr. JOHN HOW, Author of the late Letter and Postscript of
God's Prescience.
SIR,
WHen I had read the Title Page of your late Letter to the Honorable Mr.
Boil, and thereby understood its design, and withal observed the smallness of
the Bulk, I promised my self that it would be Pagella, hoc solo nomine
redarguenda, quod sit tota Gemmea. For else I thought it would not be worthy of
so great a Moecenas, a Master of all sort of Learning; and [so] whose nobility
is not only in Parchment, (as Charron speaks): nor of the Author, (for I was
aware of him, though he had concealed his name) whose parts I well knew (and
have always had the candor upon all fit occasions to acknowledge) were not of
the lower size: nor yet of so excellent a subject, and so needful in these
dregs of time, which verge so much toward Socinianism. And in the perusal of
the Letter it self, for some time I pleased my self with an apprehension that I
had not imposed upon my self; nor had my affection to the Author seduced my
judgment. Fancy and Reason were in so happy a conjunction, that I hoped they
would never be parted thoroughout the whole Discourse. But alas! too soon I
found my hopes shamefully baffled. For (beside a corrupt gloss upon Act. 4.28.
page 28. which I could not digest, and diverse passages in the process of your
after-Discourse not unexceptionable) from page 32, to 50, to speak my sense
freely, I found pro thesauro carbones, i.e. Coals instead of Treasure, shining
indeed, but black and smutty; politeness of style, I mean, continued, but the
series of well-digested thoughts broken and dissevered; jejune Answers to
Arguments full of sense; old Popish Arguments dressed up A-la-mode, and many of
which militate as much against your assertions as ours; and a great deal of
good eloquence put to a very ill use, and a far worse than it would be to play
at Duck and Drake with broad pieces in the Thames; and sometimes degenerate
eloquence, which (like painted glass) though it was an ornament, yet impeded
the transmission of the light: and (which is worst of all) the whole design of
those Pages I found to be an averment of the old Popish Calumny, that by the
Protestant Doctrine God is made the Author of sin; which I must needs profess
was a strange surprisal to me; and so much the more, because I could not
conceive what should induce you a^ Protestant Divine, to make affidavit of a
Pontificial accusation, nor why in this Discourse. For if the end you assigned
your self in doing it was the vindication of the blessed God from the
imputation of being the cause of moral evil, you have certainly lurcht the
Reader of his expectation, by offering nothing toward it but what he can easily
see through, (viz.) that God is not the cause [universally] of natural good; or
at least as remote as the Grandfather is of the Grandchild. [See your own
words, Let. p. 36.] Two causes which might seem probable of your doing it in
this Discourse, your self has removed out of your Readers way. It was not the
request of the Honorable Person to whom your Letter is directed, but (for
ought I can collect) as the defending God's Predeterminative concourse unto
sinful actions was an unenjoined task, Let. p. 150. So was the overthrowing it
too. Nor was it the connection between Prescience and Predetermination (as it
lies in the Divine Decree, and is the only true ground of the certainty of
Divine Prescience) for that was not your design to demonstrate Gods Prescience
of all whatsoever futurities, and consequently of the sins of men; but
supposing it to show its reconcileableness with what it seemed not so well to
agree, (as you since tell us) Postsc. p. 4. which I did easily apprehend
before. For all the mediums you use for the eviction of this reconcileableness,
borrow no strength from the denial of Predetermination. Sometime after your
Letter succeeded a Postscript, in the view of which I was more astonished than
before: obstupui steteruntque comae. For whereas I might have hoped that your
second thoughts would be better, they proved a great deal worse. I had such an
opinion of your modesty, that at least you would recall the hard words you gave
the Arguments urged for Predetermination to sinful actions, Thin Sophistry,
Collusive ambiguity, Let. p. 41. Vain attempts, 38. Dismal conclusions, 36. the
effects of a Sophistical wit against sense, and more against the sense of our
souls, and most of all against the entire sum and substance of all Morality and
Religion at once, p. 39, 40. and overturning and mingling heaven and earth, p.
50. And that reflection you make upon those who have used the distinction of
voluntas signi and Beneplaciti, that they have only rather concealed a good
meaning, than expresed by it a bad one, p. 106. For take all together, and I
see not that they amount to a less guilt, than of ^rampling upon that venerable
dust, which was sometimes animated by truly Heroic Souls, and bore the names
of Zuinglius, Calvin, B^za, Perkins, Pemble, Davenant, Twisse, Ames, etc. than
which no cause has had, nor needs greater Patrons. But instead of recalling,
you have avowed them, by the addition of others of the same sort, a contagion,
a deadly thing, Postsc. p. 15. An ill colored opinion, Postsc. p. 51. Fearful
consequences of that rejected opinion; vanity of the subterfuges whereby its
assertors think to hide the malignity of it, p. 50. Nor was this enough, but as
if you were Animal gloriae, (as was said of the Philosophers) an animal that
lived by the air of vain glory and applause, and thought your self another
Goliath, you cry out, I defy the armies of Israel this day; give me a man that
we may fight together. What other interpretation are these words capable of?
Now I perceive that some persons, who had formerly entertained that strange
opinion of Gods Predeterminative concurrence to the wickedest actions, and not
purged their minds of it, have been offended with that Letter, for not
expressing more respect unto it; and yet offered nothing themselves (which to
me seems exceeding strange) for the solving of that great difficulty and
encumbrance, which it infers upon our Religion, Postsc. p. 7. Or these, If I
find my self obliged any way further to intermeddle in this matter, I reckon
the time I have to spend in this world can never be spent to better purpose,
than in discovering, etc. the inefficacy of the Arguments brought for it, p.
50. but most immodest is your threatening those that assert the contradictory to
your Proposition, with your preparations for the defense of it, and plain
intimation of the value you put upon them, as sufficient to silence all
opposers, p. 51, 52. And for ought I can judge to the contrary, if contempt of
your Antagonists will dash them out of countenance, and so silence them, you
are likely enough to obtain the victory you assure your self beforehand. An
instance whereof you have given us in your ill treatment of Mr. Gale, a most
pious, modest, and learned man, and our common friend, and one who like a
friend touched your sore so gently, that one would have thought you should
hardly have cried Oh! much less have cried out of Vindictive Hostility, p. 16.
and that he was the man that might be instanced in, that had managed a public
contest with that candor and fairness, as not at all to entrench upon
friendship, which you did well know was possible to be done, (as you express
your self, ibid.) And yet how many holes do you pick in his coat? one while you
insinuate that he is of those men's humors who take an unaccountable pleasure,
in depraving what is done by others, p. 12. whereas I who have known him about
25 years, and was of the same Academical Society with you both, have never
observed any such misbehaviour of his. Another while, that he had a concealed
end of his own glory, viz. [in attacking you], (as if the good man had coveted
that inscription upon his Tombstone, -- Magnis tamen excidit ausis). And again,
assert that he had a mighty strong and irresistible inclination to squabble a
little with your Letter, p. 13. And that this inclination cannot but owe it
self to some peculiar aspect and reference he had to the Author, p. 14.
(whereas I dare be his voucher, that all the harm he wishes you is but an
increase of humility). And this guilt you make account is fastened upon him,
because he has not attempted sundry others of former and latter days, which
have said much to the purpose which your Letter does but touch on the by, p.
13. which is a strange accusation, and will appear such to those who shall upon
perusal find, that he has run the hazard of his safety in meddling with those
Giants you point at, Postsc. p. 14. But if he had not, I think he might
apologize for himself, that your tract being concise, and adorned with good
language, might invite more buyers and readers. Ratsbane capt in fine sugar,
may well be judged likely to entice some liquorish appetite to taste of it, to
their own hurt. But the greatest provocation not to let you [whoever be let]
pass, is that intolerable reflection upon the Asserters of Predetermination;
upon their Arguments, and the natural consequences of them, all at once in
these words. But the effects of a Sophistical wit against sense, and more
against the sense of our souls, and most of all against the entire sum and
substance of all Morality and Religion at once, are but like the attempt to
batter a wall of brass with straws and feathers, Let. p. 39, 40. This passage
alone were enough to raise indignation, sufficient to make a disputant (at
least if that passion be as effectual to that purpose as the old shred, --
facit indignatio versum, intimates it is to make a Poet). And this was it that
made me inquisitive after an answer to your Letter, and Postscript, as to
which, when after many rumors of Answers preparing, I found my hopes
frustrated, I resolved (though almost too late) to attempt one my self, for my
resolution was his in Terence, a quoquam alio quam a me, a me autem potius quam
a nemine; that I had rather your answer should come from any one than me, but
from me rather than no body. I met with many discouragements in the last clause
of my resolution, in general from a consciousness of my own disabilities, and
particularly from the hard measure your other Antagonist Mr. Gale has met
with, as in the instances abovementioned, so in some other. The one, your
carping at words, that you make so severe Ani^nadversion upon him for an
innocent Pleonasm, The Divine Independent will of God, which meant you no harm,
nor was more guilty of any design to rob your Essay of any part of its
eloquence, than that was to pilfer from him any part of his collections,
Postsc. p. 13. And I was not without some apprehensions that I might fall under
your lash my self, who am not curious in the choice of words, or composure of
periods. But against this fear I was somewhat relieved, as against the sorrow I
had conceived for Mr. Gales affront, (as if it had fell out for that end, and
also to justify the old saw, aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus) by an happy
accident that I have taken you tardy twice in that kind your self: For what
else but a Pleonasm is that Phrase, The rectitude of Gods holy nature, Let. p.
42. and the rectitude of Gods own most holy will and way, p 59. in the excess
of your caution, lest any should think the holy nature, the most holy will and
way of God were void of rectitude, Postsc. p. 22. And elsewhere actions
malignantly wicked, p. 32. i. e. wickedly wicked. But these are childish
criminations, unfit to be bandied from hand to hand by sober persons. The other
discouragement was the difficult investigation of your sense, which I take to
be a far harder task than to confute it; of which, that I may not be thought to
complain without cause, I have collected some instances of repugnant and
self-contradicting Propositions, in your Discourses.

1. Mediate concurrence.
1. It sufficiently salves the rights of the first cause, to assert that no
action can be done, but by a power derived from it, which in reference to
forbidden actions, intelligent creatures may use or not use as they please,
Let. p. 36. 2. All actions good to Mr. Gales Quest. Is there any action so
sinful that has not some natural good as the substrate matter thereof? you
Answ. True, Postsc. p. 36. 3. Predetermination denied as to some actions,
(viz.) evil. This is the design of all your Letter, from p. 32. to 50. and of
the Postscript.


2. Immediate concurrence.
1. I do really believe Gods immediate concourse to all the actions of his
creatures, Post. p. 28. 2. Some actions in themselves evil. Some actions of the
creatures are in themselves most malignantly wicked, Le. p. 32. and
intrinsecally evil, p. 46.

3. Predetermination to all actions granted. The active providence of God about
all the actions of men consists not merely in giving them natural powers,
whereby they can work of themselves, but in a real influence upon those powers,
Postsc. p. 39. n. 5.


By which last clause, a real influence upon those powers, if you mean (as I
cannot divine what else you can) a reducing those powers into act, (as your
phrase is, Ib. n. 6.) you come over to our Camp, and we will give good
entertainment to so serviceable a Deserter.

4. Predetermination forces the will. Nothing is more apparently a simple and
most strictly natural impossibility than not to do an action whereto the Agent
is determined by an infinite power, Let. p. 33.


4. Predetermination forces not the Will. It is unreasonable to imagine that
God cannot in any case determine the will of a rational creature, in a way
agreeable enough to its nature, Let. p. 141.

Men are enabled by an internal infusion of power and vital influence to do
much good, to which they are not impelled by it, p. 145.


non est ingenii mei hosce nodos dissolvere, i.e. I have not wit enough to
untie these knots. The consideration of these repugnancies, fills me with
wonder at your exclamation against Mr. Gale, for finding no fault with your
Pamphlet but what he makes, Postsc. p. 11. and particularly for suggesting that
your opinion falls in with the sentiments of Durandus, which many think not
well of, Postsc. p. 9. For I must needs profess, that as far as I can judge, he
has but slandered you with a word of truth. For in your Letter, by which Mr.
Gale did, and only could take his measures of your sense, there is not the most
implicit intimation of any other intendment, than to close with Durandus. And
though you do explicitly disown it in your Postsc. yet you instruct not you
Reader, how the Grammatical construction of these words above cited, p. 36. of
your Let. will yield any other meaning, than what Mr. Gale pitches upon. And
the foresight of the probability of being cried out upon for want of candor,
in the same respects, did not a little deter me from the undertakement.

A third, the necessity of making a Parallel between your and the Papists
Arguments against Predetermination, which I foresaw would give you occasion to
fault me, (as you do Mr. Gale), for parallelling your conceptions with theirs,
the reason whereof must needs be because I take a Papist for an ill-favored
name, Postsc. p. 27. yet here they are.

1. Some actions are intrinsecally evil, and in themselves wicked, Let. p. 33,
32. 2. God has as much influence and concurrence to the worst actions, as the
best, Post. p. 25. [viz. by the Doctrine of Predetermination of sinful
actions.] 3. For God to determine men to the worst of actions, can mean no less
thing than to impel them to do them, Let. p. 37. which impelling you call an
ineluctable fate, p. 33. [and so intend compelling.] 4. God has more influence
and concurrence to the worst actions than the sinner or tempter, Post. page 25.
and in more words, Let. page 32. [viz. by our Doctrine.]
1. There are many actions so intrinsecally and in themselves evil, that they
always are repugnant to the eternal Law, and Right Reason. Bell. de Am. c. 18.
2. Calvin was blasphemous against God in affirming, That God works evil works
in us, so as he works good, Alvarez de Aux. Gr. l. 4. 3. God, according to our
Adversaries opinion [viz. the Protestants] impells men, and so compells them to
sin, Bell. c. 5. 4. God according to the opinion of Calvin and Beza is the
primary Author of all sins. Bell. c. 4. de Amiss. Gr.
But pass upon this parallel what judgment you please, I am at a point. I have
proposed to my self a good end in the exhibition of it, viz. to mind my Readers
that the point under debate between you and me is a stated controversy between
the Papists and Protestants, and therefore the affirmative not lightly to be
receded from; and in drawing it up I gave my self a little pleasure mixed with
disdain; that because there was no Smith found throughout all the land of
Israel, you were sain to go down to the Philistines to sharpen your axe and
your mattock, 1 Samuel 13.19, 20. And I admired that you could not excogitate one
new Argument, but present us with all old, and strangely unfortunate, which
have been bafled as often as urged. I have i^titled my Answer De Causa Dei,
rather than De causa Deo; which latter might be proper enough for the subject,
a Defense of Gods interest as the first cause in all the actions of his
Creatures. But herein I have imitated Bradwardine's Piety, who would signify
thereby that it was the Cause of God he designed to secure from the impetuous
assaults of its Adversaries, among whom I am heartily sorry you should be
numbered, as to this instance. I know you will not own the charge, but pretend
that you are on Gods side, but if so, you have neglected an opportunity of
showing your self, by not reconciling Gods preventive methods of sin with
immediate concourse, which is at least as hard as with Predeterminative
concourse: and to be sure, any one may see it was very idle and ludicrous
trifling, to offer at reconciling those methods with God's Prescience, and to
wave that (manifestly) greater difficulty of reconciling them with his
immediate concourse, if you think there is such a thing, (to use your own words
with but the variation that a disserent instance requires) Postsc. page 3, 4. I
have been as brief as I could in my Answer, without prejudice to our cause; and
have come (as Caesar Borgia said of the French in their Expedition into Italy)
rather with Chalk in my hands to mark out the Inns, than with Arms to break
through and take possession. It will be time enough to arm when your
Preparations shall rise out of that dust and silence in which they are buried,
Post. p. 51. In the mean time I have but pointed out the Fontes solutionum, the
general grounds upon which our Answers depend, to all Arguments that can be
produced. To conclude, I could heartily wish you would serionsly reflect upon
your Letter and Postscript, and consider how many passages you are obliged to
repent of and retract. Shall I ^ind you of that notable saying of Austin,
Illius scripta summa authoritate dignissima, etc. i.e. his writings deserve to
be of the greatest authority, who has let slip never a word, not that he
would, but that he ought to recall. He that has not attained so much wisdom as
to be able to say nothing not to be repented of, may yet attain so much modesty
as to repent of what he knows he has said amiss, Aug. Ep. 17. And for your
encouragement, it may not be unseasonable to mind you, of what you cannot but
know, that Austin who gave this good counsel, did take it himself, and left
upon record retractation of his Errors, wherein he was a singular instance of
humility, and was rewarded by God with a greater esteem in the Church than any
one man since his time. Which is all, besides that I am

October. 31. 1677. Your true Friend and Brother T. D.

De Causa Dei.
IT has been always judged very needful in Polemicks to state the Question, and
explain the terms, when they labor under any ambiguity, or however fall not
under the apprehension of those who are to be instructed, for want of skill in
that art or science to which they belong, or language from which they are
borrowed. In neither of these respects will it be needless in the Controversy
now to be agitated; not as to the first, because Mr. How gives us his sense in
various terms, and such as seem repugnant to each other: one while that which
he denies is, a Predeterminative concurrence to all actions of the Creatures,
Let. p. 32. and Postsc. p. 3. and Predeterminative concourse, Post. p. 19.
another while it is Predetermining Influence, Post. p. 19. and a Determinative
influence, Let. p. 36. and Efficacious influence, Post. p. 52. As for the two
former phrases (which are of the same import) they are in effect contradictio
in adjecto in their conjunction. I appeal to Strangius, Mr. H.'s friend, but my
Adversary in the main Question under consideration, Hujusmodi
Predeterminationem nonnulli confundunt cum concursu Dei generali quem concursum
praevium appellant, etc. i.e. Some confound this kind of Predetermination with
the general concourse of God. But they speak very improperly who call
Predetermination a previous [or Predeterminative] concourse, or say that God
does by concourse determine second causes: and he quotes Twisse with
approbation, saying, Concurrere cum agente aliquo modo, etc. i.e. To concur
with an agent some way to the production of an effect, is not to determine that
agent. For the Creature also concurs with God to the production of an effect,
and yet it does not determine God: therefore nor does God concurring with the
Creature determine it to act. Strange. de Vol. Dei, Lib. 2. Cap. 4. p. 161.
Strangius does not call the terms a contradiction, I confess, but the reason
out of Twisse gave him as just ground (as it does me) so to call them. As for
the latter phrase, influence, which he makes equipollent with the former
concourse, in these words, I here affect not the curiosity to distinguish these
two terms as some do, Post. p. 29. I had rather he should hear Strangius again,
than me blaming his not affecting that curiosity of distinction: Caeterum nobis
operaepretium videtur distinguere inter ista duo vocabula concursum and
influxum, etc. i.e. But it seems worth our labor to distinguish between those
two words Concourse and Influence, which in this matter are often conjoined and
confounded. For first, Influence is of a larger extent than Concourse. For the
causality of every Cause, especially the Efficient, is called Influence. And
therefore in many instances there may be observed an Influence of God, when yet
there is no concourse, as when he acts, not making use of any second cause.
Again, although in the concourse of two Causes each of them are considered as
having their Influence, yet the word Influence is absolute, and noting a
respect to another cause; but the word Concourse is relative to another cause.
Strange. de Vol. Deil. 1. c. 11. p. 59. As for the term Efficacious, it suits us
well enough, if Mr. H. intends by it an Infallibility of the event, or the
certain production of those actions which God has an Influence upon. The
ambiguity of Mr. H. phrases removed, and the sense of them brought to a
certainty, I assert the contradictory to his Proposition, That God does not by
an Efficacious influence universally move and determine men to all their
actions, even those that are most wicked, Post. p. 52. Which if we might be
allowed the liberty of our own terms, we would thus lay down, That God does
determine, or predetermine, or move all Creatures to all and each of their
actions. Strangius fairly enough cites our Thesis, lib. 2. cap. 4. page 155.
The Question then to be discussed is, Whether God does determine or
predetermine all Creatures to all and each of their actions? So Strange. fairly,
l. 2 c. 4. p. 155. Unless it may seem meet to add that reduplicative particle,
as such, because of Mr. Howe's addition, even those that are most wicked, Post.
p. 52. As to which it is to be noted, that we who assert Predetermination of
all actions of the Creatures, do limit it to the actions considered abstractly
from the moral good or evil adhering to them: as for instance, we hold Gods
Predetermination of the natural act whereby David begat a child in Adultery, as
well as of those whereby he begat children in lawful Matrimony; and of the use
of his tongue in telling a lie to Abimelech the Priest, as well as in praising
God. Whereas Mr. How limits Gods Predetermination only to morally [or
spiritually] good actions as such, Posts. p. 39. n. 6. Which Predeter nation
special, we grant; but withal assert a general, which extends to evil actions.
In which we consider,

1. The subject; and as to this we say that sin is in that which is good, the
nature of man and his faculties and actions, and these God excites and guides
efficaciously. And this subject is called the materiale or substrate matter of
sin.

2. The end; and thus though not the nature, yet the existence of sin is good,
or it is good that sin should be, because God draws good out of it; and hence
God predetermines to the natural actions, though he knows sin will adhere to
them. The grand term then to be explained is Predetermination, or (as some
Divines and Metaphysicians sometimes call it) Praecurse and Praemotion, of
which terms the former which signifies a fore appointment, is either from
eternity, or in time. The latter two, only in time. The former (viz.)
Predetermination, is either from eternity, and so is an immanent act of Gods,
that is, of his will to produce in time all the actions of his Creatures; or in
time, which is the actual production of all those actions which he had decreed
to produce. And of this latter only is the Question to be discussed understood;
and this act of Gods is called Predetermination, because it limits the creature
to this action rather than to that; and it is called a Precourse, or Premotion,
i.e. a running before, or fore motion, (as I may so speak), because in order of
nature it is before the action of the creature. Again, Predetermination [or
Precourse, or Premotion], is distinguished into Physical or Moral. The latter,
I grant may be ascribed to God with reference to good actions as such, but not
with respect to evil actions, unless the proposing objects and occasions of sin
may (as some learned men judge) be reduced to the actions of a moral cause. But
whether the moral acts of God in commanding, threatening, promising, etc. may be
justly denominated Predetermination, will remain dubitable till another doubt
be resolved, (viz.) Whether the will do always follow the last practical
dictate of the understanding. Against the affirmative of which Question (to
note that obiter) the most acute and learned Wallis seems to oppose an
irrefragable Argument, viz. that the Will then is not disabled by the fall more
than the will of the confirmed Angels and Saints in Heaven. Wallis Truth tried
against the Lord Brook, p. 55. But let Predetermination Moral fall or stand,
our Question is not of that, but of Physical Predetermination, as appears in
that we make it common to all creatures, some whereof are not capable of a
Moral Predetermination, (supposing that to be) which yet is not intended to be
agitated at present, but only that which is exercised about free agents, that
is, rational creatures. Which that it may be done with more clearness, and may
in part obviate some of our learned Antagonist's objections, we shall
endeavor, with as much accuracy as is needful to a discourse that will fall
into other than learned men's hands, to consider Predetermination as
contradistinguished, or opposed rather to two things, which are acknowledged by
him as Gods Acts respecting the actions of free agents, (not excluding
natural), (viz.) Conservation and immediate Concourse, or Concurrence; the
concession of the former of which two, will not be sound sufficient to entitle
God to the honor of the first cause of his creatures actions; and of the
latter will (unless we take our measures amiss) enforce him to grant that
Predetermination which now he denies. First as to Conservation, we must
observe, that as Creation stands opposed to nothing; so Conservatition to
Annihilation, i. e. making that cease to be something which was so; and it
differs from Creation only in this, that it notes a continuation of that being,
and its powers and faculties, which were given by creation, as being a
continuation of that action by which it was produced; and therefore is commonly
styled continua creatio, and not unfitly termed by the Schoolmen manutenentia
Dei, i. e. Gods hand-hold, because by it God holds up all things, as it were,
with an hand from falling into nothing; by the withdrawing of which, Divines
generally think the world would be annihilated.

Secondly, As to concourse or concurrence, it may be thus defined; It is an
extrinsickaction of God, by which he does with second causes, [or the
creatures] immediately produce all their natural actions and effects. 1. It is
an action of God to distinguish it from the power communicated and conserved to
second causes, (by which they perform their several operations) by creation and
conservation. 2. Extrinsick to distinguish it from his Decree of this action
called concourse, which decree is an intrinsic action. 3. With second causes,
or the creatures, because it is such an action as joins with the creature; as
when the Writing-Master and the Scholar shape the same letter by the Masters
guiding the Scholars hand. 4. I add, all their actions, and what is produced by
action or the effects, as when the Master and Scholar write, not only is the
action the same, but the effect; the letters are the same which are done by
both together. 5. Natural actions and effects, to exclude what by accident
adheres to the actions and effects; which seeing they are defects, cannot be
produced by a proper efficiency, and so nor God concur to the production of
them by such efficiency. 6. Immediately produce, to note the intimacy of the
conjunction of God with the creature in the production of natural actions;
which is such, that one and the same action is the action of God and of the
creature.

3. As to Predetermination, it is thus defined. It is a transient action of God
which excites every creature to act. It is called a transient action of God, in
opposition to Immanent, or the Will and Decree of God that the creature should
act. That is distinguished from Concourse or Concurrence thus. 1. The very
difference of the particles, Prae and Con, i. e. Before and with, notes that
the former is in order of nature (though not of time), before the creatures
action, the latter with it. 2. That the former notes the reduction of the
creatures powers into act: the latter notes Gods acting with the creature. 3.
The former is to be conceived of per modum principii, under the notion of a
principle, or cause of the creatures acting: the latter only, per modum
actionis, i. e. as importing Gods acting with the creature. 4. The Terminus or
object of that action of Gods, which we call Predetermination, is the second
cause it self, the reasonable creature: but the Terminus or object of that
action of Gods, called concourse or concurrence, is the action of the second
cause, and effect produced by that action. So that the Question in plain words
is, Whether God does move men to all their natural actions, and so to one
rather than another. The Protestants generally maintain the affirmative, and
how forcibly Mr. How opposes it, remains now to be considered.

The terms explained, we shall endeavor a defense of our Arguments, which Mr.
How has thought meet to single out.

The first of the two Arguments of ours; which seeming most importunate and
enforcing, he has attempted to enervate, is.

Arg. 1. That it necessarily belongs to the Original and Fountain-Being to be
the first Causc of whatsoever Being; and consequently, that what there is of
positive Being in any the most wicked action, must principally owe it self to
the determinative productive influence of this first and Sovereign Cause:
Otherwise, it would seem that there were some Being that were neither primum,
nor a primo, [i. e. neither the first Being, nor from the first Being], Let. p.
35.

Answ. To which he Answers, It may well be thought sufficiently to salve the
rights and privileges of the first Cause, to assert that no action can be
done, but by a power derived from it; which in reference to forbidden actions,
intelligent Creatures may use or not use as they please, without
over-asserting, that they must be irresistibly determined also, even to the
worst of actions done by them, Let. p. 36.

Reply. For the better understanding of our Argument, and the proof thereto
annexed; together with Mr Howes Answer thereunto, it will not be unneedful to
reduce them to Syllogisms: the Argument thus,

All positive Being are effects of the first Cause. All sinful actions, as
actions, [for that is our limitation], are positive Beings. Ergo, All sinful
actions [as actions] are effects of the first Cause, [ viz. God].

The Major [or first proposition] is proved by an Hypothetical Syllogism, thus:
If all positive Beings are not effects of the first Cause, then there is some
positive Being which is neither primum [ens] nor a primo, [i. e.] neither the
first Being, nor from the first Being, [or which is neither God nor a
Creature]. But there is no positive Being which is neither the first Being, nor
from the first Being. Ergo, All positive Beings are effects of the first Cause.
To the Argument it self Mr. How replies nothing, nor yet to the proof, in form
(as by the Laws of Argumentation he was obliged). But seems to distinguish in
the Major between a double dependence, which positive Beings have upon God as
the first Cause; one, that they have no power but from God; the other, that the
exercise or use of that power is from God. The former he grants; the latter he
denies, but with a limitation as to forbidden actions.

To which we Reply,

1. That this Answer is fatal to his own Concession of Gods immediate
concurrence to all the actions of his Creatures, Postsc. p. 28. For it amounts
to as much, as if in terminis, he had asserted a mediate concurrence only to
some actions, ( viz. forbidden actions; and this was the passage I presume that
gave Mr. Gale occasion to charge Mr. How with Durandus his Opinion, which was,
That God concurs remotely and mediately with second Causes, (viz.) no otherwise
than as he confers and conserves their Essence and Power of action, by which
they themselves act nextly and immediately. And for ought I can yet understand
a very just occasion; for though Mr. How in the place abovecited acknowledges
immediate concurrence; yet in the Letter it self, by which Mr. Gale was to make
an estimate of his judgment, there was ne gru quidem, not a Syllable of any
such thing.

2. It is hard to conceive the reason of Mr. Howe's limitation; why forbidden
actions should be only by power derived from God; and good actions or
indifferent, require also an irresistible determination; when the material of
the actions morally diversified is often the very same. For instance, In the
motion of my hand to kill another out of spleen and private revenge, or to kill
my enemy in a lawful self-defence, or to strike my friend in merriment. I am
aware that he attempts to wipe off the aspersion of symbolizing with Durandus,
because he denies immediate concourse universally, whereas himself denies only
determinative concourse to wicked actions, Postsc. p. 28, 29. And be it so,
that his attempt has been successful, yet I must give Durandus the precedence
of Mr. How for sagacity in this point; and do judge that he spoke more
consonantly to himself, and the truth, when he affirmed that the
indetermination of the power given to the creature, was so universal, as to
extend equally to evil actions and to good. For it seems evident enough that
all natural actions, as such, [the Subjects of moral good and evil] must either
have, or want immediate concurrence.

3. This Answer runs counter to Mr. Howe's assertion elsewhere, That in
reference to sinful actions by this influence [determinative] God does not only
sustain men who do them, and continue to them their natural faculties and
powers whereby they are done, [which is all Mr. How has granted us hitherto
in his Answer to our Argument, from the dependence of the second Cause upon the
first]; but also as the first mover, so far excite and actuate those powers, as
that they are apt and habile for any congenerous action, etc. Postsc. p. 41.
For if by exciting and actuating the powers, he means that God reduces them to
act, he has taken a large jump from Durandus to Twisse: for the latter (nor we
who follow him) neither says nor means any more by Predetermination. And we
cannot tell what other meaning to affix to his words, without upbraiding him
with strange inadvertency in his choice of them. For else he consounds
Concurrence either with Conservation; which latter keeps the powers apt and
habile [as they are made] or with Predetermination, whereas this goes before,
that goes along with the Creatures act.

But now I attend to the proof of his strange Assertion, for a proof I
understand it to be) though he introduces it with a Besides; (a particle which
commonly is a sign of an additional Argument) which thus presents it self.

Ans. It seems infinitely to detract from the perfection of the ever blessed
God, to affirm he was not able to make a creature of such a nature as being
continually sustained by him, and supplied with power every moment suitable to
its nature, should be capable of acting, unless whatsoever he thus enables, he
determine [th^^ is, for it can mean no less thing, impel] it to do it also.
Let. p. 36, 37.

Rep. 1. If we should take liberty of judging things by their appearance at
first sight, without giving our selves the trouble of a strict disquisition, we
might easily be seduced into an imagination, that it does no less infinitely
detract from the Divine Perfection, to affirm. That God was not able to make a
Creature of such a nature, as that it might continually sustain it self,
without a supply of power every moment from God; for that opinion seems to tie
God to a shorter tedder, than an ingenuous Artificer, who can raise an Edifice
that shall last many years, without any need of his help for reparations.

And this I the rather take notice of, because I find it the sentiment of the
most acute Suarez, That they who deny Gods immediate Operation in every action
of the Creature, [which Mr. H. seems to do in his Answer now under discussion]
will doubtless be compelled to deny that the Creature does depend immediately
upon the actual influence of God. For (which is his reason) that which depends
not upon God in acting, nor does it depend upon him in its being. Met. Disp. 20.

2. This confirmation of Mr. H. Assertion is guilty of two unpardonable faults
in a man of Learning and Ingenuity, (viz.) a too early anticipation, and
immodest begging of the main Question. An anticipation, in alleging the
impelling, i. e. compelling (for that is his sense of the term, as will appear
e're long) men to act, as the import of Predetermining; whereas there is no
necessity of hooking in such an import of it: for suppose it no way to abridg
the liberty of the Will, yet by Mr. H's Argumentation, it is eo nomine to be
rejected, because the sustaining the Creature and supplying it with power every
moment suitable to its nature, [that is, in Durandus style, mediate
concurrence] is to be judged sufficient to enable the Creature to act, without
determining it to action; upon no less peril to them that shall dare to judge it
insufficient, than to be reputed detracters from the Perfection of the
ever-blessed God. And a begging of the Question it is, which I may well call
immodest, because he knows we neither can nor will grant it, without ruining
our Hypothesis; nor need we do it, because he elsewhere owns it unreasonable to
imagine that God cannot in any case determine the will of a rational Creature,
in a way agreeable enough to its nature. Let. p. 141.

I confess he gives us here but an inch, but we will venture to take an ell; I
mean, to extend his concession of some cases to every case, and particularly to
our case of sinful actions. For let our sentiment be burdened with what other
load Mr. H. shall please (as the truth is he is not over merciful to the
Predeterminants) I think he has discharged it of forcing the will, till he
has evinced a specialty in our case, which will be somewhat an uneasy task,
though we should grant him his own option, that God predetermines to sinful
actions in concreto, i.e. to the actions and sinfulness of them too; for upon
that supposition there is less necessity to imagine that God cannot determine
the will in a way agreeable enough to man's [corrupt] nature; because he does
but determine it to what it has an innate propension to of it self; and so
Gods determination is but as the wind in a man's back, which puts him on a
little faster in the way he was going before.

3. We are at a great loss as to Mr. H's meaning, whether it be that it is a
detraction from Gods perfection, to affirm, God was not able to make a Creature
that could not act universally without determination, or particularly as to
forbidden actions; the generality of the terms calls for the former sense, the
conclusion he was to prove, for the latter.

1. If the former sense be that he will own, I seem to my self fairly allowed
to infer, that then man in his primitive state had not, nor have the good.
Angels at present, any Divine determination to good actions, because to both
unnecessary; and unnecessary it must be presumed, because it is a detraction
from Gods Perfection to conceive he could not make them of such a nature, as
that they should not need it, and because they had no disinclination to be
overcome by an efficaciously determinative influence, (which is the reason Mr.
H. gives of the necessity of Predetermination to holy actions in the lapsed
state. Post. p. 35. Which if it be of any force makes it unnecessary to a state
of Integrity.) And if this inference be natural, I wonder not that Man fell,
but that he fell not as soon as he was set upon his legs; nor that some of the
good Angels turned Rebels so soon to their Sovereign Lord, but how the rest
persevere in their Loyalty. I have hitherto swom with the stream of Protestant
Divines, (not because it was easy, but in my apprehension safe) who have
conceived the good Angels security an effect of a greater degree of
determinative influence, (to borrow Mr. H's Phrase) or corroborating grace,
that is, in the terms of the Question now agitated, Predetermination, than was
afforded to the [now] bad Angels; or to speak more strictly of the continuance
of that Predetermination to the one, which was suspended as to the other: which
conception of Divines (to note that in passage) may be easily freed from the
imputation of reflecting either upon Gods Holiness, Justice, or Truth; upon the
first, because God by the suspension of Predetermination was no more the
Efficient of the Angels sin, than the Sun of the darkness that overspreads the
air, when it has withdrawn its rays; upon the second, for it is a ruled case
in the Schools, Non datur justitia proprie dicta inter Deum and Creaturas; i.
e. God cannot be properly said to be a debtor to his Creatures; no not when he
has passed a promise to them, for even then, (if we will speak strictly) he is
a debtor to himself, namely to his own truth and fidelity, not to them; and if
he should (to suppose an impossibility for illustration-sake) break his word,
he would be but Mendax, non injurius, a Liar, not unjust. Not upon his Truth,
for he was not under the bond of a promise, (as he is to the part of repaired
Mankind, whom we denominate Saints) to preserve the Angels from Apostasy. As
for those who take this Doctrine for a blemish upon Gods goodness, I turn them
over to God himself, for a reconciliation of these two seemingly contradictory
Propositions, contained in his Word, and within the verge of our own
experience, that God is good, and [yet] that he has permitted a passage for
sin, which he could have impeded. -- If the latter sense be avowed, as a
genuine interpretation of Mr. H's mind; I know not how it will be able to save
its credit, if I should charge it with being guilty of this gross absurdity,
viz. a supposal that God made Man with an ability to do sinful actions in
concreto, i. e. the natural actions, and sin that adheres to them. It Is true,
God made Man mutable, and how could he do otherwise? (unless he should have
made him a God) which very terms involve an insufferable contradiction) and so
in a remote capacity of sinning. But Mr. H's words import a next or immediate
capacity of acting, which the Creature is capable of, as soon as it starts out
of nothing into something, without the intervenient aid of Predetermination. I
am very averse from thinking this to be Mr. H's meaning; and I would offer him
a friendly hand (if he would accept of it) to help him out of the pit he is
fallen into, by minding him of our distinction between the materiale and
formale of sin, the natural action that is the subject, and the sin that is the
[inseparable] adjunct, in our temporary estate: which distinction supposed, in
conj^nction with Mr. H's Hypothesis, Mr. H's meaning will be freed from the
encumbrance now inferred upon it; and it will amount to no more than that the
power of acting God gave to man, suffices to the natural actions, since sin
adhered to them, as well as before, without the help of Predetermination. But
then this friendly hand will prove unfriendly in the issue; for though it may
clear him of one, yet it will entangle him in many absurdities, or (at least
self-contradictions: For then,

1. How shall he quit himself from the blame of being a Favourer of Durandus
Hypothesis? for the sense is the same, and the words not much different. And
yet why should he once attempt it, seeing that Hypothesis serves his professed
design of quitting God of the blame of being the Author of Sin, with much
officiousness: and that he may accept this suggestion the more kindly, a most
Learned hand shall tender it to him: Some are of opinion that God has no
immediate influence, but mediate only, in respect of voluntary agents. And
according to this opinion it is easy to clear God from the imputation of being
the Author of Sin, and yet to acknowledge his concurrence with second Causes, in
producing their defective effects. If the will of the Creature, says Scotus,
C. 2. Did. 37. Q. 1. were the total and immediate cause of her action, and
that God had no immediate efficiency, but mediate only in respect thereof, as
some think: It were easy according to that opinion to show how God may be
freed from the imputation of being the Author of Sin, and yet to acknowledge his
concurrence with second Causes, for the producing of their effects: for whether
we speak of that which is material or formal in sin, the will only should be
the total cause of it, and God should no way be a cause of it but mediately, in
that he caused and produced such a will, that might at her pleasure do what she
would. Durandus seems to incline to this opinion, supposing that second
Causes do bring forth their actions and operations by and of themselves, and
that God no otherwise concurreth actually to the production of the same, but in
that he preserves the second Causes in that being and power of working, which
first he gave them. Thus far the most Learned Dr. Field, of the Church, B. 3.
Chapter 23. page 121, 122. And yet he adds his dislike of Durandus opinion in these
words: But they that are of sounder judgment resolve, that as the light
enlightneth the air, and with the air all other inferior things: so God not
only gives being and power of working to the second Causes, and preserves
them in the same, but together with them has an immediate influence into the
things that are to be effected by them, etc. Ibid. p. 122.

3. What account can be given of his exploding our distinction between the
material and formal part of sin? [approved of above by Dr. Field]. Most of his
way, (viz. Mr. Gales) mince the business, and say, the concurrence is only to
the action, which is sinful; not as sinful, so Mr. Howe's Postsc. p. 33.

Answ. Except it were affirmed, that it implied a contradiction for God to make
such a creature, there is no imaginable pretense, why it should not be admitted
he has done it, Let. p. 37. and subjoins soon after, I must confess a greater
disposition to wonder that ever such a thing should be disputed, than dispute
so plain a case, p. 38.

Reply. That it is affirmed, Mr. How cannot surely be ignorant; nay, he frees
himself from that blame. I am not altogether ignorant what attempts have been
made to prove it impossible, p. 38. but in the interim he incurs another of
contradicting himself.

This Argument, ab absurdo, from the implication of Gods making a creature
independent upon himself, is urged against those that deny immediate
concurrence (and so by just consequence conservation) and Predetermination.

1. As to mediate concurrence, it is urged for it by Durandus, That there is no
repugnuncy nor contradiction for God to make a creature that should be able to
act without his help [otherwise, that is, than by conserving its being and
powers]. To this is Answered, Involvere repugnantiam quod creaturae sit potens,
etc. That it involves a repugnancy and contradiction, that the creature should
be able to act independently upon the Creator, as well in respect of the
created cause it self, which has necessarily a power of acting commensurate
and proportionable to its own being, as in respect of the action or effect
flowing from it; for seeing they are Beings by participation, they essentially
depend upon the first Being. Wherefore, as the Divine power cannot produce a
Being independent upon him in its Being, so nor produce an Agent independent
upon him in acting. Suarez. Met. T. 1. D. 22. n. 16. One egg is not more like
another, than Durandus Argument to Mr. Howe's; nor can a more solid Answer be
given thereto, no, though Mr. How should acknowledge immediate concurrence, (as
in his Postsc. he does) of which, in his whole Letter there is altum silentium,
and deny only Predetermination: for this Answer is a shoo that will fit either
foot (as will appear in its place).

2. As to conservation, the no necessity of Gods continual influx to that end
seems colourably affirmed upon this ground too, That it is not repugnant to
Omnipotency to produce such creatures, as when once made, may continue their
Being; though the operation of the Agent cease, by which they were produced. To
this Argument Suarez also fits a rational reply; Ad amplitudinem divinae
potentiae spectat, etc. It belongs to the amplitude of the Divine Power, that
nothing is, nor can be a moment after its production without its influence; and
also that it have full dominion over all his creatures, and an intrinsic power
of annihilating them, by the suspension or withholding of his influence,
Suarez. Met. T. 1. D. 21. n. 2, 17.

3. Which is directly to our case upon Mr. Howe's explication of his mind, that
he does really believe Gods immediate concourse to all actions of his
creatures, both immediatione virtutis and suppositi, yet not determinative to
wicked actions, Postsc. p. 28. we shall adventure a demonstration, that it
implies a contradiction for God to make a creature that can act without
Predetermination, i. e. applying it to action, and to one rather than another
action; and it is this, that such a creature would be but ens secundarium, a
second being; not causa secunda, a second cause, or (which is all one) God
should be but ens primum, not causa prima, the first Being, not the first
Cause; which I prove thus.

Arg. 1. If God does concur only by simultaneous concourse, and not by
Predetermination, or previous motion, then God cannot be the cause of the
actions of the creatures as they proceed from them. But the consequent is
absurd; and Mr. How, I presume, will not own it. Therefore so is the
Antecedent. The Consequence is proved thus: God is not by concourse the cause
of the actions of the creatures, as those actions proceed from them, because
then concourse must be before the action of the creature (for every Physical
cause is before the effect), but the very name concourse, imports a joining
together in the same action, as the Master and Scholar, whose hand is guided in
shaping the same letter. And all consent, in concourse, neither does God act
before the creature, nor the creature before God, but both together, and at
once.

Arg. 2. To make good the English Proverb, He is twice killed, that is killed
with his own weapon. I shall retort, Mr. Howe's two concessions upon him.

1. If there be an immediate concourse, then there is a Predetermination, or
putting the creature upon action before it acts; or else the creature is the
first mover of it self to action. The consequence is plausible enough, as
depending on this ground, that by concourse alone we have no account given us
how God and the creature join in one individual action rather than another. As
for instance, in the state of innocence, when man was incircled with a variety
of trees of the Garden, all good and fit for food, whence was it that he willed
to eat of one rather than another. The concourse of God with Adam's will in the
election of one (suppose that in the midst of the Garden, before the
prohibition passed upon it) could not determine it to that rather than to any
of the rest, as is plain in external actions. Two men lanching a wherry-boat
concur to the same effect; but the one does not determine the other, by lending
common assistance to that act. There must be therefore a Predetermination in
order of nature, though not of time, to that act of Adam's will [supposed] of
eating that tree instanced in, to which God concurred. This may be illustrated
by the example of a Writing-Master and his Scholar, wherein there is a
concurrence to the action of writing, and its effect the letter written; and
also a Predetermination, a putting the Scholar upon the action of writing, (not
morally, for that influence is discerned in commanding a Scholar to write by
himself; but Physically, by putting his hand on the Scholars to write, and to
write one letter rather than another. An account how the particular action of
any rational creatures will, comes to be determined upon the exclusion of
Predetermination, I know none can be given. Not by chance, upon the occasional
sudden presentation of an object; because the action is Gods (who is not liable
to any such impressions) as well as the creatures; not by the creatures
self-determining power, for that, as such, is indeterminate as to the acts to
which we conceive it must be some way or other determined. And these two
Propositions are so evident, that concurrence immediate does not determine the
will, and that yet it must be determined, that Baronius himself, who is an
Antipredeterminant, does acknowledge both, Met. 7, 8. Disp. 3. n. 66. and he
does suggest a reason against any necessity laid upon a thing by Divine
Prescience, which we will accept of for a necessity of Divine Predetermination
to the acts of the will. Illud solum imponit necessitatem alicui rei, quod est
prima ratio cur illa res non potuit non evenire, i. e. That alone imposes
necessity upon any thing which is the first reason or cause why that thing
could not but fall out. Baron. Met. 7, 12. D. 2. n. 59. [which necessity, that
it excludes not the liberty of man's will, shall be cleared in due time].

2. Again, from the necessity conceded by Mr. How, of immediate concourse and
Predetermination to the production of good actions, we shall infer the
necessity of both to all actions: This necessity must take its rise either from
something common to all actions, or peculiar to good actions. The removing the
latter, will be the fixing the former in its due place. In order hereunto, we
must consider that grace is an habit seated in the natural faculties, and
fitting them for good actions; which as it was concreated with them in
innocence; so in the lapsed estate it is re-created, or created again by
infusion: which infusion is not Predetermination: for this latter still
presupposes the former. There must be grace in habit before it can be acted.
Now then the Query is, whether the terminus of Predetermination be the habit or
the faculties; not the habit, for that is a Quality that meliorates the
faculties, and so the actions, in genere morali, and cannot be put upon action,
or one rather than another, but mediante potentia, by the intervention of the
power or faculty in which the gracious habit resides. It must then be the
faculties; the will for instance (for of that is the grand inquiry), for
otherwise (supposing what has been owned, that holy habits fit the will for
holy volitions and nolitions) in what degree the habits are confirmed, in that
the will may act without Predetermination, and produce sincerely good actions
as it please, as long as these good actions are done by a power derived
originally from it, [which is Mr. Howe's Hypothesis, and judged by him
sufficient to salve the rights and privilege of the first cause, with
reference to forbidden actions, Let. p. 36. [and I see not, why not as well
with reference to commanded actions]. The result of this ratiocination will be,
that if it be the indetermination of the powers to individual actions that
makes an excitation of them to one rather than another necessary; and the
possibility of action contained in the powers, that makes the reducing of that
possibility to action no less necessary to good actions, then the consequence
seems immovable, that Predetermination in its two Branches is alike necessary
to all actions, even when they flow from a will tainted with vicious habits and
inclinations. Quod erat demonstrandum And to me this Argument seems to carry
along with it triumphant evidence, (to borrow one of Mr. Howe's lofty
Epithetes, Let. p. 62.) my fancy labors under so despicable poverty as to be
unable to supply me with any evasion.

As for Mr. Howe's phrase of impelling, by which he intends compelling, we
shall refer the word and thing to the Head, where it will most properly fall
under examination. In the interim, let us attend to what he subjoins.

Answ. I confess a disposition to wonder that a matter whereupon all moral
Government depends, both humane and divine, should not have been determined at
the first sight, Let. p. 38.

Reply. These words imply, that all moral Government, etc. is rendered
ludicrous, and a mere Pageantry by the Doctrine of Predetermination; but upon
what Mr. How, magisterially enough, takes for granted, but does not once make
an offer of proving, that the will is hindered by Gods own irresistible
counter-action, p. 37. from yielding obedience to such Government: But if I
live till that be proved, my age will certainly exceed Methuselahs.

Answ. But Mr. How adds, The notion of the goodness and righteousness of God,
methinks should stick so close to our minds, and create such a sense in our
souls, as should be infinitely dearer to us than all our senses and powers. And
that we should rather choose to have our sight, hearing, and motive power, and
what not besides disputed, or even torn from us, than ever suffer our selves to
be disputed into a belief, that the Holy and Good God should irresistibly
determine the wills of men to, and punish the same thing, Let. p. 19.

Reply. The sum of the Argument, though accompanied with a long train of fine
words, is, that Predetermination to sinful actions crosses the natural notions
of mankind concerning Gods Goodness and Holiness. To which we return.

1. That there is not the least color for any such consequence from our
Doctrine, but upon supposition of two things; which Mr. How would fasten upon
us, but we disown.

1. That God predetermines to sinful actions, in concreto, i e. to the natural
action, and the sinfulness of it: which we constantly deny: for though we own
it a h^rd province to answer all objections that may be started against this
partition made between the one and the other, as to Gods influence, which we
affirm as to the former, the action, and deny, as to the latter, the sinfulness
of it: yet 'we doubt not (in its season) to evince these two things, that God
is the Author, and consequently the Predeterminer of all the actions of
rational creatures, (for as to irrational, though we include them, yet the
Question not being of them, we shall not intermeddle with them); and that God
is not the Author of the sinfulness, and so not the Predeterminer thereof. And
then as to the modus, or manner of Gods influence, so as to separate these that
are so nearly conjoined in sinful creatures, we shall be less solicitous, at
least with respect to Mr. Howe's satisfaction, who has professed that he can
more easily be satisfied, to be ignorant of the modus, [i. e. manner], or
medium, [i. e. the mean] of Gods knowledge, whilst he is sure of the thing; and
he knows not why any sober minded man might not be so too, while we must all be
content to be ignorant of the manner, yea, of the nature too of a thousand
things besides, when, that such things there are, we have no doubt. And when
there are few things about which we can with less disadvantage suffer our being
ignorant, or with less disreputation profess to be so, Let. p. 49, 50. And if
this Argumentation be true, in reference to Divine acts in general (as there is
no reason why it should be limited to Gods knowledge only, and himself extends
it beyond that); I conceive Mr. How has against his will given us the cause;
for that God is not the Author of sin (our last proposition) he every where
affirms as well as we. That God is the Author of all the actions of rational
creatures, he grants too; or else his words are unintelligible, and we have
cause to quarrel with him, (as he did with Persius, a crabbed Poet), si non
vult intelligi, cur vult legi, i. e. If he would not be understood, why would
he be read, (an end that every man is presumed to intend that writes), these
words, I mean, This active providence of God about all the actions of men,
consists not merely in giving them the natural powers, whereby they can work of
themselves, but in a real influence upon those powers, Postsc. p. 39. By which
last clause, if he intends reducing them to act (as his phrase is, ibid.) we
are perfectly agreed so far; and the remaining disagreement will be but about
the modus or manner, how God affords a real influence upon the powers defiled
with sin, and yet none upon the sin it self. And of ^his he and I being both (I
hope) sober minded men, may well be content to be ignorant, as long as we are
sure of the thing. But I fear I reckon without my Host, and so must reckon
again; I mean, that Mr. How will not stand to my comprimize of the difference
between us, though I see not why he should not, if he will be but a man of his
word, stand, that is, to his own Assertions.

2. Our Doctrine cannot be accused of a confederacy, to raze out the
impressions of Gods Holiness upon humane nature; but upon this supposition
also, That God does irresistibly determine the wills of men to that which he
punishes men for, viz. to sin, which is a brat we are not bound to father. For
we neither own irresistible nor resistible determination of man's will to sin,
as such; nor do we acknowledge any determination of the will at all to be
irresistible, if he takes that term for equivalent to compulsory; which if he
do not, it will be neither a friend to him, nor foe to us.

We might also observe upon his Rhetorical amplifications of his Argument, that
he seems to be no ill-willer to Transubstantiation. For if the natural notions
of Gods goodness should be infinitely dearer to us than our senses, I see not
why the notion of Gods sincerity, that he means as he speaks, should not
challenge a share in our indearments; and so why, Hoc est corpus meum, should
not assure us, that the bread is transubstantiated, though our senses, sight,
taste, feeling, join in a common testimony, that it remains bread after
consecration, as well as before: not that I charge him with that Popish
ridicule, but I would have him take notice how dangerous sometimes an
affectation of embellishments of speech may prove, by leaving him that is
guilty of it, at the mercy of his Antagonist, in deducing such inferences from
them, as can neither be safely admitted, nor creditably turned off.

Answ. Mr. How complains of the feebleness and impotency of our defense
against the forenamed charge, that God makes a Law, and necessitates the
violation of it; when it is no more than, That man is under the Law, and God
above it, Let. p. 40, 41. and he affirms, that a tender spirit, etc. will not
be relieved or eased by the thin Sophistry of only a collusive ambiguity in the
word Law, etc. ibid.

Reply. If Mr. Howe's candor did but bear any tolerable proportion to his
Eloquence, he would never have thus represented our Answer. For the truth is,
this Answer is not given by the Predeterminants to that objection to which he
applies it (as is plain enough, because we always esteem our selves unconcerned
in the charge of representing God as necessitating the violation of his own
Law), but to another, (viz.) that God sins when he produces that action with
man, which to man is sin, (which Mr. How, who in words at least owns immediate
concurrence to all actions as well we, is therefore equally concerned to
answer). For the proof of this, I shall alledg Bellarmine, who (after he had
told us, it was only Zuinglius's Answer to the same Objection that Mr. H. fits
it to; adds with the peril of his reputation), Sententiam tamen aliorum
quorundam, etc. i. e. That it was the opinion of others also, who though they
agreed not with Zuinglius, in teaching that God impels men to sin, yet they use
no other medium to evince how God does not sin, when he produces that action
with man, which to man is sin, than that God is bound by no Law, and nothing is
sin but a transgression of a Law, Bell de Amiss. Gr. l. 2. c. 18. Yet withal I
deny not, but it is also applied to that Objection, that God sins, if he does
determine to that action, to which sin inseparably cleaves. But yet the
necessitation of the violation of the Law, is no way concerned in the objection.

What now is become of Mr. Howe's charge of thin Sophistry, and collusive
ambiguity, when we deny God to be under a Law, in the same signification of the
word, wherein we affirm it of man, ( viz. as Mr. How expresses it), For the
declared pleasure of a Ruler to a Subject, p. 41. This charge disproved, we yet
grant what Mr. How objects; that the term Law, as noting an habitual
principle, and rule of acting after one steady tenor, in which sense the
perfect rectitude of Gods nature is an eternal Law to him, etc. Let. p. 41, 42,
is yet an Argument against our opinion upon Mr. Howe's Hypothesis, that thereby
the creature is necessitated to sin: but that he has neither attempted, nor
ever will be able to prove. If proof could be made that the consequence were
natural, we should not know how to decline the force of Bellarmine's grave
Argumentation upon Mr. Howe's ground, Licet deo non sit posita Lex ab aliquo
superiore Legislatore, tamen sua sapientia est ipsi Lex, etc. i. e. Though God
be not under a Law given him by a superior Legislatour, yet his own wisdom is
a Law to him; and as Zuinglius himself teaches us, That what a Law is to us,
that is Gods own nature to him. God is therefore no less bound, not to act
repugnantly to his own wisdom and nature, than men are bound not to act
repugnantly to the Law of God. Wherefore, if God should impel [Mr. Howe's
phrase], men to these things, which are contrary to the Eternal Law, and to his
own nature and wisdom, as to Adultery, his will were evil, because repugnant to
the right rule of divine wisdom, and God should deny himself, which cannot be
(as the Apostle says). Thus far Bellarmine, ubi supra.

Answ. Mr. How concludes, What relief is there in that dream, [of the supposed
possibility of Gods making a reasonable creature with an innocent aversion to
himself]. For what can be supposed more repugnant? or what more impertinent? If
innocent, how were it punishable? A Law already made in the case, how can it be
innocent? Let. p. 42.

Reply. Mr. How leaves us wholly at a loss, who it is, that with this dream
has attempted to relieve a pious and sober mind, closely urged with the
horror of so black a conception of God, that he does first irresistibly
determine men's will to, and then punish them for the hatred of his blessed
self, (as he tragically, but falsely represents our opinion), p. 40. I say
falsely, for God does not punish that natural passion we call hatred, which
himself, as first Cause, applies the second to the production of; nor does God
determine the will to that natural passion, its elicite act, irresistibly, in
his sense forcibly. But as Austin long ago, of Gods influence upon good
actions; [so say we of bad] God acts Omnipotenter pro te, suaviter pro me,
Omnipotently according to his own nature, but sweetly according to ours, (as
shall be fully cleared in its place). If any particular person of our judgment
in the main, shall propose an argument liable to exception, I see not that we
are obliged to defend it. But as Mr. How introduces it, it seems to be
represented as a common extravagancy of the Predeterminants, which I am sure it
is not; nor does Mr. How labor under a surguedry of candor, in a bare
presentation of this supposition, without its application to the Question. Both
which, because Mr. How has neglected, I think not my self obliged to give the
Reader an account of, but shall dismiss it without any ado.

Arg. 2. The second pressing and importunate Argument of ours which Mr. H.
repeats, That God does predetermine sinful actions as actions, otherwise it
were impossible for God to foreknow the sinful actions of men (many whereof he
has foretold) if their futurition were a mere contingency, and depended on the
uncertain will of the subordinate agent, not determined by the supreme agent
[God.] Let. p. 35, 36.

Ans. To which Argument, this is the sum of his Answer, That this supposed
indetermination of the Will in reference to wick^d actions, is far from being
capable of inferring any thing more than that we are left ignorant of the way
how he foreknows them, which is a small inconvenience, and manifest absurdity
not to ac^nowledg the like in many cases, seeing God does many things, whereof
the manner how he does them we can neither explicate nor understand. Let. p.
47, 48.

Rep. 1. To which I reply, That the way how God foreknows future contingencies,
is in his own Decree, at least as to such which he has decreed. For I cannot
divine what can be opposed to this Proposition, That what God has decreed he
foreknows in his own Decree, (though it should be granted that he foreknows
them also antecedently to his own Decree in some manner, which we can neither
explicate nor understand.) Taking that then for granted till it be denied, I
think Mr. H. has much overshot himself in denying universally our knowledge of
the way how God foreknows future contingencies. For either he must exclude the
good actions, which he grants God predetermines men to, Postsc. p. 39. yea, and
all actions of free agents to which he acknowledges God affords immediate
concourse, p. 28. from being Contingencies; (which himself as well as we,
suppose in the whole controversy now agitated) Or deny that they fall under
Gods Decree; (which is too absurd, because there is nothing more evident than
that what God does in time, he decreed to do from Eternity) Or if he grants
both, then it roundly follows, that God foreknew those acts of the Creatures
which in time he did either predetermine to, or concur with; and such are all
the actions of men disjunctively.

Rep. 2. We shall prove that God foreknows all future contingencies in his own
Decree, and consequently the sinful actions of men.

1. By Scripture, Isa. 46.9, 10, I am God, and there is none like me, declaring
the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet
done, saying, my counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. Upon which
Scripture the Incomparable Calvin, (so I call him in compliance with the very
Learned Andrews, (sometime Bishop of Winchester's admonition), that he was a
man never to be named without the addition of some title of Honor) thus
glosses, Neque solum ejus praescientiam hic commendat, etc. i.e. Neither does
God only here commend his own Prescience, but he affirms that he had testified
by the Prophets what he had decreed. For there were no certainty, nor firmness
in the Predictions, or Prophesies, unless the same God who foretells this or
that thing would come to pass, had the event of things in his own hand. As to
which words we may further observe:

1. The form of the expression: two Attributes are here applied by God to
himself, Wisdom and Sovereignty or liberty of Will, and a common adjunct of
both, Immutability, [or we may call it a common effect, the certainty of the
event] that what God does wisely and freely determine or decree within himself,
shall certainly come to pass.

2. The extent of it, that it refers to all those things which it was Gods
peculiar certainly to foreknow, viz. all that should certainly come to pass.
For as Judicious Calvin observes upon verse. 11. Posteaquam Propheta, etc. After
that the Prophet had spoken of the Prescience of God, he accommodates the
general expression he had used to his present purpose, to comfort the Jews in
hopes of the return of their Captivity by Cyrus, etc.

3. The argument which is couched in them, to evince the certainty of Gods
foreknowledg of what he did predict, viz. because the events predicted were the
result of his Wisdom and Pleasure, or of his own wise Decrees.

And now to draw down this General to the particular in question, Whether God
foreknows sinful actions in his own Decree. And for the proof of the
affirmative I shall quote but that place, Act. 4.28, compared with Chap. 2.23,
For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. So
the former place, Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledg of God, ye have taken and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain. So the latter; both speaking of the most wicked action that ever was
done in the world, the putting the Lord of Life to death. To the former place
the Learned Calvin says, They who acknowledge only the Prescience of God, but do
not confess that all things are managed by Gods will, are easily convinced by
these words, that God has foreordained that to be done which is done. To the
latter place the Learned Dr. Manton (now newly deceased, to the great grief of
Pious and Learned Men) affords a notable gloss, (which I especially recommend
to Mr H. for the friendship sake between the Doctor and him, in his Comment on
Jam. 1.13. p. 101. Many who grant Prescience, deny Preordination, [ viz. the
Decree, whereof Predetermination is the execution; So I understand him] lest
they should make God the Author of Sin: but these fear where no fear is. The
Scripture speaks roundly, ascribing both to God, Act. 2.23. [ N. B.] Peter
says not only (...), by the foreknowledg; but (...), determinate counsel;
which implies a positive Decree. So far he: and for ought I know consonantly
to the constant sense of Protestantism, till now of late that it grows weary of
it self, if we may judge of its present humor by Mr H. and Mr. B.) And by these
sound Interpretations we may easily judge, whether Mr. H.'s gloss upon Act.
4.28. does not corrupt the Text. Let us hear it, if our patience can bear such
an exercise. That is, God foreseeing wicked hands would be prompt and read for
this tragic enterprise, his Sovereign power and wise counsel concurred with
his foreknowledg, so only, and not with less latitude, to define or determine
the bounds and limits of that malignity, than to let it proceed unto this
execution, Let. p. 29. And soon after, Which purpose (viz.) of Christ's to give
himself to be a propitiation for the sins of men by dying, it was determined
[by God] not to hinder prepared hands to execute in this way, p. 30. These
words plainly imply a denial of Gods foreknowledg of the Death of Christ, as
consequent to his Decree of that event, (which is sufficiently confirmed by the
Scriptures now quoted against that denial) and they imply an affirmation of a
foreknowledg of Christ's Death antecedent to Gods Decree; and so make a
confusion (where a distinction ought to be kept) between Gods foreknowledg of
possibles and futures; or of what may, and of what shall come to pass; and run
Mr. H. into this absurdity, to deny that any Decree passed upon the Death of
Christ at all. For to what end should he pass a Decree, if he foreknew it would
come to pass without it? I cannot conceive how Mr. H. can rid his hands of this
absurdity, unless he shall affirm, the passion, but not the action, the death
of Christ, but not their agency who put him to death was the object of Gods
Decree. But then Austin will correct him by his gloss upon that Text, 1 Pet.
3.17, For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well-doing
than for evil doing. Sancti affliguntur secundum Dei voluntatem, etc. i.e. The
Saints are afflicted according to the will of God, but they cannot suffer
unless wicked men act. He that wills the passion, wills the action. Aug. in
Enchir. c. 100. And the Philosopher will fall foul upon him with his naxim,
Actio and Passio sunt idem motus. i.e. Action and Passion are one and the same
motion. And differ but as the way from London to York, and from York to London;
and but as the ascent and descent of the same Hill. And so it cannot be
pretended with any color, that the Decree of God includes the Passion of
Christ, and excludes the Jews and Gentiles action about it. I will dismiss Mr.
H. as to this Text without further exagitation, when I have but minded him of a
passage of the acute Twisse, (who I presume, is one of those pious and learned
men, to whom his reverence is not extinguished, notwithstanding the badness of
their opinion about Predetermination, Post. p. 49.) Dictata ista Jesuitica,
etc. Those Jesuitical dictates of the foreseen determination of the humane will
before Gods Decree, are not the dictates disserentium Theologorum, sed
somniantium. i.e. Of Divines disputing, but dreaming. Twiss. Vind. Gr. L. 2. p.
1. Digr. 2. c. 1. p. 31. And so I have cried you quittance, one dream for
another. [Let. p. 42.]

2. By reason we shall demonstrate, that Gods foreknowledg of all future
contingencies depend upon his Decree. And I shall choose to borrow (because I
have none of my own better) that of Dr. Twisse, which has been esteemed
irrefragable, says the Learned Strangius, who yet opposes it, but not with
strength enough to overthrow it; and has done us the favor to reduce the
whole process of the Argumentation into form. De Vol. Dei, etc. l. 3. c. 9. p.
626.

Arg. 1. What is future only by the Decree of God, that God necessarily
foreknew by his Decree. But every future contingent is future only by the
Decree of God. Ergo, every future contingent did God necessarily foreknow by
his Decree.

2. The Minor proved. That which is future from Eternity, that is not future
but by Gods Decree. But every future contingent is future from Eternity. Ergo,
every future contingent is future only by the Decree of God.

3. The Major of the last Syllogism proved. That which from Eternity passed out
of the condition of a thing possible, into the condition of a thing future,
that is not future but by Gods Decree. But that which is future from Eternity
did pass from Eternity out of the condition of a thing possible into the
condition of a thing future. Ergo, That which is future from Eternity is not
future but by Gods Decree.

4. The Major of the last Syllogism proved. That which from Eternity passed out
of the condition of a thing possible into the condition of a thing future, had
for the cause of that passage the Decree of God, or no cause at all. But it
cannot be said it had no cause at all. Ergo, only the Decree of God was the
cause of that passage out of the condition of a thing possible into the
condition of a thing future.

5. The Minor of the last Syllogism proved. Future contingents are either
future in their own nature, or not future but by some cause determining their
indifferent nature. But future contingents are not future in their own nature;
else it would follow, that they should be always future, and never become
present. For what agrees to any thing of its own nature, agrees to it
inseparably. Ergo, future contingents must needs be future from some cause.

6. The Major of the same fourth Syllogism proved. If there be any cause why
any thing passes from Eternity out of the condition of a possible thing into
the condition of a future, that cause must be either something without God, or
in God; and if in God, either that cause shall be the essence of God, or the
knowledge of God, or the will and decree of God. But the cause of any thing
becoming of possible future, is neither any thing without God, nor the essence
or the knowledge of God. Ergo, it is only the will or decree of God.

7. The Minor of the last Syllogism proved by parts. For first, nothing out of
God could be the cause, because that passage (which they call futurition) was
made from eternity, and therefore the cause thereof must be from eternity. But
nothing is eternal besides God. Nor can the knowledge of God be the cause; for
that severed from his will, does rather suppose, than make things future.
Moreover, if the Essence of God were the cause of this passage of things from
possibility to futurity, it must either be said to be the cause as acting
necessarily or freely. Not the former, for then all future things would fall
out necessarily, and none would fall out contingently and freely. But God in
things to be created, or created, has done, nor does any thing by necessity of
nature, but freely. If the Essence of God be said to be the cause of the
passage of things from possibility into futurity, as acting freely, this is to
grant, that the will of God and the determination thereof is the cause why any
contingent from eternity passes out of the condition of an indifferent thing
to be or not to be, into the condition of a thing future, or to determine the
futurition of it. It remains therefore that the Decree of God, or the Decreeing
will of God, be alone the cause of futurition (if you will admit the phrase)
and of its effect. Thus far Dr. Twisse.

I desire the Reader to take notice, That though I have a great reverence for
Dr. Twisse, and do judge the process of the abovecited Argument invincible as to
the main; yet I am not clear in my apprehension, that the third Syllogism is in
sense different from the second, (as Strangius objects against it with some
probability.) Nor yet do I wholly dislike Strangius his alteration of the terms
of both the Majors of the second and third Syllogism, thus: That which from
eternity was possible so, as that it also had the condition of a thing future,
its futurition is from the Decree of God. But every future contingent was from
eternity possible so, as that it also had the condition of a thing future.
Ergo, the futurition of every future contingent is from the Decree of God. And
then the fourth Syllogism will be the proof of the Major of the second,
(leaving out the third) and the words must be the same; and so the argument
runs on without any further rub, unless perhaps the reason given in the fifth
Syllogism, Why contingent things are not future in their own nature, because
then it would follow, that they should be always future, and never become
present.

For I confess ingenuously, that I cannot answer Strangius contrary consequent
from that antecedent; That if future contingents were necessarily future,
whether in their own nature, or in respect of any other cause, as the (...) of
God, they must necessarily be present some time or other. For to be future is
nothing else than that a thing should sometime be present. Strange. p. 630.

And these alterations (though I will not positively assert to be needful, as
not having had time to examine Strangius thoroughly since he came to my hands,
(which was long after Mr. H's Letter and Postscript came out,) yet I am the
more willing to admit, that I may in part wipe off the aspersion Mr. H. casts
upon many of us, who hold Predetermination, That whatsoever strength there may
be in arguments and replys to and fro in this matter, that which has too
apparently had greatest actual efficacy with many, has been the authority and
name of this and that man of reputation. Let. p. 42.

As to all the rest of the Doctor's Arguments, (if I be not a partial judge of
my own abilities, an infirmity of lapsed humane nature, which I cannot
challenge an exemption from,) I seem to my self able to answer Strangius's
subtle evasions, and should willingly have done it, but that I doubt not but I
shall meet with them in Mr. H's threatened Rejoinder, in which I expect Mr. H.
should answer distinctly, by denial or distinction, to some Proposition in
these Syllogisms; and then let him rhetoricate as he pleases in the
amplification.

We have now dispatched the two Arguments in the Letter, there remain three in
the Postscript cited out of Mr. Gale's Animadversions upon the Letter; which,
though modestly proposed by way of Question, will constringe our Learned
Adversary.

Arg. 3. Whether there be any action of man on earth so good, which has not
some mixture of sin in it? And if God concur to the substrate matter of it as
good, must he not necessarily concur to the substrate matter as sinful? for is
not the substrate matter of the act, both as good and sinful the same? Postscr.
p. 32.

Mr. H's Answ. 1. It seems then that God does concur to the matter of an action
as sinful; which is honestly acknowledged, since by his principles it cannot be
denied: though most of his way mince the business, and say, the concurrence is
only to the action which is sinful, not as sinful. Ibid. and page 33. So Mr. H.

Reply. Mr. H. misrepresents Mr. Gale's meaning: for it is not, that God
concurs to the sinfulness of the action, but to the action; which though
physically one individual action, yet is morally diversified in respect of its
conformity and difformity to the Law of God: so that considering the natural
action in concreto, with the good or evil adhering to it, it is no less true,
that God concurs to the action that has evil adhering to it, than that he
concurs to the action that has good adhering to it. This premised, to the
fault he finds with the distinction, I answer, that I doubt he must recur to it
himself, when he is pressed, to know how Gods concurrence immediate to actions
sinful will free him from the imputation of being the Author of Sin: yea, worse
than so, I cannot imagine, but that as to those actions, which he calls in
themselves sinful, he must own what he would fasten upon Mr. Gale, that God
does immediately concur to the matter of an action as sinful; for it is
impossible to separate the malignity thereof from an intrinsecally evil action,
(as he tells us) Let. p. 33. [of which hereafter.)

Mr. H's Answ. 2. This I am to consider as an argument for Gods
Predeterminative concurrence to wicked actions. And thus it must be conceived,
that if God concur by determinative influence to the imperfectly good actions
of faith, love, etc. therefore to the acts of enmity against himself, cursing,
idolatry, etc. To which (besides an unseemly scoff, is it not a mighty
consequence?) Mr. H. answers diverse things, as reasons for the denial of the
consequence.

1. That it is infirm, because the actions in the antecedent are good, quoad
substantiam, but these in the consequent are in the substance of them evil.
Post. p. 33.

Reply 1. Mr. Gale does not limit wicked actions to those that are in the
substance of them evil, but ampliates the term to all whatsoever so that
supposing the consequence were not good to such actions as Mr. H. instanceth
in; yet it may be good to those actions that are evil, quoad finem and
circumstantias, as to the end and circumstances. For instance, to be
hospitable, or charitable out of vainglory, to be reading the Scriptures at
home, when we should attend upon public worship, etc. and Mr. H. seems to
yield it.

2. I am not yet convinced that there are any actions evil, quoad substantiam.
And it is a wonder to me, that our Learned Antagonist should exact of us an
implicit faith of that Position. It ill becomes his generosity so basely to
beg the question. Let him prove that, and I will be his Proselyte as to
antipredetermination of such actions. But because he neglects the duty he
owes to his Hypothesis, I will perform mine to my own anon.

2. Mr. H. denies the consequence by an argument a pari; That we our selves can
in a remoter kind concur to the actions of others, yet it does not follow, that
because we may assord our leading concurrence to actions imperfectly good, that
therefore we may afford it to those that are down right evil; because to
prayer, therefore to cursing and swearing, and then ruin men for the actions we
have induced them unto. I^^d. and p. 34.

Repl. 1. In general it is unsafe arguing a pari, from the creature to God; that
what the former may not do, neither may the latter. The creature is bound to
hinder all the sin that he can; but if God were under such an obligation, there
would not only have been so much sin as the world affords, but indeed none at
all. And you your self discourse at large of the incongruity of an universal
determinative influence to good actions; which yet would have made an admirable
Metamorphosis of all the Sinners in the world into Saints; (at least if in
those expressions you include, infusion of grace, which divine Predetermination
of good actions presupposes, as I have proved before.)

2. If your arguing be forcible as to this instance, I see not, but you reflect
as highly upon God by the immediate concurrence you grant to all actions of the
Creatures, Post. p. 28. For will it not follow, that God affords men a leading
concurrence to actions downright evil, and then ruins them for those actions,
which were as much his as theirs? I am too dull to imagine how you can
extricate your self, but by eating your words, and distinguishing of
concurrence, as you do of Predetermination; that God concurs to actions that
are imperfectly good, but not to those that are downright evil.

3. Mr. H's answer touches not the intendment of Mr. Gale's argument, which is
to evince upon Mr. H's own assertion, that as God predetermines to actions
imperfectly good; so by the like reason he may predetermine to actions that are
perfectly evil. And the ground of the consequence is this, that if in actions
imperfectly good, the evil and the good of the actions are so divided between
the creature and God, that only the former is the Creatures, and the latter
Gods; whilst yet the natural actions themselves are common to both, to God as
the first, to the Creature as the second cause; why may not we infer that in
actions perfectly evil, the action is common to God and the Creature, but the
evil of it, the Creatures peculiar, and no more chargeable upon God, than in
the other instance. And this I take for an irrefragable Argument, ad hominem,
which if Mr. H. can satisfy, I am silenced.

4. It is an unaccountable inadvertency, (for to salve his honor, so I will
call it, rather than a slip of Judgment) to produce cursing and swearing for
instances of actions downright, or for the substance of them evil. I thought
that David's frequent cursing of wicked men in the Psalms, and Paul's swearing,
Before God I lie not, Gal. 1.20. had not passed under so bad a character; but
did rest assured, that (as the actions in themselves are capable, so in them)
they were hallowed by their manner and end.

5. To what end Mr. How closes with this clause, And then ruin men for the
actions we have induced them to, is not hard to conjecture (viz.) to insinuate,
that our Doctrine represents God under the same character with the Devil, who
induces men to sin, and then torments them for it. But what is said untruly (as
well as Profanely) of the Devil, is verified of our Doctrine, That it is not
so black as it is painted. Mr. How indeed tells Mr. Gale, you will say God may
rather, and adds as his own sense, But sure he can do so much less than you, p.
34. This suggestion deserves a severer animadversion than I shall make upon it.
In general, I say it is an odious slander. For we in no sense assert that God
induces men to wicked actions, not morally, for we constantly affirm, that his
commands, threats, are all against it; not Physically, for so he determines men
to actions, not to the wickedness of them, nor does he ruin men for what he
contributes by Predetermination, or immediate concurrence to the Production of
(viz.) the natural actions he moves to and joins in.

Answ. 3. Mr. How denies the consequence from the evidence of two Scriptures
compared, Luke 6.9. Hos. 13.6. p. 35. but (which is strange) has not directed
us how he infers from them the denial of Mr. Gale's consequence, or how they
show a difference between the warrantableness of Gods concurring to the
substrate matter of an action as good, which tends to man's salvation and
blessedness, and to the substrate matter of all their evil actions [which tend
to their ruin and misery]; we must therefore guess at it as well as we can.

Reply. The former Scripture has these words, Is it lawful on the sabbath days
to do good or to do evil, to save life or to destroy? The latter these, O
Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help: From the former
Scripture, I presume, thus he argues: If it be unlawful to man to destroy life,
then it is unlawful to God. But the antecedent is true, therefore the
consequent. And he proves the consequence by the latter Scripture, by this
Enthymeme; Gods word is to help man. Ergo, it is unlawful for him to destroy.
And this, viz. that man destroys himself. Ergo, it is unlawful for God to
destroy him. To which, I return,

1. That the antecedent or minor of the first Syllogism, is not true
universally, for for it is not unlawful for man to destroy life, se defendendo,
i.e. in self-defence; but it must be limited to Homicide or murder, which
notes not barely the act of destroying life, but involves with it a vitiosity,
or that act done in cases prohibited by the divine Law.

2. Suppose it were, yet I deny the consequence, and you cannot be any
whit-ased or relieved by the thin Sophistry, of only a collusive ambiguity in
the word [Lawful,] which you must have recourse to. For suppose you take it in
the antecedent strictly, and in the consequent analogically, in the former, for
the declared pleasure of a ruler to his Subject; in the latter, for an habitual
fixed principle and rule of acting after one steady tenor, (which are both
your own distinctions and explications of the word Law), Let. p. 41. yet the
consequence is utterly false, because depending upon this false ground; that
whatever man may not do in regard of Gods Law, God himself may not do, because
of his own nature, or habitual fixed Principle and Rule of acting after one
steady nature, (as you something odly describe it). In this sense the subtle
Twisse rejects Zuinglius maxim, Quod nobis est Lex, Deo est ingenium and is
Gods nature to himself. Though in another sense he admits it, That such
obligation, as the divine Law lays upon us to do nothing repugnant to it, that
Gods nature lays upon him to do nothing repugnant to it. Now then, though it be
unlawful to man to kill in such cases as the Law exempts, yet it is not
contrary to Gods nature to kill, and so not unlawful to him.

3. To the Enthymeme, we deny the connection, that because in [or from] God is
man's help, that therefore it is unlawful for him to destroy, for how then does
God own himself the author of all evils of suffering, Amos 3.6, Shall there be
evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? And besides, we see not, such is
the dimness of our sight, how the consequence would be proved thereby, were the
connection granted.

The proofs subjoined hang together so loosly, that I cannot make sense of
them, and therefore will dismiss them.

Your general drift I am aware of, that you deny Predestination to evil
actions, though you concede it to good, because it seems more congruous to the
divine goodness to concur (a term that you will still use, though improper
enough, to signify that divine action, we call Predetermination, as has been
shown once and again) to actions that have good in them, rather than to these
that have evil in them, because the one tends to the salvation, the other to
the destruction of man. To which I answer: This Argument, if it has any weight
will bear as hard upon immediate concurrence, which you grant to all actions,
and so to sinful, as upon Predetermination; and whatever answer will relieve
you, will with the same hand ease us. I will pause a little with the Readers
leave, and try my skill what answer I can excogitate for Mr. How, which will
not be a common friend to us both, (as we have been hitherto one to another,
and I hope shall remain notwithstanding this public contest): I have thought
out my thoughts, and they afford me but three Answers.

1. That immediate concurrence, as to sinful actions, divides between the
action and the sinfulness; so that it is only the action as such, which is Gods
and man's at once: the sinfulness of it is to be attributed to man only. And
this distinction is an open friend to us, and to which therefore upon all fit
occasions we pay our respects.

2. That if it be granted divine concurrence is as immediate to evil, as to
good actions, (so as has been explained); yet that does not necessitate or
compel the will to any elicite act, [ i. e. inward acts of willing or nilling]:
neither does Predetermination judge it self guilty, as to any such crime; for
that does but put the creature upon that action, which is produced by Gods
immediate concurrence with it. And but that it waits a fitter time to speak out
her mind, she could say, That she conceives not how she can compel the will to
any act, without compelling God himself: seeing one and the same act thereof,
is as truly Gods as the creatures.

3. If immediate concurrence thinks her self disobliged to satisfy an
inquisitive curiosity, as to the modus or manner how she joines with the
creature in an action, to which sin does necessarily adhere, seeing the thing
it self is plain, that so strict is the dependence of the creature upon the
Creator, that it cannot act without Gods immediate concurrence:
Predetermination claims the same privilege upon the like ground, that the
creature cannot exert its natural powers, till they be applied to action, nor
determine it self to action, till it be determined; which determination cannot
include a compulsion of the will, (which is the main, if not the only
controversy), for if the will act spontaneously, and from precedent
deliberation, how is it forced? if it do not, how is it a will, i. e. a
rational appetite?

Arg. 4. (which is Mr. Gale's second), is, There is no action so sinful, that
it has not some natural good as the substrate of it, Postsc. p. 36.

Answ. 1. To which Argument, proposed by way of Question, Mr. How answers,
True.

Reply. But then, if that be true, your former position, that some actions are
evil in the substance of them, p. 33. must needs be false. Let us but formalize
the Opposition thus: some actions are so sinful that they have no natural good,
as the substrate matter of them; [which is the sense of the words just now
quoted] no actions are so sinful that they have not some natural good, as the
substrate matter of them; and it will appear, that they are propositions
contradictory, and consequently, that they cannot both be true. They are two
known Rules in Logic, contradictio est oppositio inter universalem and
particularem Enunciationem [aut propositionem] And, Harum alterutra semper
vera, and altera semper falsa.

Answ. 2. Mr. How presently flinches, and Sophister-like, puts more into the
conclusion, than was in the premises. And what must be inferred (says he) viz.
from his own concession, That therefore God must by a determinative influence
produce every such action [what-ever reason there be against it].

Reply. Those words included in the semiquadrates are injuriously foisted in.
For Mr. Gale's Argument entirely is thus, If there be no action so sinful, that
it has not some natural good as the substrate of it, then God is the cause,
(viz. by Predetermination) of that natural good that is in every action, sed
verum prius; Ergo and Posterius. And indeed the Argument it self excludes any
such addition. For there can be no reason against Gods production of what is
good in any action, unless it be (what Mr. How objects) the accidental
adherence of evil thereunto; which, if it be of any moment, militates as much
against immediate concurrence, (as has been shown but now). That passage of
Austins, opportunely offers its service to us, as to the force of Mr. Gale's
Argument, Deus boni tantummodo causa est, etc. i. e. God is only the cause of
good, therefore he is not the Anthor of evil; because he is the Author of all
things that are, which are so far good as they are. It Is indeed Mr. Gale's
Argument in other terms.

Answ. 3. Mr. How pretends, Mr. Gale might better argue from his premises, The
necessity of his producing every hour a new world; in which, there would be a
great deal more of positive entity and natural goodness, Postsc. p. 36.

Reply. This is too great a scorn to be cast upon so learned a man, as Mr. Gale
is well known to be. For there is no medium that can, with the least
probability, be judged likely to be able to tack Mr. Gales Antecedent, and Mr.
Howes consequent together. To be sure, not that which he suggests; for that is
false and unworthy of a Philosopher, at least if these maxims be true,
substantia non recipit magis and minus; ens and bonum convertibile; though it is
easy to conceive there would be more positive Beings in number, upon Mr.
Howe's supposition, yet it is hard to conceive there would be a great deal more
of positive entity, and so of natural goodness in the new world, than is
already in the old one.

Answ. 4. The natural goodness that is in the Entity of an action, is no such
invitation to the Holy God, by determinative influence to produce it, as that
he should offer violence to his own nature, and stain the justice and honor of
his government, by making it to be done, and then punish it, being done, p. 36.

Reply. 1. The natural goodness of an action, has invitation enough in it to
induce God to produce it, both because it is good, and because it cannot be
done without him.

2. By Mr. Howe's own concession, something or other does induce God to produce
it, by giving and conserving the powers, and immediate concurrence to the act
of those powers.

3. It remains upon Mr. How to prove, that the producing of an action by
determinative influence, is more liable to those absurdities he names, than the
producing it any other way, (except what Durandus pitches upon; which if he
will also own, then I know what I have to rejoyn). In the interim, I am ashamed
he should clog his Reader with, crambe bis cocta, coleworts twice sod; I mean,
an odious consequence imposed upon predeterminative influence, that it offers
violence to Gods nature, and stains the justice and honor of his Government;
which we shall deny, till he has proved, that by it God makes an action to be
done, i. e. in his sense necessitates it to be done, and then punishes it being
done; which last clause is very absurd in its connection, for it supposes a
contradiction, viz. that the action is naturally good, and yet, that God
punishes the natural goodness in it.

Arg. 5. (which is Mr. Gale's third and last). The denial of Predetermination,
even of sinful actions as such, cuts off the most illustrious part of divine
providence in governing the lower world, Postsc. p. 33.

Answ. I am ashamed to answer it. Name any act of providence, I hereby deny, if
you can, ibid. So Mr. How.

Reply. 1. This act of providence thereby you deny, which in words you own, to
limit and moderate sinful actions, Postsc. p. 45. This will appear by
considering what influence your mediate or immediate concurrence (for you do so
fluctuate, that I know not which of the two you will abide by), can have upon
this effect. The mediate can have none, for that is nothing else but a
conservation of the being, with its powers and faculties, and so but abusively
called concurrence or concourse; and so does but keep the powers indeterminate,
not determine, nor limit their acts: nor yet can immediate limit any action,
because as such, it is neither before nor after the creatures action, but with
it. The withdrawing of concourse immediate, may hinder, I grant, the creatures
action: but whether God does ever withdraw it or no, Strangius. L. 1. c. 11. p.
65. doubts, and so may you, perhaps, upon his ground. Let us, for the
exemplification of this limitation, consider it, with respect to those things
which it is conversant about.

1. As to the objects of its acts; as, that Absaloms Adultery with David's
wifes, rather than any other women. This is plain, by comparing 2 Samuel 12.11.
with Chap. 16.22. In the former place, the words are, Thus says the Lord,
Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house: and I will
take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor; and he
shall lie with thy wives in the sight of the Sun. In the latter place the event
answers the threat. And Absalom went in unto his Fathers Concubines in the
sight of all Israel.

2. As to the time, when, or how long the sinful acts shall be exercised about
their objects. When, Genesis 45.5, God did send me before you to preserve life,
says Joseph to his Brethren; whereas, they might not have sold him, till the
famine came. How long; That is intimated in Psalm. 125.3, The rod of the wicked
shall not rest upon the lot of the Righteous.

3. As to the event, or issue of the actions. That an oppressor shall
impoverish, not utterly undo him he does oppress: that he who strikes his
neighbor with an intent to kill him, shall yet but wound him.

4. As to the decree of the act, Psalm. 76.10, Surely the wrath of man shall
praise thee; the remainder of wrath thou shall restrain, (...), cinges,
ligabis; which I understand of binding up the faculty, that it put not forth
its utmost force in the act issuing from it: as when a man is but in a pet, as
we say, not outragiously angry. Thus God makes as great a difference between
the same man and himself, as a Rider does when he uses a strait rein, or lays
the bridle on his Horses neck.

2. The overruling and disposing of a sinful action to good, against the
design and inclination of the sinful Agent, Postsc. p. 45. n. 10. is an act of
Providence, which Mr How denies, in the denial of Predetermination. For
immediate concurrence is all that Mr. How allows of; which, being but Gods
action with the creature, and not existent before nor after it, cannot
therefore direct the action to any end. And particularly in punishing one sin
with another. As in the instance of Absalom; his Adultery with his Fathers
Concubines, was a punishment of David's Adultery with Vriah's Wife. In this and
such like instances, God is the Author, ordinis in malo, though not mali, as
the most learned Dr. Field, Dean of of Gloucester, expresses it, of the Church,
p. 131, 132). i. e. God is the Author of the order of consequence, that one
evil shall follow another, and have the reason of a punishment thereof; which
how he can be, is no way explicable, but by the Doctrine of Predetermination
which, importing an application of the creature to action, and to one rather
than another, and at one time rather than another, etc. (as has been shown)
gives an easy account, how God may dispose of sinful actions to good ends, and
particularly to this, to be punishments of preceding sins.

And now, it is high time that we take a view of Mr. Howe's Arguments, for the
negative of the Question hitherto discussed, for which we must return to his
Letter again, where he states the Thesis he opposes, as importing an
irresistble predeterminative concurrence to all actions of the creature, even
to those that are in themselves most malignantly wicked, Let. p. 32.

Reply. Here are diverse ambiguities in the terms (besides that of
predeterminative concurrence, which has been faulted already, as not very
proper).

1. The term irresistible; which may either import, a necessity of
infallibility, as to the event, or a necessity of coaction or compulsion. If he
takes it in the former sense, it is altogether improperly. For irresistible,
imports a relation of the action of the agent, to some resistance or
counteraction of the patient; as when the water endeavors to put out the fire,
which would lick it up; or in free agents, when a man with all his strength
resists him that by force would carry him away Prisoner. If he understands the
term in the latter and proper sense, I understand not why he imposes the term
upon our Thesis; for we do not assert any compulsion in Predetermination of the
will, nor can we conceive it possible in any case; not if we should suppose per
impossible, a rational creature made under no Law at all; for then as it would
have a power, and also an inclination to use it, so there would be no need of
any force to reduce it to act; not supposing it (as it is) under a Law, would
there be any need of compulsion, not as to good actions, because there are
gracious habits to dispose the will to actions congenerous; not as to evil
actions, (no not if God did predetermine to them as such) for the will in
regard of sinful habits is of it self inclined enough to any evil actions.

2. The term, in themselves most malignantly wicked. To which I say, that it
may be understood in a double sense, either with respect, to the different kind
of Laws that prohibit actions, thus; Those actions are said to be in themselves
evil which are a breach of the Law of nature, and so are opposed to those which
are evil only by a positive law; or else with reference to the degrees of
rectitude in one and the same Law; thus some actions are said to be in
themselves evil, when they are evil in regard of their object, as that is
opposed to the end and circumstances. Thus the hatred of God, and Adultery, are
in themselves evil, because no end or circumstance can make them good; but
giving Alms out of vain glory is not in it self evil, because changing the end,
the action is good, that before was bad.

But Mr. H. understands the term in another sense, and overlooks the genuine
signification of it; viz. thus, that wickedness is of the essence of some
actions. This I collect from that clause, Nothing is more apparently a simple
and most strictly natural impossibility, than to separate the malignity thereof
from an intrinsecally evil action, Let. p. 33. Now it is plain enough, if we
take the hatred of God, which is Mr. H's instance of an action in it self evil,
that the evil of that action is separable from it, for the same passion, if the
Devil be the object of it, is good. And the evil of this action is as separable
from it, as in actions that are evil, as to their circumstances. As to read the
Scriptures, when it is our present duty to hearken to the Sermon. The reason is
the same in both, the action of hatred is evil only in regard of the undue
object, and the action of reading the Scriptures only in regard of the undue
circumstance of time. And if Mr. H. understands actions in themselves evil, of
actions essentially evil, let him enjoy his own satisfaction, but let him not
impose it upon us, who look upon it as one of the greatest absurdities a
learned man can be guilty of believing. To state the Question therefore aright
(though we have done it before) we say, that we reject the term irresistible,
as not being in the Question, but being a begging of the Question, because it
supposes some force on Gods part the Agent, which the Creature as far as it can
resists. And we disown the distinction of actions, which Mr. H. introduces into
the Question, for we know of none that are in themselves malignantly wicked;
that is (in his sense) essentially evil. But that which we assert is, That God
does predetermine the Creature as well to the actions that are evil, as to
those that are good. Let us now hear his Arguments against our Assertion.

Arg. 1. If there be an irresistible determinative concurrence to all, and so
to wicked actions of the Creature, then the matter of all Gods Laws in
reference to all wicked actions was a simple and most strictly natural
impossibility. But the Antecedent is, Therefore we must own the consequent,
Let. p. 32.

Ans. 1. In general, If we take his words simply as they found, we see not but
we may grant the whole, with as little inconvenience to our assertion as to
his. For the consequence will be the same, if some of his assertions be placed
for an Antecedent in the room of ours. If God does certainly foreknow all, and
so all wicked actions of the Creature, then for the Creature not to do those
wicked actions, was a simple and most strictly natural impossibility. For it is
as truly impossible that ev^^ts should not be such as God fore^^ows they will
be; as that men should yield obedience to the Laws of God, when God hinders
them thorugh his own irresistible counteraction, Mr. H's phrase p. 37. Again,
we may argue thus, If there be an irresistible determinative concurrence to all
good actions of the Creature, then the matter of all Gods Laws in reference to
all good actions was a simple and most strictly natural impossibility; i.e. it
is simply impossible, that good men should not do those good actions, exacted
of them by the Law. As to this last, I cannot apprehend any reason why
Predeterminative concurrence to evil actions should make the avoiding of them
impossible; and the like concurrence to good actions should leave the neglect
of them possible.

2. But because Mr. H. intends more by Impossibility than the Predeterminants
can allow him, we shall borrow a little learning from the Schools for the
explication of it. It is a Question in Metaphysics, An possibile and
contingens a part rei aequipolleant; i.e. Whether for a thing to be possible
and contingent, (...) of the same signification or import? To which it is
answered affirmatively, Si possibile accipiatur pro eo quod sese habet
indifferenter ut sit; i. e. If for a thing to be possible be taken for an
indifferency to be or not to be. And by the like reason impossible and
necessary must be terms equipollent, if impossible be taken for that which is
not indifferent to be, and not to be; or, which as it is not, so nor can it be.
It Is true indeed, that Impossible is ^ontrary to Necessary; as Necessary is
taken generally for that which cannot but be, and Impossible for that which
cannot be: yet these two are equipollent, if the one be affirmed, the other
denied; for that which is necessary to be, is impossible not to be; and that
which is necessary not to be, is impossible to be; and on the other hand, That
which is impossible to be, is necessary not to be; and that which is impossible
not to be, is necessary to be. We must therefore make a little enquiry into the
kinds of necessity, which as to things is either simple, or compound. The
latter (for the former is irrelative to our business) agrees to things in their
cohesion or connection each with other; this is divided into a necessity of the
consequent, and of consequence, or absolute, and respective. The former is a
connection of those things which cannot be severed without a contradiction; i.e.
destroying the nature of their subject. So justice to God, reason to man, agree
so necessarily to their subjects, that if you deny either, you do in effect
deny them to be what they are, The latter, a necessity whereby those things
that are not in their own nature conjoined, are yet upon supposition of
something antecedent conjoined for this or that time. Whence Baronius calls the
former, a necessity of nature; the latter, an accidental necessity. Of this
latter sort is this example, If Islanders will export Goods out of their own
Country, they must make use of Ships. And from these modes of necessity it is
easy to collect the modes of Impossibility, That something is, said to be
impossible, either absolutely, which involves a contradiction, as for a stone
to be a man; or respectively, as if a man will fly that he should have wings.
And here we may stop a while and observe how Mr. H. has gratified his own
unscholastick humor, in neglecting the strictness of Scholastic terms, to the
overthrow of his own assertion. For I am much mistaken if it is not plain
enough that Mr. H. confounds the distinction of necessity or impossibility,
into absolute and respective; and makes the matter of Gods Laws, etc. upon
supposition of Gods irresistible determination to wicked actions, to be an
impossibility of both kinds, and so of neither. For if it be an impossibility
only upon Hypothesis of Determinative influence, how is it a simple and
strictly natural impossibility? If it be a simple, etc. impossibility, how is
it an impossibility only upon an Hypothesis? [ viz. that now mentioned.]

Way being thus made by explication of the Terms, to the antecedent or minor, I
answer by denial, That the Determinative Influence to all wicked actions we
assert, does infer any coaction on the Will.

Arg. If Determination of the Will imports Coaction, or is inconsistent with
the freedom of the Will; then it is either from some general reason agreeing to
all Determination, or from some special reason agreeing only to this
Determination, viz. to sinful actions; but neither of these: Ergo, it does not
import any such thing at all; no Determination of the Will in general does
import Coaction, or destroy its liberty.

1. Upon Mr. H's own concession of a Predetermination of good actions, Post. p.
39. which I presume he will not assirm to be compulsory; yet because I cannot
see a reason why he should not, (as well as of evil actions) I will suppose him
to acknowledge it. And then I would demand whether God compels men to the
natural actions as such, or to them as morally good. Not to the natural actions
as such, but to them there is no need of it, for the powers that produce them,
are apt and habile for any congenerous action, by Mr. H's confession, Post. p.
45. Not to the actions as good, for the powers being renewed by Grace, (so far
as they are such) need but an excitation, not a compulsion.

2. It appears from the general principle of Divines, Libertas a coactione est
essentialis voluntatis proprietas; i. e. That liberty from force and compulsion
is an essential property of the will. Which may be thus evinced. 1. By the
nature of the wills liberty, that it is (...), spontaneum intellectuale; i.e.
spontaneum praeeunte intellectus lumine vel judicio, as Strange. acknowledges,
De Vol. Dei, p. 686. That is, an Intellectual spontaneity. A spontaneity in
opposition to the acting of necessary agents, such as the Sun in shining; and
Intellectual, to distinguish it from that spontaneity which agrees to brutes,
or to mankind, who are acted by fancy, without previous judgment, as Infants,
Fools, Madmen, who whilst they remain such, are brutes in the shape of men
and women.

2. It appears by the repugnancy of the terms in conjunction. For the Will to
be forced is but invita aliquid velle, i. e. to will any thing unwillingly;
which were to will and not will the same object at the same time, which is an
implicit contradiction.

2. It Is not from any peculiar reason agreeing to sinful actions. If there be
any, Mr. H. would befriend the world to bring it to light. Which will appear,

1. Upon Mr. H's grounds, if Coaction be inseparable from compulsion, upon any
special reason agreeing to one sort of actions, rather than another, it must be
with respect to good actions, not to evil. For God determines the Will by
irresistible grace, to such actions as by nature since the fall it is averse
unto; and remains so in a degree after the blessed change it has undergone:
whereas the Will having a natural Bias to evil, [as it is not, so nor] does it
need to be predetermined, i.e. forced, [if Mr. How be a faithful interpreter
of the word.]

2. There are manifest indications of liberty in sinful actions, pregnant
proofs that man has not only potentiam in se liberam, but liberum usum
potentiae; i.e. a power in it self free, but as to them a free use of his
power. An instance of his own, hatred of God, will serve our turn. This act
must be spontaneous, or it is not the act of an humane will, which is an
[intellectual] appetite; no, nor of a sensitive appetite, for to this last
spontaneity is essential, and intellectual too: and so it is, for it proceeds
from, and is guided by a precedent [though mistaken] judgment of the
understanding, which represents God to him as a Tyrant, that abuses his
authority by needless restraints upon man's natural inclinations. Suppose to
unchastity with any woman whose skin and features attract his liking. Joseph's
Brethrens hatred of him, was determined by God to the selling, rather than
killing of him; yet as they acted spontaneously, so upon precedent
consideration. Two Reasons determined their choice of the milder course of the
two they had in view, He is our Brother, and our Flesh, and what profit is it
if we slay him, and conceal his blood? Genesis 37.26.

3. If there be any reason to infer Coaction from Predetermination, it must be
the inconsistency of necessity on Gods part, and contingency on man's: Which if
it be universally affirmed,

1. Then I know not how Mr. How will salve the objection against immediate
concurrence, [which he seems to grant,] that thereby the liberty of the will
seems to be lost, both as to the exercise and specification of the act. Unless
as Burgesdicius does, (whose solution offers it service, he being the first
Metaphysick Author that ever I read,) That the concourse of God takes not away
the contingency of voluntary actions, because it does not precede the action of
the second cause. Burg. Met. l. 2. c. 11. n. 9. But then that reason (if
assented to) will give a mortal wound to the Predestination (which certainly
precedes them) of good actions, which Mr. H. acknowledges: or if he will loose
the knot artificially, he must say that the concourse of God is so accommodated
to the nature and manner of the creatures acting, that notwithstanding it,
natural causes act necessarily, and voluntary causes contingently, or freely;
and then the same answer will fit Predetermination of free agents to all their
actions.

2. The denial of the consistency between liberty and necessity in general,
will bear as hard upon (what we grant, and Mr. H. cannot deny) actions in
themselves good, as Amor Dei, the love of God; as it can do upon (what we deny,
and you assert) actions in themselves evil, as odium Dei, the hatred of God.
And harder, for the Will is but in part free to good actions, when as it is
wholly free, I mean disposed and inclined to evil actions. We are now the
better prepared by way thus made, to answer Mr. H's proofs of his consequence.
Which are,

1. Not to do an action whereto the agent is determined by an infinite power is
impossible, Let. p. 33. Ergo, not to do wicked actions, [for that is the sum of
his consequent, in his Hyp. Syll. whereof this Enthymeme is a proof] to which
the creature is determined is impossible.

Rep. 1. In general, that [supposing his Antecedent true, as it is in the sense
before given] yet the impossibility he speaks of is not a simple and most
strictly natural impossibility, which he before asserted; but an impossibility
respective, to the determination of an infinite power, (as has been proved.)

R. 2. That if he intends a respective or conditional impossibility, I grant
his Enthymeme, for it hurts our Hypothesis no more than his, viz. of
determination to good actions. For all determination does infer a necessity,
that the thing determined should be, as it is determined to be; or an
impossibility, that the thing determined should not be, as it is determined to
be.

Rep. 3. If we must supply from the Hypoth. major, the term irresistibly to
modifie the determination he opposes, and we must understand by it compulsion
or force, we again concede the whole without any disadvantage to us. And so we
may rid our hands of it, as an ignoble begging of the Question, for that was
incumbent on him to prove, not to take for granted, that our Predetermination
imports a Coaction.

Mr. H's second Enthymeme is this, To separate the malignity of an action
intrinsecally evil is impossible, p. 33. Ergo, not to do such wicked actions to
which the creature is determined, is impossible.

Rep. 1. Granting his Antecedent for Arguments sake, I cannot imagine how he
will defend the immediate concurrence of God to all the actions of his
creatures; and so to sinful actions, and so to those (if there be any such) as
are in themselves evil, against the charge of involving God in the production
of sinful actions, as such, seeing by Divine immediate concurrence the
intrinsecally evil action is as much Gods as man's action. Baronius and
Strangius (who are as Heterodox as Mr. H.) do both confess, that it is very
hard to show how God may be freed from that charge, when as he co-operates with
the creature to every sinful action. Bar. Met. 98. D. 3. n. 72. Strange. de Vol.
Dei. p. 344, 372. Though Mr. H. would lay the great difficulty and encumbrance
inferred upon our Religion, only upon Predeterminative concourse to wicked
actions. Yet, the Learned Amesius, a Predeterminant, tells us not without
reason, Deformitas moralis magis annexa videtur actui in exercito, quam in
applicatione ad agendum. Cont. Grev. p. 189. i.e. Moral deformity seems more
closely joined to action, than to application unto action. For an object may be
innocently presented to the eye, which may put a man upon action, viz. unchaste
desires.

Rep. 2. We will grant the Antecedent, ex animo, because it does implicate,
that there should be any such action. It Is a received maxim, Malum est in bono,
tanquam in subjecto, i.e. Evil is in good, as in its subject. And Augustine's
saying is well known, and as well approved, Ipsum quantulum-cunque esse bonum
est, quia summum esse bonum est. De vera Rel. c. 34. i.e. Being it self how
inconsiderable soever is good, because the chiefest Being is good.

R. 3. We deny that there cannot be a separation of an action, from the evil of
it. Of this separation there are many instances: supposing Usury lawful, (which
I will not now dispute) I may lawfully take up money at use at Ten pounds per
Cent. (if my necessity require it) when the Interest allowed by Law (which to
break in matters of public benefit is sinful) is but 6 l. A Christian Prince
may urge the great Turk to swear to Articles of Peace, though the former knows
the latter will swear by his Mahomet. These are instances of our concurrence to
the actions of others in a remoter kind, [than God does concur to the actions
of his creature] as Mr. H. speaks in another case, Post. p. 33. And by the like
reason may God Predeterminatively concur (as Mr. H. delights to speak, though
not accurately) to an action that is evil, and yet not to the evil of it; which
the Learned Twisse illustrates by diverse pretty similitudes. An Horseman that
puts on a lame horse to go, is the cause of his motion, not of his halting,
that proceeds from some hurt in his leg, the instrument of motion. The Sun by
his warmth makes the dunghill stink, of which stink that that warmth is not the
cause appears, in that the very same influence draws forth a fragrant savor
from a bed of Roses. That the dunghill smells is from the Suns drawing forth
the vapour^, but that it smells ill is from the condition of the matter. The
upper-wheel of a Clock, though by its motion it draws along with it an
under-wheel, that is irregular in its motion, yet it is not the cause of that
irregularity. When a dexterous Penman writes upon sinking paper he makes
[pothooks, as we say of children that begin to learn the art of writing] blots
rather than letters, which yet is not his fault, but the Papers. Twisse Vind.
Gr. l. 2. p. 1 a. p. 26.

Reply. 4. There must needs be a separation [and therefore it is possible to be]
between actions, and the evil of them upon Mr. Howe's own Hypothesis (viz.)
That God does predetermine to all good actions, which in the present state are
but imperfectly good. Here he must distinguish between the efficiency of God
and man, as to the same action, and ascribe the action and grace of it to God,
and the evil that adheres to that action to man, unless he will ascribe all to
God. Absit blasphemia verbo! If Mr. How can extricate himself, and not us with
the same Answer; or rather, if he can excogitate any other Answer, than by this
exsibilated distinction -- erit mihi magnus Apollo, and without an Irony,
sapientum octavus.

Reply. 2. To the connection. I Answer, That it infolds a twofold contradiction.

1. For it supposes some actions to be intrinsecally evil, and yet (by our
Hypothesis), to be determined, i. e. compelled, (if Mr. How may be admitted
our Interpreter); whereas, that is not sin which is not spontaneous, neither is
that spontaneous which is necessary, i. e. violent [or compell'd]. For violence
is a Physical action upon the Patient; in which sort of actions virtue or vice
has no place: for the will is the principle of moral actions. So the learned
Camero de Scand. p. 98. [where note, that I presume Camero denies not original
sin imputed, to be suo modo, i. e. in its kind voluntary, [and so truly sin],
according to St. Austins sentiments, nos omnes eramus ille unus homo, i.e. we
were all that one man, [Adam], and so sinned in him. This to prevent any
misapprehension].

2. It supposes sin to have an efficient cause, whereas it is a known Rule in
Divinity, Peccatum qua tale and essentialiter est effectus moralis, and non
habet causam Physicam, i. e. Sin as such, and essentially is a moral effect,
and has no Physical cause.

Reply 3. Having given an Answer to Mr. Howe's Antecedent, and Connection, we
shall now proceed to raze the foundation of his Hypothesis, by proving, that
there are no actions of free agents evil in themselves; or that no moral evil
is positive, but only privative, (which latter are the common terms of
Philosophers and Divines, in enquiring into the nature of moral evil). And I
shall borrow one Argument, which will be instead of all, from the most learned
Dr. Barlow, the now Renowned Bishop of Lincoln.

Arg. Every real and positive Being is from God the author and first cause of
all Being. But moral evil [formally] taken, is not from God the author and
first cause of all Being. Ergo, moral evil [formally taken] is not a real and
positive Being.

The Minor is evident, and acknowledged by the very Heathens, in the
appellation of Optimus, the Best, which they apply to their Jupiter, together
with Maximus the Greatest: [And will no doubt be owned by Mr. How; who, eo
nomine, for that very reason, rejects Predestination of evil actions, because,
in his apprehension, it makes God the author of moral evil].

The Major, let us hear the learned Bishop prove, [and the rather, because it
will much confirm our first Argument for Predetermination of all actions as
such].

Proof. Because it is impossible that there should be any finite and created
Being, which does not depend, and has its Being from an infinite and uncreated
Being, [viz. God]; for it must needs be, if there be any Being not caused by
God, that that Being be independent upon God as the first cause; and
consequently, God shall not be the first cause in respect of that Being, whence
follow many absurdities, etc. [whereof I shall only take the sum, as himself
has given it us, with an application to moral evil]. If moral evil, [i.e. any
sin or breach of Divine Law], be a real Being; then, 1. God shall not be the
cause of that Being; for of so deformed a birth, divine goodness cannot be the
Parent. 2. This granted, it will follow, 1. That there is a secondary Being,
and a Being by participation, [such as every finite Being is supposed to be];
which does not partake of [or receive its] being from the first Being. 2. That
there is a finite Being independent upon God, both as to production and
conservation. All which things we know, and believe are contrary, not only to
Philosophy, but Divinity. Thus far the most acute Philosopher and Divine,
Exercit. metaph. 2 a. de natura mali, ad calcem Scheib. met. p. 32, 33.

Let us take notice of the instances of those sins, which are supposed to be
evil in themselves, [or positive].

Obj. 1. Sins of commission which are evil, ex genere and objecto; (whereof two
are specially insisted on: Adams eating of the forbidden fruit, and [by Mr.
Howe] the hatred of God) are in themselves evil.

Answ. 1. In general. If all sins subsist in some actual motion of the soul,
body, or both, and this motion abstractively considered, be the material part
of every actual sin, and has God for the prime cause, in whom we live, and
move, and have our being; then no sin can be assigned, wherein this material
part may not be found. So the Learned Davevant, sometime Bishop of Sarisbury,
Animadv. on Hoard, p. 174, 175.

Answ. 2. As to the instances. The first, in eating the forbidden fruit, the
material part of the sin, in regard of the Soul was the appetition thereof; in
regard of the body, the mastication [chewing] and manducation [eating], and
other bodily acts. Separate these from the formal part, which is modus
appetendi, the manner of desiring, and contains a repugnancy to Gods command,
and God was the prime author thereof. The act of desiring and eating must of
necessity be reduced to God, without whom there neither is nor can be any
motion of body or soul: but the disorderly manner of desiring and eating
contrary to the Law of God, this is reducible (as being a defect) only to the
defective will of man, Davenant. ibid. p. 175. As to the second instance,
hatred of God; That the act terminated upon that object, in complexo, is evil,
and cannot be otherwise, we deny not; but then, that is true of acts and undue
ends, as Hospitality out of vainglory; of acts and undue circumstances, as
walking in the Fields, when we should be at Church; as of acts and undue
objects, whereof this is an instance. And so all sinful actions are evil, as to
their substance, which Mr. How has not affirmed. That hatred of God is not
evil in it self, because the act invaried, the object but changed, that act
which was evil, is become morally good. So our Learned Bishop of Lincoln,
again, Exerc. met. p. 41. which he illustrates and proves by the instance of
Adultery, where the act being the same for the substance, is altered in its
moral respect, by making the woman, with whom I committed Adultery, my wife,
Id. ibid. Which instance of our Learned Bishop is plain, in the case of David
and Bathsheba, whose society together was unlawful before, but lawful after
their marriage. They that desire further satisfaction in this point, may do
well to have recourse to a learned Discourse in our native Language, of Mr. H.
Hickman, of the positivity of sin.

Obj. 2. One sin is the cause of another, as original sin inherent [as that
stands opposed to original sin imputed] is the cause of actual sins; therefore
sin is not merely privative.

Sol. The privation which is in the natural propension of the will to sin, [in
which natural propension original sin consiste], is not the real efficient of
evil actions; but the will, in regard of that propension, is the real and true
cause of evil actions. So Baron. wet.. 5. n. 30. and 33.

Obj. 3. Our Divines do make a positive part in original sin.

Sol. Yet they hold sin to be only Privative. But then it will be demanded how
their assertions will agree together.

I Answer, In inherent sin there is said to be a positive and a negative
Quality. This latter Divines call a want of original righteousness, or not to
be able to do good. The former, they call a pravity of nature, or to be able to
do evil only, which is called Positive Legice, because it is expressed
affirmatively; whereas the latter is expressed negatively: so Maccov. op. Post.
p. 83. [r. fuse de hac re disserentem Gisb. Voet. Disp. Theol. p. 1. p. 1084

Arg. 2. If God has a prede erminative concurrence to the most wicked actions,
it is then no way explicable how the influence and concurrence the holy God
has to the worst of actions, is to be distinguished from that which he affords
to the best; wherein such inherently evil actions are less to be imputed to him
who forbids them, than to the malicious Tempter, who prompts to them, or to the
actor that does them, or wherein not a great deal more? Let. p. 32, 33. which
Argument Mr. How gives us more concisely afterward, That God has as much
influence and concurrence to the worst actions, as to the best; as much or more
than the sinner or the Tempter, Postsc. p. 25. [ viz. according to our
Doctrine].

Answ. 1. If our learned Adversary understands the antecedent, as we do whom he
opposes, of the materiale of wicked actions, we grant his consequence: for we
cannot yet see the inconvenience of owning, that there is an universal or
indifferent influence upon the actions of free Agents, as such, abstracted from
their morality. The actions of the understanding and will Physically
considered, are neither holy nor sinful; those denominations being taken from
the relation of the actions to the Law prescribed, as a compliance with, or
deviation from it: and therefore, in linea Physica, Gods influence and
concurrence is the same, when they are the substrate matter of moral evil, and
moral good.

2. If he intends the formale, or rather, the most wicked actions, in concreto,
we disown the antecedent as none of ours, and complain of his disingenuity in
pinning such an assertion upon our sleeve.

3. Yet however, for his satisfaction, I shall let him know, That (besides the
influence upon good and bad actions in what degree soever, which we acknowledge
common to both) there are diverse differences of the influence we own for
distinguishing of good actions from bad.

1. That as to good actions God does, in genere physico, re create those
internal habits, which he did concreate in the state of innocence, with the
several faculties, in which they were respectively seated, (as knowledge in the
understanding; a rectitude of the will, consisting in a compliance with the
last dictates of the practical understanding); that they might be [actus primi,
or] principles of [the actus secundi, or] operations of the faculties, [in
virtue of those habits], which [faculties] he influences to reduce them to act,
by that influence which we call Predetermination. But as to evil actions, God
insuses no evil, neither indeed can he (besides the repugnancy such an action
would carry to his holiness); because, though sin be sometimes conceived by us,
per modum habitus positivi, under the notion of a positive habit, yet it is not
properly so, and so is not capable of production by that immediate efficiency,
(which we call infusion), as has been, in part, demonstrated before.

2. As to good actions God does in the Predetermination to them, so excite to
the action, as that withal he adds new strength to the habits given, whence
those acts immediately proceed; which he does not neither as to evil actions.

3. We have a third difference from Mr. H's own concession: The ordinary
appointed way for the communication of this determinative influence is by our
intervening consideration of the inducements which God represents to us in his
Word, viz. The Precepts, Promises, and Comminations, which are th. moral
instruments of his Government. Postsc p. 40. The meaning of which words, is,
that God is not only a Physical, but also a moral cause of good actions:
whereas it is our sentiment, that God is only a Physical cause of the actions to
which sin inheres, but not a moral cause of the sin adhering to them. And (if I
do not too much trust my own judgment) this observation is not contemptible for
the evincing of it; that the indifferency of the will to choose or refuse the
Object proposed by the understanding, is not so natural to the will, but that
it may be inclined by an inherent quality to choose or refuse one object rather
than another.

As for the comparison which he makes between God, the sinner and the Tempter,
(upon our grounds), and gives God the precedence of them both in his influence
upon wicked actions, it is an odious and horrible calumny, not backed with any
proof; as he intends it of such actions in the concrete, i. e. as including
with the action the sinfulness of it too.

Reply. To it I reply, That a short Horse is soon curried. This slight
objection is easily answered.

1. Either Mr. How means as much physical influence, or moral: If the former,
we say God and the sinner have both a physical influence, upon the action that
is evil, but the Tempter none at all; and that, as to the evil of it, their
physical influence is alike, i. e. they have none at all; for sin not being a
physical effect, cannot have a physical cause. If the latter, (besides that
that influence is not in the Question), the Sinner and the Tempter have
influence and concurrence to wicked actions, and God not at all: for neither by
Commands, Counsels, Threats, nor Promises, does he induce men to sin.

2. Were it so; yet the immediate concurrence, which he acknowledges to all
actions, and so to sinful actions; in conjunction with the notion he entertains
with self-applause, of the inseparableness of the evil of some actions from the
actions themselves, makes himself obnoxious to the same charge of making Gods
concurrence with sinful actions, to be as much or more than the Sinners, or the
Tempters.

Arg. 3. Lastly, he charges the Predetermination of sinful actions with
irreconcilableness with Gods wisdom and sincerity, etc. Postsc. p. 25. by
which, etc. I presume he intends, in his Counsels, Exhortations, and whatever
means he uses to prevent them, (which are the expressions he uses in the
Title Page of his Letter, in reference to Prescience).

Reply. As to both of these perfections of God, I am not aware of any thing
well said by Mr. How, for the reconcileableness of Gods Prescience with them,
which may not by a just proportion be applied to Gods Predetermination. For the
evincing whereof, we will cast his Discourse into Paragraphs.

1. To speak particularly of Gods wisdom.

1. That there should be a direct and explicit contradiction between
fore-knowing and dehorting, we may at first sight perceive the terms cannot
admit, Let. p. 51.

Reply. The same may be said of Predetermining, and dehorting, though not
simply as to the terms, yet as to the things signified by them; for the elicite
acts of the will, being the Object of Predetermination, [contested for], we may
at first sight perceive it cannot be compelled; and so as to the event, infers
but a necessity of infallibility, as to the sinners doing what he is dehorted
from, (which also Prescience does).

2. Mr. How goes on, Let it be supposed only, that the blessed God has
belonging to his nature universal Prescience, we will surely, upon that
supposition, acknowledge it to belong to him as a perfection. And were it
reasonable to affirm that by a perfection he is disabled for Government? or were
it a good consequence, he foreknows all things, he is therefore unfit to govern
the world? Let. p. 54.

Reply. And why may not we as well argue thus, Let it be but supposed only,
that universal Predetermination belongs to Gods nature, we will upon that
supposition acknowledge it a perfection. And were it reasonable to affirm, that
by a perfection [that he not only conserves the powers of his creatures, but
reduces them to act] he is disabled for government; or were it a good
consequence, He is the first cause, [not only of all beings], but of all
actions as such, therefore he is unfit to govern the world? And I will add; nay
surely, but the more fit in the present state of mankind, [not to intermeddle
now with Angels], because all the actions of men, being either in whole or in
part sinful, he would have nothing to govern, if he had not the government of
all their actions; and govern them he could not, nor limit them, nor turn them
to good, if he did not Predetermine them, (as has been, I trust, clearly
evinced).

3. Would the supposition of such foreknowledg in God make that cease to be
man's duty, which had otherwise been so? Let. p. 54. for what influence can
foreknowledg have to alter or affect any way, either the nature of the thing
foreknown, or the Temper of the person that shall do it, any more than the
present knowledge of the same thing now in doing? p. 55.

Reply. And can Predetermination make that cease to be man's duty, which
otherwise had been so? seeing that it alters not the nature of the thing: [the
will of man], nor the Temper of the person [Predetermin'd]; but as it finds the
will free, so it leaves it; and as it finds the person disposed by habitual
inclinations, so works upon him; which is confirmed, by that grave observation
of his, which we embrace as our cordial friend, and confederate. It were very
unreasonable to imagine, that God cannot in any case, extraordinarily oversway
the inclinations, and determine the will of such a creture, as over whom Gods
general course of Government is by moral instruments, [viz. Man], in a way
agreeable enough to its nature, Let. p. 141. Only we extend it further, That
supposing, (what has been before proved), that Predetermination includes a
Perfection, God can in all cases determine the will, without forcing it to
actions to which it has a renitency; for that were to alter the nature of the
will, and the temper of the person whose will it is. And I add, what influence
can fore-determining have to alter the nature of the thing, or person
fore-determined, more than immediate concurrence to the same action, of the
same person, now in doing?

4. But if what was otherwise man's duty, be still his duty, what can make it
unfit, that it be made known and declared to him to be so? and how is that
otherwise to be done, than by these disputed means? yea, (for this is the
case), what can make it less fit, than that God should quit the right of his
Government to his revolted creatures, upon no other reason, than only that he
foresees they have a mind to invade it? Let. p. 56.

Reply. All this Argumentation fits our Predetermination as well as Prescience,
(wherein Mr. How and we agree): what can make it unfit that God should
acquaint man with his duty, by proper means, seeing Predetermination supposes
such a foreknowledg (as Mr. How supposes, antecedent to Gods decree) of the
creatures having a mind to invade Gods right of Government, if put under such
and such circumstances; or rather, (because we understand not any foreknowledg,
but of Possibilium, things possible, not Futurorum, of things future,
antecedent to Gods decree) seeing Gods determination of the Creatures will to
invade his right, without which he could not will so to do, leaves the
Creatures will as truly free from Co-action, as if it exerted all its elicite
acts, only by a power derived from God, and preserved apt and habile for action.

4. But it may now be said, All this reasoning, (says Mr. How), tends but to
establish this assertion; that notwithstanding God did foreknow man's sin, it is
however necessary he forewarn him of it: but it answers not the objected
difficulty, (viz.) How reasonably any such means are used for an unattainable
end: as it manifests the end, man's obedience cannot be attained, when it is
foreknown he will not obey, Let. p. 57.

To this difficulty Mr. How answers, That there is this noble and important
end, which Gods Edicts aim at, (viz.) the Dignity and Decorum of his Government
it self. And that he may be found in every thing to have done as became him,
and most worthy of himself. And what could be more so, than to testify his
aversion to whatsoever is unholy, his love of righteousness, and complacency to
be imitated herein, together with his propension to make them happy, who do
imitate him, p. 61. [I take here but the sum of Mr. Howe's words, because they
contain nothing controversal].

Reply. Whether this Discourse affords us any new consideration or no, yet we
can claim the benefit of it in the fullest extent of it to Prescience, as to
Predetermination also.

2. As to Gods sincerity, the difficulty may still urge, how it can stand with
sincerity; whereas that end also which fails, [viz. man's obedient compliance
with Gods Declarations of his will, p. 60.] seems to have been most directly
intended, etc. p. 65. To which Mr. How answers.

1. That the public Declarations of the Divine will do attain that very end in
great part, and as to many, and are the successful means of obtaining it, p. 66.

Reply. And so they do upon our Hypothesis, who acknowledge God first infuses
gracious habits into some, and then determines the powers in which these habits
reside, to congenerous actions; which yet excludes not the use of Gods Edicts,
as means of educing those actions: which because they are vital and free
passing from the Will, upon a comparison made in the Understanding between the
Goodness of the Objects proposed to it, do require a moral cause, whereby the
Agent may both understand the Object, and by Arguments be induced to embrace
it, (as the Learned Parker observes, These. de Trad. Pecc. ad vitam Th. 27.)

2. Nor was it necessary that those who would obey should be severed from the
rest, and be dealt withal apart, etc. p. 67.

Rep. This we also assent heartily unto.

3. Nor was it necessary, that effectual care should be taken that they should
actually reach all, and be applied to every individual person, p. 67.

Rep. Here is a strange loss we are put to for an Antecedent to the Relative,
They. The only one that I can meet with is, public declarations of the Divine
will touching man's duty, p. 66. and Divine Edicts, p. 67. and I cannot fathom
the reason of the denial of their necessity to their two ends by himself
assigned, Man's Obedience, and the Decorum of the Divine Government; at least if
he means by them the Gospel, (as I gather from his after-discourse.) If he
intends by his Relative They, determinative influences to holy actions, to
which the nature of man is now viciously inclined, (as he elsewhere speaks,
Post. p. 40, and 35, compared) I cannot find that Antecedent in his whole
Discourse foregoing: yet the following passages might give a suspicious person
some ground to pitch upon this latter for Mr. H's meaning. And thus [by
messengers running from Nation to Nation, some to communicate, others to
inquire after the tidings of the Gospel] how easily, and even naturally would
the Gospel soon have spread it self through the world? Let. p. 69. I confess
that term naturally will not down with me: for I have always seen cause to own
Dr. Sibs's weighty observation, in his Souls Conflict, That though there are
seeds of the Law, yet there are none of the Gospel in man by nature. But upon
second thoughts to do Mr. H. all the right I can, out of love to his person,
and the truth, I find, That the They refers to the Divine Edicts of the Gospel,
which he supposes not needful to be immediately by the Ministry; but the
transmission of it from those that have heard it published by them, may suffice
to others. But to what end he expatiates upon this I do not know; though I do
what ill use Mr. John Goodwin in his Pagans debt and dowry, makes of this very
notion. Sed meliora spero.

4. Nor was it incongruous that God should provide by some extraordinary means
that his gracious tenders might not finally be rejected by all. Let. p. 74.

Rep. Yet it seems not of such absolute necessity (as I always conceived it to
be) if by the dispensations of God toward the whole community of mankind,
[whereof he reckons instances, and addes] they might understand God to have
favorable propensions toward them, and that though they have offended him, he
is not their implacable enemy; and might by his goodness be led to repentance.
Let. p. 75, 77, compared. For thus Mr. John Goodwin argues against the absolute
necessity of the Gospel strictly taken. And in Phrases so near, that my fancy
is ready to abuse me with a mistake, that not J. H. but J. G. is now
discoursing. Romans 2.4, The long-suffering of God and goodness of God are said
to lead men to Repentance, because they testify according to a rational and
clear interpretation, a willingness and readiness in God to receive all such
into grace and favor with himself, who shall unfeignedly repent of their sins.
So Mr. Goodwin, Pagans debt and dowry, page 13. And he adds, There is no other
consideration but this, (at least none without this) in respect whereof the
patience and bountifulness of God can be said to lead, i.e. to persuade or
invite to repentance. There is no motive or persuasive, whereof sinners are
capable unto repentance, without hope of pardon upon repentance. Id. Ib. And
concludes you see it clear from the Scripture, that even Heathen men, and those
that want the History of the Gospel have yet a sufficiency of means whereby to
believe, and so to prevent the wrath and indignation which is to come. Mr.
Goodwin, Ib. p. 14. I must profess I am none of Mr. J. G's Proselytes, who ever
be; nor was Mr. Obadiah How, a most worthy person, and kinsman of our Learned
Antagonist, who has learnedly and largely confuted him, in a Tract entitled
significantly, The Pagan Preacher silenced, out of whom I shall transcribe his
Answer to Mr. J. G's Explication of Romans 2.4. of Heathens. This second Chapter
relates to the Jews, whom he reprehends because by their Law they would condemn
the Gentiles as sinners, when they committed the same things. But that the
patience [and goodness of God] afforded to the Jews was without the word, I
think Mr. G. will not affirm, which is the cause why the Apostle concludes the
Jews under a great inexcusability, because the ministry of the word superadded
to the light of nature, became not efficacious to restrain them from sin; and
from this very Argument he argues against the Jews, v. 17, 18. still supposing
that these persons enjoying the patience of God, v. 4. had the letter of the
Gospel. So far Mr. Ob. How, p. 52.

5. As to those with whom Gods Methods succeed not well, it is to be
considered, that he does not apply himself to every (or to any person)
immediately, and severally, after some such tenor of speech as this; I know
thee to be a profligate, hopeless wretch, and that thou will finally disregard
whatsoever I say to thee, and consequently perish, and become miserable. But
however (though I foresee most certainly thou will not, yet I entreat thee to
hear and obey, and live. Let. p. 79. And afterward, What is endeavored for
the reducement of such -- is by substituted Ministers, that know no more of the
event than they do themselves, p. 81.

Rep. Nor does God apply himself to sinners in such a tenor of speech with
reference to Predetermination of those natural actions; which because such need
a cause acting efficiently for the production of them: though he knows (without
special grace which to them he affords not) a moral obliquity will adhere to
them. And it is as true, that what God does for the reducement of them is by
Ministers, who know as little who are Predetermined to good, and who to sinful
actions, as the Saints or Sinners so Predetermined.

Having discoursed thus more laxely, Mr. H. proceeds to a more strict
disquisition of two things.

1. What may be alleged out of Gods word in reference to them that finally
perish in their wickedness, which can be thought not consistent with sincerity
to have inserted, upon the supposed foresight of so dismal an issue? Let. p.
82. And he instances in Gods professing to will the salvation of all, 1 Timothy
2.4, Not to desire the death of him that dies, Ezekiel. 18.32; Yea, and
professes himself grieved that any perish, Psalm 81.12, 13. Ib.

In answer to which Scripture in general (besides many things said well): he
says, That which Gods declarations do amount unto is, etc. That if they neglect
to attend to these external discoveries of the word, etc. they are not to
expect he should overpower them by a strong hand, and save them against the
continual disinclination of their own wills. p. 89, 90.

Reply. I am not able to make sense of the last words: For I understand not
what overcoming by a strong hand (in a sinners case) God can make use of, that
leaves the will under disinclination to salvation; And they seem to be
repugnant to another Clause referring to the same persons: that they cannot
promise themselves such power shall be used with them, as shall finally
overcome their averse disaffected hearts. p. 90.

2. Mr. H. adds, Whatsover extraordinary Acts, God may do upon some to make
them willing. p. 90.

Reply. I am not well satisfied (because I am not ignorant of the Arminians
apprehension about Paul's Conversion) that Mr. H. calls those Acts by which God
makes some men willing, extraordinary: for though they are supernatural, yet
they are ordinary to all that are willing. It seems to imply, that some are
made willing by ordinary acts, and others by extraordinary: And so it is an
ill-sounding word.

3. Mr. H. at last gives us the import of the above cited Scripture, That they
really signify the obedience and blessedness of those his Creatures that are
capable thereof, to be more pleasing and agreeable to his nature and will, than
that they should disobey and perish, which is the utmost can be meant
[particularly] by those words, God will have all men to be saved and to come to
the knowledge of the truth. p. 93, 94.

Reply. As these words sound they do not gratify my ear: For I cannot
understand, that the Connection of Disobedience and Destruction, should not be
as agreeable to Gods Will and Nature, as the Connection of Obedience and
Salvation. I take the import of 2 Cor. 2.15, We [Apostles] are unto God a sweet
savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish: that God
takes pleasure in the perishing of unbelievers, as well as in the saving of
believers.

2. Yet in sano sensu, I admit them as the most learned and pious Davenant,
sometime Bishop of Salisbury, explains the matter: When God commands any
thing which is good, he unfeignedly likes and loves such actions, and can do
no other; his own natural goodness, and holiness terminating, Voluntatem
divinae complacentiae [i. e. the will of divine Complacence] unto all holy
actions by whomsoever performed, Animadv. on Hoard, p. 350. And Gods meaning
when he offers any grace to men, is, that they should perform such actions
whereunto such grace conduces; and his meaning when he promises glory to any
man if he believes and perseveres, is truly to perform it if he do so. Id.
page 353. And not to sever the learned Bishops sentiments: To Mr. Hoards notion
[the same with Mr. Howes], that mercy is more natural and pleasing to God than
Vindicative Justice, which is his strange work; He does not willingly afflict,
etc. [for which are quoted, Mich. 7.18. Isa. 28.21. Lam. 3.33]. The Bishop
replies, That is said to be natural and pleasing to God, which comes originally
from himself, and is not an act depending upon the misdeserts of the Creature.
p. 206. As for Vindicative Justice it may be called a strange work, because it
is opus occasionatum [i. e. a work occasioned] by man's transgression. p. 287.

And once more to cite this eminent Divine; The absolute liberty and supreme
dominion, which God has in the preparing, or not preparing of effectual grace,
wherein the absolute decrees of Election and non-Election do show themselves,
is a thing as natural and pleasing to God as his mercy. p. 287.

4. Mr. H. asserts, That God does so far really will the salvation of all, as
not to omit the doing that which may effect it, if they be not neglectful of
themselves, but not so as to effect it by that extraordinary exertion of power,
which he thinks fit to employ upon some others. Let. p. 105.

Reply. This must be mixed with a grain of salt: If this omission of Gods refer
only to the use of means for effecting men's salvation, we grant, that in genere
mediorum, God is not wanting to them that live under the Gospel-dispensations.
And in this sense God representing himself under the similitude of an
Husbandman, truly says of Israel, What could have been done more to my
Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Isa. 5.4. But if Mr. H. intends (as the
words seem to sound) that salvation may be obtained by the use of means,
without that exertion of power (which he calls extraordinary) whereby that end
is obtained in some, I cannot take such an assertion upon his bare word. I have
been taught from my Childhood (and see no cause to suspect the credulity of
that age abused to draw me into a misbelief) that such an exertion of power, as
whereby God raised Christ from the dead, is universally necessary to make the
means of salvation effectual to their end.

5. Mr. H. professes his dislike of the common distinction of Voluntas
beneplaciti and signi, in this present case [viz. to explain how God wills the
salvation of all, and yet only of some] under which such as coined, and those
that have much used it, have only rather I doubt not, concealed a good meaning
than expressed by it a bad one. p. 106.

Reply. And whoever coined it (which I take it was Hugo de S. Victore) few of
our Divines but have used it, that have dealt in any Controversy which gave an
occasion for it. And why should Mr. H. charge them with a concealment of a good
meaning, which they have so often discovered? If Mr. H. only dislkes the terms,
I should not contend with him, for I can give him their sense in others from
the learned Davenant; The will of God termed voluntas simplicis complacentiae,
i. e. the will of simple complacency [which is the same with vol. signi] and
that which is termed voluntas absoluta or essicax i. e. an absolute or
efficacious will [which is the same with vol. beneplaciti] may well stand
together. God wills that all men believe and be saved with the will of
complacence; God wills and decrees to permit that some continue in unbelief,
and be not saved but perish, with the Absolute will. The former will in effect
is but a conditional will; As if the Apostle had said, God will have all men to
be saved, if all men shall believe in Christ; and to believe in Christ is an
act so well pleasing and so agreeable unto Gods will, that wheresoever it is
found it shall be rewarded. But notwithstanding the extent of this will unto
all men, there is in God an absolute will of permitting some to continue in
their unbelief, and so perish, Dav. ag. Hoard, p. 220.

But it must be observed, that whereas the most learned Bishop seems to
attribute a Conditional will to God above; he afterward explains himself, Mere
or purely conditional Decrees agree not with the perfection of the Divine
Nature. The speeches therefore cited out of Scripture [He that believes shall
be saved, etc.] do not imply a Conditional Will in God suspended for any moment
of time, and then post purificatam conditionem, i. e. after the Condition
performed] becoming an absolute and effectual will, etc. But these conditional
Decrees are grounded on some absolute revealed Decree of God, to the
Performance whereof he has tied himself. For example, it is an absolute Decree
of the Divine Will published in the Gospel, that whosoever believes, etc.
shall be saved. From hence is derived that mixed conditional Decree; If Cain,
Judas, or any other believe, they shall be saved. Now such mixed conditional
Decrees carry no contradiction to the absolute, etc. who sees not these
Propositions may well stand together? I will that if Judas repent and believe,
he shall have remission and salvation. I will not to give to Judas the gift of
repentance, of faith and of eternal life, Id. p. 225, 226, 227. I have said
enough to obviate M. H's exagitation of the terms Vol. signi and beneplaciti,
which are not worth the trouble of transcribing.

6. But M. H. adds, And of these faults the application of the distinction of
Gods secret and revealed Will unto this case, though it be useful in many, is
as guilty. Let. p. 108.

Rep. 1. As to this I say (as the aforesaid Bishop Davenant of M. Hoard); Mr.
H. should first have rightly set it down, and then have tried his strength in
confuting it, and I shall add his explication of it: We say that there is in
God a true will revealed in the Gospel of saving all men that shall believe;
and a true will liking, embracing, rewarding faith, holiness, perseverance in
all men whomsoever without distinction of persons: And this is the Will called
Voluntas simplicis complacentiae [or signi] which neither decrees nor
determines any thing infallibly concerning the being or not being of such good
acts in this or that singular person. This Will we know, and therefore we call
it his revealed will. There is also in God a secret will of bringing some men
to faith, perseverance, and the Kingdom of heaven, and of not bringing others
to any of these: this Will we know not, and therefore we call it, the secret
Will, Dav. ag. Hoard, p. 221: only it is to be noted, that when the Reverend
Bishop says, This secret will of God we know not; it must be understood, with
reference to the particular persons whom God intends to work faith, etc. in;
for we know in general, that there are some persons whom God will be thus good
unto. I add this to prevent a Cavil, which may seem very acute to them that use
it: If God's will of good pleasure [or absolute will] be secret, how come we to
know it? or if it be revealed, how is it secret? And then the members of the
distinction are confounded (as Mr. H. objects, p. 107.) who should have done
well to have told us, in what cases it is useful (though not in the present
case). For I dare offer my self to disprove the use of it in any case, upon the
same grounds that Mr. H. can the use of it in this.

Rep. 2. And yet when Mr. H. has so solemnly declared his dislike of our
distinction, he owns it himself, but in other words, which are the explication
of our terms: And whereas it may be thought to follow hence, that hereby we
ascribe to God a liableness to frustration and disappointment, that is without
pretense: The resolve of the Divine will in this matter [viz. the holiness and
salvation of all men] being not concerning the event what man shall do, but
concerning his duty what he should, and concerning the connection between his
duty and his happiness, Let. p. 112.

Now to leave Mr. H. inexcusable for the impertinency of his exception against
our Distinction; let us see how Dr Twisse (a man that much used this
distinction, and therefore blamed by Mr. H.) explains it. There is no
contradiction, says he, between these two wills Divine: For Voluntas signi is
improperly called a Will, for it signifies only man's duty, or what he should
do, as what will be pleasing to God if it be done. But Voluntas beneplaciti is
properly and simply a will, ( viz. whereby is decreed whatsoever shall come to
pass, by Gods either efficiency, or permission) Twisse Vind. Gr. l. 1. p. 1..
12. p. 140. It is evident to any intelligent Collator, that M H's and Dr.
Twisse's sense is the same, and so Mr H. has blamed himself in blaming Twisse.

7. And if it should be insisted, that in asserting God to will what by his
Laws he has made become man's duty, even where it is not done, we shall herein
ascribe to him, at least an ineffectual and imperfect will, as that which does
not bring to pass the thing willed: It is answered, that Imperfection were with
no pretense imputable to the Divine will, merely for not effecting every thing
whereto it may have a real propension, Let. p. 115, 116.

Reply. We had need tread warily here, for our way is strewed with Daggers, I
mean, with terms repugnant to each other.

1. If God be understood but to will man's duty, not the event [his obedience to
it] there is no color for the Objection, that the will of God is ineffectual;
for it is effectual (when declared) to make man's duty what it pleases.

2. If by willing man's duty, he means the event [the performance of it], then
is there an Objection indeed, but without solution, and not capable of any.

3. Take it how you will, there is no answer to the Objection. For this is, That
Gods will is ineffectual if that come not to pass which is willed: and that is,
That God has no will at all of that which comes not to pass [which yet the
Objection supposes] for what else is the meaning of a real Propension, which
differs as much from willing as an habit from an act, or as the power of seeing
when my eyes are shut, from my actual seeing when they are open?

8. Nor could any course have been taken that was fit in himself, and more
agreeable to sincerity [viz. than counsels, and exhortations, and whatsoever
means God uses to prevent men's sins]. There are only two ways to be thought on
besides, either that God should wholly have forborne to make overtures to man in
common, or that he should efficaciously have overpowr'd all into a compliance
with them. And there is little doubt, but upon sober consideration both of
these will be judged altogether unfit, Let. p. 121.

Reply. As to the former of these two ways, I have nothing to oppose; As to the
Latter, there is a great deal of doubt; and Mr. H. implies so much when he
says, it is loss obvious.

9. Mr. How proceeds to show the unfitness of Gods efficacious overpowring all
men into a compliance with his Overtures to them, because of two congruities in
the course taken for the Government of the World.

1. That it be steady and uniform; not interrupted by frequent, extraordinary
and anomalous actions.

2. That he use a royal Liberty, of stepping out of his usual course sometimes,
as he sees meet, p. 131, 132; and adds, If we apply them to the affairs of
Grace, there is something correspondent. That ordinarily [grace] be sought and
expected, in the use of ordinary means. And that sometimes its Sovereignty show
it self in preventive exertions; and in working so Heroically, as none have
befor^hand, in the neglect of its ordinary methods, any reason to expect, p.
138.

Repl. 1. This Answer is not fitted to the Question. The Question is, Whether
it be fitting for God efficaciously to overpower all men into a compliance with
the overtures he makes to them in common? The Answer is, It is not fit for God
to overpower m^n, without making any overtures to them at all: or to alter the
terms and keep the sense, the Question is, Whether it be fitting, that God
should give all men special grace, in the use of means? And the Answer is, It
is not fitting, that God should give all men special grace, without the use of
means. An admirable incogitancy in a man of parts. If the Question had been
about the fitness of Gods converting all men (whom he thinks meet to convert)
as he did Saul, by a voice from Heaven; the Answer had been akin to the
Question: (though even Saul was not converted without means, but without
ordinary means).

2. I am at a loss for a Reason, why it should be unfit for God efficaciously
to overpower all men into a compliance with the means (supposing what I hope
Mr. H. will not deny, I am sure will never be able to disprove; that no man
will ever comply with the means, that is not overpowr'd thereunto) unless it be
this, that it is unfit for God to bestow grace, and salvation upon all men
(which would be a very hard saying).

Reply. 2. As to his second Thesis, if it be (as it is pretended) an Answer to
the Question proposed. I Answer, That though it be fitting enough for God to
use a Royal liberty in giving grace to some, and not to others; yet I
understand not that the suspension of his Liberty, and binding up himself to
give grace to all, had been any way unfit. We poor Mortals, I am certain, are
very unfit to judge what is fit or unfit for God to do. We may rest satisfied
that God does nothing but what becomes him: but we shall intermeddle in things
too high for us, if we pass sentence, that for God to do otherwise in many
instances than he has done, would unbecome him. God has permitted the whole
race of mankind to turn Rebels to his Sovereign Majesty, and but some part of
the Angelical nature. This became him to do, because he has done it. But
suppose he had prevented the Rebellion of all his rational Creatures; or man's,
and not the Angels; or the Angels, and not man's; or permitted the Rebellion of
all the Angels, (as he has of all mankind); or restored the Angels, and left
man in his own ruins: would Mr. How adventure to say, that upon sober
consideration any of these ways would have been judged altogether unfit for God
to have taken?

10. Mr. How proceeds, and acquaints us, that it were incongruous that a whole
order of Intelligent creatures should be moved only by inward impulses: -- And
that the faculties, whereby men are capable of moral Government, should be
rendered to this purpose [viz. the Improvement of means] useless and vain. And
that they should be tempted to expect to be constantly managed as mere
Machines, that know not their own use, Let. page 142, 143.

Reply. Either this Harangue is impertinent, or it borders as near upon
Arminianism as Scotland does upon England. If Mr. H's meaning be, that it is
incongruous for God to overpower men, that neglect the means [as his words p.
142, imply] whereas the Question he undertook to Answer is, Whether it be
congruous for God to overpower all (as he does some) that use the means, then
his Discourse is besides the business; or if he would insinuate, that the
course which God takes with some [though not with all] in overpowring them, is
to manage them as Machines, and render their natural faculties vain and
useless; This is Arminius's Charge upon the Protestant Doctrines of the
irresistible operation of special grace.

To draw now to a close, after too long a Discourse, (that I may not tire my
Reader) I shall only request him, that he would duly consider, that of Mr. H's
Principles there are these desperate consequences, (which I have so much
charity as to believe he does not see, and (so) nor own,) That God is justled
out of his proper place; I mean, of being the first cause of all the Creatures
actions, and the Creature put in his stead, as being represented able to use
its powers, as it pleases. That one great Perfection of the Divine Nature, viz.
Foreknowledg of future Contingencies, is separated from it, by denying the only
true ground of such Foreknowledg, the Divine Decrees. And hence, the Providence
of God in governing the actions of his Creatures is left in great danger of
falling, because a Superstructure raised without a foundation. For how can God
govern those actions which depend not immediately upon him in their production;
nor are foreknown in his Eternal Decree, wherein lies the model of all he
intends to exercise his Government upon, in time?

In sum, his Doctrine opens a wide door for Atheism, and deserves as sharp a
censure as one gave of Epicurus's denial of Providence, Verbis Deum posuit, re
su^tulit; i.e. He acknowledged God in words, but denied him in deed. For as all
Arguments proving any of the Divine Attributes, do prove a God, because those
terms are essentially convertible: so those Arguments which deny any Divine
Attributes, do also deny a God upon the same ground.

I shall give the Reader no further trouble but what (if he be conscientious)
he will willingly give himself of examining what he has read, and judging
according to the evidence of Truth; for which in this momentous Controversy,
and not for victory I have entered into this public contest with my ancient and
learned Friend, Mr. How, which I take to be sufficiently warranted by that
passage of holy Writ: But when Peter was come to Antioch I withstood him to the
face, because he was to be blamed, Gal. 2.11. Whence it may be duly collected,
that the reverence or estimation of any man's person ought not to hinder a
public reproof, when he is guilty of a public scandal.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
EPist. P. 4. l. 9. r. efforts. l. 14. r. an. p. 6. l. ult. r. you. p. 7. l.
21. r. lapt. l. 29. r. efforts.

Book, p. 3. l. 30. r. in these terms. p. 4. blot out the three first lines,
and an half. p. 13. l. 1. r. materiale. p. 20. l. 3. after impeded r. 2ly. p.
22. l. 3. for 3. r. 2. p. 58. l. 26. for word r. work. p. 73. l. 28. after is
r. true. p. 87. l. 26. r. reverend.


