A COLLECTION OF Texts of Scripture, WITH Short Notes upon them.

And some other Observations against the Principal Popish Errors.

IMPRIMATUR.

Julii 9. 1688. Guil. Needham.



LONDON, Printed for W. Booker, over against the King's-Head Inn in Old-change.
1688.

The Epistle to the Reader.
IT is agreed on all hands, that the Mind and Will of God revealed to us,
howsoever the Revelation be made, is the proper and adequate Rule of
Conscience, by which we are to direct both our Faith and Practice. And that the
Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, contain at least a part of this
Divine Revelation, is granted by the Church of Rome it self. From whence it
will clearly follow, that whatsoever is contrary to that Revelation which we
have in the Holy Scriptures, ought not to be received for Divine Doctrine and
Truth; unless we will suppose an inconsistence in Divine Revelation, or that
God does contradict himself, which none will have the folly to assert. We must
remember therefore how we have received and heard in the Holy Scriptures, and
hold that fast. And if there be any Doctrine or Tradition, which contradicts
the Doctrine of God delivered in the Holy Scriptures, or makes his Commandment
therein contained of none effect, we are taught by our Savior to reject it. So
that if an Apostle, or an Angel from Heaven, and much more if a Father, or if a
Church, preach to us any other Gospel than what is therein delivered to us, we
should do the same.

Whether the Doctrines that are contested between us and the Church of Rome,
are of this Nature, is the Question in dispute. To make a right Judgment of
which, we need but consider the several Doctrines, and then compare them with
the Holy Scriptures, and observe their agreeableness and disagreeableness
thereunto. To assist the Reader in which, is the Design of this small Treatise,
wherein you have a Collection of the chief Points in Controversy between us;
and in the head of the several Chapters, is first set down the Romish Doctrine,
as it is defined and received, or generally taught in the Church; and then the
Texts of Scripture are subjoined, with short and easy Notes and Observations
deduced from them, to apply them to the present purpose; whereby it is easy to
make a Comparison between the several Doctrines and the Scripture, and the
Contrariety between them will be manifest to the meanest Capacity. But yet that
it might be made more useful, to prevent all misunderstanding, and to make the
Matters in Difference the more clear, where it was thought needful, the
Controversies also are briefly stated, and some farther Considerations added,
and the principal Objections are briefly obviated. So that it is hoped, it may
be of good use to all that desire to be guarded against the Errors of Rome,
especially to those that have not Money to buy, or Time or Capacity to read and
understand larger or more learned Discourses, for whose service it was
principally intended: And some such Thing, in so plain and easy a Method,
seemed to be desired.

The Gentlemen of the Church of Rome, we may be sure, will not be pleased with
this Method, because we do not take the Scriptures in their Sense, and with
their Interpretations. But those, we think, are Comments which destroy the
Text; and therefore we have no mind to them. And we should not have the Text
neither by their good will; for they do not love that that dangerous Book
should come into the hands of the Common People, for fear lest they should
think that the Text is against them. But however they endeavor to make
themselves Masters of the Sense and Interpretation, that that may be for them.
Thus if the Text be ready to strike them, they put out its Eyes by the
Exposition, that it shall not know how to direct its Blow, and then they are
safe enough. But we cannot think our selves obliged to take every thing upon
trust that they say.

But they refer us also to Tradition, and the Consent of the Fathers, for the
understanding of the Scripture-Doctrine; which we are not against. But unless
we will take this Tradition, and this Consent of the Fathers from their Mouth
likewise, they will not be pleased. So that, as they would have it, our Faith
must be ultimately resolved only into the present Voice of their Church. And we
must not condemn any of her Doctrines, because, they say, they shall not be
condemned; that is, they will be Judges in their own Case, for fear of the
worst.

It is well known, that we make use of Tradition, and the Judgment of the
Fathers as well as they. And we do not fear to refer our selves to them, in the
Matters contested between us; but then they must give us leave to make use of
Tradition a little more Catholickly than they do, and not to seek it only from
the Voice of their Church; For we hope, as long as we have Eyes, we may read
the Fathers as well as they; and we do not know why we may not as well
understand their Sense, as also the Sense of the Holy Scriptures, having the
same means for it; only the worst is, we want Infallible Parts, which we do not
know but they may want as well as we.

But what is it, but a great derogation from the Holy Scripture, and the Holy
Ghost, the Author of it, to think, that of it self it is equally apt to
deceive, as to instruct? to induce into Error, as to lead into Truth? What is
this, but to level it with the Heathen Oracle, that spoke always with that
ambiguity, that no Body knew what to make of it, and therefore they were as
soon deceived by it as not? But yet is not this in effect the very Sense of the
Church of Rome? Or why else does she so studiously withold the Bible from her
Members, for fear lest they should have more hurt by it, than good, if they
take it by it self? What is this, but under pretense of taking care of her
Children, to call her Father and Husband, whom she pretends so great respect
to, all to naught; and to commend her self, that she has more tenderness and
love to her Children than they? But is it not rather her own Grandeur and
Height which she takes care of, which these Doctrines do subserve to? And
therefore she is resolved to maintain them, and must use the means for it;
which i^, by withholding the Light that would discover them. For it is to be
truly feared, that if the Bible were in every one's Hand, and read with any
attention, it would soon scatter this Darkness, which the Church of Rome well
perceives. And if that be to deceive, the Scripture will deceive. And if
Instruction consists only in learning their Errors, the Scripture will never
instruct us to the World's End: So that in this the Church of Rome is in the
Right, and is a very wise Mother for her self; but let others judge how kind she
is to her Children, or faithful to her Bridegroom.

As for our parts, we are fully persuaded, that the Holy Ghost may speak as
good Sense, and as intelligibly in the Scriptures, as any of them in their
Writings, or as the Church can in hers, and that it was his Design to do so.
And therefore we doubt not, but it is done plainly and fully in all Points
necessary to Salvation; and also as to the Controversies between the Church of
Rome and us, that enough may be plainly gathered from them. And where there is
any obscurity, either it is in lesser Matters, or in prophetic Visions; or
only arises by accident, by reason of the distance of time, wherein the Holy
Scriptures were written, the variety and change of Customs, the difference of
Dialects or Forms of Speech, or some such other Causes which are incident to
all ancient Writings, and especially of the Eastern Countries. And either it
may be cleared up by the same means which we may use as well as they, or else
it must, for what I know, remain so yet to us both, for the exercise of our
farther industry.

It is the Scripture then that we build our Faith upon, and guide our selves
by; though we do not refuse any help to the understanding of it. And we are not
afraid that our common People should read it* but do exhort them to it. For we
do not desire to retain any Doctrines or Works of Darkness, and therefore we
are very willing that all should be brought to the Light. It is the Scripture
that we love; and whilst we love the Scripture, we do declare it, that we
cannot be very fond of Rome. A plain simple view of Scripture is sufficient to
keep us out of the ways of Romish Delusion. And such a view is presented to the
Reader in this little Treatise, in a Method fitted to the most vulgar Capacity.

Let us but stick to the Scripture, or written Word, which the Church of Rome
is really most dreadfully afraid of, and then we are out of danger. The
Scripture we know from whence it is; but as for their Traditions, many of them
we know not whence they are. They pretend they come from the Apostles, but we
have nothing else but only their own word for it: For we cannot perceive the
Apostolical Image and Superscription upon them. Nor would they then ever
contradict the Apostolical Writings, as we are well assured they do many of
them. Tradition indeed alone does but open a Gap to whatsoever bold and
confident Men may obtrude, that have subtilty enough to set off a Thing a
little plausibly. But let us hold fast the written Word, and we shall not fear
to be entangled with those new Doctrines, which are the obtrusions of crafty
and ambitious Men to make an advantage, by which the face of Christianity comes
to be quite marred, and all Religion comes to be endangered.

And read but this little Treatise then, and compare Doctrine and Text, and
then see who is in the right, the Church of Rome or We: For see if their
Doctrine and the Holy Text be not at variance the one with the other. And if
so, the Church of Rome must excuse us, if we leave their Doctrine and follow
the Text.

Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening Wolves; ye shall know them by their Fruits. Do not believe
every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God. If the Blind lead
the Blind, they will both fall into the Ditch. Heresies will arise in the
Church, and the Devil will sometimes transform himself into an Angel of Light,
to deceive whom he can deceive. Therefore see with your own Eyes, and beg the
holy Anointing to teach you.

A Table of the Popish Errors refuted in this Treatise.
Of the Holy Scripture and Traditions.
Chap. I. THat all saving Truth is not contained in the Holy Scriptures, but
partly in them, and partly in unwritten Traditions page 1 II. That the
Scripture is obscure 12 III. That it is not for the Common People to read the
Scripture 15
Of the Church.
IV. That the State of the Church is always visible 20 V. That Multitude is a
Mark of the Church 25 VI. That temporal Happiness is a Mark of the Church 29
VII. That Miracles are a Mark of the Church 32 VIII. That St. Peter was Head of
the Church under Christ, and the Pope is so, as his Successor 36 IX. That the
Pope has power over Kings, and can absolve Subjects from their Allegiance, and
that Ecclesiastical Persons are exempted from the Secular Jurisdiction 44 X.
That the Church of Rome is Infallible, and the Judge of Controversies, to whose
Judgment all are bound up 49
Of Prayer and Worship.
XI. That Prayers, and Divine Service, is to be celebrated every where in
Latin, in a Language unknown to the People 61 XII. That it is good and
Profitable to pray to Saints and Angels 65 XIII. That Images and Relics are to
be venerated or worshipped 81 XIV. That the Clergy may not Marry 91 XV. That
the Vow of Poverty is laudable, and that Mendicant Friars are in a State of
Perfection 94 XVI. That the Vow of Blind Obedience is laudable 98
Of Satisfactions, Indulgences, Purgatory, and Praying for the Dead.
XVII. That Persons are obliged partly to satisfy the Justice of God for their
Sins themselves, Christ having not satisfied for all the Punishment due to them
100 XVIII. That some Persons may satisfy over and above what is needful for
themselves; and that their satisfactions may serve for others, being put into
the Treasury of the Church, to be dispensed by Indulgences 108 XIX. That there
is a Purgatory after this Life for the expiation of the Sins of those that are
not sufficiently purged here; and that the Souls there detained, may be helped
by the Masses, and good Works, and Prayers of the Living. 115
Of Justification and Pardon of Sin.
XX. That Justification consists in the infusion of Grace 123 XXI. That for the
obtaining of Pardon of Sin, Auricular Confession to the Priest is necessary 128
Of the Merit of Good Works, and Works of Supererrogation.
XXII. That good Works are truly and properly meritorious of Eternal Life 123
XXIII. That Men may do Works of Supererrogation, above what the Law requires,
and may have superabounding Merits, more than themselves need, which may be
profitable to others 139
Of Baptism.
XXIV. That Baptism is absolutely necessary to Salvation, so that those who die
without it, are liable to condemnation 143
Of the Lord's Supper.
XXV. That after Consecration there remains no more of Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, but that it is transubstantiated into the very Body and Blood of
Christ 149 XXVI. That in the Sacrifice performed in the Mass, the self-same
Christ is contained and offered, that offered himself in the Cross; and that
this Sacrifice is truly propitiatory for the Sins of Quick and Dead 159 XXVII.
That the Host is to be worshipped with Divine Worship 166 XXVIII. That those
Masses are to be approved and commended, where the Priest communicates alone
172 XXIX. That the Sacrament is to be administered in one kind only, and the use
of the Cup kept from the People 175
Some Prejudices of the Church of Rome answered.
Sect. 1. They accuse our Doctrine of Novelty 181 2. They say we had no Call
184 3. They Object to us the Divisions that are amongst the Reformed 188 That
there are some Places more Holy than others; and that it is a Work of Piety to
go in Pilgrimage to them. 192 That the Sacraments do confer Grace by the Work
done 196
Of the Holy Scripture, and Traditions.
CHAP. I.
That all saving-Truth is not contained in the Holy Scripture, but partly in
the Scripture, and partly in unwritten Traditions; which whosoever does not
receive with the like Piety and Reverence, as he does the Scriptures, is
accursed. Council Trident. Sess. 4. Decret. de Can. Script.
COntrary to that which is written in the second Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 3.
verse. 15. The holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto Salvation,
through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. That which is able to make us wise unto
Salvation, contains in it all saving Truth, that is, all that is necessary to
be known in order to Salvation. For how else can it make us wise to Salvation?
How can the Holy Scripture make us wise unto Salvation, if it does not contain
all saving Truth, or all that is necessary to be known in order to Salvation?

Verse. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for instruction in Righteousness,
that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works.
Mow if the Man of God, who is to instruct others, and to declare to them the
whole Counsel of God, so far as is necessary for their attainment of Salvation,
be perfectly instructed for the discharge of his Duty from the Scripture; then
the Scripture must needs contain all saving Truth, or all that is necessary to
be known, both by him and every particular Christian in order to Salvation. And
note, that it is not our part to show what those Scriptures then were which the
Apostle here intends, they being confessedly the same which are still contained
in the Canon of it: But whatever they were, it is plain from the Apostle, that
there is no saving Truth but what is contained in them, which yet does not
derogate from the usefulness of those Books which were added to the Canon
afterward, whatever they were, they being useful however as Comments upon the
former, to clear up what was before less clearly delivered, or to declare some
Truths of less necessary importance, though all that was necessary to Salvation
was delivered before. So that we must needs apprehend the Scripture, as it is
now, to be a complete Rule of Faith, without taking in any thing of unwritten
Tradition to piece it up or complete it.

Before Divine Doctrine was committed to writing, Men had no other Rule but
natural Light, or immediate Revelation, or Tradition of what was before made
known. And when the Lives of Men were long, Divine Doctrine might better be
conveyed this way than it can be now. And in our Savior's and the Apostles
Time this might serve the turn for the present Age, in which there was a
continuation of extraordinary Gifts, and especially to the immediate Auditors
of these inspired Persons. But in the shorter Age of Men this was not thought a
safe or sufficient means to conveigh down Divine Doctrine to the following
Ages. And therefore it was thought more expedient to put down in writing what
was to be made known to after-Ages, for the more sure preservation of all such
Truths from Corruption, and to be a standing Rule to which they might have
recourse upon all occasions.

Thus God himself wrote the Ten Commandments in Tables of Stone. And Moses by
God's direction wrote the Law, as the Prophets afterward did their several
Prophecies, or a brief Summary of them: For it is said, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All
Scripture is given b^ inspiration of God. And sometimes we find express
direction for the writing of some things which were to be transmitted to future
Ages: As Exodus 17. 14. Write this for a Memorial in a Book. And Isa. 30. 8. Now
go write it before them in a Table, and note it in a Book, that it may be for
the Time to come, for ever and ever. And Psalm. 102. 18. This shall be written
for the Generation to come. Whereby is intimated the great need of writing
then, to conveigh a certain notice of things to future Ages; and which implies
the Incompetency and Insufficiency of Tradition for that purpose.

And when once it had pleased God to commit the Holy Rule to writing, we find
the Scripture commended for a perfect Direction: Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of the
Lord is perfect, converting the Soul. And Tradition is no where commended, or
any order given to have recourse to it in any case, but to the Holy Scripture
alone.

Thus, Isa. 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according
to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them.

Thus Joshua was directed to govern himself in all his Actions by the same Holy
Rule, and therein should prosper and do wisely, Josh. 1. 7. That thou may
observe to do according to all the Law which Moses my Servant commanded thee.
Turn not from it to the right hand, or to the left. And, verse. 8. This Book of
the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day
and night, that thou may observe to do according to all that is written
therein.

The same also did Joshua prescribe to his Successors, Chap. 23. 6. And the
King, when he sat upon the Throns of his Kingdom, was to write him a Copy of
this Law in a Book, and read therein all the days of his life. Deuteronomy. 17. 18,
19. And this was the way to have him prosperous, and to prolong his days. Here
is nothing at all left to Tradition, nor any recourse to be had to it, but to
the written Law alone intimated as perfect to all the intents and purposes of a
good and holy Life.

There were no other Ordinances to be observed but what were contained in the
Law, which forbad all Additions. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Ye shall not add unto the Word
which I command you; neither shall you diminish from it. So again, Chap. 12.
32. so Prove. 30. 6. Add thou not unto his Words; lest he reprove thee, and thou
be found a (...).

For this the Children of Israel were condemned, Jer. 32. 35. that they built
the high Places of Baal, to consecrate their Sons and their Daughters unto
Molech, which I commanded them not.

The Reformation of the Church therefore under Jehoshaphat, that good King, was
made by the Scripture. That was their Rule alone, 2 Chronicles. 17. 9.

The same practice was observed under the Reign of King Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 31.
3, 4.

Accordingly our Savior and his Apostles refer to the Scripture as the only
Rule, and confirm their Doctrines by it, but no where have recourse to
Tradition for any thing.

Thus for the obtaining amendment of Life, and the avoiding of Condemnation;
Luke 16. 29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. And this he
commends for as great efficacy to that end, as if one should come and arise
from the Dead to speak to them.

So Joh. 5. 39. For the attainment of the knowledge of himself, and Life
everlasting, Search the Scriptures, says he, for in the^ ye think ye have
eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me. He does not reprove, but
allow and encourage this thought in them.

Luke 24. 27. Beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them
in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself. But makes not the least
use of Tradition.

So also he refutes the Pharisees by the Scripture, Mat. 22. 31.

Thus the Apostle St. Paul, Act. 26. 22. witn^ssing both to small and great,
and saying none other things that these which the Prophets and Moses did say
should come to pass.

He teaches at Rome, that Jesus was the Christ, by the Scripture, Act. 28. 23.

He combateth all sorts of Errors by the Scripture, see his Epistles to the
Romans, to the Corinthians, to the Galatians, etc.

To end the Difference that was agitated at the Council of Jerusalem, St. James
alleges the Scripture, Acts 15. 15. So that the Scripture is that which is
every were referred to, as the Rule of Faith and Manners; but not one word said
of Tradition to that end. It having pleased God, when once the Scripture was
Indicted, to leave nothing to Tradition; though sometimes he was pleased to
reveal himself farther by immediate Revelation, till all the Books of the Holy
Canon were perfected.

On the other side, Tradition is so far from being commended, that the use of
it is decried, as the foundation of many Errors, and Wickednesses, and
Superstitions; and their adhering to the Traditions of the Fathers is censured.

Thus Mark. 7. 1, etc. When the Pharisees saw some of his Disciples eat Bread
with defiled (that is to say, with unwashen) Hands, they found fault. For the
Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their Hands often, eat not, holding
the Tradition of the Elders. And when they come from the Market, except they
wash, they eat not. And many other things there are, which they have received
to hold, as the washing of Cups, and Pots, and brazen Vessels, and Tables.
Which they observed as a part of religious Worship received by Tradition from
their Fathers, though not commanded in the Law of Moses. Like the Holy Water of
the Church of Rome, the Incensings and Garments, the Salt and Spittle, and
Exorcisms, and Wax-candles, used in Baptism; the Priests shaving the Head after
the manner of a Crown, which they profess to have received from Christ and his
Apostles, and conveyed to them by the Tradition of the Church through all Ages,
though there be not one word of any of it in the Holy Scriptures. See Council
of Trent* Sess. 22. cap. 2, etc. Cathechism. Roman. par. 2. cap. 2.. 59, etc.
But our Savior condemned all the Traditions of the Fathers, so received by
them, for vain Worship, because not written in the Law, Ver. 7, 8. So I doubt
not, but we shall have reason (...) do the like with those of the Church of
Rome* by the same Warrant.

The Apostle reckons it his great Fault before his Conversion, Gal. 1. 14. That
he was exceeding zealous (...) the Traditions of his Fathers, which were
superadded to the Law, which was the very foundation of Pharisaism, and a
ground of very great Superstition among them.

Therefore, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Ye know that ye are not redeemed by corruptible
things from your vain Conversation, received by Tradition from your Fathers,
but with the precious Blood of Christ. Here also we have an intimation from St.
Peter, of many vain Observations which the Jews took up by Tradition from their
Fathers. So that the Tradition of their Fathers was so far from being a sure
Rule to them, that it was a means of very great Corruption, which the
Christians are redeemed from.

Therefore there was that Exhortation, Ezekiel. 20. 18, 19. Walk ye not in the
Statutes of your Fathers, neither observe their Judgments, nor defile your
selves with their Idols: I am the Lord your God, walk in my Statutes; and keep
my Judgments, and do them.

The vanity and uncertainty of Tradition for a Rule of Faith, sufficiently
appears by these things. And how much the use of it is decried as mischievous
and hurtful. And if it was so in the Church and State of the Jews, which was
but of a very narrow compass, and thereupon it might be supposed then to be a
more certain means of conveyance of Truth; how much more reasonably may we
think it to be so in the Christian Church diffused through all Nations, where
by reason of the multitude and distance of Christian Teachers and Professors,
it must needs be much more easy for superstitious and conceited Men to obtrude
their Innovations, and to back them with the pretense of Tradition; of which
there has been many Instances. And hence such Difference has arisen between
Traditions themselves, as is plain in the Controversy in the Primitive Church
about Easter, and many others. And can we think that our Savior should leave
his Church to such an uncertain Rule now, when there is so much need rather to
have it more exact and settled? Should that be a Rule of Faith in the Christian
Church, which was wholly disallowed and decried in the Jewish? Or is Tradition
now become so much altered, that it is become so sure and harmless above what
it was? If Tradition be taken for a natural Means, there is nothing more
uncertain in a long tract of Time. And sure our Savior would not leave his
Church to such uncertainty when he might do better. If it be pretended to be
assisted with Infallibility, that shall be examined afterward.

It is plain, that the Christian-Inspired Writers also saw it needful to write
down the Doctrine of our Savior, to transmit it to After-ages: they did not
think Tradition was a sure means of conveyance then, no more than it was
before: Therefore St. Luke wrote his Gospel to the most excellent Theophilus,
that he might know the certainty of those things wherein he had been
instructed, Luke 1. 4. implying, that the other way of conveyance by Tradition
is not so certain. And St. Peter, I will not be negligent, says he, to put you
always in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1. 12. And, verse. 13. I think it meet to stir you
up, by putting you in remembrance. Men's memories are not so very good to retain
Divine Things, unless they are excited and quickened. And, verse. 15. Moreover, I
will endeavor that you may be able after my decease, to have these things
always in remembrance: Which seems to be done by his putting St. Mark to write
this Gospel from his Mouth. Thus St. Jude says, That he gave all diligence to
write unto them of the common Salvation, and that it was needful for him to
write unto them, verse. 3. And if it was needful for that Age, it was much more
needful for After-ages. We may be sure, our Savior and his Apostles would have
that done which was needful in their own Judgments for Men's Salvation.

And we are likewise assured by St. John, that it is done fully, as it was
needful it should be done, that nothing might be left to the uncertainty of
Tradition. John 20. 31. These things are written, that* ye may believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have Life
through his Name. He shows, that the writing of these Things is needful to be a
Foundation of right Faith to Men, and that enough was written then in his own
and the other Gospels and Writings (which it is said he had seen) to be a
Foundation of that Faith in Men which is needful to their eternal Salvation. So
that no saving Truth was left to be conveyed by Tradition at all; which yet
does not argue the uselessness of what Books were after added, as was said
before.

1 John 1. 4. These things write we unto you, that you may rejoice, and that
your Joy may be full.

So that the Scripture giving us sufficient knowledge, as to what concerns our
Faith and Comfort, in order to Eternal Salvation, how can we imagine any
deficiency in it, but must needs suppose that it contains in it all the
material Objects of Faith and Matters of saving Practice? Or how can we depend
upon Tradition as distinct from the Scripture, which was ever so decried, for
uncertain, mischievous and (...).

Therefore we conclude with our Church, That Holy Scripture contains all
things necessary to Salvation* (...) whatso^ver is not read therein* nor may be
proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man, that it should be believed as
an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. Artic.
6. It is a sufficient evidence of the vanity and uncertainty of Tradition
unwritten, that amongst all the Sayings and Works of our blessed Savior, which
St. John tells us were so many, John 21. 25. That if all the things which he
did, should be written every one, I suppose that even the World it self could
not contain the Books that should be written. Yet there is not one of all these
come certainly to our knowledge, but what is written in the Holy Scriptures.

And we have fair warning also given us of Tradition now in the New Testament;
2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. Be not soon shaken (...), or be troubled, neither by Spirit, nor
by Words, nor by Letter, as from us, as that the Day of Christ is at hand: Let
no Man deceive you by no means. By which it appears, that even in the Apostles
Times, there were forged Writings, and feigned Traditions, which some had the
boldness to obtrude for Apostolical Doctrines. This is a fair warning to us
now, much more in these later Ages, to give but little heed to any thing,
however pretended to be never so much Apostolical, that is not contained in the
Sacred and Apostolical Writings, which are owned to be undoubtedly such.

And indeed how can we believe, that the Evangelists and Apostles, in all the
Writings that they wrote (and it does not appear that they wrote any other
besides those we have) when they write many things, that are not so absolutely
necessary to be known in order to Salvation, yet should omi^ so many things
that are so as the Church of Rome, pretends? And that when they speak so often
of Baptism for Instance, that they should never tell us of the Salt and the
Spittle, the Ex^cisms and Wax-candles, but speak only of being baptized in
Water, in the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost? or that they
should never, when they speak so much of Worship, tell us of the worshipping of
Saints and Images? or of praying for the Dead, when they give us so many
directions about Prayer? etc.

We must hold fast the Traditions, say they, which we have been taught by the
Apostles, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. But we cannot believe, that these and suchlike
things were ever taught by them, when we have nothing at all of any of them in
all their Writings. And that exhortation could be then meant only of those
things which the Thessalonians had heard from them, and were very sure of, that
they were Apostolical Doctrines; And which we doubt not, were no other but what
were after set down in the holy Writings, and in them conveyed to us. It is
impossible for the Church of Rome to show that they were any other by Tradition
only, when the traditional conveyance of Points is evidently so uncertain, and
that which we have been so warned against.

Yet after all note, that all this is nothing against the Tradition of the
Universal Church, as a means of delivering down to us the Holy Scriptures
themselves, the number of the Books, and the Names of the Authors, etc. Nor
against that which is concurrent with Scripture, or corrolorative of it in any
Point of Faith or Practice, but against that which is urged as a Rule of saving
Faith and Practice, distinct and different from it, (and sometimes contrary to
it) and is pretended to be the Tradition of the Universal Church from the
Apostles Age, but can never be proved to be so.

There is no fear of falling into Error therefore, either through Ignorance or
Infidelity, as to such Traditions. But we must say as our Savior, Mark 12. 24.
Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the Scriptures? And as the
ignorance of Scripture is the Source and Fountain of Error, so on the contrary
then to follow the guidance of the Scripture, is the way to be preserved from
Error.

CHAP. II.
That the Holy Scripture is dark and obscure. Bellarm. de Verbo Dei. lib. 3.
cap. 5.
UPon this ground it is, that they withhold the Scripture from the common
People, pretending that they are not capable Judges of the Sense of it; and if
they should read it, more prejudice than benefit would arise to them from it.

But this is contrary to that which is written, Psalm. 19. 7, 8. The Testimony
of the Lord is sure, making wise the Simple. The Commandment of the Lord is
pure or clear, enlightening the eyes. Can Darkness enlighten Men's Eyes? or can
it make wise the Simple, if it be not Intelligible by them?

Psalm. 119. 105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a Light unto my path. And
verse. 130. The entrance of thy Words gives Light; It gives understanding unto
the Simple. When a Man has but begun to read or make inquiry into the Word, it
affords him a great deal of Light and Understanding. Unless the Light be
obscure then, the Scripture is not obscure. If Men don't turn their backs to
this Lamp, they may perceive the Light thereof. See how the Psalmist profited
in Wisdom by meditating therein, ver. 98, 99, 100.

Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 14. This Commandment, which I command thee this day, is not
hidden from thee, neither is it far off, etc. but the Word is very nigh unto
thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, that thou may do it. Where the
plainness of the Command is asserted, and that in order to the performance of
it. For a Rule that is not understood, can never be observed. And this
perspicuity and Intelligibleness of the Commands given by Moses, the Apostle
applies to the Gospel, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8.

2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in
whom the God of this World has blinded the minds of them that believe not,
lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. The
Gospel is plain enough of it self then, and easy to be understood by any, but
obdurate and unbelieving Sinners. For therein we all with open fact, behold as
in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, Chap. 3. 18.

2 Timothy 3. 15. The, Holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto Salvation.
But how can that be, if they be so dark that they cannot be understood? Can we
be wise without understanding? Or are they so difficult to be known, which
Timothy knew from a Child?

2 Pet. 1. 19. The Apostle calls the Prophecies of the old Testament, a sure
Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a Light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the dayspring arise in your
hearts. And if there be such clearness in them, what clearness think you is
there in the Doctrine of the Apostles? There (...) a greater degree of Light,
and Plainness, and Intelligibleness promised under the Gospel, than what was
under the Law, Heb. 8. 11. And if the Old testament be so plain and
intelligible, the New much more.

Yet note that it is granted, that there are many dark Things and hard to be
understood in the Scripture, and which are so to the Learned as well as to the
Unlearned, which may arise from several causes. But whatever things are
necessary, are plain, says St. Chrysostom. All things which concern Faith and
a good Life, are plainly contained in Scripture, says St. Austin. The Doctrine
concerning God, his Being, Attributes, and Providence; of Christ's being the
Son of God, his becoming Man, his dying and rising again; The Precepts,
Promises, and Threatenings, etc. For how are they necessary to be believed, if
they be not plainly revealed? Or are the Unlearned excused from believing them,
because they cannot understand them?

Did not Christ himself preach, and order his Apostles to preach to the
Unlearned as well as to the Learned? And did he and they preach intelligibly to
them, or no? If they did not, to what purpose did they preach at all? or how
was the World converted by them? Were there none converted but the learned
Priests and wise Men? plainly the contrary rather, Matthew. 11. 25. 1 Cor. 1. 26.
If they did preach intelligibly, then it seems their Doctrine was plain enough.
And is it not the same Doctrine that is written in the Scriptures which they
preach? How came the same Doctrine then so dark when it was writ, which was so
plain when it was preached? Does the putting it down in writing make it hard to
be understood? And was it not writ to distinct Persons and Places, and for the
use of all, as shall appear in the next Chapter? Therefore I conclude it was
written intelligibly to all, in all things necessary, or else the Holy Ghost
would be wanting to his own Design; and his writing for the use of all, could
not answer the end for which it is written.

CHAP. III.
That it is not for the Common People to read the Scripture; and if they
should, more prejudice than benefit would arise to them from the reading of it.
Council of Trent. Sess. 4. decret. de Can. scrip. Index lib. prohib. regula 4.
COntrary to that which is written, Deuteronomy. 6. 7, 8, 9. These words which I
command thee this day, shall be in thy heart. And thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine
house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up. And thou shall bind them for a Sign upon thine hand, and they
shall be as Frontlets between thine eyes; and thou shall write them upon the
Posts of thine House, and on thy Gates. This is spoken to Persons of all Sorts,
Qualities, and Conditions in Israel. And how should they do all this, without a
particular and diligent perusal of the Law? Josephus tells us, that the Jewish
Children were so well verst in it, that they could repeat the Law without Book.

Thus, Josh. 1. 8. God commanded Joshua, This Book of the Law shall not depart
out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night; then shall
thou make thy way prosperous. See a General of an Army obliged by an express
Command to read and meditate in the Holy Scriptures, and not to depend upon the
Priest's Instruction alone. So, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. the King was to write him a
Copy of the (...) and to meditate therein all the days of his Life.

Isa. 34. 16. Seek ye out the Book of the Lord, and read. The Prophet speaks to
all People upon Earth, as may be seen in the beginning of the Chapter.

We have many such Directions and Commands from our Savior and his Apostles in
the New Testament.

John 5. 39. Search the Scripture; our Savior speaks not only to Doctors or
Teachers, but also to the People: And he exhorts not only to read, but to
search them diligently.

So the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 17. Take unto you the Sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God. By which we are enabled to repel the Temptations, and to
resist the Assaults of the Devil, and to drive him from us, as our Savior
himself did.

Col. 3. 16. And let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs.
If the Doctrine or Word of Christ be contained in the Holy Scriptures, then
here is an Obligation to a diligent and serious study of them.

Luke 11. 28. Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it. And why
not then, blessed are they that read and observe it? Why should Men be hindered
from reading these Sermons of our Savior and his Apostles, which then there
was a blessing upon Man for hearing? Are they more dangerous now they are writ,
than they were when they were preached?

2 Pet. 1. 19. We have a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to
take heed. St. Peter praises those that read the Prophets; and why should Men
he blamed then for reading the Apostles and Evangelists?

Note, whereas he says, verse. 20. That no Prophe^cy of the Scripture is of any
private Interpretation. He does not speak it to deter private Men from the
reading or judging of the sense of it; but to show the sureness of their Rule,
that it was not first interpreted or written by the Fancy or Will of private
Men, but it came by the Will of God, and holy Men of God spoke therein, as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost, ver. 21.

Acts 8. 27, 28. Behold a Man of Ethiopia, an Eunuch, of great Authority and
Power under Candace the Queen, who had the charge of all her Treasure, as he
was returning from Jerusalem, and fitting in his Chariot, read Isaias the
Prophet. Observe, that this Person was not a Churchman, but a Treasurer or
Minister of State to the Queen. And Philip was sent to him by the Spirit, to
help him to understand the Prophecy he was reading. Which is a clear Testimony
of the holy Spirit's approbation of his practice, and is a great encouragement
to others to do the like; and in doing so, to hope for the divine Direction and
Blessing.

Acts 17. 11. it is said, The Bereans therefore were more noble than than those
of Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all readiness, and
searched the Scriptures daily, to know whether these things were so* It Is noted
as an Instance of an excellent Spirit in them, that they searched the
Scriptures for their satisfaction, about what was delivered by the Apostles.

So, 2 Timothy 3. 15. From a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures. See here a
Child exercised in the Holy Scriptures: And this is noted by the Apostle as an
excellent and praiseworthy thing in him.

Observe, that the Apostle St. Paul addresses the most part of his Epistles,
not to the Priests or Bishops, but to the Churches of God, to them that are
sanctified in Christ Jesus, and to all that call on the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ; see Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Gal. 1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 1.

And to show clearly that he wrote to the People, as well as to the Pastors, he
distinguishes them in his Epistle to the Philippians, Chap. 1. 1. Paul and
Timotheus the Servants of Jesus Christ, To all the Saints that are at Philippi,
with the Bishops and Deacons.

So likewise St. James addresses his Epistle to the Twelve Tribes that are
scattered abroad.

And St. Peter his first Epistle, To the Strangers scattered throughout Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and ^ithynia, Chap. 1. 1.

His second Epistle is yet more general, To all those that have obtained like
precious Faith with us, through the Righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus
Christ.

St. John writes to Fathers, to young Men, and to Children. Now what color can
there be to hinder those Persons from reading those Epistles that were sent and
addressed to them?

Add to this, that the Apostles did formally and expressly command and require
Persons to read their Epistles. Thus, Col. 4. 16. When this Epistle is read
among you, cause that it be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and that
ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea. So, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27. I charge you by
the Lord, that this Epistle be read to all the Holy Brethren.

And note, that for this end they were writ in a Language best known to the
generality of People. As also all the Holy Scripture besides was writ in a
Language that was best understood by the People for whom it was writ. The Old
Testament in Hebrew for the use of the Jews; The New Testament in Greek, that
being the Language then most generally used. And for this end there were
Translations made of the Scriptures into the Languages of several Nations, that
People of all sorts might read them.

As to what is said, 2 Pet. 3. 16. That in the Scriptures there are some things
hard to be understood, which many do wrest to their own destruction. It is from
the vice and rashness of Men, that they do so wrest them; which if they were of
humble and teachable spirits, they might avoid. And therefore to prevent this
wresting of them, the Apostle does not prohibit the People the reading of them;
but only cautions them, that they be not led away with these Errors of the
Wicked, and directs them to grow more in knowledge: the way to attain unto which
is, to peruse them with greater care and diligence. And it is an unreasonable
thing to build a Prohibition of reading the Scriptures upon a far-fetched
consequence from this Text, against so many express Commands to the contrary.

Yet see moreover, Rev. 1. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear
the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things that are written therein.

Note, here the most difficult Book of Scripture is commended to Men's reading;
and the Spirit of God calls those Blessed that read and keep it. And what
reason can there be then, to deter Men from reading the Gospels and Epistles of
the Apostles, which contain* Things much more familiar and easy to be
underst^^^^^?

Of the Church.
CHAP. IV.
That the State of the Church is always visible. Bellarm. de Eccles. lib. 3.
cap. 11.
THat the Church of God shall continue in being in all Ages, is not denied; but
that it shall be always, gloriously and conspicuouly visible to the observation
of all Persons, that they may know whither to have recourse to it to join in
communion with it, and may be moved thereunto by its splendor, is against many
Scripture-Instances and Prophecies to the contrary. Which many Times comes to
pass through the prevailing of Corruptions in it, or Persecutions against it,
which very much darken and obscure it. So that a very few Persons may retain
the purity of Doctrine in it, and those not visible to the Notice of many
others. As for Example;

What was the Face of the Church then, when God brought Abraham out of the
(...) of Infidels and Idolaters? Genesis 12.

What was the Face of the Church when Israel was in Egypt, where they defiled
themselves with the Idols of Egypt? Ezekiel. 20. 7, 8. Then they rebelled against
me, says God, and would not hearken unto me; they did not every Man cast away
the Abominations of his Eyes, neither did they forsake the Idols of Egypt; then
I said, I will pour out my Fury upon them, and mine Anger against them in the
midst of the Land of Egypt. Here was a very great Corruption in the State of
the Church, and that in the very chief and principal Points of Religion.

What was the Face of the Church in the Time of the Judges of Israel? Judge. 2.
10, 11, 12, 13. All that Generation were gathered unto their Fathers; and there
arose another Generation after them, that knew not the Lord, nor yet his Works
which he had done for Israel. And the Children of Israel did evil in the sight
of the Lord, and served Baalim: And they forsook the Lord God of their Fathers,
which brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and followed other Gods, of the
Gods of the People that were round about them; and bowed themselves to them,
and provoked the Lord to anger: And they forsook the Lord, and served Baal and
Ashtaroth. How was the Face of the Church disfigured at that Time, when they
publicly worshipped false Gods? He that would see the several Ecclipses of the
Church of Israel then, let him read this History of the Judges, particularly
Chap. 2. 3, 4, 6, 10. And, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. When Israel was for a long season
without the True God, and without a teaching Priest, and without the Law.

In the Reign of Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, ten of the twelve Tribes of
Israel revoked from the Service of God, and publicly worshipped the Calves in
Dan and Bethel, which were made by the Commandment of Jeroboam, 1 King. 12. And
if you desire to see how much the Face of the Church was disfigured, and how
often the Service of God was interrupted, read the History of the Kings.

The ten Tribes were the greatest part of the Church of Israel. But in them the
Church was so obscured in the Time of Ahab, that Elijah complained, 1 King. 19.
10. The Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine
Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the Sword; and I, even I only am left, and
they seek my Life to take it away. God had indeed reserved to himself 7000 Men,
that had not bowed their Knees to Baal. And, 1 King. 18. 4. When Jezebel had
put to death the Prophets of the Lord; Obadia took an hundred Prophets, and hid
them by fifty in a Cave, and sed them with Bread and Water. So that there was a
Church then left in Israel; but i^ was so obscured, that Elijah himself could
not see it.

In the Kingdom of Judah also, there was sometimes the same obscure State of
the Church. As in the Time of Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28. 24, 25. For Ahaz gathered
together the Vessels of the House of the Lord, and cut them in pieces, and shut
up the Doors of the House of the Lord, and he made him Altars in every corner
of Jerusalem. And in every several City of Judah he made high Places to burn
Incense unto other Gods, and to provoke to anger the Lord God of his Fathers.
Repeated again, 2 Chronicles. 29. 6, 7. There was no other Church of God then upon
Earth, but what was among the Children of Israel and Judah; and there was not
any one Temple dedicated to the Worship of the True God but that at Jerusalem.
But yet you see that was profaned, the Service of God banished, Idolatry
established. And what external Form of a Church then was there there, where the
true God was not acknowledged or served?

So in the Time of Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33. 4, 5. Who built again the high Places
which Hezekiah his Father had broken down, and he reared up Altars to Baalim,
and made Groves, and worshipped all the Host of Heaven, and served them. Also
he built Altars in the House of the Lord, whereof the Lord had said, In
Jerusalem shall my Name be for ever. Which was as great a Promise as ever was
made to any Church; and if there had been any Promise designed ever to secure
the State and Splendor of the Church in any place (...) ^ould think this had
been such an one, (If (...) had been but a like Promise made, or half (...)
said of the Church of Rome, what confi^^nt boasting and brags should we have
had?) yet you see Jerusalem and the Temple filled with Idols. And it is
moreover to be observed that at this time the State of the Church was so
corrupt, that there were no Copies of the Law to be found extant among the
People, but the Book of the Law was found in the restoring of the Temple by
Josiah; at the reading of which, as a new thing, the King was mightily
terrified, 2 Chronicles. 34. 18, 19, 20. which is a plain Argument, that the Law was
but little known, and the Copies of it generally lost. And the Prophet Jeremy
says, Jer. 11. 13. That according to the number of thy Cities were thy Gods, O
Judah; And according to the number of the Streets of Jerusalem (which is yet
called the Holy City, Matthew. 27. 53.) have ye set up Altars to that shameful
thing, to burn Incense unto Baal. And what Corruptions did the Prophet Isaiah
complain of before? Chap. 1.

In the time of the Captivity, the whole Land was a des^lation and an
astonishment, Jer. 25. 11. the Temple of Jerusalem was demolished, and the
Service of God beaten down.

So in the New Testament there are Prophecies of great defections, and much
obscurity that there should be in the Church, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. For the time will
come that they shall not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own Lusts shall
they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears; And they shall turn away
their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned unto Fables. So, 1 Timothy 4. 1.
The Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter Times some shall depart from
the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, (or rather
Doctrines concerning Demons, or a sort of under-Gods, or angelical Mediators
with God) speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their Consciences ^eared with an
hot Iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding (...) abstain from Meats. How
well does this agree to. 4. Church of Rome?

Rev. 12. 6. The Woman (by which the Church is represented) fled into the
Wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God, there to lie hid for a
time, during the rage of the Dragon. It is very unjust and unreasonable then to
demand, that at all times we should show the visible State of the True Church.

Rev. 13. 15, 16, 17. The time is prophesied of, that the second Beast shall
cause, that as many as will not worship the Image of the former Beast, shall be
killed. And he causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond,
to receive a Mark in their right hand and in their forehead; and that no Man
might buy or sell, save he that had the Mark or Name of the Beast, or the
Number of his Name. And how should the Church then, during this Tyranny, have a
visible and flourishing State? And the Papists themselves allow, that in the
time of Antichrist there shall be an universal defection for a time.

It is certain in Fact, that many Churches founded by the Apostles themselves
have quite fallen away to Mahometanism. And in the time of Athanasius the whole
World almost was become Arian. And in the Ages, just before the Reformation,
the Purity of the Church was so lost, and corrupted with Error, Superstitious
and Idolatrous Worships, that the Doctrine of the Gospel was almost quite
extinct, and false Legends, humane Traditions and Constitutions had taken place
of the Word of God, and were come in the room of the Divine Commands and
Institutions. So that it is no wonder, if in those Ages we could not show any
one Congregation or number of Persons and Professions, that always held the
same Doctrines that we do. Though there were always some that opposed and
groaned under the growing Superstitions of their Age.

Luke 18. 8. I say unto you, says our Savior, when the Son of Man comes,
shall he find Faith on the Earth? What then at that time shall be the Face of
the Church? If you will believe Cardinal Bellarmin, all the public Ceremonies
of Religion and Sacrifices shall cease, De Romans Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 7. And if
there be nothing of the public Ceremonies of Religion, how should the Church
then have a visible State?

And as for the Roman Church in particular, the Apostle gives some intimation
of her Defection, as great as that of the Jews, Romans 11. 20, 21, 22.

CHAP. V.
That Multitude is a Mark of the Church. Bellarm. de Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 7.
THis does not agree to the Church alone, nor yet always to it, nor to the
purest part of it, in opposition to others. If we should go to the Poll, the
Mahometans would outnumber the Christians. And the Professors of the True
Doctrine are many times but few in comparison of the rest of the Church, and
much more in comparison of the rest of the World. And therefore this is a very
improper Mark to distinguish and know the Church by in all Ages. As especially
in the first Age, and in the Time of the Arians, and in the Reign of
Antichrist. So that to assert it for a Mark, agreeing to the Church Universal,
is false.

Luke 12. 32. Fear not, little Flock, for it is your Father's good Pleasure to
give you a Kingdom. The Church is called a little Flock; and Babylon, that is
opposite to the Church, is called a great City, Rev. 16. 19.

Consider the Course or Series of the History of the Church. For after more
than sixteen hundred Years after the Creation of the World, the Church was
composed but of eight Persons that entered the Ark, Genesis 7. 13.

Near two thousand three hundred Years after the Creation of the World, the
Church was composed but of seventy Persons, that went down into Egypt, Exodus 1.
5. and all these but of one Family. And though it was much increased in Moses's
Time, yet then it was still but one People, wandering in a Wilderness. It was
confined to the Jewish People alone for many Ages, and to a few Proselytes that
came into them.

And as to the Jewish People it self, and more than three thousand Years after
the Creation of the World, besides the two Tribes that worshipped at Jerusalem,
there were in the other ten but seven thousand that had not bowed their knees
to Baal. And these so little appearing, that the Prophet Elijah thought he
himself had been left alone, 1 King. 19. 10. Of what side then was the
Multitude? there were four hundred lying Prophets, and but one true one, 1
King. 22.

In our Savior's Time, the whole Christian Church consisted of twelve
Apostles, and seventy Disciples, and some few followers besides; which were not
many, nor very constant in their Profession. John 6. 66, 67. For from that time
many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him. So that our
Savior said also to the Twelve, Will ye also go away? If the Apostles had
followed some sort of Maxims, they had answered, Yes, Sir, we are going too,
for the Multitude is not of thy side. Again, Chap. 12. 37, 38. Though he had
done so many Miracles before them, yet they believed not on him; That the
saying of Isaias the Prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke, Lord, who has
believed our Report? and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? It seems then
the Church was not made up of Multitude.

Mat. 27. 20. The chief Priests and Elders persuaded the multitude that they
should ask Barrabas, and destroy Jesus. To follow the multitude then, one
should have cried against the Savior of the World, Let him be crucified, verse.
22.

Acts 1. 15. In those days (after the Ascension of Christ) Peter stood up in
the midst of the Disciples; and the number of the Names together were about one
hundred and fifty. There was no great Assembly of Christians then in the World.

In After-Ages the Church indeed was much increased; but yet at some times was
so overrun with Errors, that the number of the Orthodox was inconsiderable in
comparison of the Heretics.

And it is prophesied, Rev. 13. 3, 4. that all the World would wonder after the
Beast; and worship the Dragon which gave power unto the Beast: and they
worshipped the Beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast? who is able to make
War with him? Few Disciples follow Jesus Christ, but behold the whole World
runs after the Beast.

And, verse. 7, 8. It was given unto him to make War with the Saints, and to
overcome them; and Power was given unto him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and
Nations. And all that dwell upon the Earth shall worship him, whose Names are
not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb. How should all the Inhabitants of
the World worship the Beast, and yet Multitude be of the side of the Church?

So, Rev. 17. 1, 2. it is the great Whore that sits upon many Waters, (now,
verse. 15. The Waters which thou saw, where the Whore sits, are Peoples,
and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues.) And the Kings of the Earth have
committed Fornication with her, and the Inhabitants of the Earth have been
drunk with the Wine of her Fornication. So that the great Whore commands Kings,
and a multitude of Peoples, and Nations. This is that the Church of Rome vaunts
of so much; but we shall think never the better of them for their Multitude,
nor yet the worse of our selves though we were fewer than we are, having had
such fair Warnings as to this Matter.

This is no sufficient Argument of their being the true Catholics, for having
the greatest number of Professors of their side, unless they likewise retain
and profess the Catholic Faith, the same Christian Religion, which all good
Christians in all Ages, and of all Nations, have ever constantly professed. And
if we do this, we are true Catholics, though we are the lesser number, if it
be so. But upon Calculation it has been judged, that the number of the Reformed
is not much unequal to theirs. But no wise Man ever judged of the Truth of
Religion, by the major Vote; which is an Argument to none but Fools. Exodus 23.
2. Thou shall not follow a Multitude to do evil. But, if Multitude were always
in the right, this had been a very improper and vain Caution.

CHAP. VI.
That Temporal Happiness is a Mark of the Church. Bellarm. de Eccles. lib. 4.
cap. 18.
WHat was said of the former Mark, may also be applied to this here. This does
not agree to the Church alone, and therefore cannot be a proper Mark to
distinguish it from others. For the Heathens, and especially the Mahometans,
have often had this to plead for themselves. Besides, it is but a contingent
Note, and agrees to the Church, and the Defenders of it but at some times. And
some times agrees to one part of the Church, when it does not to another; and
sometimes to the more corrupt part of it, when it is otherwise with that part
that is more pure. And therefore it is a very improper Note to distinguish one
from the other; and so does not do the office of a proper Mark. Or if it
signified any thing, the Reformed of this and the last Age may plead it in some
places, blessed be God, as well as the Romanists. But indeed it is but a
fallacious Mark; and to assert it universally of the Church, or the most pure
part of it at all times, it is false, and contrary to the Doctrine and
Predictions of the Scripture, and the Experience of the Church.

John 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this World. Our Savior did not aim at an
earthly Pomp, or Grandeur, or Authority, like the Kings of the Earth, nor to
leave this as an Inheritance to his ^ollowers. 1 John 2. 15. The Lusts of the
Flesh, and the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, are not of the Father,
but of the World.

Mat. 16. 24. If any will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross and follow me. Not temporal Happiness, not a Cross of Gold and Silver,
but Affliction for the Gospel.

Mat. 24. 9. They shall deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you; and
ye shall be hated of all Men for my Name's sak^. This was the lot of the
Apostles, and the Christians of the first Age; and so it has continued to be,
more or less, in most of the Ages since. And the Church indeed seems to be
calculated for a state of Affliction, for then it thrives best.

John 15. 20. Remember the Word that I said unto you, The Servant is not
greater than the Lord: If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute
you. The Life of our Lord Jesus was a continual Persecution; And God has
predestined us to be conformed to the Image of the Son, Romans 8. 20.

John 16. 2. They shall cast you out of the Synagogues: yea, the time shall
come, that whosoever kills you, shall think that he does God service.

Verse. 20. Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shall mourn and lament, but
the World shall rejoice; ye shall be sad, but your sadness shall be turned into
joy. All things have their season, Eccles. 3. The World laughs now, but one day
it shall gnash its teeth. Good Men mourn here below, but above God shall wipe
away Tears from their Eyes, Rev. 7. last.

Acts 14. 21. Paul and Barnabas returned, confirming the Souls of the
Disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the Faith; and that we must
through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. Affliction and
Tribulation is no more than what those who continue in the Faith may expect to
meet with, according to what has come to pass in former Ages.

2 Timothy 3. 12. All those that will live godly in the Faith of Jesus Christ,
shall suffer Persecution. But the Children of Babylon glorify themselves, and
live deliciously, Rev. 18. 7.

1 Thessalonians. 3. 3. I sent to comfort you, that no Man should be moved by these
Afflictions; for your selves know that we are appointed thereunto. The Church
is not appointed then to a continual prosperous State.

Rev. 12. 14, 15. When the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the Earth, he
persecuted the Woman which had brought forth the Man-Child. And to the Woman
were given two Wings of a great Eagle, that she might flee into the Wilderness
into her place. And the Serpent cast out of his Mouth Water as a Flood, after
the Woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the Flood. This
represents the Fury of the Devil, stirring up Persecution against the Church,
which God nourishes for a time in the Wilderness.

Chap. 13. 7. It was given him, (that is, the Beast,) to make war with the
Saints, and to overcome them. Where was then the Prosperity of the Church?

Chap. 17. 4. The Woman, the Great Whore, was arrayed in Purple, and
Scarlet-colour, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls, having a
golden Cup in her Hand, full of abominations and filthiness of her
Fornications. But now behold the Equipage of the faithful Martyrs, Heb. 11. 36,
37. They had trial of cruel Mockings and Scourgings, yea moreover, of Bonds and
Imprisonment: They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the Sword; they wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented, (of whom the World was not worthy) they
wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth.

Therefore, 1 Pet. 4. 12. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery
Trial, as though some strange thing happened unto you.

John 16. 33. In the World ye shall have Tribulation, (a description of a State
far enough from temporal Prosperity) but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
World.

CHAP. VII.
That Miracles are a Mark of the Church. Bellarm. de Eccl. lib. cap. 14.
Whenever any Persons have been sent out upon an extraordinary Message, by an
extraordinary Mission from God, to preach or teach such Doctrine as has not
been delivered before, or not sufficiently attested; In that case it is
confessed, that Miracles are necessary to attest their Mission, and to confirm
their Doctrine. But this Mission of theirs having been once sufficiently
attested, and their Doctrine confirmed by Miracles, and both this Doctrine and
Miracles faithfully recorded, and the Records safely preserved, then there can
be no absolute need of more Miracles. For there can be no need of doing that
again which has been sufficiently done already: And therefore there can be no
need of more Miracles, when a Doctrine already sufficiently confirmed by
Miracles, is only to be cleansed and restored from the mixture of Errors with
which it is defiled or obscured. But in that case it is sufficient to have
recourse to the Writings and Records in which the true Doctrine has been
delivered, which has been sufficiently confirmed before. And therefore
Hezekiah and Josiah wrought to Miracles, when the Reformation was set a-foot by
them according to the Law, already confirmed by Miracles. And Hosea, Amos, etc.
wrought no Miracles, when they were sent to recall the People from their
Apostasy to the observation of the Law. And John Baptist himself wrought no
Miracles, John 10. 41. being but to teach the People that Doctrine that was
delivered in the Promises of the Old Testament concerning the Messiah. And for
the same reason there was no necessity that Miracles should be wrought by our
Reformers, it being their Business, not to teach any new Doctrine, but to
restore what was already taught, and formerly confirmed by Miracles.

And it is moreover to be observed, that neither our Savior nor his Apostles
did insist upon Miracles alone, as the only Test of the Truth of their
Doctrine, but in conjunction with the Predictions and Prophecies of the Old
Testament, which were fulfilled in our Savior's Person, and in his Works and
Doctrine, as may appear by our Savior's own method, which he took for the
conviction of others, Luke 24. 25, 26. where he appeals to all that the
Prophets have spoken concerning himself. And by his referring them to the
Scriptures for their information, John 5. 39. And so St. Peter corroborates the
Testimony of the Resurrection of Christ, with David's prediction of it, Acts 2.
22, 24. And refers likewise to the Prophecies of the Old Testament as the most
sure Rule, 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17. And St. Paul in his preaching, said none other
things than those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come, Act. 26.
22. So that the Jews were to receive our Savior and his Doctrine, not barely
upon the account of his Miracles, but as in conjunction with the Doctrine and
Prophecies of the Old Testament, and so as having all the concurrent Characters
of a Divine Revelation. And we have much less reason now to receive any
Doctrine from any Persons or Church, upon the account of any Miracles wrought
or pretended to be wrought by them, unless it be likewise conformed to the
Doctrine of the Scriptures, already delivered and confirmed, by which it is to
be tried.

We are also forewarned in the Scriptures, that it may please God sometimes to
permit Signs and Wonders to be wrought for the trial of Men, whether they will
adhere to the True Doctrine already delivered, and sufficiently confirmed. And
the false Prophets and Teachers shall make use of such Methods to propagate
their false Doctrines. Therefore this can be no proper Mark or Character of a
true Prophet, true Doctrine, or a true Church. Thus,

Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams,
and gives thee a Sign or a Wonder; And the Sign or Wonder come to pass, of
which he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other Gods (which thou have
not known) and, let us serve them: Thou shall not hearken to the words of that
Prophet, or that Dreamer of Dreams; ^or the Lord your God proves you, to know
whether you love the Lord your God with all your Heart, and with all your Soul.

Mat. 24. 24, 25. False Christ's and false Prophets shall arise, and shall show
great Signs and Wonders, that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very
Elect. Behold, I have told you before. Is not this a fair warning?

2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. That wicked One, (viz. the Son of Perdition) his coming shall
be after the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders.
This is the very Mark and Livery of the Son of Perdition.

Rev. 13. 13, 14. And he does great Wonders, (viz. the Beast that had Horns
like a Lamb) so that he makes Fire come down from Heaven on the Earth in the
sight of Men; and deceives them that dwell on the Earth, by the means of those
Miracles that he had power to do in the sight of the Beast. And some it seems
shall be deceived thereby: For the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter
Times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, 1 Timothy
4. 1. The so many pretended Miracles of the Romish Church, then give us cause
of suspicion that all is not right. It is for them to pretend to Miracles, that
want other confirmation of their Doctrine; but when we preach only the Doctrine
already confirmed, we do not need them.

Gal. 1. 8. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel
unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. It is
in vain to alleadg Miracles to confirm a false Doctrine; for it is not the
preaching or apparition of an Angel is enough to recommend it; and if not so,
then not any other Miracle. So that we are to try the Doctrines now, not by
Miracles, but by its consonancy to, and correspondency with the Doctrine of the
Scriptures already established. And we must judge of the Miracles themselves by
the Doctrine, and not the Doctrine by them. And as we are to judge of the
Doctrine, so we are to judge of the Church that teaches it: And have cause to
suspect Miracles now as the Marks of Deceivers, who we are foretold shall
pretend to them, than to take them as Tests of true Doctrine, or Marks of the
true Church.

It is the Character of the Pharisees, never to be contented with the Miracles
that have been sufficiently wrought, but still to expect more, Mat. 16. 1. But
we are contented with the Miracles already wrought by our Savior and his
Apostles. And since we teach no other Doctrine than what was taught by them, we
may say of good right, that their Miracles are our Miracles, and that they
authorize our belief.

So that we shall think not one jot the worse of our selves now for want of
this Mark; nor one jot the better of the Church of Rome for its pretending to
it.

CHAP. VIII.
That St. Peter was supreme Pastor and Governor under Christ, and had a
prim^acy of Dominion over the Church; and that the Pope is so as his Successor.
Catechism. Roman. par. 1. de 9. Artic. Symbol.. 11.
THis is the main Foundation of all the glorious Pretenses of the Bishop and
Church of Rome. Upon this it is that they arrogate so great Authority to
themselves over all the Churches of Christ throughout the World, and over all
their Members. The Roman Church is defined to be the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches. Fourth General Council of Lateran. Can. 2. Council of Trent. Sess. 7.
Can. 3, etc. And the Roman Bishop defined to be the Vicar of God and Christ,
and the Successor of St. Peter, and to have the supreme Pastorship over the
Universal Church. Council of Trent. Sess. 6. de reformat. cap. 1. Sess. 15.
cap. 7.

But the very Foundation of all, that St. Peter had such an Headship and Rule
over the whole Church, above the rest of the Apostles, is overthrown by many
Texts of Scripture.

Mark 10. 42, 43, etc. Jesus called unto them, and said, Ye know that they
which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles, exercise Lordship over them, and
their great Ones exercise Authority upon them. But so shall it not be among
you; but whosoever will be Great among you, shall be your Minister; and
whosoever of you will be Chiefest, shall be Servant of all. If our Savior had
intended a primacy of Jurisdiction or Authority to St. Peter over the rest of
the Disciples, would he have expressed himself in such universal Terms, so
absolutely denying this Authority and Superiority to all? Would he not have
excepted St. Peter's Right and Privilege which he intended to him? But here is
an universal Negation of such supreme Authority, to all of them indifferently,
without any such Exception.

Mat. 19. 28. Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, that ye which have
followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit upon the Throne
of his Glory, ye shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. The Apostles are here represented, sitting equally upon twelve Thrones.
Is not this to let us understand, that they were to have an equal Authority?
Whereas if St. Peter was to have had a superior Authority, one would, think he
should have had a Throne too superior to all the rest.

Mat. 23. 8. Be not y^ called Rabbi, or Master; for one is your Master, even
Christ, and all ye are Brethren. Here is no assignation of any Mastership to
St. Peter, as Christ's Vicar; But all the Disciples are joined together in an
equality of Brotherhood under Christ their Lord.

Luke 22. 24. There was also a strife among them, which of them should be
accounted the Greatest. Note, that this Dispute was but the Evening before the
Passion of Jesus Christ, after these words were spoken, Mat. 16. 19. I will
give unto thee the Keys. If St. Peter had been then constituted the Chief of
the Apostles, there would never have been this Dispute among them touching the
Primacy. For our Savior upon this Dispute said not one word that he had given
it to St. Peter. But on the contrary,

Verse. 25. 26. The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them; and they
that exercise Authority upon them, are called Benefactors, but ye shall not be
so. Which certainly excludes such a Supreme Authority as is claimed by the Pope.

John 20. 22, 23. Jesus Christ breathed upon his Disciples, and said unto them,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose Sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whose
Sins ye retain, they are retained. Note here, that the Power of binding and
loosing, which was promised to St. Peter, Mat. 16. 19. is here given to all the
Disciples indifferently. Therefore that Promise conveyed no special Privilege
or Authority to St. Peter, but what was given in common to them all.

Ephesians. 2. 20. Ye are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. Note, that the Apostles and
Prophets are here put in the same rank, and are all equally called
Foundation-stones, as St. Peter was called a Rock, Matthew. 16. 18. and James and
John, Pillars as well as he, Gal. 2. 9. To Jesus Christ alone belongs the
Pre-eminence.

So, Rev. 21. 14. And the Wall of the City had twelve Foundations, and in them
were the Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. You see here still the
Apostles advanced to the same degree of Honor.

Bu^ note, that the Apostles are not called Foundations in respect of their
Persons, but in respect of the Doctrine which they held or preached. And in the
Text, Matthew. 16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church.
The Rock there mentioned is expounded by many of the Ancient Fathers, as St.
Chrysostom, St. Ambrose, St. Austin, etc. of the Doctrine which St. Peter
confessed, that Christ was the Son of the living God. Which Christ calls a Rock,
and that upon which he would build his Church, with allusion to St. Peter's
Name that spoke it, which signifies a Stone. And upon this Doctrine all the
Apostles indifferently founded the Churches where they came as well as he.

John 21. 17. Where our Savior three times says to St. Peter, Feed my Sheep.
What is there contained in that, or signified by it, but what is equally the
duty of all other Pastors of the Church? So that here is no Privilege conferred
only to him, but a Duty injoined which concerns all, but is there particularly
three times repeated to St. Peter, and urged upon him as the best expression of
his Love which he then professed to his Lord and Master, whom before he had
thrice denied, and perhaps was, as a rebuke for that denial, three times
repeated.

1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. Here St. Peter puts himself in the rank of the Elders, that
is to say, the Pastors of the Church, and does not in the least attribute to
himself any manner of Domination, and forbids the same to others. The Elders
which are among you, I exhort, who am also an Elder: He does not say, who am
supreme Ruler and Governor over all, as he might and should have done, to have
enforced his Exhortation the more, if it had been true. For he should have
magnified his Office as St. Paul did. Feed the Flock of God which is among you,
taking the oversight thereof. Which is the same Exhortation which our Savior
gave him: And how then is it a special Prerogative belonging to him alone? But
then he adds likewise, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre,
but of a ready Mind; neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being
Enamples to the Flock. Quite contrary to the Pride and Arrogance of many
Bishops of Rome that lord it over all.

Consider farther, there are no Indications of any such supreme Authority in
St. Peter, but the quite contrary in very many Instances.

St. Peter is not always named in the first place; as Mark 16. 7. Joh. 1. 44. 1
Cor. 1. 12. Gal. 2. 9.

He spoke not first in the Council of Jerusalem; but a great Dispute there had
been before he began his Discourse, Acts 15. 7.

It was not by his Sentence that the Decree of the Council was stated, verse. 13.

The Message to the Gentiles was not sent by him, verse. 22.

The Decree of the Council was not published in his Name, verse. 23.

He shared the Ecclesiastical Charge with the Apostles, as their Fellow and
Companion in the Work of the Lord. Gal. 2. 9. And when James, and Cephas, and
John, who seemed to be Pillars, perceived the Grace that was given to me, they
gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of Fellowship, that we should go unto
the Gentiles, as they unto those of the Circumcision.

St. Paul makes himself equal unto him in all things; Gal. 2. 6. Of those that
seemed to be somewhat, whatsoever they were, it makes no matter to me^; God
accepts no Man's Person; They that seemed to be somewhat, in Conference added
nothing to me. So, 2 Cor. 11. 5. For I suppose I was not a whit behind the very
chiefest Apostles. It had been good manners to have excepted St. Peter, his
Head and Lord, at least.

St. Peter was sent in Commission by the rest of the Apostles, Acts 8. 14. When
the Apostles that were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the Word of
God, they sent unto them Peter and John. Does this look like his being their
Head, or having supreme Authority over them? Sure it would be esteemed a
strange piece of presumption, if the Bishops should undertake to do the like to
the Pope!

St. Peter was required to render an account also of his Carriage: Acts 11. 2,
3. And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they that were of the Circumcision
contended with him, saying, Thou wentest in unto Men uncircumcised, and did
eat with them. But Peter rehearsed the Matter from the beginning, and expounded
it by order to them.

He was also publicly reproved by St. Paul, Gal. 2. 11. When Peter was come to
Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. And, verse.
14. When I saw that they walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the
Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou being a Jew live after the
manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the
Gentiles to live as do the Jews? Was this very decent in Paul, if St. Peter was
his Head, and chief Governor over all? So that here is not the least Testimony
or Sign of any such Supremacy or Power ever owned or acknowledged by St. Peter.

Note also, that all Headship over the Church is always appropriated to Christ,
and that in such a manner, that it cannot be delegated to St. Peter or any
other.

Thus, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. God has put all things under the feet of Jesus
Christ, and has given him to be Head over all Things to his Church, which is
his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. Had it not been proper to
have said, And under the feet of St. Peter too, and his Successors as Christ's
Vicar, if it had been so. But as in the Body of Man there is but one Head, so
there is but one Head in the Church, of which we are all Members.

Ephesians. 5. 23. The Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head
of the Church; and he is the Savior of the Body. Where the Apostle joins his
being Head of the Church and Savior together: So that he that is not the
Savior of the Church, cannot be the Head. And note, that our Lord Jesus Christ
is the Head of the Church, in the same manner as the Husband is the Head of the
Wife. So that as in the business of Marriage there is to be no Substitute, so
neither is Christ to have a Deputy or Vicar in his Church.

1 Cor. 3. 11. For other Foundation can no Man lay than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ.

But supposing that St. Peter was Head of the Church, why must the Pope be so?
Or if it could be proved, that there was such an Headship in St. Peter, how
does it appear that this was any more than a personal Privilege, in which
therefore he was to have no Successor? and an Honor conferred upon him out of
particular respect, and not from any universal necessity of such an Office in
the Church? A supreme Pastor, they say, is necessary to the Unity of the
Church; and therefore St. Peter was such a one, and therefore he ought to have
a Successor in that same Office. But is it sufficient to build so great a
Pretension, that can be rightly grounded upon nothing but a Divine Institution,
upon a mere humane reasoning of the expediency and necessity of the Thing? Is
it not more modest rather to argue the contrary, that because there is no
Divine Institution of such an Office, that therefore it is not necessary,
however we may mistake the convenience of it? Show the Institution, and we will
believe it; or else, though St. Peter should have been Prince of the Apostles,
and Head of the Church under Christ, (which yet is shown that it was not) why
may not we take this for a particular Honor, and not for a necessary Office?
Cannot our Savior, who is God over all, sufficiently dispense his Influences,
and provide for his Churches Welfare, as far as he thinks meet in this military
State, by other Means and Church Officers, without such a Vicar Head? Or how is
it possible, that a mere Creature should be capable of executing such an Office
over all the Churches, for their good, at such remote and distant places? or
how could he be able to manage such a wide and mighty Empire?

But after all, if it could be proved that St. Peter was vested in such an
Office for the Time being; yet how does it appear that he was to have a
Successor in it, or that it must be the Bishop of Rome rather than any other?
So that here we are altogether at uncertainty still, and must build an
Institution again upon mere humane Reasoning. If because he himself was Bishop
of Rome, so was he said to be of Antioch too. And why should not his Successor
at Antioch claim this Privilege as much as he at Rome? If because Rome was his
last See when he died, how does it appear that his dying there transfers his
Authority to the following Bishop, unless it appears it was his last Will to
have it so, and that he had power to make such a Will? But, lastly, does it
appear by the Scripture at all, or certainly by ancient Record, that ever St.
Peter was at Rome, much less Bishop there? And if not, how is the Pope his
Successor at all? See for this a late Discourse printed at London, called, A
Modest Inquiry, Whether St. Peter were ever at Rome, etc. So that here is
nothing but uncertainty still, to build all their glorious Pretenses upon. And
considering all, I cannot but conclude as our Church does, Sermon of Obedience,
3d. part; The usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome, which he most wrongfully
challenges, as the Successor of St. Peter, is false, feigned, and forged.

Neither is it necessary then to the being of a true Church, to be united to
the Pope as supreme Pastor and Governor over it, as is pretended, Catech.
Roman. par. 1. de 9. Artic. Symbol. sl. 11. If no such Center of Unity be
appointed by Christ, who is the Lord and Bridegroom of the Church, then it
cannot be necessary to the Unity of the Faith to be united in it, nor is that
an essential Note of the True Catholic Church. And so all those great
Pretensions of the absolute necessity of Peoples being in Communion with the
Church of Rome, under the Pope as supreme Pastor, upon the pain of Damnation,
for the guilt of Heresy and Schism in breaking this Union, are merely false and
vain. So that our Church may be a Member of the true Catholic Church, and in
Catholic Unity still, though we have separated from them; if there be nothing
else to render our separation culpable, besides this vain pretense.

The Apostle gives us an account of all other Church Officers, both ordinary
and extraordinary, that are appointed by Christ for the edifying of the Church;
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we
all come in the Unity of the Faith, etc. But not one word of such an Office as
that of supreme Pastor or universal Sovereign over all: Which we may be sure he
would not have omitted, if such an Office had been so necessary to the
aforesaid Ends as is pretended.

CHAP. IX.
That the Pope has power over Kings, to Excommunicate and Depose them; and can
give Power to resist Sovereign Princes, and can absolve Subjects from their
Allegiance. And that all Ecclesiastical Persons are exempted from the
Jurisdiction of Secular Courts. The 3d General Council of Lateran, Cap. 27. and
14. The 4th of Lateran, Can. 3. de Haereticis, and Can. 43. Council of Lions,
Ann. 1245. Council of Constance, Sess. 17. Council of Trent, Decret. de
Reformat. Cap. 12.
THis vast and exorbitant Power being founded upon the Pope's Headship over the
Church, which is refuted before, there needs no new Arguments here for the
confutation hereof. For it is not pretended that the Pope has a proper and
direct temporal Sovereignty, but as a necessary Consequent to, and appendix of
his Spiritual, and for the promoting the Ends thereof. The Pope can change
Kingdoms take them from one, and give them to another; as the sovereign
spiritual Prince, if this be necessary to the Salvation of Souls: Which are the
words of Bellarmi^^. (...) Romans Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 6. So that the same
Arguments produced before to refute the spiritual Sovereignty, serve also to
overthrow the temporal, and more strongly, this having only relation to the
former, and inferred from it by far-fetched Consequences, without the least
intimation from Scripture.

And the exemption of all Ecclesiastical Persons from the Temporal Power; is
grounded likewise upon the same Papal Headship: For he being supposed to be
their supreme Governor and Sovereign, is to take cognizance of all Causes that
have relation to them, as their proper Judge. And this being the Consequent of
such a Principle, the Principle being overthrown, the Consequence must also
fall with it. And then there remains no other Power upon Earth, to which the
Clergy are to be subject as their supreme Governor under God and Christ, but
sovereign Princes and States in their several Dominions. But yet this pretended
Exemption of the Clergy may be likewise farther confuted from the following
Texts.

Romans 13. 1, 2. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers, meaning the
supreme Civil Authority, whatsoever it is, whether Emperor, King, etc. in their
several Dominions. Here Is an universal Assertion respecting all Persons under
such Authorities, and no exemption of any: For there is no such Power, lawfully
constituted, but of God: The Powers that be, are ordainded of God. Wherefore he
that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves damnation. So that there is no Power whatever that
can absolve Subjects from their Allegiance to the supreme Magistrate, or free
them from his Jurisdiction lawfully constituted. For he bears not the Sword
in vain; it is his part to bear and wield and Sword of Justice. For he is the
Minister of God, to execute Wrath upon him that does evil, and to punish
Offenders. And therefore Ecclesiastical Persons, as ^ell as others, if they do
evil, against the Laws of God and a lawful Government, are liable to the just
execution of punishments inflicted by such Governors. But it is well known,
that the Republic of Venice was put under an Interdict, for having began a
Process against an Abbot and a Canon, who were notoriously criminal and
punishable.

1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. See also St. Peter' s Judgment. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake; whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil Doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. He does not say, Submit your selves to me, as the
supreme Head of the Church; neither, says he, Submit your selves, from time to
time, to my Successor in Rome; but submit your selves to the King as Supreme.
And how could he more manifestly teach subjection, which all Persons, of
whatsoever Condition and Quality, should render unto him? For he makes no
exception of the Clergy, but this Epistle is directed to them as well as
others. See Chap. 5.

Tit. 3. 1. See here again to the same purpose St. Paul, Put them in mind to be
subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates. Who were these
that Titus was to put in mind to be subject? but those who by St. Paul's
direction were committed to his care and teaching; among which we find the
Elders and Bishops of the Churches, Chap. 1. 4, 5. these were some of those
then whom Titus was to put in mind to be subject.

Aaron was Elder Brother to Moses, and chief Priest; yet nevertheless he was
subject to Moses, and called him his Lord, Exodus 32. 21, 22. And Moses said
unto Aaron, What did this People unto thee, that thou have brought so great a
Sin upon them? (viz. of the Golden Calf, of which they spoke); And Aaron said,
Let not the Anger of my Lord wax hot: thou know the People, that they are
set on mischief. And, Numb. 12. 11. Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my Lord, lay
not this Sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we have
sinned; for he and Miriam had murmured against Moses.

The chief Priests were subject to the Kings of Israel. For which you need but
read the Books of Kings; See one Example hereof, to which no reply can be made,
1 King. 2. 26, 27. Unto Abiather the Priest said King Solomon, Get thee to
Anathoth, unto thine own Fields, for thou art worthy of Death: but I will not
at this time put thee to death, because thou bear the Ark of God before
David my Father, etc. So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being Priest unto the
Lord. But now under the New Testament, says Cardinal Bonaventure, the Temporal
Rule is subject to the Priesthood, and Popes may now degrade Kings, and depose
Emperors, as this has often come to pass. But wherein is the difference? and
where is the proof of this impious Assertion?

St. Paul pleads his cause before Felix, a secular Judge, and does not except
against the Jurisdiction of the Court, Acts 24. And so again before Festus,
Acts 25. But now the meanest Priest, and the poorest Monk of them all, where he
can, refuses to appear before the secular Judges. And it is a received Maxim;
The Pope ought to judge all the World, and be judged himself of no Body.
Distinct. 40. Can. Si Pape.

At last St. Paul appeals unto Caesar, Acts 25. 10, 11. Then said Paul; I stand
at Cesar' s Judgment Seat, where I ought to be judged, being a Roman. So he
acknowledges Cesar's Jurisdiction: Yet to the Jews I have done no wrong, as
thou very well know, though I were liable to their Courts. If I be an
Offender, or have committed any thing worthy of Death by the Roman Laws, I
refuse not to die; so he readily submits himself to the Trial of their Laws,
and to the Sentence to be inflicted according to them: But if there be none of
these things whereof they accuse me, no Man may deliver me unto them, to be
punished by them. I appeal unto Caesar, the Roman Emperor, as my proper and
lawful Judge. And is not this a plain acknowledgment then of Cesar's just
Authority? But, says Bellarmine, he was constrained to appeal unto Caesar,
because the Gentiles and Jews would have mocked him (and with good reason) if
he had appealed to St. Peter, who was his Sovereign Prince and Judge. Recognet.
lib. de sum. Pontif. and de Cle^. lib. 1. cap. 30. Is not this prettily said of
so great a Cardinal?

CHAP. X.
That the Church of Rome is Infallible, and that it belongs to her to judge of
the Sense of Scripture; so that all Persons are bound up to her Judgment and
Definitions. Catech. Roman. part. 1. de 9 Art. Symbol.. 18. Council of Trent,
Sess. 4. Decret de Edit. and usu Sacr. libr.
THis is contrary to all those Texts of Scripture that allow a Judgment of
Discretion to every private Person in Matters of Religion, whereby they are at
liberty to judge for themselves, and to try and examine the Doctrines which they
are taught, whether they be true or false, or whether revealed by God or no. As,

1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. How must we
prove all things, if we must take them upon trust, without examination from any
Person whatsoever?

1 John 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they are of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the World. So
that we are not to give up our selves by an Implicit Faith, to be led by any
Persons whatsoever that pretend themselves Guides, but examine their Doctrines
before we receive them. And here is no referring of Christians to an Infallible
Judge, to whose Sentence and determination all are bound to submit, which the
Apostle ought in all reason to have done, if such an one had been constituted
in the Church, and not to leave it to every Man's private Judgment to examine
these things, as he does;

1 Cor. 10. 15. I speak as to wise Men, judge ye what I say. The Apostle implies
a Capacity and Power in private Men, to judge and discern of the Doctrine
proposed. And though he was guided by an Infallible Spirit, yet he does not
expect that Men should blindly submit to his Doctrine, but requires them to
make use of this Power of discerning in themselves.

Acts 17. 11. The Bereans are commended for searching the Scriptures daily, to
know whether those things were so or no, which were delivered by the Apostles
themselves.

Gal. 1. 8. Tho we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you,
than that which ye have received, let him be accursed. This plainly supposes,
that Christians may and can judge in themselves when Doctrines are contrary to
the Gospel, and that they ought to do it, and not blindly rely upon on any one,
no, not an Apostle, or Angel from Heaven.

1 Pet. 3. 15. Be ready always to give an Answer to every Man that asks you a
Reason of the Hope that is in you. Christians must understand, and judge of the
Grounds of Faith themselves.

Mat. 7. 15, 16. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps-clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Ye shall know them by their Fruits. How
should they beware of them, if they cannot discern or judge of them and their
Fruits? We have warning given us of seducing Spirits that shall be in the
latter Days, 1 Timothy 4. 1. And how can it be, but Men will be in danger of
giving heed to them, if they must not judge for themselves, or cannot discern
their Doctrines?

Mat. 15. 14. They be blind leaders of the Blind. And if the Blind lead the
Blind, they both fall into the Ditch. The Leaders of the People, you see, were
blind: And the People that follow blind Leaders shall perish with them. This is
a fair warning to us, not blindly to submit to the guidance of any.

So that there is no other way, but for the People themselves, by a diligent
and serious perusal and study of the Scriptures to judge for themselves what the
right Sense and Interpretation of them is, and what Doctrines are true or
false; not refusing the assistance of their Spiritual Guides who are appointed
for their direction herein; yet not giving up themselves unreservedly or
unlimitedly to any, as Lords of their Faith.

If there were a Judgment of Authority vested in any Person or Persons in the
Christian Church, which might impose upon all, and to which all were bound in
their Judgments to submit, why is not this Infallible Judge referred to by the
Apostles? How is a judgment of discerning allowed to every private Person,
which is inconsistent therewith?

But for Men to judge for themselves, is indeed a natural Right belonging to Men
as Men, and as rational Creatures. And no Man can judicially embrace the True
Religion, unless he be permitted to judge whether that which he embraces be the
True Relig^on or no.

And supposing the Scriptures plain in all Things necessary to Salvation, (as
has been proved Chap. 2.) so that every Man, of ordinary capacity, after
competent Instruction in Matters of Religion, may arrive to a sufficient
understanding of all those things that are so, he may judge of them as well for
himself as any Man or company of Men can judge for him. For every Man can judge
of what is plain. And therefore it is reasonable that those things which are
plain to every Man, should be left to every Man's judgment. And there can be no
necessity of an Infallible Judge to guide or determine him therein.

The Civil Magistrate, or Judge, only determines Men's Practice and outward
Actions, or disposes of some of their Goods and Properties. And that there
should be such an one, besides a Law or Rule, is needful in Civil Government,
for the regulating Men's outward Actions and Properties. But he does not
prescribe to our inward Sense and Judgment; which is the thing that this
Infallible Judge in Religion is pretended to do; to whose Judgment Men must not
only submit their Practice, but their Judgment. Which is quite a different
thing from the former; and therefore there is no parity of Reason from one to
the other.

If they say, It is needful that there should be such a Judge in the Church, for
the determining and ending of all Controversies, and for the preventing and
repressing of Heresies and Confusions; and therefore there is such an one. This
is to argue from our own Fancies what God should do, and not what he has done.
And they might as well conclude the Being of an Universal Infallible Judge over
all the World in Temporal Matters, for the Peace of the World; which yet we see
is not appointed as such an one over the Church for the Peace of the Church.
But it is not to be expected that all Differences in Religion should cease in
this World; for there must be Heresies, 1 Cor. 11. 19. As there were Heresies
even in the Apostles Times, though they were Infallible; which is an Argument,
that Infallibility in any, if it were, is no certain means to prevent Heresies
or Divisions. If Men be modest, and humble, and teachable, God has provided
sufficient means for their direction, in the plainness of the Rule which he has
given in all things necessary, and appointing Guides for their direction in
doubtful things, if they will follow their instruction. But if Men be governed
with Prejudice* and Passion, they would not hearken to an Infallible Judge if
there were one. And Christ the Judge of all will take an account of such Men in
due time, when the Great Judgment-Day shall come. Then the Tares shall be
gathered together, and bound in bundles to be burnt, and the Whea^ shall be
gathered into the Barn, Mat. 13. But this Judgment in the mean time is to be
suspended till that Day shall come.

But that Men may judge for themselves in some things without an Infallible
Judge, our Adver^aries themselves are fain to allow: For how else (...) they
judge in the Controversy about the Infallible Judge himself, whether there be
such an on^ or (...) and who it is? and of the Scriptures and Reasons that are
brought to prove it? And if they may judge of this Controversy, and of these
Scriptures and Reasons without an Infallible Judge, then why may they not also
of others which are as necessary, and of other Scriptures and Reasons in other
Points which are as plain as they? And then there is no need of an Infallible
Judge at all.

As for the pretended Infallibility of the Church of Rome, for the qualifying
it to be such a Judge: If the Church of Rome be infallible, then it must be so,
either as it is a Christian Church, and because it is so; And then all
Christian Churches would be Infallible likewise, and not that only: Or, as it
is an Apostolical Church planted by the Apostles, if it were so; and then all
the Churches that were planted by the Apostles, would be so likewise; and this
would give no particular privilege to the Church of Rome: Or, as it has
continued down a succession of Pastors from the Apostles, by whom there is a
safe conveyance of Apostolical Doctrine and Tradition to the present Age; But
if this be so, then all the Churches that have had such a Succession, will be
Infallible likewise as well as the Church of Rome: as the Grecian Church which
has had the like Succession; and upon this Principle the Church of England may
come in for a share too. But indeed this proves the Infallibility of no
particular Church at all, because of the uncertainty of Tradition therein,
notwithstanding such Succession, which may arise from many Causes; No more then
it did the Infallibility of the Jewish Church, notwithstanding that it had a
continual Succession of the Priests and Pastors, as much as the Church of Rome,
or any other Church whatsoever can pretend unto. And therefore we are not to
have respect to any Church, Pastor, or Pastors, as Infallible, nor to bind up
our Judgments to them as such, upon the account of any such Succession. Aaron
was called to the High Priesthood immediately by God himself; but was he
therefore infallible? or were the People bound to follow him when he made an
Idol? Exodus 32. Vriah was a Priest by an uninterrupted Succession from Aaron;
was he therefore Infallible, or to be followed, when he overturned the Service
of God, and Introduced Idolatry into the Temple? Caiaphas the Chief Priest was
so by an uninterrupted Succession for 1500 Years; ought he therefore to be
followed, when he condemened Jesus Christ for a Blasphemer? or were the
Resolutions of the Council, where he was President, Infallible, when Jesus
Christ was declared worthy of Death? The Pharisees sat in Moses Chair, and the
Disciples are bid observe and do, whatso (...) they said unto them; ought one
therefore with them to have rejected Jesus Christ? By that word therefore
whatsoever, he does not mean every thing without limitation, but whatsoever was
agreeable to the Law of Moses. So that they were to judge for themselves, what
was, or what was not so agreeable, Mat. 16. 6. It is foretold, that ravening
Wolves should arise from among the Bishops of the Churches: Does their
Succession of Orthodox Bishops oblige the Sheep of our Lord therefore to follow
them as Infallible? The Son of Perdition was to sit in the Temple of God; but
was he therefore Infallible, or to be followed in his Revolt?

If the Church of Rome be then Infallible, and yet not so upon the former
Accounts, Is it then, by reason of its Relation to its first pretended Bishop
St. Peter, who was Infallible; and by reason of his dying there, and his
leaving his Privileges to his Successors of that See? But though St. Peter was
Infallible, how does it appear that this was more than a personal Privilege,
and in which therefore he was to have no Successor? As the Infallibility of the
rest of the Apostles was a personal Privilege, and in which they were to have
no Successors. As for St. Peter's Headship over the Church, and that of the
Bishops of Rome as his Successors, it is refuted in the foregoing Chapters.

But if the Church of Rome be Infallible none of these ways, and yet is so,
then must it not be by virtue of some particular Promise, by which
Infallibility is annexed to the Church? But where is that Promise? As for the
Apostles calling the Church, The Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. If
it proves any thing, it proves the Infallibility of the Church of Ephesus, and
not that of Rome; For the Apostle speaks of that Church in which Timothy was
Bishop, which was the Church of Ephesus. But indeed it signifies the Churches
Duty, and not her Performance; and may be likewise applied rather to Timothy
himself than to the Church. As for that saying, Mat. 18. 17. Tell it unto the
Church. If that proves the Infallibility of a Church, it proves the
Infallibility of every Church. And so the Church of Rome will get nothing
particularly by it; for the Direction is given to every particular Member in
case of Scandal offered by him to his Brother: And whither is such an one to
make his Complaints, but to the Church of which he is a Member? And indeed it
is only an Institution of Church Discipline in every Church, for the reducing
of Offenders to Repentance, and not a setting up a Judge of Controversies in
Matters of Faith, for all Men's infallible Direction. As for that Promise, John
16. 13. When the Spirit of Truth is come, he shall guide you into all Truth. It
was made to all the Apostles, and seems to be made to them only, as appears by
the Circumstances of the Discourse, Chap. 14. 25, 26, 28. Chap. 15. 26, 27.
Chap. 16. 4, 6. Or if it be to be extended to their Successors, so far as it is
so, it must be extended to all their Successors, as it was made to all the
Apostles. And so it will make all them Infallible likewise, if it does make any
of them Infallible, and not their Successors in the Church of Rome only, or the
Popes and Bishops there by a particular Privilege.

But now suppose the Church of Rome were Infallible, who is it in that Church
that is Infallible? Is it the Pope alone? or is it a General Council called by
him? or is it both together, or the Council confirmed by a Pope, or the Council
alone? In this they do not agree among themselves. As for the Pope's own
Infallibility, his Pretentions are considered already. And if a Council be not
Infallible, unless called and confirmed by the Pope, who is yet in himself
Fallible, how can the Calling or Confirmation of a Fallible Pope, make a
Eallible Council Infallible? or will two Fallibles put together, make one
Infallible? As for the Infallibility of a Council alone in it self, if the
greatest or major part of Christian Pastors are not Infallible, but may fall
into the grossest Errors, (as all will allow) then how shall a General Council
be Infallible, which is to represent the whole Church, and in which things are
to be carried by the Rules of the major part, which may* err? Unless it can be
proved, that the major part of Christian Pastors, which are grossly erring
singly by themselves, when they come together, shall be endued with so much Wit
and Honesty, that they shall suffer themselves to be governed and overruled by
the lesser part that do not err? But what Promise or Security have we for all
this? As for Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name,
there am I in the midst of them. If that proves an Infallibility in the Persons
so gathered together, it proves the Infallibility of every Assembly of
Christians, gathered in Christ's Name, as well as of a General Council. And
therefore it would prove too much; whereas indeed it is a Promise of Christ's
gracious Presence, and not of an Infallible Guidance. And that suspended upon
condition of being gathered in Christ's Name, acting for his Glory, according
to his Rule, by his Command and Commission. As for that Place, Acts 15. 28. It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay no other Burden upon you, etc.
It is only a Declaration of the present Case, and not a Promise for the Future.
It is true, that this Council was guided by the Holy Ghost, and was Infallible;
but it does not follow that other Councils shall. For the Apostles who were all
Infallible, were the chief Actors in this Council, and therefore its
Determinations were Infallible; which cannot be said of those of any other
Council, where there is not the same reason.

And now as to the Infallibility of a General Council, suppose it were granted,
how shall we certainly know when a Council is truly General? Or suppose such an
one, and Infallible when it sits, yet how will that satisfy the pretense of the
necessity of a living Judge in the Church at all Times, for the ending of
Controversies, unless such a Council did always sit? Which we know there did
not in the first Ages of the Church, when there were many Heresies and
Differences; and we know has not done in several Ages, and we see does not now
at this Time. If they say we may read the Determinations of Councils that are
in Writing, and that will suffice us: So we may do the Determinations of the
Articles of Faith in the Scriptures; which yet they say is not sufficient,
without a living Judge to give their Sense. And if the Scriptures are not
sufficient without a living Judge, then neither are the Definitions of Councils
that are in Writing: For the Definitions of Councils left us in their Books,
are as much a dead Writing as the Scriptures, and can as little help
themsel^^^; and we see there is as much difference about the Sense of them. So
that if there must be a living Judge, and a General Council must be (...), then
there must be a Council still sitting. For if the written Determinations of a
former Council will serve the turn, then they must give up the Controversy of
the necessity of a living Judge. And if it can be proved, that the Scriptures
are a sufficient Rule, without such Determinations, and sufficiently (...) in
all things necessary, then though it be but a dead Rule, yet it will do the
deed as well as the dead Determinations of a dead Council: And so all the
Controversy will run into that abo^^ the sufficiency and clearness of
Scripture, (which has been considered in the beginning) and to his Controversy
about the Infallibility of a General Council for a living and visible Judge,
will be wholly superseded and useless.

Yet after all, if all these Difficulties could be got over, about an
Infallible Pope or Council, yet that would not signify very much to the common
People, unless their particular Bishops and Curats may be supposed to be
Infallible likewise; to give them an Infallible account of an Infallible Pope
or Councils Definitions; or unless every particular Person may go himself to
the Pope or Council for rcsolution in all Cases. Which they know cannot be
done; for the common People cannot read all their Determinations in Print or
Writing; or if they could, would as little understand them as they do the
Scriptures, and so must need a living Infallible Judge nearer at hand to give
them Infallible direction, or else they may still be deceived for want of one,
if the want of one must needs make them liable to deceit; so that they must
have Infallible Curats likewise to preserve them from danger of being deceived.
If they say the Curats may inform them of the true meaning of the Definitions
of Councils and Popes, and that they may be sufficiently certain of this,
without their being Infallible, (which is the only thing that can be said) then
it seems there may be Certainty without Infallibility. And then why may not the
Protestant Bishops and Ministers, though they were not Infallible, as certainly
inform the People of the true meaning of the Scriptures? So that if the
Scripture be a sure and plain Rule of Faith, so that it may be understood
without the Infallibility of those that read it, then the Protestant People,
who have not Infallible Teachers, may yet have as much certainty of Faith as
the common People of the Church of Rome can have for their Lives.

Of Prayer, and Worship, in an Unknown Tongue.
CHAP. XI.
That Prayers, and the Public Divine Service, is to be every where celebrated
in Latin, or a Tongue not understood by the People. Council of Trent, Sess. 22.
Cap. 8. and Can. 9.
AGainst the Rule of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. almost the whole Chapter; Verse. 2.
He that speaks in an unknown Tongue, speaks not unto Men* (or to their
understanding) but unto God alone; and no Body receives any benefit by them.
Verse. 4. For he that speaks in an unknown Tongue, benefiteth and edifieth
himself alone. Therefore, Verse. 5. greater is he that prophesies, and speaks
intelligibly to the Church in plain words, than be that speaks with Tongues,
except he interpret, that the Church may receive edifying. And, Verse. 6. then
if I come unto you speaking only with Tongues unknown, what shall I profit you?
Verse. 7, 8, 9. Even things without Life giving found, as musical Instruments,
whether Pipe or Harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall
it be known what is piped or harped? And if the Tri^^pet, for example, give an
uncertain and untelligible sound, who shall prepare himself to the Battle? So
likewise you, except ye utter by the Tongue words easy to be understood by your
Hearers, how shall it be known what is spoken by you? or what are they the
better? For, ye shall speak unprofitably, and into the Air? Verse. 10, 11. There
are, it may be, so many kinds: of Voices, and several Languages, in the World,
and none of them are without their proper signification, but this only to those
that know them. Therefore if I know not the meaning of the particular Voice or
Language, I shall be unto him that speaks, only an unintelligent Barbarian;
and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me. This is that which comes to
pass between the Priest and the People in the Church of Rome when they sing
Mass, one is a Barbarian to the other, not understanding a word what is said.

Verse. 12. Forasmuch as ye are zealous then of Spiritual Gifts, that ye may not
be unintelligible and unprofitable, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of
the Church. Verse. 13. Wherefore let him that speaks in an unknown Tongue,
pray that he may also have the Gift and Ability to interpret it. Verse. 13, 14.
For if I pray in an unknown Tongue, my Spirit or Gift of Tongues prays well
indeed, but my Understanding is unfruitful as to others to make them
understand, so as they may profitably join with me. What is it then here to be
done? I will pray with, or by my Spirit or Gift of Tongues; and I will pray
intelligibly with my Understanding also to others. And ^ will sing with the
Spirit, and with the Understanding also, or else keep silence in the Church.
V^rs. 16, 17. Else when thou shall in such an unknown Tongue bless or sing
praises to God with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the
Unlearned, join his Affection and Intention with thee, and say Amen at this thy
giving of Thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say? For verily thou
gave Thanks well, but the other is not edified or advanced in his Devotion
hereby. Verse. 18, 19. I thank my God, I have this Gift to speak with Tongues
more than any of you all. Yet when I am in the Church, I had rather speak five
words with my understanding, in a way that is intelligible, that so by my Voice
I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown Tongue. Verse.
26. Let all things be done to edifying.

It is plain from all this Discourse of the Apostle, that all Public Service
in the Church should be done to the Edification of the Church. But if the
People do not understand what is said, they cannot be edified by it, or give
their assent to it. And it is plain, if it be performed in a Tongue which they
know not, they cannot understand the Matter of the Service. And consequently
it is a vain and unprofitable Act, because in this way the People are not
edified. For it is certain, that in this way the Mind is not informed, nor the
Affections rationally excited; and therefore it is but a blind irrational
Devotion that is then offered up to God by the People; and thereby his Name is
profaned rather, and taken in vain, than honored.

How should the People say Amen, when they say their Prayers, and give Thanks
in Latin? How should the common People of England be able to say Amen, seeing
they understand not what is said? or how should they know what they say Amen
to? If the Pri^st should be so wicked, he may Conjure as well as Pray, or Curse
the People, instead of Blessing them, and they never the wiser, but say Amen to
their own Condemnation. Or when he baptizeth, he may baptize in the Name of the
Devil (for any thing they know) as well as in the Name of Christ; as it is said
a Jew once did under the Profession of a Priest.

As to what they pretend of the Unity of Devotion which would be attained
hereby all the World over. Unity of Understanding sure would more advance that,
than Unity of Language; for all Languages are all one to God. But where there
is no Unity of Understanding, there can be no Unity, either of Affection or
Devotion. Here the Priest may pray for one thing, and the People may pray for
another. Whilst the Priest is praying for Heaven, the People may pray for fair
Weather; or one for Pardon of Sin, and another for Patience, and so on, in the
same place, and at the same time. But here is no united Devotion, which is the
great End of public Service, unless the People likewise understand what the
Priest prays for, and so may join with him* nor yet any Devotion at all,
without understanding what they are about.

CHAP. XII.
That there are other Mediators of Intercession in Heaven besides Jesus Christ,
such as Angels and Saints, and especially the Virgin Mary, who is the Mother of
Mercies, and Advocatress of the Faithful. And that it is good and profitable to
invoke them, and to have recourse to their Prayer^, Aid, and Help. Council of
Trent. Sess. 25. de Invocat. Catech. Romans par. 3. cap. 2. and par. 4. cap. 5.
WHich is contrary to all those Texts of Scripture which speak of Christ, as
the only Mediator, and that instruct us to direct our Worship and all our
Prayers to God alone by him.

1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus. The Apostle speaks it without distinction, that as there is but
one God (excluding all inferior Deities) so there is but one Mediator,
excluding all inferior Mediators, without distinguishing a Mediator of
Redemption, and Mediators of Intercession. So that it is as much an Error
against the Christian Faith, to teach many Mediators, though inferior to
Christ, as to teach many Gods, though subordinate to the Supreme God.

So, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in
Heaven or in Earth, (as there be Gods many, and Lords many) but to us there is
but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. In opposition to the Pagan
Idolatry, in worshipping many inferior Gods and Lords, together with the
Supreme God, either as sharers with him in the Government of the World, or as
Mediators with him for Men. But we are to worship, and in Worship to apply our
selves to no other but this only Lord God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. For,
Acts 4. 12. Neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is no other Name
under Heaven given among Men whereby we must be saved; not yet in Heaven
neither.

John 14. 6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no Man can come unto the
Father but by me. And, Verse. 13. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name,
I will do it, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. And, John 16. 24.
That your Joy may be full. This is the only direction which our Savior gave
his Disciples a little before his Death, to ask in his Name, and to come to the
Father by him, to which and to no other way of address is the Promise of
Audience made. So that for any to address themselves to Saints or Angels as
Mediators, must needs be presumptuous and vain.

Ephesians. 2. 18. For through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the
Father. And, Ephesians. 3. 12. By him we have boldness and access with confidence,
through the Faith which we have in him. There can be no need then of other
Mediators, since the Son renders the Father accessible and favorable to us, so
that we may come to him with an holy boldness and confidence.

Heb. 4. 15. For we have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the
feeling of our Infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, Sin
only excepted. We cannot address our selves to any one that knows our
Necessities better, who has more compassion of our Miseries, or who is better
able to do us good, or who is more nearly allied unto us, For we are Members of
his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bone, Ephesians. 5.

Verse. 16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace (to the
immediate presence of God, whither we may immediately direct our Prayers,
through the Merits and Intercession of Christ, not to the Shrine of any Saint
by the way) that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in a time of need.
And, Heb. 10. 19. Having therefore boldness to enter into the Holiest by the
Blood of Jesus, by a new and living Way which he has consecrated for us
through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh; and having an High Priest over the
House of God, let us draw near with a true Heart, in full assurance of Faith.
But to use the Mediation of Saints and Angels, and directly contrary to this
boldness and assurance which we should have in our access to him by Christ: For
that sets us at a greater distance from God, and implies, as if we did not dare
to approach his Presence, without the Intercession of a Favorite Saint.

Heb. 7. 24, 25. But this Man, because he continues for ever, has an
unchangeable Priesthood; wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
Intercession for them. Where the Intercession of our Savior is made an act or
part of his unchangeable Priesthood, not to be imparted to any other. And by
this Intercession of his we obtain Eternal Salvation: So that there can be no
need of any others Intercession. The Mediatory Intercession of Saints then is
an invasion of Christ's Priestly Office; and does also plainly imply the
insufficiency of our Savior's Intercession, contrary to the Apostle.

Heb. 12. 24. We are come to Jesus, the Mediator of the New Testament, and to
the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel. Note,
that Jesus Christ is the Mediator in virtue of his Blood. Which does not cry
for Vengeance against his Brethren, as Abel's did; but by which he intercedes
and calls for Mercy, Grace and Peace for the greatest Sinners, who have their
Hearts touched with Repentance; and therefore none should be discouraged from
approaching this Mediator.

1 John 2. 1, 2. I write these things unto you that ye sin not; but if any Man
sins, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous: For
he is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but also for the
Sins of whole World. Where Christ is described as the Advocate, the only
Advocate appointed for us in the Court of Heaven, and the Advocate General of
all Christians. And the Holy Spirit joins Intercession and Propitiation
together, and founds the former upon the latter, to teach us, that whosoever is
not a Mediator of Redemption and Propitiation, cannot be an Advocate or
Mediator of Intercession. It is his Mouth alone then by which we speak to the
Father, and that in the virtue of the Propitiation which he has made.

So again, Romans 8. 34. It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again,
who is even at the right Hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us. The
Intercession of Christ is founded upon his Death. It belongs to none other but
him who shed his Blood upon the Cross, to appear for us within the Heavenly
Sanctuary.

It is his part only to present the Prayers of the Church of God, who can cover
their Defects, and render them acceptable to God; which was formerly shadowed
in the Person of the High Priest, who was to carry upon his Miter a Plate of
pure Gold, in which was engraven Holiness to the Lord. Exodus 28. 37, 38. Thou
shall put it on a blue Lace, that it may be upon the Mitre; upon the forefront
of the Mitre it shall be. And it shall be upon Aaron' s Forehead, that Aaron
may bear the Iniquity of the Holy Things, which the Children of Israel shall
hallow in all their Holy Gifts: and it shall be always upon his Forehead, that
they may be accepted before the Lord. This is fulfilled in Christ alone, who is
the Substance and the Truth of all the ancient Figures.

All the Psalms of David, and all other Prayers, both in the Old and New
Testament, are directed to God alone, and not one Supplication made, or one
Hymn bestowed upon any Tutelar or Patron, Saint or Angel, throughout all the
Scripture. Which is very strange among so many devout Men, and their Devotions
that are mentioned, if the thing had been allowable. 2 Kings 2. 9. Elijah said
to Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken from thee. And why
not after, if the thing were so proper? But Elijah gave no encouragement to
this; nor is there any instance of any Prayer made to him by the Jews, though
it was certainly known he was in Heaven: Nor yet to any Angel, to Gabriel, or
Raphel, or any other, though the Angels certainly were as much in Heaven then
as they are now. Jacob's Prayer, Genesis 48. 16. was to the Angel that redeemed
him, that is, to Christ, who often appeared as an Angel to the Patriarchs,
before his Incarnation, and is called the Angel of God's Presence, Isa. 63. 9.

All the Instructions for Prayer which we have in Scripture, teach us to have
recourse to God alone. Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of Trouble, and I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Let any one show the like Command
to call upon the Saints, and we will instantly do it.

Acts 2. 21. Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.
But it is nowhere said, whosoever shall call upon the Name of St. Peter, or
St. Paul, shall be saved.

Luke 11. 1, 2. When one of his Disciples said to him, Lord, teach us to pray;
our Savior gives this as the Model of all Prayer, When ye pray, say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc. Which sure none can speak to a Saint or Angel,
who acknowledge themselves our Brethren, and our Companions in Service, Rev. 12.
11. Chap. 19. 20.

Romans 8. 15. They that are the Children of God, have received the Spirit of
Adoption, whereby they cry, Abba, Father. And so, Gal. 4. 6. For as much as ye
are the Children of God, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our
Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. That Spirit, which is the Spirit of Adoption,
teaches the Children of God, to pray to God alone, and that with humble
Confidence, as to a Father; and all the Prayers that he forms in our Hearts,
are addressed to God as our Father. So that that Spirit then that puts Men upon
praying to Saints, is another Spirit, and not the Spirit of Jesus Christ. And
those that have not the confidence to address their Prayers to God, whatever
Spirit they are endued with, have not the Spirit of Adoption.

All our Prayers and Thanksgivings are Spiritual Sacrifices; but Sacrifices
ought to be offered to God alone. Psalm. 50. 14. Offer unto God Thanksgivings,
and pay thy Vows unto the most High. Hos. 14. 2. Take with you words, and turn
unto the Lord; say unto him, Take away all Iniquity, and receive us graciously;
so w^^l we render thee the Calves of our Lips. Heb. 13. 1^ By him therefore,
viz. Jesus Christ, let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God continually,
that is, the Fruit of our Li^s, giving Thanks in his Name. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Christians are an Holy Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices to God by
Jesus Christ.

It is a vast knowledge, that the Saints to whom we pray must be supposed to
have. For they must be supposed to know where their Petitioners are, what they
want, and how truly and rightly they pray, and this perhaps of Persons in a
thousand places or more, if they should pray all to the same Saint at the same
time. As for instance, to St. Paul, or St. Peter, what if all the People in the
World should pray to them at the same time, as it is possible, and may be done
upon Popish Principles; then St. Peter and St. Paul must know the Conditions of
all the Men in the World at the same time: or to instance in St. Nicholas, the
Sea-man's Saint, in the words of an excellent Author. He must be supposed to
hearken, when he is in Heaven suppose, to what one Seaman prays in a Shipwreck
at the Straits; to what another wishes for, when he is becalmed in the
South Sea; to the Cries of another, who sees an Hurricane by the Barbadots; to
the private desires of another, who fishes for Pearls in the Guiny-Shore, or
Herrings by our English-Coast, or for Whales hard by Greenland, or for Trouts
in the small Rivers; and he must be able to hear what thousands of Passengers
who cry to him, being ready to perish, in as many places all at once; and
withal in these numberless Places and Exigencies, what they both think and
deserve, in order to the returning of suitable Reliefs and Helps. Is not this a
vast Knowledge for a m^re Creature to have? But we are well assured, both by
Scripture and the nature of the thing, that it is vastly above them, and is what
they have not. And therefore to ascribe it to them, what is it but Idolatry?

The Saints in Heaven do not hear our Prayers. To Hear Prayers, is made the
peculiar Attribute of God in Scripture. Psalm. 65. 2. Oh thou that hear
Prayer, unto thee shall all Flesh come. For, Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord is nigh
unto them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in Truth. But can any
one say so of the Saints? Their Essence is not infinite, to be in all Places of
the World near unto all those that cry unto them.

The Saints departed do not know our particular Necessities. Eccles. 9. 5, 6.
For the Dead know not any thing; also their love, and their hatred, and their
envy is now perished. Job 14. 21. His Sons come to honor, and he knows it
not; and they are brought low, but he perceives it not of them. He does not
know the Condition or Necessities of his nearest Relations. Isa. 63. 16. Thou
art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us
not. Yet Abraham was now in Heaven, into whose Bosom the Faithful pass, Luke
16. 22. And God tells Josiah, 2 Kings 22. 20. I will gather thee unto thy
Fathers, and thine Eyes shall not see all the Evil which I will bring upon this
place. He was not sensible, after his departure, of the public Miseries, much
less the particular Necessities of his People.

If the Saints departed know our Necessities, how do they know them? They are
not Omnipresent, are they? Or do they see all in the Face of God? But it is
certain the Angels do not; for they know not the Day of Judgment, Mat. 13. 32.
Besides, if they see all things in the Face of God, this is to make them
Omniscient, as God is, and so to make them Gods: or do they only see some
things? If they only see some things, how shall we be assured, that they see
either us praying, or what we want? For who can tell but these may be some of
those Things which they do not see? Or do they only know all things that occur
by the information of Ministring-Angels? But how are we sure that the Angels
themselves know all our Affairs, tho they may know some, wherein their own
Comfort and Happiness is likewise concerned? as the Conversion of a Sinner,
which brings Joy in Heaven, Luke 15. 7. This one thing we are sure they know,
because our Savior has told us so; but we are sure of no more.

But neither Saints nor Angels know our Hearts or secret Thoughts, and
therefore it is certain they do not know what the inward Disposition is of him
that prays, whether there be that Piety, Charity, Faith, good Intention, etc.
as there ought to be, to bring his Performance within the promise of Audience.
And for want of this Knowledge, they do not know whether his Prayers ought to be
regarded or no, though they know his Necessities. All this is the Prerogative
of God alone to know the Hearts of Men; 1 King. 8. 39. Hear thou and do, and
give to every Man according to his ways, whose Heart thou know. For thou,
even thou only know the Hearts of all the Children of Men. And upon this
consideration he directs his Prayer to him; and according to this there is none
but he alone that knows what Prayer of any Man is from the Heart. Rev. 2. 23.
All the Churches shall know, that I am he which searches the Reins and Hearts.
If either Saints or Angels then know our Hearts, or all our Wants; what other
way is there, but by Revelation from God? But we have no assurance that there
is such Revelation. And therefore to pray to them in confidence of that which
we do not know, can be nothing less than a presumptuous vanity. And it seems
God must first tell them all we want, before they can represent the Matter to
him; and also must inform them whether our Prayers be fit to be regarded or no,
before they can reasonably undertake our Cause. For Example, whenever a
Scholar prays to St. Catherine, or a Seaman to St. Nicholas, or a Painter to
St. Luke, nothing can be done till God calls to these Saints, and tells them;
Hear you Catherine, Nicholas, and you Luke, such and such an one prays to you,
that you would pray to me, and persuade me to grant them such and such things;
and to dispose you to be the more earnest with me, I must tell you, the poor
Seaman is in great danger, and is at this very nick of time like to miscarry,
etc. Thus God must reveal to his Saints what is to be done, before they can
pray to him; the King must be, as it were, a Master of Requests to his
Courtiers. Which is a mere round-about and useless course; but the proper and
direct way is to go to God himself immediately, who certainly knows all, and
who is of himself ready to hear us. John 16. 26, 27. In that Day ye shall ask
in my Name; and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you; for
the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me. To set up other
Mediators which he has not appointed, we may fear will alienate both him and
the Father from such Men.

The Holy Angels and Saints departed this Life, are in an invisible State, and
for what we know to the contrary are very far remote and distant from us, and
so are out of the Lines of Civil Conversation, either by Word, Letter, or
Message; and there being no manner of certainty of their being acquainted with
all our Wants, or that they know our Hearts, and hear our Prayers; to pray to
them with confidence of their hearing us, and to trust in their Aid and Help,
is to perform an Act of Honor and Worship to them above what is due to their
Degree, and which can be paid only to God with any rational Assurance. And it
is not the Presumption that they hear us (if they hear us not) and practicing
accordingly upon this Presumption, will excuse this Act from Idolatry, no more
than the covetous Man's inordinate presumption of the value and helpfulness of
his Ri^hes, above what is really in them, will excuse his delight and
confidence, and trust in them, from being Idolatry, which yet the Scripture
condemns for such. And tho the Saints and Angels in this case are not believed
or owned for Gods, or to have the Supreme Perfections of the Deity; yet if
there be a degree of Honor and Worship given to them, which is above them, and
does not belong to them, but to the supreme God, though they are not believed
to be the supreme God, this degree of Honor and Worship that is given to them,
will be Idolatry. For any degree of Honor and Worship given to a Creature,
which does not belong to them but to God, is Idolatry. And unless they could
certainly show how the Saints may know our Wants and Hearts, and hear our
Prayers; otherwise to pray to them, and trust in them, is in the construction
of the Fact to suppose them Omnipresent and Omniscient; and these are owned to
be the Perfections of the Supreme God alone; and therefore in the construction
of the Fact, this is to suppose them to have the supreme Perfections of the
Deity; and an Act of Honor to them upon such a Supposition implied, though not
intended, what is it but that they can very hardly be excused from Idolatry?

But suppose again, they had such a knowledge as is pretended, to reach to all
our Wants, and Hearts, howsoever they come by it; if this ^^pposition were
real, as it is not, yet this does not necessarily infer, that we should pray to
them for their Help and Aid; nor ought we therefore to do it, unless we are
authorized to do it, by the Divine Command or Law. And if we are forbid to do
it by the Divine Law, and this Act of Prayer be by the Divine Law appropriated
to God, (as it is before proved to be) then to perform this Act to them, is to
perform that to them which is due only to God, and so is Idolatry still in the
construction of the Law, notwithstanding the knowledge supposed in them.

But observe, moreover, Our Adversaries do not barely ask the Prayers of the
Saints, and trust in their hearing and helping them, but they pray with the
same solemnity of Devotion as they do to God and Christ; In the same Places and
Times of Worship, in the Churches and Divine Offices, with the same prostration
of Body, and uncovering the Head; and what is all this but to equal them with
God Almighty in all the Circumstances of Worship, and outward Adoration; so
that there is no difference in their outward carriage, between what they
perform to God, and what they perform to them? And is not this to give them
that Worship which is only due to God? or is there no outward Adoration
appropriated to God at all? or if there be, with what Circumstances is it
invested, or how is it to be known or differenced from what they perform to the
Saints departed? or does the difference lie only in the inward intention of the
Mind, and not in any outward Circumstance at all? So it seems they think, there
being no outward Circumstances at all, by which their outward Adoration of God
and the Saints are distinguished one from the other: but they think, as long as
they make a Protestation of (...) owning the Supreme God alone for God, and
worship him accordingly; though they render the Saints the same outward
Adoration in all the Circumstances of it, yet that cannot be supposed to invade
his Worship. But we find in Scripture, that there is a certain outward
Adoration, which there are certain outward Circumstances to determine,
appropriated to God; and the giving of this with any such Circumstances, as in
the construction of the Fact do determine it only to God, to any Creature, is
condemned, whatsoever the inward Intention of the mind may be of reserving to
the Supreme God his own Prerogative. And what shall we think then of the
outward Adoration of the Saints, performed in the Church of Rome, which in all
the Circumstances of it is the same with what is performed to God? If this be
not Idolatry, then there is no merely outward Idolatry at all. And the three
Children might have given an outward Adoration to Nebuchadnezzar's graven
Image, so as they had but reserved or directed their inward Intention aright.

See what our Savior says to the Devil, Luke 4. 8. Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Where it was only outward
Adoration, or bowing down to him, that the Devil did desire, and not so as that
he himself should be owned for the Supreme God, or the Worship given to him
with any such intention: For he did not pretend in this Request to be the
Supreme God, or to challenge Worship as such; for he in the same breath
pretends that he had the disposal of all the Kingdoms of the World, not in his
own right, but because it was delivered to him, which implies an owning of a
Supreme God above him. But yet our Savior refuses to render him such
Adoration, or to bow down to him, for this general Reason only, that thou shall
worship the Lord thy God alone, without considering the distinction of supreme
or inferior Worship; or that the outward Adoration was to be determined by the
inward Intention alone, which the Devil would have been content to have left to
him. Nor does he assign that as a Reason of his refusal, that the Devil was a
wicked Spirit, but gives a Reason which would have been equally against it, if
he had been a good One. And the same Reason as much reaches us as it did him.

Col. 2. 14. Let no Man beguile you of your Reward in a voluntary humility, and
worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen,
vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind. Where the Humility censured by the Apostle,
which is the ground of this Worship of Angels, is not that which implies a
submission to them themselves as Supreme Gods, but that which implies a respect
to the only Supreme God, upon the same ground as what is now practiced in the
Church of Rome, viz. That because the Majesty of God is so high and
inaccessible as he is, it becomes us therefore to sue to him by the
Intercession and mediation of Angels, as his special Favorites, or to trouble
those with our Devotions, rather than him so much: Which is a specious sort of
Humility, but is here notwithstanding condemned. And the practice of praying to
Saints in the Church of Rome, being founded upon the same Reason, is also
liable to the same Apostolical Censure.

Rev. 19. 10. and 22. 8, 9. When St. John fell at the Feet of the Angel to
worship him, who showed him these things: The Angel forbad him, See thou do it
not; for this reason, I am of thy Fellow Servants, and of thy Brethren, that
have the Testimony of Jesus: worship God. So that none of our Fellow Creatures
are to be worshipped, but God alone.

Acts 10. 25. When Cornelius fell down at St. Peter's feet, and worshipped him,
it could not be supposed that he intended to give him supreme Divine Adoration,
as God. But yet St. Peter took him up, saying, Stand up, I my self also a^ a
Man. For that reason alone refusing it. And he is a Man too now he is in
Heaven, as well as he was then, but only now he is out of his Body, and more
perfect in his Spirit.

As for what concerns the Virgin Mary in particular, the same Reasons make it
alike unlawful and idolatrous to pray to her, as to pray to the other Saints.
Neither is there any thing of Prerogative left to her in this respect in the
Scripture.

Luke 1. 46. Mary said, My Soul does magnify the Lord: This is far enough from
calling her self Lady, according to the style of the Litanies.

Verse. 47. My Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. She owns God for her
Savior, which is far enough from calling her self the Salvation of others.

Verse. 48. From henceforth all Generations shall call me Blessed. She does not
say, All Ages shall adore me, and shall address their Prayers to me, but all
Generations shall call me Blessed, as we do. But,

Chap. 11. 27, 28. When a certain Woman among the People said unto him, Blessed
is the Womb that bare thee, and the Paps which thou have sucked. Then said he
unto her, Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep it.
How can this consist with such a strange Superiority as is pretended to belong
to her?

John 2. 4. Jesus says unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? My Hour
is not yet come. Which our Savior does not speak out of any want of respect or
love to her; but to check her interposing in the Office and Work that was
committed to him. And can we believe then that she does share with him in the
Office of Mediator; much less that she has Authority to command him?

Mat. 12. 47, 48. When a certain Man said unto him, Behold thy Mother and thy
Brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee: He answered, Who is my
Mother? and who are my Brethren? And he stretched forth his Hands toward his
Disciples, and said, Behold my Mother, and my Brethren. For whosoever shall do
the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister,
and Mother. There is neither here, nor at any other time, the least
encouragement given to that Worship and Service that is performed to her. He
does not bring out his Holy Mother before the People that stood round about,
nor say to them, Behold the Queen of Heaven and Earth, before whom every Knee
should bow. Behold the Ladder by which you shall ascend into Heaven, and the
Door by which you shall enter into Paradise; see that ye place your Hopes and
Confidence in her. But rather gives certain Instructions quite contrary to
prevent this Superstition.

As for what is pretended, that there is no difference between begging the
Prayers of our Brethren upon Earth, and the Popish praying to Saints in Heaven
to pray for us. There is a vast difference; our Brethren upon Earth are within
the compass of civil Conversation, and we can certainly acquaint them with all
our Wants. It is quite otherwise with the Saints in Heaven. We are required to
ask the Prayers of our Brethren upon Earth; but we are required to pray to God
only in Heaven. Our Brethren upon Earth pray for us, as Joint-Petitioners or
Fellow-Supplicants, through the Merits of our common Redeemer Christ Jesus:
Whereas they pray to the Saints in Heaven as Joint-Mediators of Intercession
with our Blessed Savior. Here we ask or desire the Prayers of our Brethren;
but they pray to the Saints in Heaven with the Solemnities of Devotion as they
do to God himself. But should we kneel down in a solemn manner, in the same
place and manner as we do to God and Christ, and pray to a Friend in Spain or
America, to hear or help us, then we should do just as the Papists do to the
Saints in Heaven. But would not the Papists themselves censure that for
Idolatry, or downright Madness? And whatsoever words do they think then their
own Practice deserves? Let them give their own Practice what Name they please,
we will not wrangle with them about a Name.

CHAP. XIII.
That it is lawful to represent God and the Holy Trinity by Images: And that
these Images, and the Images and Relics of Christ and the Saints are to be
duly honored, venerated, or worshipped; And that in this Veneration and
Worship those are venerated which are represented by them. Council of Trent,
Sess. 25. de Invocat. Catech. Romans par. 3. cap. 2.
WHich is expressly contrary to all those Texts that forbid the making any Image
or Resemblance of God at all, or of any other thing whatsoever in order to the
bowing down to them and worshipping them, and that condemn all such Practices
for the greatest Blockishness and Idolatry. For,

Exodus 20. 4. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, nor any likeness
of any Thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters
under the Earth; thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them. The
words are universal, forbidding all Images whatsoever in order to Worship, and
not only the Images of false Gods; neither is there any one Circumstance in the
words, to limit or determine them to such, What boldness is it then to except
the Images of the Trinity, and our Savior and the Saints out of it, contrary
to a plain and general Law?

But notwithstanding this plain prohibition, it is pretended, that God himself
appointed the Cherubims as the Symbols of his Presence, and his
Representations, and that the Jews were to direct their Worship to them as the
Objects of it, Exodus 25. 17, 22. Whereas the Cherubims were not in the place of
Worship, for that was the Temple it self, representing the Church upon Earth.
But the Cherubims were in the Holy of Holies, which was the Figure of Heaven,
out of the Peoples sight, where they were never to come; but the High Priest
only once a Year, as a Type of Christ entering into Heaven. It was the
Mercy-Seat, and not the Cherubims, that was the Symbolical Presence of God; and
the Cherubims were to represent the Angels that encompass his Throne. And it
was neither the Cherubims or Mercy-Seat that was to be worshipped or prayed to,
or any Adoration to be made to them, but only to God who made there his
peculiar Residence; and so they worshipped God toward that place, and no
otherwise, as we now lift up our Hands and Eyes to Heaven where he now dwells.
But it can never be shown, that God any where appointed any Images as
Representations of Himself, or Objects of Worship; which would be against his
most express Prohibition.

Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16. Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves (for ye saw no
manner of Similitude, when the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst
of the Fire) (...) you corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image, the
similitude of any Figure, the likeness of Male or Female. Here God forbids the
making any* Image or Resemblance of himself, by whatsoever Figure it may be
expressed. For the Circumstances of the place determine this plainly to the
Images of the True God, who spoke from Mount Horeb; and the Prohibition of them
is made without any limitations or evasions.

For it is in the Nature of the thing tending to produce in Men gross Notions
of God, and tending to the abasement and dishonor of his spiritual and
incomprehensibly glorious Nature. Act. 17. 29. Forasmuch then as we are the
Offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto Gold or
Silver, or Stone graven by Art, and Man's Device^ 5But such gross Notions these
Images are too apt to incline unto; As Romans 1. 22, 23. Professing themselves to
be wise, they became fools, and changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God,
into an Image made like to corruptible Man, and to Birds, and four-footed
Beasts, and creeping Things. Where not only the worshipping, but the very
making of any Images of God by the Heathen, is censured by the Apostle, as
being a debasing of his Nature. For, Isa. 40. 18. To whom will ye liken God? or
what likeness will ye compare unto him? It is not a thing possible to be done.
And how will the Images among the Romanists escape this Censure, which have as
little resemblance of God, as any that the Apostle and Prophet do condemn?
Sometimes they paint one Body with three Heads, sometimes one Head with three
Faces; sometimes one Body with two Heads, and a Pigeon in the midst; sometimes
and old Man holding a Crucifix in his Hands, and a Pigeon upon his Shoulder.
What is this but a mere mocking of God and the Holy Trinity, and a downright
debasing of his glorious Nature?

These Images of God and the Holy Trinity, as also some others of Christ, as a
Child in his Mother's Arms, are so far from being any way beatificial, to give
the Vulgar any Instruction, that they tend to pervert and overthrow all
honorable Notions of God and our blessed Savior. They tend to render Men, as
Jer. 10. 8. Altogether brutish and foolish: for the Stock is a Doctrine of
Vanities. For, ver. 14, 15. Every Man is brutish in his Knowledge; every Founder
is confounded in his graven Image: For his molten Image is falsehood, there is
no breath in them, they are Vanity and the work of Errors. Does not this agree
to the Popish Images as well as to any other? or what difference is there?
Psalm. 115. 4, 5. Their Idols are Silver and Gold, the work of Men's hands. They
have Mouths, but they speak not; Eyes they have, but they see not; they have
Ears, but they hear not; Noses have they, but they smell not; they have Hands,
but they handle not; Feet have they, but they walk not; neither speak they
through their Throat. This is just the description of the Images of the Church
of Rome; neither is there any thing here that does not exactly agree to them.
And how unlikely is all this to give Men much Instruction? Habak. 2. 18. What
profits the graven Image, that the Maker thereof has graven it? The molten
Image, and a teacher of Lies? What Instruction or Teaching can it give, to set
out God and the Holy Trinity by the Resemblances beforementioned? or to dress
out God like a Pope, with a Miter and a Triple Crown? which yet they often do,
and make Alehouse Signs with such Pictures. Is not this to expose the Divine
Nature to contempt and scorn, instead of giving any good Instruction?

But as the making of the Images of God is cried down and condemned in the
Scripture, so of any other likewise in order to their being worshipped or bowed
down to; and the bowing down to any Image is condemned, which equally respects
Popish Images as any others.

To the Law abovementioned, Exodus 24. add Levit. 26. 1. Ye shall make no Idols
nor graven Images, neither rear you up a standing Image, neither shall you set
up any Image of Stone in your Land to bow down to it; for I am the Lord your
God.

Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Cursed be the Man that makes any graven or molten Image, an
abomination to the Lord, the Work of the hands of the Crafts-man.

Isa. 2. 8, 9. The Jews are severely reproved for this; Their Land is full of
Idols; they worship the Work of their own Hands, that which their own Fingers
have made: And the mean Man boweth down, and the great Man humbles himself,
therefore forgive them not. It is not the worshipping of Images, as they are
the Images of false Gods, that the Prophet condemns them for; but in general of
all Images: And he censures them for just such Worship as is practiced in the
Church of Rome, for humbling themselves and bowing down to them. This is that
they do in the Church of Rome, they fall down before their Images, and pray
before them; and moreover they kiss them, they offer Incense to them, they
light Candles to them, they dress them and adorn them, they crown them with
Flowers, they carry them upon their Shoulders, they go in Pilgrimages to them;
in a word, they do every thing and more, they render them the same Service, and
the very same outward expressions of Honors, which the Jews or Pagans did to
their Images.

So, Isa. 44. 13, etc. The Carpenter stretches out his Rule; he marketh it out
with a Line; he fitteth it with Planes, and he marketh it out with a Compass,
and makes it after the Figure of a Man, according to the Beauty of a Man, that
it may remain in the House. He ^eweth him down Cedars, and takes the Cypress
and the Oak, which he strengthens for himself among the Trees of the Forest;
he planteth an Ash, and the Rain does nourish it. Then shall it be for a Man to
burn; for he will take thereof and warm himself; yea, he kindles it, and
baketh Bread; yea, he makes a God, and worshippeth it; he makes it a graven
Image, and falls down thereto. He burns part thereof in the Fire; with part
thereof he eats Flesh; he rosteth Roast, and is satisfied; yea, he warmeth
himself, and says, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the Fire. And the residue
thereof-he makes a God, even his graven Image. He falls down to it, and
worshippeth it, and prays unto it, and says, Deliver me, for thou art my
God. See also Jer. 10. 3.

Again, Chap. 46. 6, 7. They lavish Gold out of the Bag, and weigh Silver in a
Balance, and ^hire a Goldsmith, and he makes it a God; they fall down, yea,
they worship. They bear him upon their Shoulders; they carry him, and set him
in his place, and he stands; and from his place he shall not remove: yea, one
shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his trouble. And
why are not these, and all other things wherein the Popish and Jewish Concerns
about Images alike equally to be condemned?

For note, that it is not to be imagined, that either the Jews or Heathen were
so stupid, as to worship the Images beforementioned, as Gods themselves, but
as the Symbols of him, whom they thought ther^^^ God, and whom by consecration
they thought to be in them, or present with them, and so worshipped them in
relation to him. For the Apostle says of the Heathens, Romans 1. 25. That they
changed the Truth of God (whom they knew, verse. 21.) into a Lie, and worshipped
and served the Creature more than the Creator; (...), or besides the Creator,
who is blessed for ever. Which implies that they worshipped the Creator, but
making these Images of him, they worshipped them besides him, or with him:
Which shows that Idolatry is consistent with the Worship of one Supreme God.
And that worshipping the Images of this one Supreme God, together with him, was
the Sin of the Heathen. And therefore though the Papists likewise own and
worship one Supreme God the Creator, yet by worshipping his Images in relation
to him, or with him, they may be guilty of Idolatry. As the Men of Ephesus
worshipped the Image which came down from Jupiter, Acts 19. 35. So that they
did not take the Image for Jupiter himself; but as the Image of him whom they
thought the Supreme God, and as the Symbol of his Presence, and so they
accordingly worshipped it? do not the Papists the same?

And it is evident, that the Jews in worshipping the molten Calf, intended
their Worship to it, not as being either a God really it self, nor yet as an
Image of an Egyptian or false God, but as an Image of Jehova the True God, and
as the Symbol of his Presence with them, Moses being, as they thought, quite
gone from them; and there being a Promise made just before his departure, to
send an Angel before them: For they intended to worship that God in it, that
brought them out of Egypt. And could they think that this Image did it before
it was made? or that an Egyptian God would work such a deliverance for them?
Besides, Aaron proclaimed a Feast to Jehova upon the Day of its Consecration,
Exodus 32. And their Sacrifices to it were Sheep and Oxen, which was an
abomination to the Egyptians to offer. Neither is this any where laid to their
Charge, that they fell to the Idolatry of worshipping false Gods, as afterward
to Baal Peer, Mo^och, Remphan, etc.

Such also was the Worship given to the two Calves at Dan and Bethel set up by
Jeroboam; It was given to them as the Symbols of the true God. Jeroboam not
intending thereby to forsake him, but only to take Men off from going to
Jerusalem to worship him, which was contrary to his Interest. He gives this as
the only Reason, 1 Kings 12. 27. If this People go up to do Sacrifice in the
House of the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall the Heart of this People turn again
unto their Lord, even unto Rehoboam King of Judah, and they shall kill me.
Whereupon the King took Counsel, and made two Calves of Gold, and said unto
them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: Behold thy Gods, O Israel,
which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt; using the same words as Aaron did.
And the People were easily persuaded, for ease-sake, generally to comply with
this; which it cannot be imagined they should so soon have done, if thereby had
been designed an utter rejection of the True God. Which was afterward done by
Ahab, setting up the Worship of Baal, which is therefore reckoned as a greater
Sin than this of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 16. 31. It came to pass as if it had been a
light thing for him to walk in the Sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, that he
went and served Baal, and worshipped him. And Jehu is commended for destroying
Baal out of Israel, 2 King. 10. 28. In doing which he boasts of his Zeal for
the Lord, verse. 16. And he is rewarded for it, ver. 28. Howbeit from the Sins
of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, Jehu departed not from
after them, viz. the golden Calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan.
Which plainly signifies that the Calves at Bethel and at Dan were worshipped as
Symbols and Images of Jehovah the true God; and therefore this is distinguished
from the Idolatry of Ahab in worshipping Baal, and looked upon as a lesser Sin,
which otherwise it would not have been. And the Idolatrous Worship of the Sun
and false Gods, is noted as a Consequent of the Idolatry of worshipping the
True God by Images, or Images as his Symbols, through the just Judgment of God
upon Men's blindness, in doing as they do. Acts 7. 41, 43. Deuteronomy. 4. 25, 26, 27,
28. And yet Jeroboam is highly condemned for Idolatry, in the Worship of the
Calves, though the true God was worshipped in them; and he is said
notwithstanding to have gone and made other Gods* and molten Images, to provoke
me (says God) to anger, and have cast me behind thy back, 1 Kings 14. 9. It
being so by Interpretation, because he worshipped the Images with God, and did
not worship God in his own way.

The like may be said of Micah, who no doubt intended no more, but to worship
the God of Israel in his molten Image, and that only as the Symbol of his
Presence, Judge. 17. And those that went a whoring after Gideon's Ephod,
directed their Worship through that to God himself, Judge. 8. 27. And those that
worshipped the Brazen Serpent, intended their Worship to that but in a
secondary manner, as to an holy Relic, which God formerly made use for the
Healing of the People; and they thought no doubt to honor God in honoring of
that, 2 King. 18. 4. yet all these are condemned for Idolaters. And the Church
of Rome has not any one thing more to say for her self in her worshipping of
Images, than these might have said for themselves.

Let Men's Intentions be never so good (as they think) to honor God in such and
such a way; If Men do such Actions as the Law forbids, and interprets to be
Idolatry; it is not Men's Intentions, whatsoever they may pretend, can excuse
them from being idolatrous. For it is the Law that determines our Actions; and
our Intentions cannot alter the nature of an Action, that is determined by the
Law.

If our Adversaries give Honor and Worship to the Images, which must terminate
in God and Christ, (as they pretend) then it must be Divine Worship which they
give to the Images, because it is certainly Divine Worship which is given to
God and Christ; for if it pass from the Image to the Person, then it is the
same Worship which is given to both, though it terminates not in the Image but
the Person.

And as for the Images of Saints; If the same Worship be given to the Images as
to the Persons, (as it must be likewise if it pass by them to the Persons) then
if the Worship which they give the Saints themselves, be due only to God, and
so is idolatrous, (as is proved in Chap. foregoing) then so is their Worship of
their Images idolatrous likewise.

And what is said of their Images, may be in like manner applied to their
Relics, supposing them never so real; and much more to their feigned ones, as
we have reason to believe many of them to be; as the Milk of the Virgin, etc.

Deuteronomy. 34. 6. God buried Moses, etc. and no Man knows of his Sepulcher unto
this day; lest the Israelites, who were inclined to Idolatry, should worship
his Body, as it is the general Opinion. And for that reason the Devil would
have showed the Grave and Body of Moses to the Israelites, but Michael the
Archangel hindered him; which may be conjectured to be the Contention mentioned
Jude 9.

2 Kings 18. 4. Hezekiah brake in pieces the brazen Serpent that Moses had
made, though of God's own institution, and which was preserved among them as a
Memorial of the Divine Operation, in healing those formerly that looked up to
it. The Reason was, because it was abused to Idolatry, and the Children of
Israel did burn Incense to it.

If there should be any Miracles or Cures wrought by the means of any Relics,
it is by the Power of God alone that it is done, who is therefore to have all
the Glory, and not either the Saint or his Relics to share in it; which the
Saints have always refused and referred all to God, as St. Peter, Acts 3. 12.
and St. Paul, Acts 14. 14. And though we find in Scripture therefore many
Miracles wrought by Moses's Rod, Elijah's Mantle, the Hem of Christ's Garment,
St. Peter's Shadow, and St. Paul's Handkerchief, yet we never read that any of
these were adored or worshipped; or if they had, it had been Idolatry, it being
a referring the Virtue and Honor to Creatures above what was in them, and what
belonged to God alone, who wrought all by them.

CHAP. XIV.
That the Clergy may not Marry; and that Marriage to them is a Pollution.
Council of Trent, Sess. 24. Can. 9. Decret. Gratian. distinct. 82. Can. Propos.
and Can. Plurimos.
COntrary to that which is written, Heb. 13. 4. Marriage is honorable among
all, and the Bed undefiled. It Is spoken universally, and the Apostle makes no
exception of the Clergy, or Ministers of the Gospel.

So, 1 Cor. 7. 2. To avoid Fornication, let ever^ Man have his own Wife, and
every Woman her own Husband. And, verse. 9. If they cannot contain, let them
marry; for it is better to marry than to burn. This is a general Rule,
concerning which none can show that God has excepted Priests or Monks.

1 Cor. 9. 5. Have we not power to lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well as
other Apostles, and as the Brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? For, that this is
to be meant of a Wife married to an Apostle, is the Opinion of Pope Leo
himself. Distinct. 13. Can. omni^. So that the Apostle might have married if he
had pleased, and was under no Obligation to the contrary.

1 Timothy 3. 2, 4, 5. A Bishop then must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife,
vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to Hospitality, apt to teach; One
that rules well his own House, having his Children in subjection, with all
gravity. For if a Man know not how to rule his own Family, how shall he take
care of the Chruch of God? Then he that is chosen into the Office of a Bishop
may have, and retain a Wife. These words, the Husband of one Wife, cannot be
understood of the Church of God, seeing the Apostle makes a dictinction between
the Pastor's Family and his Flock; If a Man know not how to rule his own House,
how shall he take care of the Church of God?

1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. The Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter Times,
some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and
Doctrines of Devils; speaking lies in Hypocrisy, and having their Consciences
^eared with an hot Iron, forbidding to marry. Is not this true of the Church of
Rome, that wholly interdicts Marriage to the Monks and Clergy? It is in vain to
say, that there were some Ancient Heretics who did forbid Marriage, and that
the Apostle speaks of them in this place, for many may fall into the same
precipice. To forbid Marriage, either wholly, or to any Persons whatsoever, as
a Pollution, is plainly to incur the Apostle's Censure.

Noah a Preacher of Righteousness, was married, Genesis 6.

Abraham the Father of the Faithful, was married, Genesis 12.

Moses the greatest of the Prophets, was married, Exodus 2.

God himself gave orders touching the marriage of the chief Priests, Lev. 21.
12.

The Prophet Isaiah was married, Isa. 8. 3.

The Prophet Ezekiel was married, Ezekiel. 24. 18.

There is mention made of St. Peter's Wife's Mother, Mark 1. 30.

St. Philip the Evangelist had four Daughters, Acts 21. 9.

Unless there were a Command to forbid the Clergies Marriage (which that there
is not, is plain to those who read the Bible carefully) and unless there were
an universal Promise of the Gift of Continence to them, at least upon their
asking, as it does not appear there is, it can be nothing else but a bold
presumption, and which is the occasion of many Mischiefs, to lay such an
Injunction or Prohibition upon them.

CHAP. XV.
That the Vow of Poverty is laudable, and that Mendicant and begging Friars are
in a State of Perfection. Council of Trent. Sess. 25. cap. 1. Bellarm. de
Monach. lib. 2. cap. 20, and 45.
THis is to make a Vow of that which God often inflicts as a Curse upon Men,
and therefore should be reputed a thing which Men should not choose, but avoid.
Psalm. 109. 10. David, speaking of the Wicked, says, Let his Children be
continually Vagabonds, and beg; let them seek their Bread also out of desolate
Places, as those that are cast out of their Habitations. The Royal Prophet puts
beggary among the Curses of God; and what Reason has any one then voluntarily
to take it up as a State of Perfection? So, Deuteronomy. 28. 48. Because thou servedst
not the Lord thy God with joyfulness and gladness of Heart, for the abundance
of all things; therefore shall thou serve thine Enemies in hunger, and in
thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things.

Poverty has many Inconveniences and Troubles usually attending upon it, and
is that which often exposes Men to great Temptations and Snares, which no Man
can be sure he shall be always able to bear or overcome; whatever his present
temper and disposition of Mind may be, if he be cast into this Estate by the
Providence of God, he may believingly pray and hope for the Divine Assistance;
but voluntarily to vow it, and expose himself to it, is to put himself upon
that which may be an occasion of much Sin* which no Man should do. It is that
which wise and good Men have prayed against; ^rov. 30. 8. Give me neither
Poverty nor Riches, but feed me with Food convenient for me. Should any one
make that a Vow to God, which the wise Man prays against?

To have a competent provision of the good things of this Life, according to
the condition of ones place, is a Blessing and Comfort, and may be of great use
to the ends of Piety and Charity, for the more cheerful serving God, and the
relief of our necessitous Brethren. Voluntarily to cast away this, is to be
ungrateful to the Bounty of God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17. And: it is to be cruel to ones self, not to use the good things
which God has given us of his Liberality as a Blessing. For so it is
accounted, Psalm. 128. 1, 2. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord: For
thou shall eat the Labor of thy Hands; happy shall thou be, and it shall be
well with thee. And it is against that Duty which we owe to our Neighbor, by
which we are obliged, as far as we may, and as far as the Providence of God
will assist us, so to provide and manage Things, by our Labor and Industry, as
that we may always be in a capacity to relieve others in necessity, and not to
cast our selves upon their relief when we may avoid it. For this we have the
Apostle's direction and approbation, Acts 20. 35. I have showed you, that so
laboring ye ought to support the Weak; and to remember the words of the Lord
Jesus, how he said; It is more blessed to give than to receive. So, Ephesians. 4.
28. it is the Apostle's Rule, Let him that stole, steal no more; but rather let
him labor, working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to
give to him that needs. Voluntarily to put ones self out of a capacity of
doing this, is to sin against the Command of the Apostle, and under pretense of
Perfection to violate a downright Command. And is this fit to be the Matter of
a Vow?

To seek our living by begging Relief of others, without using those Means
which we may for our own subsistence, is expressly against God's Ordinance, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. For when we were with you, this we commanded you, That if any
would not work, neither should he eat. And what is such a Vow then, but to
contradict God's Ordinance? Is this the perfection of those slow Bellies, those
lazy and slothful Monks, that live delicately upon the Liberality of others;
that pervert and abuse the Alms of the People, and consume in Idleness and
Luxury what the Poor should have? Genesis 3. 19. God has laid it upon Men, In the
sweat of thy Face shall thou eat thy Bread.

It was ordered by God among the Jews, and was looked upon as a great Blessing,
Deuteronomy. 15. 4. That there be no Poor among you. And is that now to be vowed under
the Gospel as a State of Perfection?

As for what our Savior says to the Rich Man, Mat. 19. 21. If thou will be
perfect, go and sell all that thou have, and give to the Poor, and thou shall
have Treasure in Heaven; and come and follow me. The Perfection which our
Savior there speaks of, is Christianity it self, which is a necessary
Qualification for the entering into the Kingdom of Heaven, Verse. 23, 24, 25. and
is therefore Matter of Command, and not of Counsel; and obliges every Man to
perform the hardest Tasks, and to part with any thing here at Christ's Command.
Here was an explicit Command to this rich Man to part with his Estate, to sell
all, and give to the Poor; which therefore he ought to have done at Christ's
Command, if he would be saved. And there was an an explicit Command to the
Apostles to leave their Nets, i. e. their whole Estates and Employments, and to
follow Christ. But there is no such explicit Command any where generally given
to oblige all Christians, and therefore is not their Duty. But we can no
otherwise now judge of our Savior's Command, and consequently of our own Duty
in this respect, than by the call of his Providence, the Necessities of others,
and a prudent consideration of all Circumstances, by weighing of which we are
to judge, how we may honor God best with our Substance.

The Monkish Vow of Poverty then, instead of being a Christian Perfection, is a
mere groundless and superstitious Invention. And is indeed a mere pretense and
hypocrisy. For though they cast away their private Possessions, they have very
great Estates in common, and live in fullness of Luxury upon the common
Treasure, which they are sure will not fail. And is not this, do you think, a
great piece of Perfection and Self-denial, to live in the fullness of all Things
from the common Stock?

CHAP. XVI.
That the Monks do well to vow a blind Obedience to their Superiors. Council.
Trid. Sess. 25. cap. 1. Bellarm. de Monach. lib. 2. cap. 21.
AGainst that which is written, 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a Price; be
not ye therefore the Servants of Men. But is not this plainly to make
themselves Servants of Men, to submit themselves so, as to obey them in all
things, without reserve?

Romans 6. 16. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves Servants to obey,
his Servants ye are to whom ye obey. And can there be a greater Servitude, than
to obey any one with a blind obedience?

1 Cor. 11. 1. Be ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ. Note, that the
Apostles themselves would not be followed, but in those Things only wherein
they are the Followers of Christ, who is the true Model of Perfection. Christ
alone is ^o be obeyed unreservedly, Matthew. 17. 5. Hear him. But as for Men, we
must not give up our Faith or Practice absolutely to be ruled or swayed by any
Man. Matthew. 23. 8. Call no Man your Father upon Earth; for one is your Father
which is in Heaven. Neither be ye called Masters; for one is your Master, even
Christ.

Note therefore, that when it is said, Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the
rule over you. It must be meant only in such things as are agreeable or not
contradictory to the Word of God, though they be troublesome or grievous to the
Flesh; but not in any thing that is contrary to it.

There are no Rules or Laws which are universally obligatory to Christians, but
the Laws of Christ; and no others but as consistent with them. And of this
Consistency, all Men must judge for themselves before they obey. But,

Acts 4. 19. Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto Men more
than unto God, judge ye? Thus they ought to speak to their Superiors, and not do
every thing they command, without examining it. Which by the sad experience of
the Christian World, has been the cause of many Mischiefs in these latter
Ages, whilst some have blindly and unreservedly submitted themselves to the
Commands of their Superiors, and upon no pretense whatsoever are to withdraw
their Obedience.

Of Satisfactions, Indulgences, Purgatory, and praying for the Dead.
CHAP. XVII.
That Men are obliged, partly to satisfy the Justice of God for their Sins
themselves, Christ having not by his Satisfaction fully answered all. Council
of Trent. Sess. 14. cap. 8. Can. 12, and 13.
FOR the understanding of which, it must be considered, that they distinguish
of Sins, that some are Mortal, and some are Venial. And of the ^^nishment due
to them, that to Mortal Sins, both an Eternal and Temporal punishment is due;
but to Venial Sins only a Temporal. Now they say, that Christ has satisfied
for the eternal punishment due to Mortal Sins, which all that are in a State of
Grace are delivered from. But for the temporal Punishment which belongs to
Venial Sins, and which remains as belonging to Mortal Sins besides the eternal
Punishment, they say that Men are obliged to satisfy themselves by Penitential
Works, or (...) here or in Purgatory. And that these Works and Sufferings are
true and proper Satisfactions and Compensations to the Justice of God. And
Christ has no otherwise satisfied for Venial Sins, or for the temporal
Punishment belonging to Mortal Sins, than by his Merits obtaining that they may
satisfy.

This we think is derogatory from the compleatness and fullness of our Savior's
Satisfaction, and that free and full Remission of Sin, which upon our
Repentance and Faith we obtain upon the account of his alone Satisfaction.

For, Isa. 53. 4, 5. Surely he has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows;
he was wounded for our Transgresgressions, and was bruised for our Iniquities:
the chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes are we healed:
which is granted to be meant of Christ. And the Apostle referring to it, says,
1 Pet. 2. 24. Who himself bare our Sins in his Body on the Tree; by whose
Stripes ye were healed. It is spoken indefinitely without exception, of his
bearing our Sins, and the Punishments due to them. And the Effect of it is our
Healing, and the obtaining Peace with God. But how are we healed, or have Peace
with him, if there be so many Wounds and Punishments for us to undergo still by
way of Satisfaction, which is the effect of unsatisfied vindictive Justice?

1 John 1. 7. If we walk in the Light, even as he is in the Light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all Sin. Mark, not only some, but all; and consequently from all the Punishment
by way of Satisfaction. For this is meant of those Sins that are committed by
Men that are in a state of Grace, and that walk in the Light. And such, if any,
are those Sins which they call Venial, to which the Temporal Punishment is due.
But the Blood of Christ cleanses from these, and consequently has satisfied
for the temporal Punishment too, as well as the Eternal, or else how are we
cleansed from these, if we are not cleansed from the temporal Punishment due to
them, when they say there is no other Punishment due to these but Temporal?

So, Verse. 9. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
Sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Where the same universal
Terms are used, all Unrighteousness, without exception.

1 John 2. 1, 2. I^ any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours
only, but also for the Sins of the whole World. The Propitiation for Sin, for
all Sin, is wholly ascribed to Christ. But how is he a Propitiation, if
Vindictive Justice still makes its Demands, and we must still satisfy in part
our selves?

John 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World. If
it is he that does it all, then no part of Satisfaction will be demanded of us.

So, Heb. 1. 3. He by himself purged our Sins. Not we at all by our own
Sufferings.

So, Heb. 9. 26. Once has be appeared in the end of the World, to put away Sin
by the Sacrifice of himself. And, Heb. 10. 14. By one Offering he has for ever
perfected them that are sanctified. Where Sin is put away, and completely
expiated, and Sinners perfectly reconciled, what is there more to be done to
satisfy? This is done by the one Offering and Sacrifice of Christ; there is no
Sacrifice or Offering then ^or us to make.

Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a
Curse for us. Are the Punishments of Purgatory, or those temporal Ones here
spoken of, threatened by the Law, or no? If not, then they are not due. If they
were, Christ has taken them off, as they are a Curse, that is, as they are
vindictive or satisfactory Punishments; for he has redeemed us from the Curse
of the Law.

Rev. 1. 5. Who has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood; to
him be Glory for ever and ever. If is not the Blood of Martyrdom, or the
Sufferings of any of the Saints that washes them from their Sins, but the
Blood of Christ; all the Glory of it belongs to him. But the Romish Doctrine
implies, that it is but part of our Sins, and part of the Punishments that he
delivers us from. This certainly lessens the Love of Christ, and the Glory
due to him: For they must needs grant, that he had loved us more, and had been
a more perfect Savior, if he had delivered us from all.

But we find also, that full Remission and Pardon is granted unto us now
through Christ. And what is Remission of Sin, but Remission of the Punishment
due to Sin, so that none is to be undergone by the Sinner by way of
Satisfaction? and consequently Remission of all Sin, of all such Punishment?
Now this is the Covenant of which Christ is the Mediator, Heb. 8. 12. I will be
merciful to their Vnrighteousnesses, and their Sins, and their Iniquities will
I remember no more. But how can it be said, that God remembers their Sins no
more, when he still exacts Satisfaction? The Apostle says, Heb. 10. verse. 17,
18. That where remission of these is, there is no more Offering for Sin. All
being done sufficiently by the once Offering of Christ.

Thus, Col. 2. 13. He has quickened you together with him, having forgiven you
all Trespasses. Not some only, or only in some part or respect. But how are all
Trespasses forgiven, if still there is some Satisfaction to be made? Isa. 44.
22. I have blotted out as a thick Cloud thy Transgressions, and as a Cloud thy
Sins. But it seems by the Romish Doctrine, they are not quite blotted out.

Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, that
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. But is not that a sort of
Condemnation, to be adjudged to make Satisfaction for Sin, by undergoing so
many Punishments, either here or in Purgatory? What is Purgatory, but a
Temporary Hell?

But, Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing (any thing at all) to the charge of
God's Elect? It is God that justifies: Who shall condemn? It is Christ that
died. The Death of Christ answers all; and God will not demand any thing of the
Sinner.

Ephesians. 4. 32. Be ye kind one to another, forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you. God's forgiving us our Trespasses, is made
a Rule to us to forgive our Brethren. Now we are to forgive our Brethren all
Trespasses, and so does God then forgive us. Mat. 18. 32. I forgave thee all
that Debt, because thou desiredst me.

And this forgiveness of God is all free to us for Christ's sake. Psalm. 32. 5.
I said, I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
Iniquity of my Sin. He does not pretend he had satisfied for his Sin, by his
Sufferings mentioned Verse. 4. but speaks of it as mere and free forgiveness,
only upon his Confession and Repentance. Free Forgiveness and Satisfaction are
inconsistent. 1 John 1. 7. God is so there indeed, to be faithful and just to
forgive us our Sins; but that is not upon our satisfying for them, but only
upon our confessing and forsaking them. And none will say, that to confess and
forsake them, is to give a Recompense and Satisfaction. And therefore the
Faithfulness and Justice of God there, must be understood with respect to his
own Promise, and not to the Sinner's own Satisfaction.

Besides, to teach that Men may satisfy for some Sins themselves, as all Venial
Sins, is to require that which is impossible to be done; there being no Sins
truly Venial, or not deserving Eternal Death, and seclusion from the Presence
of God in their own Nature; though all Sins are Venial upon Repentance, and in
respect of the Event only, through Christ's Mediation. So that to encourage Men
to look for the doing away of such Sins by their own Satisfactions, is to
bolster them up in Pride and Self-confidence, and at last to deceive them: For
we can never by our Satisfactions exhaust the demerit of any of our Sins. For,
Romans 6. 23. The Wages of Sin is Death; the Apostle speaks it without exception.
So, Ezekiel. 18. 20. The Soul that sins, shall die* That Is the desert of Sin. So
again, Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that
are written in the Book of the Law to do them: He who commits the least Sin,
meriteth the Curse. For, Jam. 2. 10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and
yet offends in one Point, is guilty of all; by Interpretation, the Authority
of the Lawgiver being violated in that one, as well as in all. Mat. 12. 36. I
say unto you, That every idle W^rd that Men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the Day of Judgment: For by thy Words thou shall be
justified, and by thy Words thou shall be condemned. Yet we do not say, that
all Sins are equal, or equally deserving the same degree of Death or Pain, but
all deserving the Death and exclusion from God. So that it is not possible for
the Sinner to offer a sufficient Recompense or Satisfaction for the least Sin.

Mich. 6. 6, 7. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before
the High God? Shall I come before him with Burnt-offerings, with Calves of a
Year Old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten
thousands of Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my Firstborn for my Transgression;
the Fruit of my Body for the Sin of my Soul? So, by what means shall I satisfy
the Justice of my God? Shall I Fast in Lent? Shall I make Prayers of forty
hours long? Shall I give all my Goods to nourish the Poor? But all these things
cannot expiate my Sins; these have no proportion or equivalence to his Justice.

And moreover, as to those Penitential Works, which are said to be
Satisfactions, as Prayer, and Fasting, and Alms, etc. they are Debts already,
to which we are obliged by virtue of the Law, (there being no Works of
supererrogation beyond or above the Precept of the Law, as is proved
afterward); and therefore they cannot be Satisfactions for other Debts, or
Sins, or Defects of Obedience: For that which is a Duty already due before the
commission of the Fault, can never satisfy for the Fault committed.

We are obliged indeed to Repentance, and to practice some Acts of Discipline,
to show our indignation against our selves for our Sins, and to deter us the
more from sinning for the future. And sometimes we must make some Satisfaction
to the Church for the Scandals that we have committed, and to testify the truth
of our Repentance; and sometimes to particular Men, in case of particular
Instances. And we do not doubt but these things are very pleasing to God, and
may aver^ his Displeasure according to his Covenant and Promise made to us
Penitens, and are tending to his Honor. But we deny that they are proper and
equivalent Satisfactions to the Justice of God; or that any Sufferings are so,
which we can undergo; or that there can be any such performed or undergone by
us at all.

As for the Sufferings and Punishments inflicted by God himself upon Men, after
their Sins are forgiven, these are not designed by him as vindictive
Punishments upon them, and Compensations to his Justice; but either for Example
to others, that they sinning may not presume upon impunity from his sparing of
others; or as Acts of mere Discipline, and fatherly Correction, to deter his
own from falling into the like Sins for the time to come. For, Psalm. 103. Like
as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that serve him. What
a Father does, is for his Childrens amendment; he does not inflict Torment or
Suffering on them for his own Satisfaction; nor does delight in giving them any
trouble, were it not needful for themselves. Or if any earthly Parent does so,
yet God does not, Heb. 12. 10. Nor is it true always, that these temporal
Inflictions are, or are to be inflicted upon good Men, but only in some certain
Cases, when God sees it meet and fitting for them or others.

CHAP. XVIII.
That some Persons may satisfy over and above what is needful for themselves,
and their own Sins; so that their Satisfactions may serve for others that want
them, or have not enough of their own. Catech. Romans par. 2. cap. 5. p. 61. And
that these are put into the Treasury of the Church, to be dispensed by
Indulgences. Decret. de Indulg.
BUT by what is said in the foregoing Chapter, it appears, that no Man
whatsoever can offer an equivalent Satisfaction or Compensation to the Justice
of God for any one Sin of his own; and that he can never by his Sufferings
exhaust the demerit of any one Sin, the Wages of Sin being Death everlasting.

And, Psalm. 130. 3. If thou, Lord, should mark Inquities: O Lord, who shall
stand? The Psalmist's Question implies, that no Man can stand in Judgment, if
God should be strict with him. And how can he be supposed to suffer more than
he deserves?

Psalm. 143. ^. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord. The Psalmist
is afraid to put himself* upon an equal Trial before God. But according to
these People, one may not only reckon with the Justice of God, but that God
will be indepted something over and above.

Psalm. 90. 7, 8. We are consumed by thine Anger; and by thy Wrath are we
troubled. Thou have set our Iniquiquities before thee, our secret Sins in the
Light of thy Countenance. The Prophet Moses here speaks of the Calamities of
this Life, and refers them all to our Sins: So that whatsoever we suffer, is
but a just infliction for our Sins.

Dan. 9. 7. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of
Face. The Prophet reckons, that whatsoever God inflicts upon Men, he is
righteous therein, and that an utter confusion of Face is but what we deserve.
It was his own Sin, as well as the Peoples, that he was confessing, Verse. 20.

Ezra 9. 13. After all that is come upon us for our Evil Deeds, thou our God
have punished us less than our Iniquities deserve. Must not we always say the
same? And what is become then of Satisfaction, and superabundant Satisfaction?

Lamen. 3. 39. Wherefore does a living Man complain, a Man for the punishment
of his Iniquity? But if God should punish him more than he deserves, he would
have cause of complaint. But, Job 34. 23. God will not lay upon Man more than
is right, that he should enter into Judgment with God; as it is implied, he
might do if he should. So that whosoever suffers, suffers but what is due; and
yet does not satisfy, much less over-satisfy.

The Penitential Works of the Saints, are but what are due also before, as was
before observed, and therefore are not Satisfactions. And the Afflictions that
are laid upon them, are for other ends, and not to be an equivalent
Satisfaction to Divine Justice. It is Christ alone who has offered himself a
full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice for all our Sins. He is the Lamb of
God, that takes away the Sins of the World. Who his one self bare our Sins in
hi^ Body on the Tree. The only Propitiation; 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. For there is one
God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a Ransom for all. This is no Man's Business but his, nor can be done by
any but him. For, Acts 4. 12. There is not Salvation in any other; For there is
no other Name given among Men by which we must be saved. But if others may
satisfy, and their Satisfactions may serve for us, they are so far made our
Redeemers and Saviors. Which is to put them into Christ's Office and stead;
who only was made to be Sin, or a Sin-offering for us, that we might be made
the Righteousness of God, i. e. treated as Righteous Persons, in him, and for
his sake, and not for the Merits and Satisfactions of others, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
And, Verse. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself; not by the
Satisfactions and Merits of Saints. 1 Pet. 1. 19. Redeemed we are by the
precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot. Which
the Apostle implies it was needful he should be, to become our Redemption; but
this cannot be said of the Sufferings of any Saint. 1 Cor. 1. 30. He is made to
us of God, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption; that,
according as it is written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord, and
give him the praise and thanks of the whole Work, and have no dependence upon
the Sufferings and Satisfactions of Saints. For, Isa. 43. 11. I am the Lord,
and besides me there is no Savior. And, Col. 2. 10. Ye are complete in him. So
that we have no need of Saints Satisfactions; nor is it their Office and
Business to satisfy, but only Christ's. We cannot do it for our selves, nor
others for us, but he alone, who is our Peace. As was also proved before by the
Texts of the foregoing Chapter.

There is none but Christ, who by his Satisfactions and Intercessions does
answer for others Sins. There is no mere Man that can answer for another.
Though God may, and does often show Mercy to some Men, with respect to others
in many Instances, according to his Covenant, or for other holy and wise Ends;
it is not for the sake of any Merits and Satisfactions which others have
offered for them; nor does he pardon Men's Sins, or give them Life, upon the
account of such Merits and Satisfactions; but deals with Men in that respect
only, according to their own Works, and shows Mercy only in Christ, and for his
sake.

Gal. 6. 6, 7. Let every Man prove his own Work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself, and not in another. For every Man shall bear his own
Burden.

Exodus 32. 31. Moses said, O this People have sinned a great Sin; yet now, if
thou will forgive their Sin; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of the Book
which thou have written. And the Lord said unto Moses, Whosoever has sinned
against me, him will I blot out of my Book. The Prophet Moses was not admitted
to bear the Punishment of the People, but every Man was to bear his own Sin.

Ezekiel. 18. 20. The Soul that sins, the same shall die. The Son shall not
bear the Iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the Iniquity of
the Son. The Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, and the
Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon him.

Mat. 3. 9, 10. Think not therefore to say within your selves, We have Abraham
to our Father: every Tree which brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down
and cast into the Fire. ' It Is not another's Righteousness will avail to our
acceptance.

Hab. 2. 4. The Just shall live by his Faith; not by the Faith of another.

1 Cor. 3. 8. Every Man shall receive his own Reward, according to his own
Labor. For, 2 Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every Man may receive the things done in his Body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad. 1 Pet. 1. 17. For the Father
judges without respect of Persons, according to every Man's Work. In vain
shall we allege the Fasts and Alms of another: He that serves God by a
Proctor, shall go to Hell in his own Person.

Mat. 25. 8, 9. The foolish Virgins said unto the Wise, Give us of your Oil,
for our Lamps are gone out. They would fain have had a benefit in their
Righteousness. But the Wise answered, saying, Not so, lest there be not enough
for us and you. It must be your own Righteousness that must serve you,
according to the Covenant of Grace in Christ. And therefore, Verse. 35. one
Man's good Works did not profit another, but every one is judged according to
his own Actions.

And it is Christ alone that satisfies for others, and not any Saint with him,
or subordinate to him: As, 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. Every one of you says, I a^ of
Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ: Which is equally
blameworthy, in having recourse to their several Merits with Christ's, as upon
other respects. Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye
baptized in the Name of Paul? The same may we also say to those of the Church
of Rome, when one says, I am of St. Francis, I of St. Dominick, and I of the
Society of Jesus? Is Jesus divided from Christ? Was St. Francis crucified for
you? or were ye baptized in the Name of Dominick, or Ig^atius Loyola?

As for what the Apostle says, Col. 1. 24. I now rejoice in my Sufferings for
you, and fill up that which is (...) of the Afflictions of Christ in my Flesh,
for his Body's sake, which is the Church. It is not meant, that he suffered to
satisfy for their Sins, as if any thing were wanting in the meritorious
Sufferings of Christ to that end; God forbid. But it was for the Church's good
that the Apostles suffered, to give them an Example of Constancy, etc. And the
Sufferings of the Members of Christ are called Christ's Sufferings, 2 Cor. 1.
5. And they are partakers of Christ's Sufferings, 1 Pet. 4. 13. They being
predestined to be conformed to their Head, Romans 8. 29. They are to suffer as
he did, and so by degrees to fill up the Sufferings that are designed for the
whole Body of Christ; and then at last also they shall reign with him, but that
by his Gift and Purchase alone, Rev. 2. 10. And, Rev. 7. 14. These are they
which came out of great Tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them
white in the Blood of the Lamb; therefore are they before the Throne of God.

Now if there be no Satisfactions for Sin made by any Man or Men, but only
Christ; and much less superabounding Satisfactions and Merits for others, above
what any one has need of him, then there can be no Treasury of these in the
Church for the use of others that want: For there can be no Treasury of that
that is not. And what need can there be of it, when Christ's own Satisfaction
is sufficient in all Cases?

And if there be no such Treasury in the Church for the benefit of others, to
be dispensed: then the Pope, nor any one else is the Dispenser; for he cannot
dispense it if it be not. If it be not in his hands to give, he cannot give it,
or rather sell, for they do not use to be very free of their Gifts. And then
consequently the use of Pardons and Indulgences for the dispensing out of these
superabounding Merits and Satisfactions to others, is a vain thing. For this is
to pretend to give that that is not, than which what can be more vain? And
consequently to sell about these Indulgences for Money, and thereby to give
People hope of Pardon of their Sins, is both to cheat and deceive their Souls,
and pick their Pockets, by pretending to sell to them that that is not.

But suppose there were such a Treasury, why must the Pope be the Dispenser?
Why should it not be supposed, that that is left in the hands of Christ Jesus
alone, who is only able to discern who are fit to have benefit thereby; and who
has the Key of David, who opens and no Man shuts, and who shuts and no
Man opens? Rev. 3. 7.

But whatsoever Satisfactious or Merits, even of Christ himself, any Person
has share in: Surely these are not to be sold by Money, nor has any one an
application thereof made to him by such a Traffic; but upon his Faith and
Repentance alone, which Christ alone, and not Man, can judge of the sincerity
of, and accordingly apply the Benefits of his Redemption.

Indulgences of Canonical Penance in the Church, upon the humiliation and
submission of the Penitents, are allowed. But Indulgences to dispense an
imaginary Treasury of imaginary Satisfactions, and there to be bought by Money,
or some very slight Performances, are a bold and unaccountable rashness and
presumption.

CHAP. XIX.
That there is a Purgatory, or place of Torment after this Life, for the
expiation of the Sins of good Men, that are not sufficiently purged here. And
that the Souls there detained, are helped by the Masses, Prayers, Alms, and
other good Works of the Living. Council of Trent, Sess. 6. Can. 30. Sess. 25.
Decret. de Purgat.
THE Foundation upon which this Doctrine of Purgatory is built, is, That there
is a Debt of Temporal Punishment remaining to be paid, even by those that are
absolved and in a state of Grace, tho the Eternal Punishment be forgiven. And
that every Man therefore must undergo these Temporal Pains, in proportion to
his Sins, Christ having not at all satisfied for them: And if this be not done
in this Life, that then it must be done in the next, in Purgatory, before a Man
can have entrance into Heaven.

Now this having been refuted before, and it having been proved, that Christ
has satisfied fully for all our Sins, and that we have complete and perfect
Remission of Sin through the free Grace of God, upon the account alone of
Christ's meritorious Satisfaction; and so that there is no proper Satisfaction
to be made by us for Sin at all, the Foundation upon which Purgatory is built,
is taken away. And all those Texts serve to the refuting of it, which are
before produced to prove the compleatness of our Savior's Satisfaction, and of
the free Remission of our Sins upon it.

But yet if it were admitted, that there were a reserve of some proper
Satisfactory Punishments, which God may think fit to inflict upon some Men in
some Cases here; yet unless it could be proved, that this were a perpetual
Ordinance, and perpetually observed by God, it would not signify any thing to
the purpose of what is intended. And yet if this were admitted likewise, that
it were perpetually so here, yet what is this to prove a Purgatory hereafter?
For who can tell, but for such Punishments as are to be undergone, it may be
all done here, unless God reveals to us to the contrary? But there being
neither one nor other of these things proved, but the contrary rather
appearing, we cannot otherwise think of Purgatory, but that it is a fond Thing
vainly invented.

Moreover, it is directly contrary to all those Texts of Scripture that assert
the Happiness and Rest of the Saints after this Life. As,

Isa. 57. 1, 2. The Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come. He shall
enter into Peace: they shall rest in their Beds. Is this to be taken away from
the Evil to come, to be put into a condition where they must undergo heavier?
Is that to enter into Peace, and to be at Rest, to be burning in Fire seven
times hotter than ours, and which differs from that in Hell in nothing, but in
respect of duration?

Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth, that
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them; that is,
their good Works, in the gracious Reward that is given them, not their Sins and
Punishments. Now all the Faithful that die, die in the Lord, Romans 14. 5. So
that they all rest from their Labors. But to be tormented in burning Fire,
sure that is not to rest from their Labors, but to be put to worse.

In the Book of Wisdom, which the Church of Rome holds for Canonical, and
therefore cannot deny its Testimony, Chap. 3. 1. it is said, The Souls of the
Righteous are in the Hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. What
can be more express?

John 5. 24. Our savior says, Verily, verily I say unto you, That he who
hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has eternal Life, and
shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from Death to Life. Note, that
it is not said, That he who believes in Jesus Christ, shall pass from Death
unto Torment; but he that shall pass from Death to Life, that is a blessed
Life; for the other would be to pass from Death to Death, at least for a while.

Therefore, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know, says the Apostle, that if our earthly House
of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made
with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. It is not Purgatory then, or a Place of
Torment that the Saints remove into when they remove from their Bodies.

And therefore says he, verse. 2. In this we groan earnestly, desiring to be
clothed upon with our House which is from Heaven. But if Death were followed
with Torment so horrible, as those are represented to be which are in
Purgatory, there would be reason rather for one to be affrighted at it, and to
fly from it, than to desire it with so much ardour and earnestness, and to wish
to continue in this present state of Life still for fear of the worst.

Yet again, verse. 6, 7, 8. Whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent
from the Lord, and are willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be
present with the Lord. Implying, that that would be presently upon the leaving
the Body. Now our Lord sure is in Heaven, and not in Purgatory. Therefore so
shall the Saints be also when they die.

Hence says the Apostle, Phil. 1. 21. To me to live is Christ, and to die is
Gain. But according to the Romish Church, to die is a damage to us. The fear of
Purgatory may make the best Men fearful of dying.

But, verse. 23. I am in a great strait betwixt two, desiring to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ, which is far better. This implies, that he did not doubt
but it would be so. But if there were a Purgatory to pass through first, it
would be far better to abide longer in the Body. For though St. Paul had less
Sin than others, yet it cannot be denied but he might have some venial Sins.
And if there must be Punishment undergon by way of satisfaction for these Sins,
equivalent to the Fire of Hell, as that in Purgatory is said to be, though he
did undergo more Crosses and Afflictions than others, yet ye did not undergo
those that were equivalent to the Fire of Hell; and how could he be sure then,
but that he also must enter into Purgatory first before he pass into Heaven?
and then one would think, he should have little Heart to desire to be
dissolved: But he does not fear any of this.

And note, that the Apostle speaks of the Happiness in the next Life in common,
in the plural number, as belonging to all the Saints, and not as a special
Privilege to himself alone. So, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me
a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at
that day; that is, the day of his departure out of this Life, verse. 6. And then
mark, Not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

Luke 23. 43. Our Savior said to the believing Thief on the Cross, This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. He does not say, when thou shall have been
some Years in Purgatory, I will receive thee into Paradise; but, this day, etc.
Now Paradise is acknowledged to be the Seat of the Blessed, not a place of
Torment. And yet there was no Person that could deserve more to be sent to such
a place than the Thief, having had no time to do Penance for any of his Sins.
For if to suffer Death for his Sins was a sufficient Satisfaction; then it were
best for every Man to desire to suffer such a Death or worse. For the pains of
the worst of Deaths are much easier it seems than those of Purgatory.

But is it not indeed very strange that God should forgive Men the Eternal
Punishment due to the worst and most mortal Sins, for the sake of Christ's
Satisfaction, and yet exact so severe a Punishment for Sins, in their own
nature Venial, which may be so easily remitted? that God should do the greater,
and yet that he should not do the less? When yet it must needs be owned, that
Christ has offered a Satisfaction enough for all if it be but applied.

As for those places that are pretended to prove a Purgatory, 1 Cor. 3. 13, 15.
There we read of Fire indeed, and that is all, but not one word of
Purgatory-Fire. It is the Fire of the Day of Judgment is there meant, which is
eminently in Scripture called the Day, and is that indeed which shall be
revealed by Fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. And it is the Works of Men there that shall
be burnt, that is, their false Doctrines, which are but Hay and Stubble, when
the Trial comes. But it does not speak of the burning of their Persons that
hold the Foundation, who are not to be burnt, but saved, yet so as by Fire;
which is only a phrase to express the doing of a thing with great difficulty,
Zech. 3. 2. see a like phrase Jude 23.

As for Mat. 12. 32. it speaks of the greatest of Sins, the Sin against the
Holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven, and so that Phrase signifies,
neither in this, nor in the World to come, that is, not at all. So, Mark 3. 29.
it is expressed, He has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal
damnation: or, that Phrase may signify, that that great Sin should not be
forgiven in the Times of the Messiah, or under the Gospel, which is sometimes
expressed by the World to come, Heb. 2. 5. and 6. 5. when the Jews expected that
greater Sins should be forgiven, than could be expiated by Levitical
Sacrifices. Or, if Sins be said to be forgiven in the World to come, what is
that, but at the Day of Judgment, when the actual deliverance of the Just from
Punishment, and their final acquittal, may be not improperly called the full
remission of their Sins? What is this to Purgatory, where Sins are not
forgiven, but punished?

Mat. 5. 26. They shall not come out thence till they have paid the uttermost
Farthing; that is, never; but must abide in Hell for ever. Hell is mentioned,
verse. 22, 29, 30. And diverse degrees of Punishments intimated there, with
allusion to the different degrees inflicted in the Jewish Courts, but not one
word of Purgatory.

As for, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. those Spirits there said to be disobedient, were not
saved at all, as it is pretended they shall be out of Purgatory. And the Prison
that they are said to be in, does not signify Purgatory, as if Christ then by
his Spirit preached to them there. But by his Spirit in Noah, he preached to a
disobedient World, though his preaching did then no good; their Souls being
then, as it were, by Lust and Sin enslaved and imprisoned in their Bodies, and
are now lying in the Prison of Hell for all this.

Now then, if there be no Purgatory, or place of Torment in the next Life for
just Men, to the end pretended, then likewise Prayers, or Masses and Alms for
them, are vain things to the end proposed, viz. in order to the deliverance out
of it. If there be no such thing, then these things that have relation to it,
can be of no use. And yet if there were a Purgatory for expiation of Sins, and
for satisfaction for temporal Punishments due to them, how does it appear, that
Prayer for those in that State will help them out of it? or who can tell, but
that they must continue there, if they be there, till the Day of Judgment? As
for the supererrogating meritorious Works of the Living, and their
availableness to deliver their dead Friends out of Purgatory, it is after
proved likewise, that there are no such Works. But yet if they were, how should
they be available to get them out of it, when the superabundant Merits and
Satisfactions of Christ were not available to prevent their going in? If others
Satisfactions and Merits might be of use to them in Purgatory, one would think
Christ's should have kept them out. But if Christ's Satisfactions could not
help them, but they must satisfy for themselves how should the Saints good
Works upon Earth help them?

This is the great Doctrine, with the Appendages of it, that brings in so great
Wealth to Rome, and therefore no wonder it is so stiffly retained; though among
all the Directions that are given about Prayer, up and down the Scripture,
there is not any where the least intimation of any direction for praying for
the Dead, or of any use that it would be. Which it is very strange that it
should be omitted among so many Instructions, that are given about Prayer, if
it were to have been done.

As for 2 Maccab. 12. 39, etc. where he says, Money was sent to Jerusalem, that
Sacrifices might be offered for the Slain; and it is recommended as an holy
Cogitation to pray for the Dead. Those Men that died, died in the Sin of Achan,
and therefore were liable to eternal Punishment. And so there could be no
ground to suppose, even according to Popish Principles, that they were in
Purgatory, but in Hell. And if it proves the benefit of Sacrifice and Prayer
for the deliverance of dead Sinners, it must be out of Hell it self, and not
out of Purgatory. Judas's Offering was a Sin-offering for the sake of the
Living, that the whole Assembly might not suffer for the Sin of the Dead, as
they once did in the Case of Achan, Josh. 7. And Prayers were offered up to God
to the same end, to avert his Anger from them. But Jason the Writer of the
History, or his Epitomizer, being a Platonic Jew, and having his Head filled
with some Platonic Notions, ignorantly applies all this as done for the Slain.
But he commends Self-murder too, and praises Razias for killing himself, 2
Mac. 14. 42. So that we have no great reason to rely much upon the Judgment of
this Author.

Of Justification, and Pardon of Sin.
CHAP. XX.
That Justification is by Charity or Righteousness, which is infused and
inherent in us. Conc. Trent. Sess. 6. cap. 7. Bellarm. de Justificat. lib. 1.
FOR the understanding of this, it must be considered, that the Romish Doctors
distinguish Justification into the first and second. The first, in which a Man
is made Just, by the infusion of the habit of Charity. The second, is his
cooperating with the Grace received, by which he merits and attains to a
greater increase of Righteousness. But both these are inherent in him; so that
Justification with him, is the same with Regeneration and Sanctification; and
all is wrought in them, in the use, and by virtue of the Sacraments. But
besides this, they speak of, and seem to include Remission of Sins in
Justification; by which they mean both the removing of the Fault, and the guilt
of Sin. But the remission of the Fault, is nothing else but the abolishing of
Sin by the aforesaid infused Grace, whereby it is destroyed, and ceases in its
being. And then the guilt of Sin, which is its desert of, and obligation to
Punishment, is remitted of course, by natural and necessary Consequence. For
Sin being abolished, where there is no Sin, there can be no Desert or
Punishment, and so no Obligation to it. So that Sin being abolished, the Guilt
is taken away; but it is no otherwise taken away, than by taking away the being
of Sin; but it follows that by a necessary result. So that according to-them,
Justification or Remission of Sin, is not an Act of God's Grace, absolving the
believing and penitent Sinner from Guilt, and graciously imputing his Faith to
him for Righteousness, and so accepting him as Righteous, and dealing with him
accordingly, though his Righteousness be imperfect, and do not deserve it,
merely of his own free Grace, upon the account of the satisfactory or
meritorious Sacrifice of Christ Jesus offered up to him. But the taking away
the Punishment of Sin, is a thing arising by a natural Consequence from the
abolishing of Sin, and so is necessarily due upon the infusion of Grace, and is
really no distinct Act from it. And so the free Grace of God, and Redemption of
Christ, has no other hand in the Justification and Remission of a Sin^^r, than
as procuring and giving Grace to the Si^ner for abolishing of Sin, and making
him inherently just; and then the rest is due and follows of course.

Against that which is written, Acts 13. 38, 39. Be it known unto you
therefore, Men and Brethren, that through this Man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of Sins. And by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Where that which is
the Forgiveness of Sins in the first place, in the second is expressed by
Justification. So that Justification and Forgiveness are the same thing; and
are consequent to Faith, which is the condition of it, and so is to go before.
And this Forgiveness now under the Gospel-Law or Covenant is of such Sins, of
which by the Sacrifices of the Law of Moses, there was no remission. So that
Gospel-forgiveness or Justification is the acquitting of the Sinner from his
Sin, upon the account of the Sacrifice of Christ.

So, Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
Remission of Sins that are past, that he might be just, and the Justifier of
him that believes in Jesus. Where Justification and Remission of Sins are also
taken for the same, and the one is but explicatory of the other. And it is an
Act of God's Grace, not infusing of Grace, but forgiving of Sins past, upon the
account of Christ's Propitiatory Sacrifice, to all those that believe in him,
though they be not innocent or sinless, nor have any thing of Merit or Virtue
in themselves toward the purchasing of this Remission.

And, verse. 28. Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith without
the Deeds of the Law. And being without the Deeds of the Law, it cannot be
supposed to consist in Sanctification, which is expressed by such Deeds. But
the meaning of it therefore is, That Faith and sincere Obedience to the Gospel
of Christ, is so accepted by God upon the account of Christ's Sacrifice, that
though it be not a perfect Righteousness, the true Believer shall be freely
discharged and acquitted of all his Sin, by God's pardoning-Grace, without
having a perfect legal Righteousness in himself to deserve it.

Romans 4. 3. Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for
Righteousness. And, verse. 5. To him that works not, but believes in him that
justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness. And, verse. 22.
It was imputed to him for Righteousness. Where Justification is not the
infusion of Faith or Righteousness, but it is the Acceptance of the Believer's
Faith through mere Grace, as if it were a perfect Righteousness, though it be
not, and though a Believer has not in himself a perfect innocence or
blamelessness.

Verse. 6, 7, 8. Even as David describes the blessedness of the Man, to whom
the Lord imputes Righteousness without Works; saying, Blessed are they whose
Iniquities are forgiven, and whose Sins are covered. Blessed is the Man to whom
the Lord will not impute Sin. Where the imputing of Righteousness, and the not
imputing of Sin, and the forgiving of Iniquities, and covering of Sins, are all
taken for the same, and are all but several Expressions of Justification. And
the imputing of Righteousness without Works, sure is not the infusion of
Righteousness, which is expressed by Works. And the covering or not imputing of
Sin, is not the abolishing of it.

Romans 8. 33. Who then shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is
God that justifies; who is he that condemns? Where Justification is opposed
to Accusation and Condemnation. And from hence it is plain, that it is a
judicial Act of God toward us, discharging and acquitting Believers for
Christ's sake, from what they are accused of, and condemned by the Law. And it
is an Expression taken from Judicial Proceedings at a Court, where the Judge
does not infuse new Qualities into one at the Bar, but acquits and discharges
him from the Guilt of which he was accused, and the Punishment due to it. As
the word is also used. Prove. 17. 15. He that justifies the Wicked, and
condemns the Just, even they both are an abomination to the Lord. Where his
Fault is, that he acquits the Wicked, who ought to be condemned. But if he
could turn his Heart, and make him Just, sure that would be no abomination. And
indeed this sense of the word Justify and Remit, is the usual sense of all the
World; and to understand it otherwise of induing a Man with good Qualities, is
against the common usage of all Mankind. And certainly it ought to be
interpreted and taken in such its usual sense then in those places, that
directly treat of Justification, and where all the Circumstances do concur to
such a signification. Though there should be some particular place elsewhere,
where it may be singularly interpreted in another manner, where the
Circumstances of the place do require it.

Now the result of all is, That Faith, or a believing reception of, and
submission to Christ and his Laws, is prerequired in us as the condition upon
which Justification and Remission of Sin is promised in the Covenant of Grace,
upon the account of Christ's Sacrifice. So that this is presupposed to
Justification in order of Nature. But the whole of Remission and Justification,
is the free Act of God's Grace, acquitting the true Believer of this Sin and
Punishment due to it, upon the account of the meritorious Satisfaction made by
Christ Jesus, and accepting of him as righteous, and dealing with him
accordingly, though he has a great deal of Sin, and has not a perfect
Righteousness of his own to deserve it. His Acquitment and Acceptance is not a
natural Consequent of his having Grace inherent in him, as if that were
properly his Justification; but it is by virtue of the Promise made in the
Covenant of Grace, with respect to, and upon the account of the Satisfaction
made by Christ Jesus. So that the free Grace of God, and the Sacrifice of
Christ, have an hand both in the procuring of Grace for us, and the acceptance
of it also when that is done.

CHAP. XXI.
That for the obtaining of the Remission of all Mortal Sins, a particular
Confession of them to a Priest, (which they call Auricular Confession) with all
the Circumstances, which do either increase or diminish the Sin, as far as can
be called to mind (at least an intention of making such a Confession) is
absolutely necessary. Council. Trident. Sess. 14. cap. 4, 5. Can. 6, and 7.
Catech. Romans Par. 2. de Poeniten. N. 38.
THis, they say, is absolutely necessary to be, either in Act or Desire. So
that Contrition, (which is the same with Repentance, that is, a sorrow for Sin
past, and a purpose of forsaking it for the time to come) though perfected also
with Charity, is not enough to obtain Remission without this. But yet imperfect
Contrition, or Attrition, which arises merely from the fear of Hell, with
Confession to a Priest, and his Absolution, will do it, without perfect
Contrition, or true Repentance for the Sin.

But this is a mere humane Invention, tending to raise the Grandeur of the
Priests, to acquaint them, with all Men's Secrets, and to cherish their
Covetousness and Ambition, by the Gain that they make hereby of their
Absolutions and Indulgences; and tending likewise to cherish carnal Security in
those that confess to them, considering that Pardon of Sin may be had at so
easy a rate with Confession; and to trouble the Consciences of those that have
no mind to it, as if without it their Sin were unpardonable, though they have
true Contrition or Repentance for their Sin. And it is manifestly against all
those Texts that require Contrition or Repentance in order to Pardon, and not
Attrition only; and that make such Contrition a sufficient Qualification for
Pardon, without this Auricular Confession. As,

Against, Isa. 1. 16, 17. Wash ye, make ye clean; put away the evil of your
Doings from before mine Eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well.

And then, verse. 18. Though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as
Snow; though they be like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. And,

Chap. 55. 7. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his
Thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him;
and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon. So,

Ezekiel. 18. 30. Repent, and turn your selves from all your Transgressions; so
Iniquity shall not be your ruin. Verse. 31. Cast away all your Transgressions,
and make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit; for why will ye die? Verse. 32. Turn
your selves, and live ye. From all which observe, That Repentance and turning
from Sin, in Heart and Life, is absolutely required in order to the Pardon of
it; and that a promise of Forgiveness is made to this, without requiring
Confession to a Priest to be joined with it.

For, Psalm. 51. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit; a broken and a
contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise. This indeed is acceptable to God,
accompanied or followed with a real forsaking of Sin, and nothing less than
this. David thus confessing his Sin to God, obtained pardon, Psalm. 32. 5.

If less will serve, or more be required, there must be a new Institution for
it in the New Testament. But now see Act. 3. 19. Repent, and be converted, that
your Sins may be blotted out. But, Luke 13. 3. Except ye repent, ye shall all
perish. And our Savior therefore appointed, Luke 24. 47. That Repentance and
Remission of Sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations. So that it
is true Repentance which is the condition of Pardon in the New Covenant; but
Confession of Sin to a Priest is no where required.

For, as for Mat. 3. 6. where it is said, that many were baptized of John in
Jordan, confessing their Sins. And, Acts 19. 18. That many that believed, came
and confessed, and showed their Deeds. It was their own voluntary Act, arising
from the heart of Zeal, and was done publicly before all. Not secretly
whispered in the Ears of a Priest, nor was it exacted or required, as a Matter
of necessary Obligation.

And as for what St. James says, Chap. 5. 16. Confess your Faults one to
another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. Note, that he directs
to this, only in case of bodily Sickness, accompanied with an afflicted or
distressed Conscience, in order to the obtaining the more fervent Prayers of
those who are made privy to their Case, for their relief and help from God; but
he does not appoint it for an universal standing Rule for all Men, and of
absolute obligation upon them in all Cases, for the obtaining of Remission of
Sin, by a Priestly Absolution.

And note, that when our Savior says, John 20. 23. Whose soever Sins ye remit,
they are remitted; and whose soever Sins ye retain, they are retained. It can
only be meant of such Sins as might happen to come to their knowledge; and in
such Cases wherein they might be able to make a right and sure Judgment of Men's
Repentance of, or pertinacy in Sin; which the Apostles were sometimes enabled
to do by special Revelation; and then they had an extraordinary Power given
them by the Holy Ghost, to inflict extraordinary Punishments upon Men, and to
take them off again, as they saw cause upon Men's Repentance, Acts 5. 3, 4. and
13. 11. 1 Cor. 5. 5. 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7. But the most that any Priest now can do,
who is not invested with those extraordinary Gifts, is to pronounce Men
absolved from the Guilt of their Sin, upon condition of their Repentance, or
condemned for their not coming up to it. And here is no Institution of
Confession to be necessarily made to a Priest; nor the least intimation given*
that the Sins of Men cannot be otherwise remitted, if so be they perform the
condition of a sincere Repentance in themselves.

There is no trace or track of it in our Savior's dealing with Sinners, though
he had to do with very great ones. Nor yet in the Apostles: And St. Peter
himself, when he sinned, we hear of him only, that he went out and wept
bitterly, by that Sign expressing the real Contrition and sincere Repentance of
his Heart; but we read not a word of his going to a Priest to make Confession.

In case of public Scandal indeed given to the Church, a public Confession is
very needful, and was always the Discipline of the Ancient Church. And in case
of perplexity of Conscience, for the disburdening of that, and as an help to
Repentance, a private Confession of the Sinner, and opening his Case to some
Spiritual Guide, is also very useful. But that a particular private Confession
of all Mortal Sin, with all its Circumstances, to a Priest, is of perpetual and
necessary obligation to all, in order to the obtaining pardon of Sin, can no
where be proved. And therefore is an horrid Imposition, and intolerable Tyranny
upon Men's Consciences; and is to change the Terms of Salvation from what God
himself has appointed, and to make that both easier and harder than he has made
it, either as it is said, that Confession is enough with bare Attrition, or
that it must be added over and above to true Repentance it self. And note, that
the priestly Absolution, when it is given, is not Authoritative and Judicial.
For so to absolve Sinners, and forgive Sins, belongs only to God, Mark 2. 7.
Isa. 43. 25. who is the only Lawgiver, Jam. 2. 12. or to Jesus Christ, who has
the Key of David; who opens and none shuts, Rev. 3* 7. who alone has the
supreme, independent, and absolute Power and Authority to do all things in the
Church. And whereas he has likewise given unto the Pastors of the Church the
Key of the Kingdom of Heaven, they then open Heaven, when they declare the
Grace of God to repenting Sinners; they shut Heaven when they declare the
Judgment of God to impenitent Sinners. But if they be ignorant or wicked, let
them pardon the Impenitent, and excommunicate the Good, that which they do on
Earth is not ratified in Heaven. The Authority they have to pardon Sin, or to
absolve the Sinner, being only ministerial, declarative, and conditional, upon
the profession and supposition of the Sinner's Faith and Repentance.

Of the Merits of Good Works, and Works of Supererrogation.
CHAP. XXII.
That the Good Works of Justified Persons are truly and properly Meritorious,
and fully worthy of Eternal Life. Council of Trent, Sess. 6. chap. 16. Can. 32.
THese Good Works are said by them indeed to be done by the Grace of God, and
Merit of Christ. But then it is the good Works themselves that are truly
meritorious of Eternal Life. And the Grace of God, and Merit of Christ, have
only a remote or mediate Influence toward the procuring Eternal Life, viz. by
giving us Grace to enable us to act. And that being done, the Acts or Works
themselves, which justified Persons perform, do truly and properly deserve
Eternal Life.

Contrary to Romans 6. 23. The Gift of God is Eternal Life through Jesus Christ
our Lord. He said, The Wages of Sin is Death; Sin deserves Death. But he does
not say, by way of opposition, the Wages of Righteousness is Eternal Life, but
the Gift of God is eternal Life. To teach us, that Eternal Life is a free Gift
to us, and not merited by the Righteousness and good Works of any. For free
Gift and Merit cannot stand together.

So, Luke 12. 32. Fear not, little Flock, it is your Father's good Pleasure to
give you a Kingdom. The Kingdom of Heaven is represented as a Gift, and that as
flowing from the Father's good Pleasure, and therefore not from their merit.

So again, John 10. 28. My Sheep hear my Voice, and follow me, and I give unto
them Eternal Life. This is given to Men upon their hearing and following of
Christ; It is not their following of him does deserve it.

Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. By Grace are ye saved, through Faith; and that not of your
selves, it is the Gift of God. Both Faith, and Salvation it self, which is the
End of Faith, is all of Grace and Gift, not of Works, lest any Man should boast.

So, Tit. 3. 4, 5. After that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward
Man appeared, not by Works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according
to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost, that being justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs
according to the Hope of Eternal Life. Regeneration is of Grace, and
Justification is of Grace, and free; and we have the hope of Eternal Life, as
Heirs, partaking of the Adoption, which is free, and not as Mercenaries, by
Work and Merit. And the whole of our Salvation, from first to last, is of mere
Mercy.

Thus, Exodus 20. 6. Showing Mercy to thousands of them that love me and keep my
Commandments. Those that love God, and render the most obedience to the
Commands of God, have yet need of his Mercy; they can claim nothing by debt, in
a way of strict Justice.

It is allowed by our Adversaries, that Men by their good Works cannot merit
Remission of Sin. And they who cannot deserve to be forgiven, how should they
deserve to have an infinite Reward bestowed upon them? But whence should both
one and the other come then, but from Grace? And if by Grace, then it is no
more Works; otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if it be of Works, then it is
no more Grace; otherwise Work is no more Work, Romans 11. 6, 7. For to him that
works is the Reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt; Romans 4. 4. So that
it is also a Contradiction to say, that he gives us Grace to Merit, for Grace
excludes Merit. Where there is Merit, there can be no Grace; and where there is
Grace, there can be no Merit. And if there cannot be Merit to obtain Remission,
but that is of Grace, how should there be Merit to obtain Glorification.

To have a Righteousness, or Works truly Meritorious, this Righteousness and
these Works then must be perfect at least, and without defect. For how should
an imperfect Righteousness merit? But this cannot be said of the Righteousness
or good Works of any Justified Person whatsoever. For, Jam. 3. 2. In many
things we offend all. Job 9. 3. If he will contend with him, he cannot answer
him one of a thousand. And, verse. 21. If I justify my self, mine own Mouth
shall condemn me. If I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.

That a Justified Person may merit eternal Life by his good Works, his good
Works ought to be perfect, and he ought certainly to have no other but good
Works; for where there is Sin, there is need of Pardon. And it is strange that
he should have need of Pardon for some, and yet can merit a glorious
Immortality by others? But now it is plain, that every justified Person does
sin often.

Again, to have good Works properly meritorious, there must be a proportion
between the Work and the Reward; that the good Work may be a sufficient price
or value for the Recompense. But now what proportion can there be, between an
Imperfect Righteousness and Eternal Glory? Romans 8. 18. I reckon, says the
Apostle, that the sufferings of this present Time are not worthy to be compared
with the Glory that shall be revealed in us. 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. For our
light-affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. There is no comparison between the
Sufferings of the most glorious Martyrs, and the transcendently glorious Reward
in Heaven. Then there is no equality of worthiness of one to the other. And if
the Sufferings of the most glorious Martyrs have not a Dignity and Worth in
them, equal to the Glory to come, what shall we say of all other good Works?

Nay, though our Works were perfect, as perfect as a Creatures can be, yet
there would be no proportion between our Work and Eternal Life, that is so
unspeakably great. Therefore Adam in Innocence could not merit properly such a
glorious Reward, as is now promised us in the Gospel. For there is no
proportional dignity in the Work of any Creature suitable to so great a Glory.
The most that can be said is, That he did not deserve Pain or Punishment; or
that he did deserve some consideration for the right use of this Free Will that
was put into his Power; but not that he deserved so great, and long, and
glorious a Reward, as is promised us. And how can any Justified Person now
deserve it, whose Righteousness is so stained and defective? The most that can
be here said also, is, that it is congruous that good Men, who labor against
so many Difficulties in mortifying their Lusts, and to please God, should not
be treated in the same manner with other Men; but it cannot be said, that they
deserve so great a Reward, as a blessed and glorious Immortality.

Again; be our Works never so perfect, yet they could not merit Eternal Life,
because we do but that which as Creatures we are bound to do, though there were
no Reward proposed. Luke 17. 10. When you have done all those things that are
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable Servants; we have done that which was
our Duty to do. And we can bring no advantage to God by it, by which he should
be bound to repay it. For, Job 22. 2. Can a Man be profitable unto God? Or is
it Gain to him, that thou make thy Ways perfect? So, Job 35. 7. If thou be
Righteous, what give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand? Thy
Wickedness may hurt a Man, as thou art, and thy Righteousness may profit the
Son of Man. Job was very sensible of this, and therefore what little cause
there was of boasting in, or relying upon the Merits of his Righteousness,
though it had been never so perfect. Job 9. 15. Whom, though I were Righteous,
yet would I not answer him, says he, speaking of God, but I would make
supplication to my Judge. So, Psalm. 16. 2. My Goodness extends not to thee.

And after all, whatsoever good Work any Justified Person does, he does all by
a Power received from God himself; and how can he merit from God by that which
he himself has given? For, Job ^1. 11. Who has prevented me, that I should
repay him? Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good Works. Phil. 2. 13. For it is God which works in you, both to will and
to do of his good pleasure. And, 1 Cor. 4. 7. What have thou that thou have not
received? And if thou have received it, why boastest thou, as if thou had
received it not? Romans 11. 35. Who has first given unto him, and it shall be
recompensed, unto him?

When there is a Promise of a Reward annexed indeed to any performance, upon
condition of it, then upon the performance of the Condition, tho it be never so
small, and by whatsoever power it be performed, the Reward is due, tho it be
never so great. But it is due by Promise only, the Promiser of mere Grace
engaging himself to it, and not from the dignity of the Work. And in this sense
Eternal Life may be said to be due to them that keeps Covenant with God; And
therefore it is sometimes called a Reward; and God will at last proceed with Men
according to their Works, according to the Order assigned, and Condition
prefixed in the Covenant of Grace. But still the Reward promised is of Grace to
us, being only founded upon a free and gracious Promise, by which God has
obliged himself to give it; but is not by virtue of a just and proportionable
dignity in the Work it self. But this will not serve the turn of our
Adversaries, who assert that Works are properly meritorious; which must be
understood in themselves, and not by virtue of the Promise. For pardon of Sin
is promised to Repentance; and yet none will say, that Repentance meriteth
Pardon. Tho it be as much said, 1 Jo^. 1. 9. That if we confess our Sins, God
is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins. As, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. That it is a
righteous thing with God, to recompense Tribulation to them that trouble you;
and to you who are troubled, rest with us. Or as, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth there
is laid up for me a-Crown of Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge shall
give me at that day, and to all them that love his appearing. Besides, if
nothing else had been meant, then that our good Works obtain Eternal Life by
virtue of the Promise, there had been no occasion to have had an Anathema
pronounced against those that denied it, when that was never denied by any Body.

CHAP. XXIII.
That Men may not only be perfect in this Life, but that they may also do Works
of greater perfection, than what are required in the Precept of the Gospel-Law,
which they call Works of Supererrogation, and so may have superabounding
Merits, more than what themselves need, and which may be profitable to others.
Catech. Romans par. 2. de Sacr. par.. 77. Rhemist. Annot. on Luke 11. 35. 2* Cor.
2. 10.
BUT if there be no Perfection for Man here to attain, but what is contained in
the Precept of the Law, which is the Rule of all Perfection to us, then there
is nothing that Man can do, that shall be a Perfection beyond or above the Law.
And the former will appear by these following Texts.

Mat. 22. 37, 38. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with
all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. And thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self. Here God requires the whole Entire Man, with all his Faculties. And
whatsoever in due Circumstances can be an expression of this Love to God or
Men, is here required. So that one cannot do that Work, which, all
Circumstances being weighed, is not required and commanded in the Law.

Mic. 6. 8. He has showed thee, O Man, what is Good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God? What is Good, and what does the Lord require of thee, are taken for the
same. By which the Prophet intimates, that that only is good and acceptable to
God, which God requires. And whatsoever God requires, is contained in these
Generals, so that there can be no good or acceptable Work but what is reducible
to them.

Mat. 5. 48. Be ye perfect, says our Savior, as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect. The Perfection of God himself, as far as it is imitable by us, is
proposed as the model of that Perfection which is required of us. And unless
there be some Perfection then, which there is not the Idea of in God, what
other Perfection is there for us to practice or attain, but what is required?

Romans 12. 2. All that the Apostle requires of Christians, is, To Prove what is
that good, and acceptable, and perfect Will of God, under the Gospel, in order
to the doing of it. Where he reduces all that he desires, that Christians
should be informed in the understanding and practice of the Will of God. This
Will of God is perfect, and the Rule of Perfection. And it is a conformity to
this Will of God, which is only good and acceptable to him.

Col. 1. 9, 10. The Apostle prays, that Christians may be filled with the
Knowledge of his Will, in all Wisdom and spiritual Understanding; that ye might
walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good Work.
It is the Will of God, is the Rule of every good Work, and of whatsoever is
pleasing to him. And therefore it is the utmost that a Christian can desire to
know or do. And this it is his duty to do: so that there can be no good Work,
that is pleasing to God but what it is his duty to do.

Chap. 4. 12. Again; That ye may stand perfect and complete in all the Will of
God. If a Man can do all the Will of God, he will be perfect and complete. And
this every Man ought to labor after. So that there is no perfection or
compleatness but what is contained in the compass of Man's Duty required. For
there is no Perfection, but what is regulated by the Will of God, which is the
Rule of Man's Duty.

Luke 17. 10. When ye shall have done all these things that are commanded you,
say, We are unprofitable Servants, we have done that which is our Duty to do.
The scope of our Savior is to show, that we cannot at any time boast, that we
have done more than our Duty, or what as Servants we were obliged to. For
whatsoever we do, being such, it is a Debt to our Master. Being bought with a
Price, we ought to do whatsoever we may glorify God in, both with our Souls and
our Bodies, 1 Cor. 6. ult.

Phil. 4. 8. Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things. What good Work or Action
can there be, which is not contained in this Command of the Apostle?

There are some things indeed, which in themselves, nakedly considered, are
indifferent, and do not come under any Command. Such are Marriage, and single
Life, etc. But then the observation of them nakedly in themselves, is
indifferent too, and not a Perfection. But in certain Times, for certain Ends,
when the glory of God, the State of the Church, the Edification of our
Brethren, or our own Necessity require it, that which is indifferent in it
self, nakedly considered, and under no Command, as it is clothed with these
Circumstances, then becomes necessary, and a downright Duty, as far as it can
be conceived conducible to those Ends. And this is the State of things
mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. And the mistake in this Matter arises from
not distinguishing between an universal Law, that obliges all, and that which
obliges only some Persons in some Circumstances. Both these are Laws, the
violation of which is Sin; whereas the latter have been misunderstood for mere
Counsels. Now then if a Man can do no good Work, but if it be good, it is his
Duty to do, by one Command or other, then he can have no proper merit at all;
and much less can he merit for others, by doing his own Duty.

And it is strange to consider indeed, that a Man who is not absolutely perfect
according to the Law, should yet be able to do above the perfection of the Law.
And that that is the Case is plain, whatsoever is pretended to the contrary.
For, 1 King. 8. 46. There is no Man that sins not. Prove. 20. 9. Who can say,
My Heart is clean, I am pure from Sin? Psalm. 19. 13. Who can understand his
Errors. Psalm. 130. 2. If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquities, who shall stand?
Therefore, Psalm. 143. 3. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord; for
in thy sight shall no Man living be justified. Job 9. 2. I know it is so of a
truth. For how should Men be just with God? If he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand. Job 15. 14. For what is Man that he should
be clean; or he that is born of a Woman, that he should be righteous? Isa. 64.
6. For we are all as an unclean Thing, and our Righteousness as filthy Rags. 1 John 1. 8. If we say that we have no Sin, we deceive our selves. Jam. 3. 4. For
in many things we offend all; none excepted.

Of Baptism.
CHAP. XXIV.
That Baptism is absolutely necessary to Salvation; so that those who die
without Baptism are damned. Council. Triden. Sess. 7. Can. 5. Bellarm. de Amiss.
great. and stat. peccat. lib. 2. cap. 6.
THE Necessity of Baptism we constantly maintain; and that it is a Law of
Christ which he has established in the Gospel to be for ever observed. But we
think it very uncharitable to determine, that all those that die without it are
absolutely excluded from the Grace of Christ: nor have all of the Church of
Rome been of this uncharitable Opinion. But it is supposed, that Martyrdom, or
Penance, and Acts of Faith, Hope and Charity, may supply the Defects of it. But
if Children, which are not capable of these, die without Baptism, they very
uncharitably hold, that they are excluded from all part in Jesus Christ. Which
being the general Opinion, the Sense of the Council of Trent is to be supposed
to intend it.

But by what has been said in the foregoing Chapter, it appears, that the
Grace of God is not absolutely tied to the Sacraments, but is rather
presupposed unto them. So that there is sometimes Sanctification,
Justification, and the other Graces, before the use of the Sacraments. As
Abraham believed, and was justified, before he was circumcised, Romans 4. 10.
Cornelius received the Holy Spirit before he was baptized, Acts 10. 19. And our
Adversaries are forced to grant, that there may be Acts of Faith, and Hope, and
Charity, without or before the Application of them: As the Thief on the Cross
believed, though he was never baptized, Luke 23. 42. Even after those words
were spoken by our Savior, Except a Man be born again of Water and the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Now if there may be this Grace of
Faith without Baptism, then so likewise there may be Salvation. For, John 3.
16. God so loved the World, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting Life. So that if they may believe without Baptism, then so
likewise they may be saved; as we see the Thief on the Cross was, who entered
into Paradise without being baptized. Sacraments are Seals of Grace, which they
serve to increase and confirm, as being before; but they do not give Grace or
Salvation any other ways, than as they confirm the Covenant, by which it is
promised to them who are in it.

It is not the Sacraments then which make Children to have part in the Covenant
of God, and the Fruits thereof, tho by these Rights they are visibly initiated
into the fellowship of the Catholic Church. But on the contrary, they receive
the Sacraments, because they belong to the Covenant of God before. Genesis 17. 7.
God made a Covenant with Abraham for himself and his Seed, to be a God unto
thee, says he, and thy Seed after thee; and upon this they were to receive the
Token of Circumcision, as a Seal of the Covenant, verse. 11. So that
Circumcision followed the Clauses of the Covenant, and did not give them a
right to it, nor make them the Children of God, out presupposed their being so.

So in the New Testament, God has taken Children into Covenant, together with
their Parents that believe; so that their Children are holy already before they
are baptized, and that from the very Birth, as being born within the Covenant
of Grace. 1 Cor. 7. 13, 14. The unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the Wife,
and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Husband; else were your Children
unclean, but now are they holy. By which he cannot understand Legitimate in
opposition to Bastardy; for so they would have been, being born in Matrimony,
though neither of their Parents had believed. But he means, they are holy to
God, by virtue of the Covenant, by which he is the Parent's God, and the God of
their Posterity, Genesis 17. 7. And if the Lord be the God also of Children; and
if they be holy, being sprung from the Righteous Seed, how can they possibly
perish though they die unbaptized? For though it be a federal Holiness only,
which can be directly argued from words, yet it must be supposed to be such a
federal Holiness, as intitles them to saving Benefits contained in the
Covenant; which therefore if they die before their actual breach of the
Covenant, they shall not fail to attain.

Mat. 19. 14. Our Savior therefore ^aith, Suffer little Children to come unto
me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Note, that as the Crown, which is put
on the Head of the Children of Kings, does not acquire to them a right to the
Kingdom; but because the Kingdom belongs to them, the Crown which is the Symbol
thereof, cannot be denied them. So Baptism does not acquire to Infants a right
to the Kingdom of Heaven; but because the Kingdom of Heaven is obtained for
them by the Blood of Jesus Christ, Baptism, which is the Sacrament thereof, is
administered to them. But the Promise of God, for not being sealed with the
outward Sacrament, is never the less true, nor less constant.

Baptism succeeded Circumcision, and comes in the room of it, and is of the
same use to us as Circumcision to the Jews, as the Apostle teaches, Col. 2.
11, 12. And Circumcision was as necessary to the Israelites, as Baptism is to
us. But now behold the Ordinance of Circumcision. Genesis 17. 12. Every Child that
is eight days old, shall be circumcised among you. Luke 12. 3. In the eighth
day the Flesh of his Foreskin shall be circumcised. It was not to be done
before the eighth day; there is no exception made in case of necessity. Yet
shall we say, that if they died before the eighth day, being uncircumcised,
that then they were not saved? What a cruel Law had that been then to limit
Circumcision to the eighth day? David's Child died on the seventh day, and
therefore before it was circumcised, 2 Samuel 12. 18. And yet he does not doubt
of the Child's Salvation; verse. 23. I shall go to him, but he shall not come to
me. Sure he does not mean in Limbus, or in Hell, but in the place of the
Blessed. And many of the Children of Israel in the Wilderness that were not
circumcised, no doubt died in that time, Josh. 5. 5. And shall we think
therefore they were all deprived of eternal Salvation? And what became of the
other Sex, that were not capable of Circumcision, if the Sacrament of
Circumcision were absolutely necessary to Salvation? And if that was not
absolutely necessary, then why is Baptism so?

For if Baptism be so absolutely necessary to eternal Salvation, that all
Children dying without it, should be excluded from the Grace of Christ, then an
infinite number of Children would merely perish by the Fault or negligence of
others, without their own. This would make the Salvation of a Child to depend
upon the Will of a Midwife. If she baptizeth the Child after his coming forth
of the Womb, behold he is saved; but if she crusheth him, behold he is lost for
ever. What can be more unreasonable than this? Ezekiel. 18. 20. The Soul that
sins, it shall die; The Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father. But
if a little Child be not baptized, this does not come from his Fault; and sure
he shall not be punished for the negligence of his Parents, or for want of
opportunity. When Moses neglected to circumcise his Son, Exodus 4. God spared
the Child, in that he was Innocent, but sought to kill Moses for his
carelessness in the omission.

Note therefore, that when it is said, Mark 16. 16. He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved. It is plain from the following words, that Baptism is
not of the same necessity with Faith; for it is added only, and he that
believes not, shall be damned. But it is not said, He that is not baptized
shall be damned, if so be he has Faith. But that Baptism is joined to Faith in
the Promise, it is to signify and express our duty of publicly testifying our
Faith in Christ, by our being baptized in his Name. So that Baptism is here
required only as it denotes our external profession of the Faith of Christ,
which is to be notified by Baptism, as the solemn and visible Sign of it;
Baptism being a Right divinely instituted for that end.

So again, when it is said, Acts 2. 38. Repent, and be baptized, for the
remission of Sin. And, Chap, 22. 16. Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy
Sins, calling on the Name of the Lord. It is so required and expressed, because
Men express and testify their Faith and Repentance by Baptism, that they may
obtain remission of Sin. And it is by Baptism that God seals to them remission
of Sin, upon their Repentance and Faith in Christ, therein testified and
expressed. It Is the faithful undertaking of the Baptismal Covenant, that is the
condition of Salvation. And Baptism it self is required only as it is necessary
to notify and own this our Consent and Covenant unto others. And if we perform
the Condition, the want of the use of the Sign, when it does not arise from our
own neglect, shall not hurt us.

As for John 3. 5. and Tit. 3. 5. see in the former Chapter.

Observe only this farther, that by reason of the Opinion of the absolute
necessity of Baptism to Salvation, the Church of Rome has empowered Midwives,
or any other Person, to administer it in case of peril of Death. But this
Opinion being overthrown, it is evident that that Practice is groundless, it
being the contempt (which is a virtual rejection of the Christian Faith) and
not a bare want of it that is damning. Moreover, it is plain, that our Savior
has committed the administration of the Sacrament to those to whom he
committed the Office of Teaching; Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Go teach all Nations,
baptizing them. But this Office was committed to the Apostles and their
Successors in the Ministry, and not to Women, to whom the Apostle has
prohibited it; therefore so is the administration of Baptism prohibited to them
likewise.

Of the Lord's Supper.
CHAP. XXV.
That after the Consecration, there remains no more of the Substance of Bread
and Wine in the Sacrament; but that there is a Transubstantiation, or a change
of the substance of Bread and Wine into the proper substance of the Body and
Blood of Christ. Council of Trent. Sess. 13. chap. 4. and Can. 2.
THE Foundation upon which this portentous Doctrine is built, are our Savior's
words of Institution, Mat. 26. 27, 28. and Luke 22. 19. Jesus Christ took Bread
and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my Body, which is given unto
you; this do in remembrance of me. Now we do not question but that our Savior
made his words good; but the Question is, In what sense our Savior's Words are
to be understood? whether in a literal and proper, or in a figurative Sense?
The Church of Rome says, in the literal and proper; we say, in the figurative
Sense; and so consequently that in them there is no Foundation of
Transubstantiation.

Now to make this clear, we argue thus. If there be no necessity to understand
them in the sense of Transubstantiation; and there be a great deal of Reason to
understand them in the figurative Sense in which we understand them; and that
it is very absurd and unreasonable to understand them otherwise; then they
ought to be understood in the Sense in which we understand them. For we ought
certainly to understand them in that Sense, which it is most reasonable to
understand them in. Now that there is no necessity to understand them in the
Sense of Transubstantiation, and that there is a great deal of Reason to
understand them otherwise, may appear by these following Observations.

The Sense in which we understand them, is very agreeable to the Custom, and
Usage, and Manner of speaking, which was very familiar among the Jews, with
whom such figurative Expressions were very common. For we have many of this
sort in Scripture, it being usual in the Hebrew Language to say, Things are
that which only thy signify and represent. As, Genesis 41. 26. Joseph tells
Pharaoh, The seven good Kine are seven Years, i. e. they signify and represent
them; And the seven good Ears of Corn are seven Years. And so in the matter of
the Sacraments; as Circumcision is called the Covenant, Genesis 17. 9. and yet in
the following Verse is expounded to be only the Token of it. So the Paschal
Lamb is called the Lord's Passover, Exodus 12. 11. Yet by Verse 13. appears, as
in all reason it was to be only a sign of it. So Baptism is called the washing
of Regeneration, because it was the Sign and Seal of it. And the Cup is by our
Savior called the New Testament, because likewise it was the Seal of it; where
the Cup is also taken for the Wine in the Cup. Our Savior speaking of himself,
says, I am the Door, Joh. 10. 9. and, I am the true Vine, Joh. 15. 1. (the
Church of Rome would have mightily triumphed in it, if it had been said, This
is my true Body) yet no Body takes these Expressions properly. This manner of
speaking then being so common and familiar with that Nation, well may we
interpret our Savior's words, This is my Body, in the same manner, according
to the nature of a Sacrament, and the subject Matter thereof. So it is said,
that the Rock which followed the Israelites, was Christ; 1 Cor. 10. 4. They
drank of the Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. Sure there can
be no necessity of understanding our Savior's Words in another manner, when
this form of Speech was so common among them; but it is very agreeable to
understand them as we understand them.

Besides, it is but the same form of Speech which was used by the Jews in
celebrating the Passover, which our Savior and his Disciples had been just now
about. And he instituted this Sacrament for the like End, as the Passover had
been; and it was now for ever to succeed in its place. This Passover is our
Savior and our Refuge, we are told, was the form among the Jews; meaning, that
it did put them in mind, and represent to them the Salvation which God wrought
for their Fathers in Egypt; and did likewise foreshew the Salvation of the
Messiah, the true Paschal Lamb, that was to take away the Sins of the World.
And at the Passover, the Master of the House likewise took Bread and brake it,
and gave it to them, saying, This is the Bread of Affliction, which our Fathers
ate in Egypt; not the very Bread sure, but only a Type or Figure of it. So our
Savior in like manner, accommodating himself to their Customs and Phrases,
used the very same Symbols, and expressed himself accordingly, This is my Body,
which is broken for you; which our Savior appointed in remembrance of himself
ever after, in the room of the Paschal Lamb. Now how should we understand our
Savior's words then, but agreeably to the old form in the like case?

Besides, it is plain from the words themselves* about the Institution, that it
was very Bread, of which he said, This is my Body. For it is said, He took
Bread, and gave Thanks, and brake it, and gave to his Disciples, saying, Take,
eat, This is my Body. What he took, he blessed; that which he blessed, he
brake* that which he brake, he gave to his Disciples: What he gave to his
Disciples, of that he said, This is my Body. But he took Bread; therefore of
the Bread he said, This is my Body. And if it was Bread* then it could not be
his very Body, but only a Symbol or Sign o^ it, because it was Bread still.

And that it was Bread still, ever after the Consecration, we have also the
Apostle's words for it; 1 Cor. 10. 17. For we being many, are one Bread, and
one Body; for we are all partakers of that one Bread. So that it is Bread
still* which they are partakers of* which was after the Consecration. So again,
Chap. 11. 26, 27, 28. As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the Lord's Death till he come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread,
and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and
Blood of the Lord. But let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Cup. Where he calls it Bread three times, in three
Verses together, even after the Consecration.

In like manner our Savior speaking of the Cup* when he had said, Mat. 26, 28.
This is my Blood of the New Testament, immediately after adds, (...) unto you,
I will not henceforth drink of this (...) Vine, until I drink it new with you
in -- my Father's Kingdom. From whence it is plain, that it was the Fruit of
the Vine, and real Wine, which he drank with his Disciples; and that was after
the Consecration.

Besides, if the substance of Bread and Wine are changed in the Sacrament, into
the very substance of the Body and Blood of Christ, when is it done? Is it done
before those words were pronounced, This is my Body? or in them? or after them?
If it was done before; When was it done? or by what Command? or in what way? If
it be not done till after they are all pronounced, or till after the word Is is
pronounced, then it is false to say, This is my Body, before the change is
wrought; which is not till after* the word Is is pronounced; for these words
are only declarative of what is before, and are not imperative of what should
be. And if it was not before these words were pronounced, then a thing is
pronounced to be, which was not; which is a false Proposition: And if it had
been intended, that the change should have been wrought by these words, then it
should have been, Let this be my Body, or, This shall be my Body, and not, This
is my Body, which only declares what a thing was before, and does not command
it to be what it was not. So that in truth it only means, that the Bread was
set apart by our Savior for the Sign and Token of his Body, when he blessed
it and gave Thanks.

Again, our Savior gave to his Disciples his Body as broken. But then his Body
was really whole and unbroken, for it was before his Passion, and it was the
Bread only that was broken. Therefore our Savior did not give his very Body,
but the Bread broken, only as a Symbol of his Body which was to be broken. So
that it was really Bread which he gave, and not his very natural Body; but the
Bread as a sign of his Body, and for that reason called his Body, because
signifying it And so these words are to be understood only in a Figure.

Are not these words to be understood in a Figure? 1 Cor. 10. 17. For we being
many, are one Bread and one Body, for we are partakers of that one Bread: Or
are all Christians turned into Bread first, and then into the Body of Christ,
by their being made partakers of the Bread in the Sacrament? It is as good an
Argument to argue so from these words, as to argue from our Savior's, This is
my Body, that therefore the substance of the Bread is turned into the substance
of his Body.

But the figurative way of speaking is evident and undeniable in the other part
of the Sacrament about the Cup, Luke 22. 20. And therefore why may not we
suppose the like in the former about the Body? This Cup, says our Savior, is
the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you. Here is Figure upon
Figure, the Cup for the Wine: But neither Cup nor Wine is the New Testament,
nor yet our Savior's Blood neither, but the Seal of it. But as our Savior's
Blood was the Seal of the New Testament, and of all the Promises and Benefits
contained in it. So was the Wine a sign of his Blood, and as such was given to
the Disciples, as a Seal of the New Covenant confirmed by our Savior's Blood.
And that this must be so, is also plain, because our Savior gave it to his
Disciples as his Blood shed. But his own natural Blood then was not shed;
unless they will say, it was shed before he suffered; for this was before his
Suffering. So that it must needs be understood only figuratively, that the Wine
poured forth did signify and represent the Blood of his which was shortly to be
shed for Sinners, and by which the New Testament was confirmed. And for that
end, and because of the use of it mentioned, it has the name of the Blood given
to it, the Sign having the name of the thing signified.

And though it be thus only in a figurative and not in a proper sense, that we
are to understand the words of the Institution, yet the Benefit and Comfort of
the Sacrament will be nevertheless: For it may be of equal efficacy and
advantage to us, if we outwardly receive only the Symbols, as if we received
the very Body and Blood of Christ themselves; for the efficacy does not lie in
the thing received, but in the Blessing that goes along with the Institution.
As the Water in Baptism, without a substantial change in the Element, with the
Divine Blessing, is equally serviceable to the Ends of that Sacrament, as if
there were a substantial change. So, 1 Cor. 10. 16. The Bread which we brake,
is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? We may have Communion with the
Body of Christ, by partaking of the Bread. As Idolaters may have fellowship
with Devils, by partaking of the Sacrifices offered to them, without having the
substance of the things sacrificed to them, turned into the substance of
Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 20. So Believers may have fellowship with Christ, by
partaking of the Bread and Wine instituted for that End, without having the
substance of the Bread and Wine changed into the substance of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ.

We see then it is highly reasonable and necessary to understand the words of
Institution, as other figurative Expressions of the like nature are to be
understood. And there is not the least inconvenience or absurdity will follow
upon it. But to understand them in the sense of Transubstantiation, is highly
unreasonable, and is against the being and design of the Scripture, and is also
monstrously absurd.

If the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, be turned into the Body and Blood of
Christ, then Christ must be with us still with his bodily Presence, which is
against the whole current of Scripture; for he is ascended into Heaven, and
therefore he is not here. Acts 3. 21. The Heavens must receive, or retain him,
until the time of restitution of all things* And how is he then in the hands of
the Priest? Col. 3. 1. Christ sits at the right Hand of God, and there we must
seek him, and not in the hands of a Priest, or upon the Altar. For, said he,
John 16. 28. I leave the World, and go to the Father. And therefore in his
absence he promised the People another Comforter, who should abide with them,
and supply his place, John 14. 10. But, Henceforth, says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
5. 16. we know him no more after the Flesh, he abiding in us only by his
Spirit, and we know him only by Faith. We are not like the Disciples of the
Prophet Elijah, who sought on Earth for their Master, whom God had taken up
into Heaven, 2 King. 2. Our Savior s^ith, Mat. 26. 11. The Poor ye have always
with you, but me ye have not always. Whereas if he be every where in the Mass,
we may have him with us always, as much as the Apostles had him. And when our
Savior told them, they had always the Poor with them, whom they might show
kindness to, but not him, and therefore they should not grudg at the expense of
a box of Ointment upon him* If they had been of the Mi^d of the Church of Rome,
they might have answered, Lord* we shall have thee with us as long as we shall
have the Poor; and this cost which this poor Woman has been at, is nothing in
comparison of what shall one day be laid out upon Thee, in h^^ging the Streets
with Tapestry, in ^^ecking the Altar^, (...) enclosing* Thee in rich and ^ostly
Pieces, and in s^^ting* Thee up (...) stately and magnificent Mansions.

But then if Christ's Body be with us, it seems he must be invisible also, and
not to be felt; which is contrary to the nature of an humane Body. In which he
is made like unto us, Heb. 2. 17. To be invisible, is to be more like a Spirit
which has not Flesh and (...), Luke 24. 39, 40.

If the Body of Christ be also in the small Wafer of the Sacrament, he must be
without proper extension, suitable to the nature of an humane Body.

And if he be whole in every Wafer of the Sacrament, he must be whole in many
places at once. Which is a contradiction, for then he would have a Body which
is one, and not one, but many, as the places are in which he wholly is. And it
is against the reasoning of the Angel, Mat. 28. 5, 6. He is not here, for he is
risen. But according to this Doctrine, he might be there and risen too; and
then the Angel's reasoning was not good. And then Christ might be distant from
himself, as that Body now which is at London would be distant from that that is
at Rome many hundred miles; and that Body which is at Rome, may meet that Body
which is at London; and so it would be the same, and not the same, and the same
would move toward and meet it self. And then Christ's Body might move, and not
move at the same time, and it might be carried and not carried; and it might be
eaten and not eaten; in one place eaten with Rats, and at another place
worshipped; and might be glorious and not be glorious; and innumerable such
Absurdities follow upon this senseless and unreasonable Doctrine.

Besides the barbari^y and bloodiness of eating and drinking humane Flesh and
Blood, and devouring ones God. And then the most wicked Men may receive Christ
with the mouths of their Body, and likewise eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood.
But Christ tells us, this we only do now by believing in him, John 6. For the
Flesh profits nothing. The Wicked having not Faith, have no part in him, they
do not dwell in Christ, nor Christ in them, as they that eat his Flesh and
drink his Blood do, John 6. 56. And therefore it must be understood spiritually
and by Faith.

To conclude, We have as much assurance that Transubstantiation is false, as
that Christianity is true; that is, our Sense and Reason in concurrence with
the Holy Scripture. And is not this a goodly Doctrine, which if granted, would
raze the Foundation of the Christian Faith, and reduce us to the vastest
Uncertainty, so that we could reasonably believe nothing? For what can we be
certain of at all, if not that which we perceive clearly with all our Senses,
and which we can reason as plainly about, as about any thing whatsoever? Or if
our Savior and his Apostles were now preaching or working Miracles in the
World, how should we judge of all they said or did, but by those Mediums, which
about Transubstantiation we must entirely renounce?

CHAP. XXVI.
That the Mass is not only a commemoration of the Sacrifice of the Cross; but
that the self-same Christ is therein offered, that offered himself upon the
Cross; and that this Sacrifice performed by the Priest, is truly propitiatory
for the Remission of Sins of the Quick and Dead. Council of Trent, Sess. 22.
chap. 2. Can. 1, 2, 3.
THis is a consequent of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and the corporal
Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, without which it cannot subsist. For if
the very Body of our Savior be not substantially and properly present in the
Sacrament, then how can there be a proper Oblation of the Body of Christ there?
For how can there be a proper Oblation of that that is not properly and
substantially there? The Body of Christ being there in a Figure or
Representation, there is a commemoration of the Sacrifice of his Body which he
offered on the Cross, and there is a representation of the Sacrifice of his
Body made there; upon which account it may be called a Commemorative Sacrifice.
But there being no proper or corporal Presence of his Body, there can be no
proper Oblation of it. So that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation being refuted
before, this being a Consequent of it, must fall with it.

There is the Sacrifice of Christ in a Figure indeed, that is, there is a
Representation of the Sacrifice of Christ, by the Bread broken, and the Wine
poured forth, which represents to us the breaking of his Body, and the shedding
of his Blood, in the Offering which he made of himself on the Cross. So the
Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 11. 26. As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this
Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till he come. So that therein the Death of
Christ is showed forth, and we have Communion with him in his Benefits by an
Act of Faith, when we partake of the Symbols of his Body and Blood. And it was
for this End, for the nourishing and confirming our Faith, and the expressing
our gratitude to our dying Lord, by keeping up a grateful remembrance of his
Death, that this holy Rite was instituted. But read the Institution entire,
Luke 22. there is not the least intimation of any sacrificial Act there
performed by our Savior, or commanded the Disciples, He took Bread and brake
it, and gave it to them, saying, Take, eat, this is my Body, which is given for
you; Do this in remembrance of me. A Sacrifice is offered to God; but here is
nothing offered to God, but a representation of that^ Body that was to be
broken and offered, and the Bread distributed to the Disciples to nourish their
Faith.

And indeed that which our Savior did then, could not possibly be a
propitiatory Sacrifice, unless they will say, that Propitiation was made by
Christ before he suffered on the Cross; for this that Christ did was certainly
before his Suffering. And what need then of the following Oblation on the
Cross, if Propitiation was made before? For what need that be done again, that
is sufficiently done already? So that we conclude, that there was no
propitiatory Sacrifice offered in the Supper, because there was no Propitiation
made before the Oblation on the Cross. And if there was no Propitiation made in
the Sacrament then, neither is there now, the Institution being always the
same; and that only being required to be done by the Disciples, which was then
done and appointed by our Savior, and for the same Ends and no other.

And we in many places find, that the purging away of our Sin, and our
Sanctification and Redemption, which is the Fruit and Consequent of
Propitiation, is entirely attributed to that offering of the Body of Jesus
Christ, which was made by himself on the Cross, and which was offered but once;
and that by this once offering all this was done, so that there is to be no
more offering then for Propitiation.

Heb. 7. 26, 27. For such an High Priest became us, who needed not as the legal
Priests, to offer up Sacrifices, first for his own Sins, and then for the
Peoples, and to do this often, as they did it every Year* and often; For this
he did once, when he offered up himself. And that once in him was sufficient,
to all the Ends of a propitiatory Offering. Chap. 9. 12. For by his own Blood
he entered in once into the Holy Place, having obtained ^ternal Redemption for
us, by that once Offering. If the Blood of Christ shed once upon the Cross ^e
of such infinite and eternal efficacy and merit for our Redemption, what need
can there be of more? For, v. 13, 14. How should not the Blood of Christ* who
through the eternal* Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your
Conscience from dead Works? And, Chap. 10. 10. We are sanctified, and our Sins
expiated, by the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ on^e for all. And, verse.
13. This Man, Christ Jesus, after he had offered one Sacrifice for Sin, for
ever sat down on the right Hand of God, as having fulfilled his Offering. Verse.
14. For by one Offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.
Therefore, says God, in consideration of this once Offering of Christ, Verse.
17. 18. Their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more. Now, where Remission
of these is, there is no more Offering for Sin. There is Faith and Repentance
indeed required on our part, that we may have benefit in the Offering made; but
there is no more Offering for Sin, that being sufficiently done already by
Christ's own Offering.

So that to talk of the necessity of more, or repeated Offerings and Sacrifices
for Propitiation, is in the necessary construction of the Fact, whatever is
pretended, to impeach the once Offering of Christ, which he made himself for
us, of insufficiency for the Ends of Propitiation. And by this the Apostle
argued the insufficiency of the legal Offerings, Heb. 10. 1, 2. For the Law
having only a weak shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image and
solidity of the things, can never with those Sacrifices which they offered Year
by Year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect, as touching remission
of Sin. For then would they not have ceased to be offered? because that the
Worshippers once purged, should have had no more Conscience of Sins, for which
there had been made sufficient atonement. So that according to the Apostle, the
repetition and reiteration of Sacrifices, is a note of their Imperfection. And
by the same reason, the Sacrifice of Christ once offered upon the Cross would
be imperfect, if there were a necessity of its being frequently offered. Which
is manifestly contrary to all those places before, which assert the perfection
and sufficiency of Christ's one Offering made on the Cross.

Besides, there can be no Propitiation made by any Offering, without the
destruction of the Offering, in the stead of him for whom the Offering is made.
But now in the Sacrifice of the Mass there is no destruction of the Offering,
as our Adversaries themselves allow. Heb. 9. 22. Almost all things are by the
Law purged with Blood; and without shedding of Blood there is no remission. But
now in the Mass there is no shedding of Blood; for they say, That is an
unbloody Sacrifice. And how can that be a Sacrifice for Propitiation and
Remission then? An unbloody, undestroyed Sacrifice, and yet a propitiatory
Sacrifice, cannot stand together, but are inconsistent. And the Apostle argues,
verse. 25, 26. That it was not needful, that Christ should offer himself often,
as the high Priest enters into the holy Place every Year with the Blood of
others, (quite contrary to what the Church of Rome pretends, which teaches,
that Christ does offer himself often by the hands of the Priest in the Mass,
and the very self-same Offering too that he offered himself upon the Cross) for
then must he often have suffered since the Foundation of the World. Offering
and Suffering are joined together; so that if there be an Offering, there must
be a Suffering; and if there be no Suffering of Christ in the Mass, then there
can be no Offering. But now says the Apostle, Once has he appeared in the end
of the World, to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself. And as it is
appointed to all Men once to die, but after this the Judgment; so Christ was
once offered, when he suffered and died as a Sacrifice, to bear the Sins of
many; and unto them that look for him, he shall appear the second time without
Sin, or suffering for Sin, unto Salvation. So that the time of Christ's
Suffering is past, and so therefore is the time of his Offering, to put away
Sin by the Sacrifice of himself. And there is no more Offering of Christ to be
to the end of the World, because there is no more dying or suffering. The
propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass then is a mere vain pretense.

Neither has Christ instituted a Priesthood upon Earth to offer such a
Sacrifice as is pretended; for he himself is the only Priest. Heb. 7. 23, 24.
They truly (under the Law of Moses) were many Priests, because they were not
suffered to continue by reason of death. But this Man, (Jesus Christ) because
he continues for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood: That is, The Levitical
Priests were a number of Men succeeding one another; by which Succession,
provision was made for the continuation of the Priesthood, which otherwise must
have expired through the mortality of the Priests. But Christ has no Successor
in his Priesthood, which does not pass from him to any other (for that is the
meaning of the word (...) here rendered unchangeable) because he himself is not
mortal, but continues for ever. So that as he continues for ever, so he
continues the only Priest for ever. Verse. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save
them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. The Salvation which he works, is not by virtue of any
new Sacrifice, or the repetition of what he has offered, but by virtue of his
Intercession, which is founded upon the Sacrifice which he offered on Earth. He
ever living to make this Intercession, thereby obtains and applies to us the
infinite Merit of his Death, without the repetition of the Sacrifice for our
Salvation. And it is the Spirit of Christ, which he has obtained by his
Sacrifice and Intercession, to be his Vicegerent now upon Earth in his absence,
that by his Grace enables us to believe, and so applies to us the benefit of
our Savior's Death; without which ten thousand Sacrifices repeated would be of
no value to us.

It is to be observed, that while the Chief Priest was in the Sanctuary, there
was never any Sacrifice offered, Levit. 16. But now Jesus Christ is in Heaven,
prefigured by the Sanctuary, Heb. 9. Therefore whilst Christ is in Heaven,
there is no other true and proper Sacrifice to be offered; for now the Offering
is ceased.

The Sacrifices now are Prayers and Praises, which Christ has made all his
People Priests so far, as to offer these Spiritual Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Rev. 1. 6. and, Romans 12. 1. the Sacrifice of Christians consists in offering
themselves to God by an holy Life, and not in offering Jesus Christ, who having
offered himself over upon the Cross, is now at the right Hand of God, where he
makes intercession for us, but is never more to be offered for us.

As for Melchisedeck's pretended Offering of Bread and Wine, which they say did
but typify the Offering of Christ under the Species of Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, and so is to be continued by it. Genesis 14. 18. It Is plain that he
brought forth Bread and Wine, not to offer to God, but to refresh Abraham's
Men. What he did as a Priest, was in his priestly blessing of Abraham. The
Apostle makes not the least mention of his Offering, when he compares him with
Christ, but makes Christ to be of his Order upon other accounts. Besides, tho
Christ himself be a Priest after the Order of Melchisedeck, yet it is plain
before, that Christ had no Successor in his Priesthood, but is the only Priest
himself after this Order.

From 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. it cannot be inferred, that in the
Sacrament there is an Altar and Sacrifice, as there was among the Jews and
Heathens, but only that they who partake of the Lord's Supper, have as truly
Communion with him, and thereby do testify their Communion with him, and owning
his Religion, as they who fed upon the Sacrifices of the Gentiles, that were
offered to Devils, did thereby testify their Communion with Devils. The
Comparison is made, not between the things themselves, which are in themselves
of a different Nature, but between the Actions of the Men, and their
signification, which is the same in both sides, and bears the same construction.

CHAP. XXVII.
That the Host is to be worshipped in the Sacrament with Divine Worship, and to
be solemnly carried about, and showed to the People to be worshipped. Council
of Trent, Sess. 13. Chap. 5. Can. 6.
WE do not deny, but that Christ may be lawfully adored and worshipped by us in
the time of the celebration of the Lord's Supper; but this does not serve the
turn of the Church of Rome, which defines that Adoration be given to the
Sacrament: That the Sacrament is nevertheless to be adored, because it was
instituted to be received. And the Adoration is not fixed in the Person of
Christ, as separate from the Host, but as making one Object of Worship together
with it.

But it is plain to any one's Observation, that there is a total silence in the
Scripture about this Matter; that there is not the least hint or intimation
given of it, where ever there is any thing spoken of the Supper. The
Evangelists, in the relation of the Institution, and St. Paul in the repetition
of it, are very punctual in setting down what our Savior did and enjoined at
that time. They declare minutely every particular Action and Expression of our
Savior; How he took Bread, and brake and blessed it, and gave it to them,
saying, Take, eat, this is my Body. In like manner he took the Cup, etc. But in
all, not one word of worshipping it, or carrying it in procession to that End:
Which questionless would have been done, if any such Adoration had been
intended to it.

St. Paul especially had a most fit occasion to have insisted on it, when he
set himself on purpose to correct the Irreverence of the Corinthians in their
carriage about this Ordinance, 1 Cor. 11. For this would have been the highest
aggravation of their Fault that could be possible, to carry themselves so very
irreverently to their dearest Lord, corporally and substantially present before
them. And how could he have insisted on a better Topic, to create in them a
greater reverence? But behold, there is nothing of all this; he only minds them
of the Institution, and that it was done in commemoration of the Death of their
Redeemer, who gave himself for them; but he has not one word of all this
Popish Doctrine of Adoration, Elevation, and Procession, or any thing in the
least that has a tendency to it.

The Scripture also almost every where is speaking of Christ, and informs of
his Excellency, and the Divinity of his Person; and tells us of the wise Men's
adoring of him; and gives a Command to honor him, as we honor the Father,
John 5. and tells us, that every Knee should how to him, Phil. 2. And that the
Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1. But why does it no where tell us, that he is
substantially present in the Sacrament, under the species and form of Bread,
that we may worship him there, to make the Ordinance more august and solemn;
especially considering that he lies there so obscured under the species of the
Elements, in an unactive and invisible and inglorious State, where he works no
Miracles to attest his Divinity as he did in the World, nor gives out the least
Ray of his Glory, to engage us to this Worship and Adoration?

This is only the Consequence of that porte^^ous Doctrine of Transubstantiation
taught by the Church of Rome, which is refuted before, and therefore must needs
fall with it; for it is upon the Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into
the very Body and Blood of Christ, and upon the presumption of whole Christ
being there substantially present by this Conversion, that the Adoration of the
Host is founded by them. But if Transubstantiation be false, and there be no
Conversion; if the Bread be Bread still, and the Wine be Wine still* then they
cannot but confess themselves, some of them, that the Worship that is given to
it is mere downright Idolatry.

And indeed, what is there in the Idols that the Prophets mention, and the
Character that they give of them, but may be every way most aptly applied to
this God of the Papists?

Read the Character that the Prophet Isaiah gives, Chap. 44. 9, to 20. And what
is there there, that may not with the same likeness be spoken of the Host?
First, the Countryman sows Wheat, and reaps it, and gathers it into Barns, and
thresheth it out; then it is groun'd and sifted, and the Baker makes it a Wafer,
and bakes it, and some of it he puts to other uses; then the Priest Consecrates
it, and behold it is a God. Is not this now as senseless as the former, and just
such another description as that? And how is that an Idol then, and not this?
Do not the Reproaches and Ironies that the Holy Prophets thrown on Idols* fall
full as heavy upon this that ^s adored at the Mass?

So, Chap. 46. 1, 6, 7. see what he says of Idols, and how easily it may be
applied. For this God too may sometimes fall to the Ground* which then must be
scraped to take up all clean. Men carry it upon their Shoulders, and sometimes
it has been taken Captive. And may not one cast the same kind of Reproaches on
this, as the Prophet Jeremy does on those, Jer. 10. 2, 3, 4? Surely the
Prophets did not urge the Matters pertinently, or did not foresee that the like
might in time be cast in the Christians Teeth for their Worship; or else if
those were meet and proper Characters of the Idols then, and the same agree to
the Host, then the Host is an Idol as well as they.

So how does the Psalmist decipher the Idols of the Heathen, Psalm. 115. 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8. But the Host does not look near so well; it is a little Dough made
into a Wafer, the work of the Baker, that does not carry so much likeness to a
Man, as to have the similitude of Members.

This is liable also to the same Casualties and Mishaps, as those that the
Prophets declaim so much against. These Wafer-Gods are not able to save
themselves, they are not able to escape from Wars, and Thieves and Robbers. The
Priests make fast their Temples with Locks, lest they should be stolen. They
are liable to be gnawed upon by things creeping out of the Earth; and when they
are eaten, they feel it not. Therefore if the Host be taken by a Mouse, or any
other Creature, and cannot be found, then they do endeavor to take, kill, and
burn that Creature, and cast the Ashes under the Altar. And if either Flies or
Spiders chance to fall into the Chalice, because these little Creatures cannot
drink so little but they drink whole Christ, and have him in their little Guts,
the Priest must by all means swallow down these Flies and Spiders, if he can do
it without danger of his Life, or fear of Vomiting. But whereas God does in
Scripture threaten a wicked Church or Nation, that he would spue them out of
his Mouth; Were this Doctrine true* (...) as a Reverend Person says) they
might do the like to him; nay, and not only vomit up their God, but cause him
to be burnt. For if the Priest do vomit up the Eucharist, and find the Species
whole, then he must reverently eat or swallow the Vomit again; but if the
Species appear no^, then he is to burn it. In a word, this God of the Papists
is liable to all those Abuses that any thing in the World can be, and yet
cannot help himself. And what greater Indications or Characters can there be of
an Idol than what belongs to this? And if the Worship of this may be excused
from Idolatry, then why may not the Worship of all others as well, there being
as little Godhead in the consecrated Wafer, (as has been proved) as in their
consecrated Statues and Images, and therefore Divine Worship belongs to it as
little.

And whose Heart now would not rise at this? that a Wafer should be adored and
reverenced as God himself, with the very same Worship? That that must be
worshipped for God, which may be eaten, or burnt, or lost, or carried away by
Mice? or must be supported or carried about by Men, and cannot sustain it self?
That that is to be the Object of Divine Worship, that has neither Eyes to see,
nor Ears to hear, neither Sense or Reason to feel or understand what is done to
it? Is this a God that is the work of Men's hands, that the Plowman sows, and
the Miller grinds, and the Baker bakes? when of the same Meal some may be used
to other purposes, and this is by the Priest made into a God to be worshipped:
Who can think on this without exceeding horror?

For supposing Transubstantiation not true, as is proved before, then they
worship that for Christ, by a mistaken supposition, as if it were very Christ,
when it is not so, but really the Elements of Bread and Wine; and so do give
that Worship to a Creature, whatever their mistaken supposition of it be, which
is due to God alone; which is properly Idolatry. Neither will it excuse them to
say, that they suppose it to be Christ, and that they worship the Sacrament
only upon such supposition, and that else they should not do it. For if that
would excuse their practice from Idolatry, then it would serve as well to
excuse the Idolatries of the blindest Heathens, and most heretical Idolaters
that ever were in the World; who when they worshipped the Sun or Fire, or any
other Creatures for Gods, they always did it upon this supposition, that they
were Gods, or else they would not have done it neither. And if a Papist should
happen upon a mistake, to worship an unconsecrated Wafer, yet if he should do
it upon the same supposition, it seems that it would excuse him from Idolatry
also; which yet they themselves will not allow, because his supposition is
false. And if there be no Transubstantiation, so is theirs false also, though
the Wafer be consecrated. And therefore upon their own Doctrine, this
supposition being false, will not excuse them from Idolatry. And it is not
their good Intention will excuse their unlawful Act, no more than it did the
Jews in worshipping the Molten Calf, when they kept a Feast unto the Lord. And
in crucifying the Lord of Glory, out of ignorant Zeal which they had, Romans 10.
2. And no more than it does those that kill the Disciples of Christ, and think
that they do God service therein, John 16. 2. For to have an Action morally
good, it must be conformable to the Rule, both as to the Matter and other
Circumstances, as well as the End. And it is not a good Intention or End alone
by it self, that is enough to constitute any Action morally good.

CHAP. XXVIII.
That these Masses are to be approved and commended, where the Priest
communicates alone. Council of Trent. Sess. 22. chap. 6. Can. 8.
BUT this is a mere perversion of the Institution of the Supper, and contrary
to the Ends and Design of it. Mat. 26. 26. Jesus took Bread, and blessed it,
and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples; He did not keep it to himself; and
said, Take, eat; He gave it them to eat, and did not set it out, or hold it up
to be gazed or looked on by them, whilst they were to have no part or share in
it themselves. And he took the Cup, and gave Thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, Drink ye all of it. Not as the Priest does in the Church of Rome, who
drinks all himself.

The Sacrament is a visible Right or Sign, designed on purpose to express our
gratitude to Christ, and to keep up a visible Memorial of his Love in suffering
for us, to increase and nourish our Faith in him, for the receiving of the
Benefits of his Death and Passion. But how shall this be done in it, or
attained, by those that are not concerned about the administration? How do they
express their Gratitude, when they do nothing? or how is their Faith advantaged
by others using the Symbols which Christ has instituted, without the
applicatory use of them for themselves.

Besides, the Sacrament is designed to signify and confirm our Christian
Communion one with another, as Brethren partaking of the same Benefits, and
united and joined together in Christian Love; and therefore it has been called
a Communion. But how can there be a Communion, where the Priest is alone by
himself.

Acts 2. 42. It Is said of the Primitive Christians, They continued sted^astly
in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in
Prayers. This breaking of Bread was in fellowship with one another, and with
the Apostles in Church Communion. By breaking of Bread being understood the
whole Celebration of the Supper, the part being taken to express the whole.

So, 1 Cor. 10. 17. For we being many, are one Bread, and one Body; for we are
all partakers of that one Bread. As many Grains of Corn make up one Loaf, being
^^oulded and joined together, and many Members together make up the Body: So
Christians ^^ited and joined, become one Body in this Sacramental Communion.
And it is plain from the Apostle, that one design of the Supper, is to express
and testify this Communion; so that the Supper then is for Christian Communion.
And when the Supper is administered, there ought to be a Communion. But when the
Priest receives alone, there is no Communion.

1 Cor. 11. 20, 21. The Apostle censures them for their uncommunicating kind of
celebration of the Lord's Supper. When ye come together into one place, this is
not to eat the Lord's Supper. Their coming together in one place, signifies,
that there ought to have been a Communion together there. But this they failed
in; For in eating, every one takes before other his own Supp^r. Which he
censures, and then he repeats the Institution, to show that Christ intended
that an Holy Communion together should be observed in these their
Church-Meetings, for the observation of the Feasts of Charity, and the Lord's
Supper. Verse. 33. Wherefore, my Brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry
one for another; to preserve Unity and Charity with the Brethren, and with one
another.

As for the Mass being a Sacrifice, and that that may be offered alone by the
Priest; that is refuted before. But however, as a Sacrament it ought not to be
administered alone, but in Christian Communion and Fellowship. It Is not the
Priest alone can celebrate it as such; but other faithful People with him are
likewise to meet and join together to hold this Sacramental Communion.

As for the Spiritual Communion by Faith in Christ, which they say may be had
by those who only look on, and do not communicate in the Sacrament. We do not
deny this Spiritual Communion, without which the other is ineffectual. But our
Savior appointed not only a Spiritual Communion, but a Sacramental Communion;
and this Sacramental Communion cannot be had without the Sacramental Action,
that is, without communicating in the Sacrament: Which therefore, by our
Savior's Commandment, all Christian People should do, and not the Priest alone
by himself.

CHAP. XXIX.
That the Sacrament is to be administered in one kind only, and that the People
are not to have the use of the Cup. Council of Trent. Sess. 21. chap. 2, 3.
Can. 1, 2, 3.
AGainst that which is written, Mat. 26. 27. And he took the Cup and gave
Thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. Note then, that the
Cup is contained in our Savior's Institution, as well as the Bread, and is as
essential a part of it. And if by virtue of the Institution, all Christians are
obliged to the use of the Bread, then by virtue of the same Institution, they
are likewise obliged to the use of the Cup. Or if, notwithstanding the
Institution, they may take away the Cup; then, notwithstanding the same
Institution, they may take away the Bread also; and so they may make void the
whole Sacrament. Note also, that in the same quality that the Apostles received
the Cup, in the same quality also they received the Bread. If they received the
Cup as Priests, (and so that belongs only to Priests) then they received the
Bread as Priests likewise; for there was no alteration made in them, between
the two Receivings, of the Cup and the Bread. And by the same reason they may
take away the Bread ^oo from all but Priests, as well as the Cup. But indeed
the Apostles were not there at the Supper, in the quality either of Apostles or
Priests. But Jesus Christ did the Office of a Pastor, and they were the Flock,
and so partak'd of the Supper, as Christ's Disciples, and not as Apostles or
Priests.

Again, verse. 28. For this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for
many for the Remission of Sins. Here we have the Reason of our Savior's
Command, why all should drink of the Cup, because this represents his Blood,
which is shed for many for the Remission of Sins. Now to all Christian People
there belongs pardon of Sins by the Blood of Jesus Christ, and not only to the
Priest: And therefore all Christian People are to partake of the Cup, and not
the Priests only. For to whom the reason of the Command belongs, to all such
belongs the Command. Again note, It is by the Blood of Jesus Christ shed and
separated from his Body, that Remission of Sins is obtained, of which they are
to keep up a Commemoration in the Sacrament. And this Commemoration therefore
cannot be kept up by the use of the Bread alone without the Cup, which has a
particular relation to his Blood shed, or poured out. So that there is a proper
and peculiar use of the Cup in the Sacrament, as well as of the Bread. And the
use of it, as it is said, belongs to all those to whom Remission of Sin by
Christ's Blood shed and poured out belongs, which is here in this way
represented and sealed to them.

Mark 14. 23. And he took the Cup, and when he had given Thanks, he gave it to
them, and they All drank of it. Note, that as Jesus Christ said, Drink ye all
of this, so it is here expressly observed by this Evangelist, that they All
drank of it. This Communion of All is particularly observed touching the Cup,
and not touching the Bread; surely, not without Reason, but as if the Holy
Spirit would thereby purposely forewarn us against this sacrilegious
presumption of the Church of Rome, in debarring the People the use of the Cup.

John 16. ^3. Verily verily I say unto you, Except (...) at the Flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his Blood, (...) have no li^e i^ you. Our Adversaries
believe, that in this place he speaks of the Lord's Supper; and by consequence
they deprive, as much as in them lies, all the poor People of Eternal Life, (if
it be to be meant as they interpret it) because they do not permit them to
drink of the Blood of Jesus Christ.

1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. They did all eat the same spiritual Mea^^ and did all drink
the same spiritual Drink; for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed
them; and this Rock was Christ. The Israelites did not only eat of the Manna,
which was a Figure of the Body of Christ, but they also drank of his Blood in a
Mystery. And why should they withold from Christian People the same
privilege, when our Savior has allowed it to them? For, verse. 16. The Cup of
Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? It is
the Cup, that is, the Communion of the Blood of Christ. And why will they
hinder the Christian People then from the Cup, which is the Communion of his
Blood. For if the Cup be the Communion of his Blood, it is in vain to pretend
that whole Christ is contained and communicated under the Species of Bread.
Verse. 17. For we being many, are one Bread, and one Body, for we are all
partakers of that* one Bread, and of that one Cup, as it is added in some
Copies. But whether these words were in the beginning, or were added
afterward, it is plain, that whenever they were inserted, the Cup was then in
use among the People.

1 Cor. 11. 25. This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood. Here the Apostle
repeating the Institution of the Supper, lets us know, that it is the Cup that
is the Seal of the New Testament confirmed by the Blood of Christ. And should
not those then, who have part in the Covenant, have part also in the Seals of
the Covenant* Now all Believers have part in the Covenant, therefore they ought
also to partake of the Cup, that is the Seal of the Covenant. And upon this the
Command follows, Do this, as o^t as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. So that
all those who are in the Covenant, and so ought to celebrate the memory of the
Death and Passion of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, where the Covenant is
confirmed, ought to partake of the Cup for this End. But all true Christians
ought to do this, and consequently ought to partake of the Cup: For if the
Command of Doing this in remembrance of Christ, added after the Bread, Luke 22.
19, 20. make it the Duty of all Christians to partake of the Bread for that
End. Then the same Command added after the Cup, which is here mentioned by St.
Paul, makes it their Duty in like manner to partake of the Cup. And if they are
not obliged by this to the use of the Cup, neither are they obliged by that to
the use of the Bread; and so they may take away from them the use of the Bread
too as well as the Cup; or else they ought to continue both, a^ there is the
same Command for both; Verse. 26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till be come. So that they must drink
this Cup, as well as eat this Bread, to show the Lord's Death. This is to be
done by both together, and not by either singly. And all those for whom Christ
died then, are obliged to show his Death in the Sacrament, by the use of the
Cup, as well as by the use of the Bread. But Christ died not only for the
Priests or Ministers of the Gospel, but also for the People. And therefore this
order concerns both.

Verse. 28. But let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and
drink of that Cup. This is spoken to the People of Corinth; and it is plain,
from many Passages in this and the foregoing Chapter, that the People of the
Church of Corinth did drink of the Cup, and committed great excess in their
drinking. But notwithstanding this Abuse, the Apostle does not presume to alter
the Institution, or to take it away. And what shall we think^ then of the
presumptuous boldness of the Church of Rome, that dares to do this in manifest
defiance of, and open contradiction to our Savior's Command and Institution,
and without the least color of any good reason?

If they say, whole Christ is contained in the Bread: was it not so in the
beginning of our Savior's Institution, as well as now? And if our Savior
notwithstanding instituted the Cup, how do they dare to take it away upon this
vain Presumption, as if they knew better than our Savior what was fit to be
done? This Doctrine of Concomitancy of the Blood with the Body, did not keep
our Savior from instituting the Cup; and how comes it to be so good a Reason
now, to take away what he was instituted? He has appointed different Symbols,
one for his Body alone, and another for his Blood, as shed and separated from
his Body; the one to eat, and the other to drink. And how should the Bread,
which is to be eaten, which represents his Body without the Blood, represent to
us the Blood as shed and separated from his Body, by way of concomitancy, when
they are considered as asunder? If so, then the Blood of Christ must be eaten
too with the Bread, but is not drank; whereas our Savior instituted the Cup as
a Symbol of his Blood shed, and so to be drank apart, as the Symbol of it, and
not eat by way of concomitancy with the Bread, which is the particular Symbol
or Figure of his Body.

But some have urged, that some of the Blood may be apt to hang upon Men's
Beards, and so be profaned; and therefore for this reason the People ought not
to have the use of the Cup. As if there were not Beards in our Savior's Time
also as well as now; but they were new sprung up, or new come in fashion in
these latter Ages. But it seems our Savior did not consider this very weighty
Reason.

SOME PREJUDICES OF THE Church of ROME Answered.
SECT. I.
They accuse our Doctrine of Novelty.
THIS the Pharisees likewise alleged against our Lord Jesus Christ, and urged
the same Prejudices. Mark 1. 27. They question among themselves, saying, What
thing is this? What new Doctrine is this? And, Acts 17. 19. St. Paul being
brought to Areopagus, they demanded of him, May we know what this New Doctrine,
whereof thou speak, is? So likewise this is the Tone of the Romish Doctors,
who call the Reformation an upstart Religion, and say, that our Doctrine is
new; and still are insisting upon the threadbare Question, Where was your
Religion before Luther? As the Ancient Heathens no doubt would be almost
perpetually questioning the Jews in the same manner, Where was your Religion
before Abraham?

And the same Answer for substance will serve for our Defense, that would do
for theirs. For as our Savior said to the Pharisees, Whatever they may pretend
about the Antiquity of their Religion, the like the Jews might say to the
Heathen, and so we may say to the Church of Rome, That from the beginning it
was not so. Idolatry, and the worship of Idols, was not from the beginning. So
neither was the Mass, Purgatory, worship of Images, Invocation of Saints,
believed or taught from the beginning of Christianity. But our Religion is as
ancient as Christianity it self, as the Jewish Religion in worshipping the True
God, in opposition to the Heathen Idolatry, was as old as that of Noah, or
Enoch, or Adam. For we believe and receive nothing, as absolutely necessary to
Salvation, but what our Savior and his Apostles taught and delivered to the
World, and what is contained in the Ancient Creeds. But as the Worship of the
one True God, and the True Religion, was grea^ly corrupted in the Ancient
Times, which Abraham was raised up to reform; and so his Reformation was new in
comparison of the Abuses that were before. So indeed the Reformation of the
Corruptions and Errors, which for many Ages had obtained in these Western Parts
of the World, did not begin very long ago. And if this be accused of Novelty,
we cannot help that, but are sorry it was no sooner. All Reformation is new, in
comparison of the Abuses that went before; and so therefore was that set a^oot
by Luther.

But how could this be remedied, unless there should be no Reformation at all;
or because things are once ^ad, they should never be better? For they cannot be
better without being reformed; and whenever a Reformation begins, it is
certainly New. So that the Question is, Whether those were Errors and Abuses
which the Reformation cut off? and so whether it were a Reformation really or
no? And if this be so, as may appear in part by the foregoing Treatise, then
the Reformation justifies it self, though it was p^^y it had not been sooner.
And all those Negative Articles, which we hold in opposition to the Errors of
the Church of Rome, and which now make up part of our Confession of Faith in
opposition to those Errors, are only New because the Reformation is New. And so
it must be, whenever Men renounce or protest against Errors, or unless they
will err still.

SECT. II.
They say, That we had no Call.
THey say we had no Call to do as we did; we had no Call to separate from the
Church of Rome, or to set a^oot this pretended Reformation.

But were those Errors or no, which the Church of Rome taught? And were they
Innovations and Corruptions or no, which they practiced? If they were, as has
appeared in part before, have we no Call to renounce Errors, or to reject
Corruptions? or must there never be a Reformation of Things that are amiss?

If they say we should have stayed till the Church had done it. If they mean by
the Church, the Church of Rome, we see it is not done yet; and how long then
should we have stayed? For these very Things which the Reformation rejects, are
still defended by her; and all the Protestations and Applications that have
been made to her, have had no effect upon her to procure a Reformation on her
part; and we do not know when they will have.

But why must we stay till the Church of Rome had ordered the Reformation,
(which we see would have been long enough?) What is the Church of Rome to us,
but as a Sister Church, whatever she pretends of her Catholicism, and
Masterdom, or Mistresship over the rest of the Churches, which is refuted
before? And what has she to do then to control our Reformation, or to oblige
us to stay her leisure? Or why have not Princes, and National Churches in
themselves full Power and Authority to reform what is to be reformed in their
own Precincts? We see what the good Kings of the Jews, Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah
did. And what did we do, but what in a like case they did before? And if the
Church of Rome had had never so much an Authority over us, yet if upon due
Applications she would not reform Errors, and redress Abuses, and yet these
Errors and Abuses be of a most pestilent and dangerous Nature to the Souls of
Men, and most contrary to the true Religion, must we therefore persist in these
false Beliefs and Practices, whilst she thinks fit to retain them? And hazard
our Eternal Salvation in rejecting Divine Truth, and contradicting the Light of
our Minds, and the true Gospel-Doctrine, merely out of respect to her? Or must
we not provide for our own welfare our selves, without which we should run the
hazard of Eternal Perdition, if others will not do it who ought?

Now this was the very Case: The Corruptions of the Church of Rome were so very
great, both in Faith and Worship, (as may appear partly by this little
Treatise) and were so very dangerous and fatal to Men's Souls, and so
universally spread, and so stiffly maintained, that there was no hope of a
Reformation of them by that Church; but the Council that was assembled to
remove Corruptions, settled them the stronger. Because they could not be brought
to a better mind to renounce these Errors, must we therefore continue to err
for company? Or, when we could no longer hold Communion with them, without
having a Communion in these Corruptions, had we not a just cause then of
separation from them?

Jer. 51. 9. We would have healed Babylon, and she is not healed: forsake her,
and let us go every one to his own Country. It is just the same in our Case; we
have remonstrated to the Church of Rome her Errors, and she has not reformed
them; but on the contrary, she has excommunicated and persecuted with Fire and
Sword, those that have published the Truth; and therefore we had just cause to
abandon her Communion.

2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate,
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and be
a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty. And, Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers
of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues. Here is our Call to do as
we have done; when we could no longer abide in the Communion of the Church of
Rome, without being defiled with her Sins, and partaking of the Torment which
is prepared for her, we were then obliged to come out of her.

Romans 16. 17. I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and
Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. This,
we say, the Church of Rome has done; so that we are required by the Apostle to
mark and avoid them. For, Gal. 1. 9. Whosoever preaches, says he, another
Gospel than that which ye have received, let him be accursed. And we have seen
that the Church of Rome has corrupted the Doctrine of the Gospel in many and
very great Instances, so that it looks like another Gospel than what was
preached by our Savior and his Apostles.

1 John 5. 21. Little Children, keep your selves from Idols. And if the Church
of Rome be guilty of Idolatry, as has been proved, and we cannot keep to them
without keeping to her Idolatry, must we not then keep our selves from both?

For it is in vain to pretend that their Doctrines, that is, we say their
Corruption is ancient. This was no warrant to the Jews formerly to follow the
old Heathen Customs, because of their Antiquity. But, says Joshua, Chap. 24.
14, 15. Put away the Gods which your Fathers have served on the other side of
the Flood, and is Egypt, and serve the Lord. And if it seem evil to you to
serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve, whether the Gods which
your Fathers served, that were on the other side of the Flood, or the Gods of
the Amorites, in whose Land ye dwell: but as for me, and my House, we will
serve the Lord. The like, we say, does concern us: And if others will persist
still in their false Worship, it does not follow that we should do so too. And
therefore if the Worship of the Church of Rome be such, as we prove it is in
many Instances, we are bound to renounce it, though it were never so Ancient,
yea, though it were older than Noah's Flood.

SECT. III.
They object to us the Divisions that are among the Reformed.
BUT what do they get by this? Because there are Divisions among the Reformed,
is therefore the Reformation it self evil? Or, because we are divided among our
selves in some things, and some of us then must be in the Wrong, does it
therefore follow that they are in the Right?

If this be an Argnment against the Reformation, the same might have been an
Argument against Christianity it self: For as soon as Christianity spread it
self abroad, were there not Divisions then too amongst those that embraced it?
Some were for retaining the legal Ordinances, and mixing the Ceremonies of the
Law with the Gospel of Christ, with whom the Apostles had great contention.
Some very famous Churches were leavened with this Error, as that was which was
in Galatia. Other strange Heresies were broached in the Church of Corinth, and
obtained amongst many, even in the Apostles Days. And there soon arose many
others that corrupted the Faith of the Gospel, both in the Apostolical and
following Ages; Gnostics, Valentinians, Marcionites, Arians, etc. which spread
far and wide, and continued a long time. Was this now a just Objection against
Christianity, that there were Divisions and Heresies among those that professed
themselves Christians? And how comes it then to be so mighty an Argument now
against the Reformation?

We are sorry indeed to see it fall out so, that there should be no better
agreement amongst the Reformed, and that there should any Heresies spring out
of those that pretend to the Reformation. But we are not at all surprised at
it, or moved to think e're the worse of the Reformation from the Church of
Rome, because we don't agree in some things amongst our selves: For we are
foretold that so it should come to pass, Romans 16. 17. Mark them which cause
Divisions: It implies, that Divisions there would be. And, 1 Cor. 11. 9. For
there must be Heresies, that they which are approved, may be made manifest.
Heresies are some of the Works of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 20. And therefore as long
as the Flesh is so predominant with many, it is no wonder that there should be
Heresies which are the Works of it. If Christianity at first could not prevent
it, we can have no expectation that the Reformation should do it. 2 Pet. 2. 1.
There were false Prophets among the People, even as there shall be false
Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying
the Lord that bought them. And they doing it privily, it may not be presently
discerned neither, till after some tract of time.

But, say they, You have not the means of Unity among you, for you want a Judge
of Controversies, which is absolutely necessary in a Church, and therefore
there are so many Heresies and Divisions among you. But this pretended means of
Unity is refuted before in the Chapter of the Infallibility of the Church, etc.
where it is proved, that there is no such thing or means appointed. We have as
much the means of Unity as the Primitive Church had, which was as much as God
thinks fit to appoint in the Church. They had infallible Teachers to teach them
the Doctrine of God; and we have the Doctrine which was taught by these
infallible Teachers recorded in the Scriptures, which is of the same use to us
as it was to them. But neither they nor we have an infallible Judge to dermine
our Assent; nor can have, unless you will put out the Eyes of humane Nature.
But every one is left to judge for himself, by the Rule of the Doctrine
delivered. God has given us a plain Rule, as has been proved, and is ready to
assist us with his Spirit in all things necessary to our Salvation, if we be
humble and teachable. And then we should do well enough without an infallible
Judge. But yet these means were not effectual in the Primitive Church to prevent
Divisions and Heresies, because Men did not use them aright (for all Men will
never be so sincere, and honest and diligent as they should be) though they
were sufficient to have done this, if Men had used them as they ought. And
therefore how can we expect now they should be of better success?

The Church of Rome indeed pretends to such a means of Unity, which we prove
that Christ never appointed, viz. An Infallible Judge of all Controversies. But
then as they pretend to that which they think is a greater means of Unity, so
one would think that they should have a greater Unity too among themselves. But
is it so indeed? Is there nothing but Unity in the Church of Rome? Are there no
Divisions? or were there never any Schisms? Has this pretended Judge of
Controversies determined and put an end to all Controversies? No, he neither
has done it, nor dares attempt it.

But we agree, say they, in all the fundamental Points. In what? Is not the
Doctrine of the Infallible Judge, a fundamental Point it self? And do they all
agree in that, and who this is? And if they did, so do we agree in the same
Rule of Faith, the Holy Scriptures. And why is not our agreement in the same
Rule of Faith, as good as their agreement about the Infallible Judge? But they
all agree likewise, that Protestants are in the wrong. And we all agree as
much, that Papists are in the wrong. So that if this Point of agreement signify
any thing, here we are even with them. But do they agree among themselves in
other things? No, no more than Protestants do among themselves, but have
differences, the same, or as great as any Protestants can have whatsoever they
be. And notwithstanding the decisions of their pretended infallible Judge, they
do as much differ in particular Doctrines, in the sense of those decisions,
which are for the determining of the sense of Scriptures, as the Protestants do
about the sense of Scripture, without the decisions of such a determining Judge?

Therefore we think it very reasonable, that the Church of Rome should do as
our Savior directs, when they cry out so much upon our Divisions, that they
would first pull out the Beam out of their own Eyes, and reconcile all
Differences at Home; and then they shall see the more clearly to cast out the
Mate out of their Brother's Eye. Which they can never do, whilst the Beam is in
their own; or at least, I hope, we shall never go to them to do it.

FINIS.
[This Chapter should have come in after Chap. XI.]
That there are some Places more Holy than others, and that it is a Work of
Piety to go in Pilgrimages to them. Bellarm. de Cultu. Sacris. lib. 3. cap. 8.
THis is to revive Judaism again. For God dwelt among the Jews indeed in an
appropriate manner in the Temple of Jerusalem, where were the Symbols of his
Presence. The Temple was God's House, and therefore an Holy Place, because God
was there peculiarly present. Thither were all the Males of the Children of
Israel to resort three times a Year, and there alone offer their Sacrifices and
Oblations to God: And the Place made the Worship acceptable to God, which was
offered there; so that the Worship was not so acceptable to God which was
performed in other places; for the Presence of God sanctified the Place, and
made it Holy; and that sanctified the Worship, and gave value to it, and
therefore it was more acceptably performed there than in another Place.

But now under the Gospel there is no such Holiness of Places, because there is
no such symbolical Presence of God in one place more than in another; for God's
Presence is no longer confined to any one Place, but he equally accepts the
Worship that is devoutly offered him all the World over.

John 4. 21, 23, 24. Woman, believe me, the Hour comes, when ye shall neither
in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father, as the peculiar and
appropriate Place of his Worship, as if he were more especially present there,
than in any other Place, or would better accept the Worship performed there,
than in any other Place. For now all such religious distinction of Places for
Worship shall be taken away. But the Hour comes, and now is, when the true
Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father
seeks such to worship him, as well in one place as another. And such devout
Worshippers shall be acceptable to him in any Place.

Mal. 1. 11. For from the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same,
my Name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every Place Incense shall be
offered unto my Name, and a pure Offering; that is, inward and spiritual
Worship and Sacrifices, whereof the Ceremonial here expressed were but Types
and Figures. And thus People are every where to serve God, with true and our
Worship: For it is the Service now that sanctifies the Place, and not the Place
that sanctifies the Service, as it was among the Jews.

1 Timothy 2. 8. I will therefore that Men pray every where, lifting up holy
Hands, without wrath, and doubting of God's audience and acceptance. For God is
every where present; and in whatsoever Place we are, we are equally near unto
him. 1 Cor. 10. 26. The Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof. The whole
Earth, where God is called upon, is Holy Land. St. Paul prayed on the Seashore
at Tire, Acts 21. 5.

And, Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there
am I in the midst of them. Every Assembly of Christians met together in
Christ's Name; and according to his Will is the Church and House, and living
Temple of God, where he is present, which is not built with Stone or Brick, but
is made up of living Saints, the Habitation of the Spirit; as the Church in the
House of Nymphi, Col. 4. 5. of Aquila and Priscilla, 1 Cor. 16. 19.

The Temple of Jerusalem was but a Type and Figure of Christ's Body and Humane
Nature, which was the True Temple, in which the Godhead dwelt; and therefore
he calls his Body the Temple; John 2. 19. Destroy this Temple, and in three
days will I raise it up. And therefore after the Incarnation of Christ, in
which the Figure and Type of the Temple of Jerusalem was accomplished, God
would no more have a Figurative Temple. And now Christ is ascended into Heaven,
there is no Temple upon Earth, but the Saints themselves, who are the Temples
of the Holy Ghost, and who offer up spiritual Sacrifices by the assistance of
the Spirit, which are acceptable to God, not as performed in this and the other
place, as if they derived acceptance from the Holiness of any Place, but by the
Offering of the Body of Christ once for all, through the Eternal Spirit, with
which he sits at the right Hand of God in the Heavens, to make Intercession for
us, and to procure the acceptance of our Persons and Services.

Much less then is there any Holiness in Places derived from any Saints, from
whom the Popish Churches yet derive their Holiness. It was the peculiar
Presence of God which was thought among the Jews to render the Place Holy; for
where God is peculiarly present, there it is Holy Ground. But now it is from
the Saints, and the Worship that is performed to them in such a Place, and
their Relics that are placed there, that the Popish Holiness of most of their
Places is derived. And it is a great Act of Devotion with them to go in
Pilgrimages, to visit and worship at such Places, as to our Lady of Loretto,
Montferrat, to St. Thomas at Canterbury, St. Winifred's Well, and suchlike
Places. And they think their Services performed in such Places, are very
acceptable for the Place sake. Now if there be no appropriate Holiness in
Places with respect to the Presence of God peculiarly in them, which renders
the Worship acceptable: Who can believe that the Shrines of Saints can derive
any acceptance to the Service?

Yet we do not deny, but in common decency, that some peculiar Respect should
be shown to such Places where we solemnly worship God. But it is the Worship
that is there performed to God (and not the Presence of God, that is supposed
to be peculiarly there, more than in any other Place) that does sanctify the
Christian Places of Worship, whatever Sanctification they have. But it is not
the Place that does sanctify the Worship; as it was among the Jews, where the
Altar sanctified the Gift, Matthew. 23. 19.

Of the Sacraments.
[This should have followed Chap. XXI.]
That the Sacraments do confer Grace, ex opere operato, by the Work done.
Council of Trent. Sess. 7. Can. 8.
THE Sacraments are Seals of the Covenant and Promise of God on his part made
with Men, which they confirm to us, upon our susception or receiving of them,
and the performance of the Condition which on our part is required, and which
we enter into a solemn Engagement to do, and do make a visible profession of in
them. And it being a Covenant of free Grace, which God makes with Man, and by
which he really intends to procure our Salvation; it must needs be supposed, by
virtue of this Covenant, that God is beforehand with Men with such measures of
his Grace (without which in this corrupt and fallen State we could do nothing)
by which now we may be enabled to do what on our part is required. And upon our
solemn engagement of our selves to God in this Holy Covenant on our part, it is
not to be doubted but the Spirit of Grace shall be given to us, to enable us to
perform all the Duties and Conditions of the Covenant necessary to Salvation.
But the Grace which is given, is the effect of the Spirit, and is given by
virtue of the Covenant and Promise. The Sacraments do no otherwise exhibit it
to us, than as they confirm the Covenant on God's part, by which it is given;
and assure this Gift to us, upon our performance of our part.

The Holy Ghost does call the Sacraments, Signs and Seals of the Grace of God;
as, Genesis 17. 11. Ye shall circumcise the Flesh of the Foreskin, and it shall
be a Token or Sign of the Covenant between me and you. And, Romans 4. 11. He,
that is, Abraham, received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith. But it cannot be any where found, that the Sacraments
are called Vessels, containing the Grace of God. And it was a Seal of the
Promises made to the Righteousness of the Faith which he had, yet being
uncircumcised. So that Abraham' s Faith went before the Sacrament of
Circumcision, and was not wrought by it. And, Verse. 9, 10. This Faith was
reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness; not in Circumcision, but in
Uncircumcision. That so (verse. 11. believing before Circumcision) he might be
the Father of all them that believe, though they be not Circumcised; but who
also walk in the steps of that Faith of our Father Abraham, which he had being
yet Uncircumcised.

And as Abraham believed and was justified before Circumcision, and therefore
his Faith and Justification was not wrought by the Sacrament of Circumcision;
so Cornelius and his Company received the Holy Spirit before they were
baptized. As i^ plain from the words of St. Peter, Acts 10. 47. Can any Man
forbid Water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy
Ghost as well as we? Which teaches us, that God does neither tie his Grace to
the outward Circumcision, nor yet to the Water of Baptism. The use of these
Sacraments was not to work that Grace which they had before, but to be a solemn
Engagement to them to perform their part of the Covenant, and to confirm the
Promise of God to them. And therefore we find also Faith required, before
Baptism can be administered: Acts 8. 36, 37. What does hinder me (says the
Eunuch) to be baptized? And Philip said, If thou believe with all thine
Heart, thou may. Faith is pre-required before Baptism, and therefore is not
wrought by the Sacrament of Baptism.

We find indeed, that upon the solemn profession of their Faith, by their
admission of the Sacrament of Baptism, there were sometimes greater measures of
the Spirit poured out upon some, Acts 19. 5, 6. But it was in consideration of
their Faith, which went before Baptism, that these Measures of the Spirit were
given to them. Their Baptism was only a testification of their Faith; Ephesians. 1.
13. After ye believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise.

So when Baptism is called the Baptism of Repentance, it is not because
Repentance was wrought by it; but because it was a Sign and Testification of
it, and farther engaged to it.

We therefore also find, that Justification and Salvation are everywhere in
the Scripture ascribed to Men's Faith and Repentance; and not to the Sacraments,
as they would be, if the Sacraments were the proper and immediate Causes of
that Grace, by which we are justified and saved. Thus, Romans 1. 17. The Just
shall live by Faith. And so, Gal. 2. 20. I live by the Faith of the Son of God.
And this Faith, and so all Grace and Holiness is wrought by the Spirit, by
means of the Word. Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word
of God: And, John 3. 8. As the Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear
the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, or whither it goes; so
is every one that is born of the Spirit. God oftentimes in an imperceptible
manner conferring his Grace, and not confining it to the Sacraments: So that
the Sacraments do not give, but only seal to us the Promise of Grace and Life.

1 Pet. 3. 20, 21. In the Ark of Noah, a few, that is, eight Persons, were
saved by Water. The like Figure whereunto even Baptism does now save us. But by
Baptism, I mean, not the putting away the filth of the Flesh; or that the
outward Act of washing the Body serves to this Salvation, which God does not
lay on any outward Ceremony, otherwise than as it is an Act or Exercise of our
Faith and Obedience. But the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, in the
Covenant of Baptism, when a Person being asked, does really and faithfully
engage and promise to believe in, and give up himself to God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, and to renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Baptism is
but the celebration of this saving Covenant; and it is covenanting sincerely,
that is the Condition of Salvation, and washing is but the Sign.

As, Romans 2. 25. Circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the Law; but if
thou be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made Uncircumcision. So it
may be said of Baptism, with respect to the Gospel. It is not any Sacrament in
it self, that gives Grace or Justification, or acceptance with God; but thereby
the Benefits promised are sealed to them that perform the Conditions. Thus,
verse. 28, 29. He is not a Jew, whom God will accept and justify, who is one
outwardly, only in the Ceremony; Neither is that Circumcision acceptable, which
is only outward in the Flesh, and therefore it is not the external Sacrament
which gives the Grace; but he is a Jew, justified and accepted of God, that is
one inwardly; and Circumcision is that of the Heart in the Spirit, and not in
the Letter or Ceremony, whose Praise is not of Men, but of God. The like may be
said of the Christian and his Baptism. So, Gal. 5. 6. For in Christ Jesus,
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, nor the outward
washing of Baptism neither, but Faith which works by Love. It Is this, and
nothing else that avails to the Christian's Salvation. But if the Sacraments
themselves did work Saving-Grace, the same might be as well affirmed of them.

It is said indeed, Romans 6. 4. We are buried with him by Baptism into Death,
that like as Christ was raised up from the Dead, by the Glory of the Father,
even so we should also walk in Newness of Life. The meaning of which is this,
that we by our Baptism enter into a Profession, Engagement, or Undertaking, to
give over all Sin, and to live a new regenerate Life, in conformity to the
Death and Life of Christ. This Profession was represented and signified by
their going down into the Water, and being, as it were, buried in it, and then
rising out of it again. It is not Baptism which works this Grace of
Mortification, but that proceeds from our believing, Reception, and hearty
submitting our selves to the form of Doctrine delivered to us by the Spirit of
Grace in the Gospel, verse. 17. And it is by the Spirit that we are enabled to
mortify the Deed of the Body, Romans 8. But Baptism testifies and represents our
Profession and Engagement to do it.

It is said also, Gal. 3. 27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ, his Spirit and Nature, and are become his Members. There,
being baptized into Christ, signifies those that have sincerely consented to
that baptismal Covenant, of which the outward Baptism was a Badg and
Profession. It was not by virtue of their Baptism, but by (...) of their Faith
which they professed in their Baptism, that they became Members of Christ.
Verse. 26. Ye are all the Children of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus. According
to John 1. 12. To as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believed in his Name.

So, John 3. 5. Except a Man be born of Water and the Spirit, etc. It is the
Spirit's Regeneration which is asserted, and which is only mentioned, verse. 8.
But this spiritual Regeneration was represented by the Water of Baptism.

So, Tit. 3 5. The washing of Regeneration, that is, Regeneration signified and
sealed in Baptism; or, which is to the Soul, as a laver or washing is to the
Body to cleanse it from Sin.

So, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that
he might sanctif^ it, and cleanse it, with the washing of Water by the Word. It
is the Regeneration it self which is there intended by the washing of Water,
which is said to be wrought by the Word; because by the means of the Word we
are cleansed from the filth of Sin, as the filth of the Body is cleansed by the
washing of Water. But yet this Regeneration is signified and represented in
Baptism, and there all do make a profession of it.

ERRATA.
PAge 52. line 5. read, Judiciously. P. 67. l. 19. r. is directly. P. 81. l. 3.
r. what words. P. 84. l. 3. r. beneficial. P. 104. l. 30. r. God is said. P.
118. l. 20. r. yet He. P. 123. l. 9. r. with them. P. 140. l. 24. r. in, to the
understanding. P. 145. l. 23. r. from these words. P. 147. l. 21. r. rite. P.
152. l. 16. r. even after. P. 168. l. 32. r. throw on.
Advertisement of some Books lately printed against Popery.
1. A Modest Enquiry, Whether St. Peter were ever at Rome, and Bishop of that
Church?

2. The Fallibility of the Roman Church, demonstrated from the manifest Error
of the Second Nicene and Trent Councils, which assert, That the Veneration and
honorary Worship of Images, is a Tradition Primitive and Apostolical.

3. A Demonstration that the Church of Rome, and her Councils have erred: by
showing, that the Councils of Constance, Basil, and Trent, have in all their
Decrees touching Communion in one kind, contradicted the received Doctrine of
the Church of Christ.

4. A Treatise of Traditions. Wherein is proved, That we have Evidence
sufficient from Tradition; 1. That the Scriptures are the Word of God. 2. That
the Church of England owns the true Canon of the Books of the Old Testament. 3.
That the Copies of the Scripture have not been corrupted. 4. That the Romanists
have no such Evidence for their Traditions. 5. That the Testimony of the
present Church of Rome can be no sure Evidence of Apostolical Tradition. 6.
What Traditions may securely be relied upon, and what not. The Second Part.


