TOTVM HOMINIS; OR, THE DECALOGUE IN Three Words,

Viz, Justice, Mercy, and Humility.


BEING A SERMON Upon Micah 6th. Verse. 8th.

Preached in the Cathedral of St. Peter's, York, upon Monday the 15th day of
March, 1668/9, before the Right Honorable Baron Turner, and Baron Rainsford.

The Right Worshipful St Jo. Armitage Bart. being then High Sheriff of
Yorkshire.

By SAM. DRAKE, D. D. Vicar of Pontefract, and sometime Fellow of St. John's
Col. Camb.

London, Printed for William Grantham at the Black Bear in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door, 1670.

TO THE TRULY VIRTUOUS And RELIGIOUS LADY, THE LADY MARGARET ARMITAGE, Wife to
Sir JOHN ARMITAGE of Kirklees, Baronet.
MADAM;
THe best Guard being Innocence; and, this Sermon wanting Protection, Where
shall it find more of Safety (because where more of Purity) then in Your Breast?

Whilst I am Pleading my Gracious Sovereigns Just Power, I fear not but your
loyal Husband will Espouse my Quarrel, and Patronize my Sermon: And, I hope,
your pity will not see this Perish, Treating of those Virtues and Graces that
have such an Assimilation to Your Self.

I here present You, Madam, with a small Glass, but broken from the
Chrystalline Heaven; wherein, you may see the Body of Divinity, the Glory of
the Lord; and, what Glory he would put upon you: Therein God presents to you as
rich a Triple-Offering as the Wise Men of the East did to his only Son, Gold,
Frankincense and Myrthe.

A Bevy of Rich Jewels, which the Indies are ignorant of; nor is Arabia so
happy as to Parallel. The Ruby of Justice, the Pearl of Mercy, and the Emerald
of Humility; Thus the true Christian is blazoned.

May these Virtues then by the Sanctification of the Spirit, be as a Collar of
SS to Adorn your Neck. May these unpolisht Lines, intended as an enlargement
thereon, be subservient to your Devotions, and Closetted in your Pious and
Discerning Breast; so shall you be all Glorious within, and the King of Heaven
shall take pleasure in your Spiritual Beauty.

In my Prayers I may not forget your Two virtuous Daughters; may Madam
Margaret, and Madam Catharine deserve the style of Jemima and Kesia (two of
Holy Jobs Daughters) for the Light of Divine Truth in them, and the Perfume of
Godliness.

Residing at London, you have the Glory of Art and Nature in your Eye; but, the
Ornament of a Meek and quiet spirit in Gods sight is of greater Price.

Some New City-Modes may differ much from this, and one from another; but, I
assure you, after this Manner in the Old Time Holy Women, who trusted in God,
adorned themselves.

And, if you will be but so just to your own self, as to Peruse, and still
Practice Gods Holy Precepts; so Merciful to Me, as to Pardon this Presumption,
you Crown the Hopes and Desires of

MADAM, Your Most Humbly Devoted Servant, S. D.

Micah 6th. Verse. 8th. He has showed thee O Man what is good: And, What does
the Lord require of thee? But to do Justly, to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly
with thy God.
WHen the Prophet Micah observed how the Formal Jew doted upon his Shadowy
Ceremony, he presses the Substantial Duty of Justice upon him: In Aram Dei
Justitia imponatur; Let Justice be put upon thy Heart the Altar, Offer Mercy
rather then Sacrifice: And, if by Humility thou make thy self a whole
Burnt-Offering, consuming thy former Glorious Self in that Holy Conflagration;
How much more Acceptable will this be then the Fat of Rams? In like manner,
when I take notice that some Novelists of this Age of ours, have been so wholly
given to Platonic Speculations, Ayery Notions, and Fond-affected Expressions;
who, would be accounted Religious, (though they have lost their Decalogue in
their Pretended- Creed, and Morall-Honesty in the Refinedness of their Faith:)
I hope it will not be unsuitable, if I, (according to this Prophets Method,)
press these Primitive Practical Duties of Justice, Mercy and Humility, in the
Language of my Text. Thus then, God having cleared himself from those unworthy
Aspersions of a hard Master, which some undutiful Servants would have fixed
upon him, in the soft Language in the third Verse of this Chapter; O my People,
What have I done unto thee? and, Wherein have I wearied thee? testify against
me: and then, by a short Epitome of his long continued signal Favors Tacitly
taxed here, (as plainly elsewhere) the Ungrateful, Hypocritical, and Formal
Pretenses of that Jewish Nation, Verse. 5. O my People, Remember now what Balack
King of Moab consulted* etc.

At the sixth Verse they make their Reply; Wherewith shall I come before the
Lord, says Israel? and how my self before the high God? If the Lord would be
appeased with thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of Rivers of Oil, these
Impossible things I would attempt; yea, even unlawful ones, The Firstborn for
my Transgression, and the Fruit of my Body for the Sin of my Soul; this would I
give for an Atonement. And indeed, any thing of that People God might sooner
have had then a broken heart: The Prophet now comes to make Gods Rejoinder in
my Text; Away with such flourishing Pretenses, you do but shuffle and trifle
with God; you need not now begin to ask the way to Zion, with your faces
thitherwards; you need not make so much Question what will please him? He has
spoke his mind freely, and his Commands are fair writ, he has showed thee O
man what is good.

Thee O man -- If man should be taken for the Magistrate, as Genesis 43. 11. Carry
down the man (the Ruler Joseph) a Present, and in other places, then the Errand
is in the Prophets language, to thee O Captain. Truth is, if a man in power
will walk in darkness, some puny advantages he has to deal perversely; but if
he will but eye the light of the word, he shall find all these obviated in my
Text: What is it the Lord requires? (lest he should be injurious, to do
justice;) lest he should be cruel, to love mercy; lest he should be frivolously
imperious, to walk humbly.

And because the name of Adam being so low, man rather affects that of Geber, a
Gilded Hillock; nay, to be accounted (...), The Prophet seems to check him
thus, Pride gets nothing but a slight from Reason, and a worse sure from
Religion; shall the Gloe-worm vye with the Sun? shall the Subject strut it in
the face of his Sovereign? Walk humbly, it is with thy God. If there be many
by-ways, the night dark, or our Guide blind, we may easily fall into a ditch:
but here is a light set up in the Text, and that from the Father of lights; He
has showed.

And thee O man -- It seems a particular Ray is ordered to reach every single
person; He has chalked out the way, the good old way; this do and live. Thee O
man -- Though spoken by the word in general, as much concerns us as if directed
to every individual. God (as I may so say) talks with every person immediately,
aiming to awaken every single soul to his duty.

Let us water our own Field by cutting a passage from the common River,
inferring with David when God at large says, seek ye my face. Let every one
subsume, thy face Lord will I seek. But what is it the Lord has showed thee?
what is good -- This is an extensive word; what is seasonable, what is
delectable, what is profitable: The Apostle Philip. 4. 8. comments upon the
word. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, lovely and of
good report. The all seeing eye enlightening the understanding, shows thee what
is good for thy will to make choice of. If thou be not so generous as to
make choice of virtue for its innate splendour, yet surely so prudent thou will
be to make thy election of that which is good for thine own sake. Self-love
will constrain thee to this, as well as Gods Command. And what I pray is it the
Lord requires? but to do justly -- So good that it is a miracle man should need
a Mandate for the acting of it, or a Lawgiver to require it. Gregory Nazienzen
calls man (...), an heavenly Statue, of which no man was the Artificer; and so
may I call my Text. Justice, Mercy, and Humility, these rich glories of the
Soul are fit materials for a superstructure that may reach Heaven. The language
of the Text speaks it of no humane extraction. The Precepts are so excellent,
and refined, so agreeable to the spiritual part of our temper, so apt to cleanse
and sublimate the drossy part of man, that they are even proportioned to feast
our Souls.

There is such a Facultas Deo Analoga, an (...), as Plato styles it, betwixt
this Law (I am sure) and the Soul, that the Affections are necessitated to
strike in in the Chorus: Such a commanding Beauty, man cannot choose but be
enamoured with its Rays; the words like so many Philtres, charming us into an
holy obedience; the very sound of them, like David's Harp, may drive away the
evil spirit, (...). They are Love Tokens left with the Sons of men to engage
their affections to him: Two of them be in the representations of Himself. Upon
such an account St. Chrysostom in his 12th. and 13th. Oration (...) words it
thus concerning his (...); There needs no Oratory to allure men to these, we
need not heap up Arguments to convince you of their equity. What need of an
Interpreter to acquaint you with Gods meaning in them? They have such
proportion with our reason* there is such a Magnetic power in the good that is
offered to us, as may well attract every rational being. Such an intrinsic
lovelyness, and native fairness in them, that it is no eclipse or diminution of
the liberty of the first being, to say he could not but require them. Since he
has created the World, there must be Justice, and Mercy too to preserve it,
else men would swallow down each other, as greater Fish devour the less.

To the Question then the wicked put, Psalm. 4. 6. Who will show us any good?
our Prophet may make answer in the Text by just and merciful actions God will
put more joy in our hearts then when their Corn, and Wine, and Oil (their
goods) increased. True, if critically we distinguish, none is good but one,
that is God, but Virtue being the way to the Author of Virtue, we must use the
Stream of Justice to come to the Just one, and the Rivulet of Mercy till we
come to the Fountain of it. Thus we love lower Excellencies because they lead
to higher; as we value gold Oar when we find it on the top of the earth,
because it leads to the Mine it self. And if one poor spark of Virtue be so to
be loved for its self (as Justice) much more is that infinite Rock of Orient
and most shining Virtue to be loved in God.

The Text then is an Answer to the Question, verse the 7th. wherewith shall I
come before the Lord? -- And in opposition to their formal he offers a real way
of pleasing God: Do justly, etc.

In which three words you have the two Tables of the Law: all the second Table
duties are comprehended in the former part of the Text, Justice and Mercy, and
the sum of the first Table duties in the later, and walk humbly: (that is)
notwithstanding you could plead exact equity toward the rich, repeating
Samuels Challenge, and melting Charity toward the Poor, yet still you have
need of the Righteousness of a Savior, and the Mercy of our God; therefore
walk humbly.

Let Us take a Landscaip of the words, though many through wilful ignorance or
contempt pretend they know not the way of Duty, yet God has not left them in a
dark Apocrypha, but he has vouchsafed a clear Apocalypse. He has showed --

And though even earthly Princes think it below them to render a reason of
their Decrees, yet that men may be convinced of the equity of his proceedings,
that they are such as flow naturally from an enlightened soul (if violence be
not offered to it) he appeals, what is it the Lord requires?

It Is plain also by the gradation of the language, that whosoever pretends
piety toward God, must be sure to be a strict observer of Justice amongst his
Brethren. The foundation of all is laid in doing justly.

Yet in Mantissam, over and besides Justice, which is a due to all, there is
another Duty, which though no humane Law can reach us if we act not up unto
(for whoever was impleaded for not relieving the Poor? What Bar could Dives be
brought unto though he withheld his goods from Lazarus, to whom yet the Wise
man says they are due) yet Gods Law requires even an office of mercy where an
object of pity is tendered; therefore my Text adds to love Mercy: And though we
know the way, and acknowledge the equity of it, endeavoring to please God by a
sttict heart toward Justice, and an enlarged hand to Charity, except God be
our God, and so actions performed as fruits of faith, they are not acceptable:
my Text says he must be thy God. To the Duties of the second Table we must
join Duties of the first: These things ought ye to have done, but by no means
leave the main undone, To walk humbly. Neither yet will it suffice, soberly to
take the employments upon us which God injoynes, and humbly to manage them for
a start only, but with a steady, constant perseverence to the end. This is
called in my Text walking with God.

More distinctly. First man pretends ignorance, but God says he has showed:
It Is not to be denied but many lie still in darkness, their foolish hearts
blinded, so that they cannot understand spiritual things savingly, discerning
spirits they have not, they cannot order their speeches or their persons as
they should: They neither know the affirmative nor Negative part of their duty;
they neither see what injustice they have done against the commands, nor what
mercy they have neglected to do according to the Commandment: Therefore the
Error of their ways they understand not, they will not repent, and so are
without hope.

It Is for a Lamentation that too many sit still in darkness and in the shadow
of death; but then where is the fault? has God barricado'd up the way of
knowledge? or left himself without a wi^ness? who cries behold me, behold me,
to a Nation that seeks not after him? True, an evil eye cannot behold that
which is good, a coveting eye cannot love Justice, a cruel eye will not love
mercy, nor a proud eye humility; but the reason of all that is their own false
glass.

These evil beasts or beastly Lusts have devoured the man I would speak to; If
our Doctrine be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, eternally, if not
temporally; for besides that (...), that sacred Manuscript which is writ by the
finger of God himself in the heart of man, the Quakers Scripture of God within
us, the Bible of Gods own Printing there (as they style it.) Remember St.
Austins Toll, Lege, he points us to a more legible Book; the Gleanings of this
Book is better than the Vintage of all other; so that you need not now cry to
us as the Disciples of John the Baptist, Master what shall we do? God has gone
before you in a fiery Pillar, what is writ in the Law* how read thou? To the
Law and to the Testimony, all their words that speak not according to this they
have no light in them, but are benighted souls.

The Word is nigh you, in your eye, he that runs may read in our mouths, the
Word has gone through the world, nay into your hearts convincingly: Nor is it
an Oriental Tradition, or a Rabinical Dream only handed to us by unfaithful
Echoes, and imperfect rebounds, no ridling Oracles are our rule, but a
revealed Word: there he has showed the O man: Omnis Scriptura est mensa
Sapientiae; there you may feast your selves says Origin, and Ireneus in his
third Book says Ostentationes quae sunt in Scripturis non possunt ostendi nisi
ex Scripturis, never so lovely or beneficial sights: The Devil has his Shows,
the whole world and the glory thereof; but our best way is to wink when he
offers the object: Here Is a sight man is made spectator of, so good, that it is
worthy of Gods own eye, being an Emanation from himself: The vail is taken off
from the face of Divine Truth, and you may love it for the beauty your selves
behold in it. And as he gives his Word to shine without, so he gives his Spirit
to shine within, that the light of the Spirit might apprehend the light of the
Word: here are shewings indeed. Barren fruitless Cutiosities he has not shown,
but necessaries to salvation are clearly revealed; the Form of sound words, and
the truth which is after godliness, these rich Mines are bared.

The way of Duty is plain; who so is wise may understand these things; then
shall you know if you follow after to know the Lord.

Light is come into the world, and we live in the Goshen of it. (...) should be
our salutation; welcoming these Irradiations: Ignorance is now wilful work; if
men will either read or hear they need not be filthy; he has showed them a
cleansing Fountain. Walk in the light then, and when with Solomen you have
considered these empty and shadowy Lights below; where we can scarce find any
thing worth a glance; then lift up your gates, and your hearts; that the King
of Glory may come in with the goodly Train of his revealed Truths. Open your
souls to these Heavenly Visions, and warm them in these eve^lasting Sunbeams.

Times of former Ignorance (so called because of glimmering discoverings
comparatively) God is said to wink at, but after the Sun of Righteousness
himself has arisen with healing in his wings, now he looks broad upon sinners,
chastising them with his beams for sins, though small as Atoms. You may have
darkness in the day if you shut your windows. O why do you not open your eyes
and discern? why do you act in the choicest points of Religion out of blind and
implicit Principles? Sons of light will not do so, but in his light, they will
eye eternal light. O how has the Truth suffered betwixt the over-prying
Socinian and the blind obedient; I would neither have you burn your wings by
over near approaches to this light, nor yet wink at Noon. Above all O take heed
of withholding truth in unrighteousness after these shewings.

Thou requirest obedience, Da quod jubes, said St. Austin, and jube quod vis.
Surely if our Piety be not prevailed upon by the reverence of this He in my
Text, the Author, yet the excellency of the Imposition does so recommend it to
our reason, that we must put off the best part of our Nature to evacuate the
force of our Religion. We have a Law, and by that Law we ought to walk; true,
Lex non valet nisi promulgata, but this great King has sent out his
Proclamations: He has so showed thee: And least man should appeal from him as
a severe Lawgiver, he appeals to himself. What is it the Lord requires? but
that which is good, so good that Justice and Mercy are Gods own attributes. By
his Prophet Ezekiel God takes it hainously, and well he may, that man should
question his ways by whom all things are pondered, and who does all (...),
according to the Counsel of his Will, with mature deliberation, being Equity
himself; by way of challenge therefore, are not my ways equal? And shall not
the Judge of Heaven and Earth do right? And though he give not account of his
matters, he is not bound to it, Job. 33. 13. Yet what is it, Come now, let us
reason together says the Lord: Are they not the cords of man and the bands of
love, Hosea 11. 4. That I would draw you in by? By downy persuasions, not iron
compulsions. What are you afraid of these golden chains? they are not Fetters
for your feet, but Bracelets for your necks. Vices are chargeable, but Virtue
is free, and you are wooed to it in a winning way.

Origin in his fourth book Contra Celsum breaks out thus, (...) -- Though it be
mutual to Men and Beasts to catch and be caught, yet there is a great deal of
difference Ratione an violentia. Now we are fetched over with no rushing wind,
or imperious sowerness, but with gales of grace. They are ignoble disingenious
spirits that are not won over by such ways. The Sacrifices under the Law were
seasoned with salt, which mystically denotes discretion; and the Gospel is the
best Rationale in the world: Let me therefore court you to the duties of the
Text by St. Paul's Suada, Rom 12. 1. It Is (...), a Reasonable Service; the Law
of God set before an intellectual eye, carries such a light and beauty in it as
may justly ingratiate it with the understanding: And that heavenly beam which
God has darted into the soul of Man for the discovery of his own Laws, being
so exactly conformable to that light, should readily comply with it.

God does not so much as show thee, offer any command unto thee but what is
good: His Yoke easy, his Burden light, his Commandments not grievous: They are
good for thy self O Man: Thy goodness extends not to him: And if thou will not
hate thine own flesh, thou must embrace them. They consult their own good that
do good, all things work for the best to them; when these few and evil days
are gone they receive good in death: Whereas it shall be objected to the
wicked; Son thou have received thy good things: Then the righteous man's best
good is to be produced; and when Temporal goods fail he enjoys Eternal. The
contemplation of this put David upon the question, Psalm the 34. 12. What man
is be that desires to live and loves many days that he may see do good? The
answer at the fourteenth verse is, Let him do good; will ye still continue in a
barren Wilderness, and not reach forth your hand to the offered Grapes of
Eschol? will you give a ready submission to what the Devil requires, and will
you be obstinate against Gods commands: will you be valiant under the comm^nds
of a Tyrant, and Cowards under your lawful Sovereign? What Command is harsh
when Honor is profer'd? What Obedience is performed though Heaven be as a
Label annexed thereunto?

Do but strive and thou may storm; attempt and thou shall conquer: There is
no difficulty to a resolved Soul: He that gives thee his Commands will assist
thee in the keeping of them. But what formidable Commands does God impose? Lord
what would thou have us to do; lets take a particular view. Is there ever a
bitter herb in his prescription that might lead death into the Pot? Testify
against him if you find any. I speak to wise men, judge what I say. You whose
senses be exercised, that you can discern betwixt good and bad; you that have a
spiritual Pallat, a heavenly Relish, you ought to hear reason when Man speaks
it, much more when God offers it, and in such a taking way. His Law makes man
contract all his first reason to apprehend it: And the Gospel is the dilatation
of Gods own reason, a line to reach even to us (...), rational demonstrations.
Every mouth must be stopped when God opens his so convincingly. Was it some great
matter, was it never so difficult a work of faith, the Path straiter than
indeed it is, 'twas well worth our struggling to obtain Heaven at our Journey's
end: how much more should we press forward when he only enjoins us those things
which suit our reason so adequately?

To do justice -- (...) what but (...), which the Emperor and Philosopher
Marcus Antoninus held to be Equivalences: There are (...) in the world; even
the ruder heap of Mankind, that do but (...), will cry up Justice; others, are
so Rational, as to plead for Mercy; and, the better bred Bereans desire and
endeavor to walk with God.

Do Justly -- And, Is not Suum cuique tribuere Natures Maxim? You may hear
every man in his own Dialect extol this Precept, Parthians, and Medes, and
Elamites; the barbarous Scythian, and wild American have some Relish of
Justice, it is so pleasant. This Notion is a Pearl, that shines in the dark;
none but wallowers in the mire will trample upon it: This Gold will endure any
Touchstone; every Palate is satisfied with its sweetness: In this Via Regia all
Travellors desire to walk; even Gath and Askalon would have owned this, and,
Should not Jerusalem? Justice has an Olive Branch in its mouth, and drops
sweetness and fatness upon the Land it comes into: Adeo res sacra est, says
Seneca, ut siquid illi simile, etiamsi Mendacium, placeat; so venerable a thing
is Justice, that the very Counterfeit, the Bristol goes for Current. (...),
says the Philosopher; Those that labor to pervert it, do yet Honor it: and,
even those Men, who themselves will not practice it, cannot yet but love it, at
least commend it in others.

It gives Honor where it cannot winn Assent: As Pilate acknowledged, he found
no fault in our Savior, whom yet he Condemned: This God expects from all. That
Elegant Moralist Plutarch, says, God is angry with them that Counterfeit his
Thunder and Lightning: (...); His Scepter and Trident he will not have meddled
with; not imitate His Sovereignty; but, loves to see us darting out those warm
and cherishing beamings of Justice in the Text, of Justice, Goodness and
Clemency: They that practice these, with the Be, may make a Trade of their
Pleasure; in their business may have Recreation, and in a holy Epicurisme fare
deliciously every day upon their own Dainties.

Do Justly -- Omnes virtutum species uno Justitiae nomine Continentur (says
St. Jerome) ad Demetrium. Do Justly; Not Talk right only, as some Glibtongu'd
Absalons of late time; who, that they might Revile the Footsteps of Gods
Anointed, (our late Martyred Sovereign of Blessed Memory,) said, There was no
man deputed of the King to do them right, though their matters were just. O
(says Absalon) that I was a Judge in Israel! Great matters indeed, when he and
they were Advanced; In his wrath against our sins he made them such: Was not
the most righteous of them a Thorne-Hedge? Blessed be God who has restored us
our Judges as at the first, and our Officers as at the beginning; who will do
Justice, not Word it only.

Do Justice -- Not that I intend to Prescribe Laws to you, from whom we are to
receive them; but, in regard Gods Law must have the Precedence, upon which ours
are Grounded, I think it meet (as S. Paul upon another account says) to put
you in mind of these things from the mouth of God, though you do know them, and
be established in those present truths.

Thus then, Justice being the Firstborn in the Text, may seem to challenge a
double portion of Discourse: yet, my dispatch shall be quicker through this
branch, in regard I have such lively Comments before me; nor need I press that
much which these Parts have experienced to be your Practice for many years.

Do Justice -- And then Justum is done Just, when it is distributed equally.
There was much Corruption it seems in St. Cyprians time, which opened his mouth
thus; Inter ipsas Leges delinquitur, inter Jura peccatur, Innocentia nec illic
ubi defenditur reservatur: Blessed be God we have no such complaining in our
Streets. yet, exact and critically Curious should man be when he sits in the
Seat of God; for, as Gregory in his Morals, Saepe ipsa nostra Justitia ad
examen divinae Justitiae deducta Injustitia est, and sordet in districtione
Judicis quod fulget in estimatione operantis; Our best Gold will scarce hold
out weight in the Balance of the Sanctuary: Much care therefore should we have
in our evenness of Justice; David's Justice was as large as his Dominions, 2 Samuel to all his People.

Let Judgment run down like water, and Righteousness like a mighty stream,
that touches every door equally; No Fractus, no Windings: and, a sameness as
in water toward all; as Justice must wet the head, so down it must run to the
skirts of the Garment; like the Sun it rejoices as a Giant to run his course:
Sol non alius diviti, alius Pauperi; and citius Solemn a Caelo quam Justitiam a
Fabritio -- His beams are equally shed abroad; Laws are made without respect of
persons: and, when they are so executed, then it is an honor to the
Distributer, and a Happiness to the People.

That this may be done, Praecipitancy must be avoided. I will go down now and
see, says the Judge Omniscient concerning Sodom: The Eternal God takes time to
teach Man to weigh matters. A Cause may, (like the Israelites Cloud,) look
bright enough on the one side, and yet Aegyptian-darkness on the other. Si
Judicas, cognosce; and, when the Cause is pondered, the fear of man must be
banished. A Magistrate is Pudore, Blanditiis, and Metu major, says Isiodore:
Pilate stumbled at this Stone, If thou let this Man go, thou art not Caesar's
Friend (said the Jews,) down falls his Courage at this word, and he lost three
Friends thereby, God, Caesar, and his Conscience. The Ensign of the
Law-giving-Tribe was a Lion, and with these Salomons Throne was supported:
Phineas was a Man of a Noble Spirit; and, the Contempt of Families could not
terrify Job. When the Magistrate is valiant for the Truth, O how becoming is
that Spirit of Power.

But, What went you out for to see, a Reed shaken with every wind? alas, such
a one is not worth looking on; he that does Justice must not be flexible upon
the Account of any Relation or Reward.

Affections may pervert Judgment: When the Object is too near the eye, that
Approximation and Vicinity is a prejudice to the sight. Justice is the Souls
Serenity, a kind of Stoical Apathy: I may say as Aristotle, (...) It Is a pure
Intellect, not only without a Sensitive part, but without a Will; pure
Judgment without Affections; All have an equal Interest in it, and Privilege
by it. Non Sanguinis necessitudo sed virtutis Cognatio proximos facit (says
St. Ambrose;) So that the Magistrate must be Speculum non Coloratum; a Glass
not prejudiced, not prepossest with any Tincture; as unconcerned as the Glass.
It was the Commendation of the Tribe of Levi, Deuteronomy. 33. 8. That he said of his
Father, I know thee not: What, Had these Levites lost Natural Affections? No,
but they knew not their nearest Relations, so as to be partial in the Execution
of Gods Commands: Iustitia non novit patrem, non novit matrem, veritatem novit,
personam non accipit, Deum imitatur; It Is a great piece of the Magistrates
Knowledge, to be Ignorant of his Acquaintance, lest they should Bias him or
his Affections. Exit personam judicis quisquis amicum induit, says Cicero.

A noble Resolution that was of Saul, had it been well grounded, 1 Samuel 14. 24.
39. Had he done well in Adjuring the People, he had done eminently well in
resolving not to spare his own Son Jonathan: Personal Relations must not sway
in Public Concerns. Though Coniah was as a Signet upon my right hand, yet
should he be plucked thence: And, as the Provocation of the dearest Relation
must be hazarded, rather then that of God, and the Conscience; so much more
light in the Balance should a Gift be. Hugo in his Homilies calls this Fatuam
Reverentiam alicui exhibitam, non causa debita sed propter Vtilitatem. It Is
below a generous Soul, and may Judas his Quid dabitis never receive other
Answer then St. Paul's Silence: Felix looked that he should have given him
Money, but his expectation was frustate. Lyranus has a Note I cannot here
pass; for, there is as great a temptation to a Christian to favor a poor man
in his cause out of tender comiseration as there is in hopes from the rich; yet
this must not be done neither, says he, ne forte motu pietatis indiscretae
condescenderis ei in prejudicium justiciae.

These are the chiefest Remora's of the Ship of Justice, but the remembrance of
your names and places will break through these pitiful retards: I have said ye
are Gods says God himself of you. If really you would be so, let your hearts
be clothed with Zeal, as your bodies with Scarlet, which is an Emblem of it.

The Magistrate is (...), Lex loquens, quid vanae sine moribus leges
proficiunt? Be greater then, by your example than your office: This puts life
into the Law when you are the transcript of it, without which it is but a dead
Letter. Holiness gives boldness: God looks for such men to stand in the Gap,
and make up the breaches of Justice. Such as eyeing the day of the Righteous
Judge are timorous with a Laban or a Doeg, to abuse their power, as knowing
they are called Shields of the Earth, to whom power is given principally for
protection, not vexation or ruin of others. Nemo prudens punit quia peccatum
est, (says Seneca) sed ne peccetur: Revocari enim praeterita non possunt,
futura prohibentur; it is not in the power of punishment to recall what is past,
but to prevent what is possible the reaching: It Is in exemplum, that Israel
might hear and fear and do no more so presumptuously.

Lest man should mistake the ground of his power, as if it was given him to
march Agrippa like (...), the Text tells him of another design that God has;
and therefore he backs his power with a precept of pity: Love mercy.

Non mihi sed populo, said Adrian the Emperor; and the Philosophers words are
(...), Hoc Reges habent munificum and ingens, prodesse miseris, says Seneca.

The Apostle calls the Magistrate a Minister for good; and was it not for this
addition of Mercy, even Justice it self might be suspected for Cruelty. We must
then do justice so, as that we must love mercy also.

Justice is a debt upon Man's account, Mercy is Gods over-measure. One of the
Kings of France said to a Woman, who on her knees begged justice of him, Rise up
or beg mercy, for I owe thee justice. Man punishes if we be not just, but God
punishes if we be not merciful: his ways are not as our ways, nor his
thoughts as our thoughts; he has many supererogating moreovers.

And love Mercy -- And now that I have showed how Justice conveys your estate
over to you, I might show you how Mercy calls for an holy alienation of it,
bids you draw forth your soul to the hungry: So the word Mercy is sometime
taken: but this would not be so suitable.

Love Mercy -- If we take the words exegetically, by way of Comment upon the
former; then he that does justice must by his place afford unto the people a
merciful protection in opposition to cruel oppressors. Upon this account the
Prophet Ezekiel in his 28. 16. styles the Magistrate a covering Cherub, to
spread out a securing wing; and so is Moses styled a Nursing Father to his
Israel.

Or if we look upon this as a distinct charge (as indeed there seem to be a
great Emphasis of love upon Mercy, and a merciful act may be done when it is not
loved) then the Magistrate must be of sedate affections, of a composed temper,
not hurryed away with the least violence of passion. The reason is rendered by
St. James; For the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, no it is
observed they stand in opposition there: Inferiora fulminant, there is thunder
in the lower Region; but all above is quiet: He that is placed above his
Brethren, must not give place unto wrath. None refuse the waters of Siloe
because they run softly, but such as are styled the raging waves of the Sea,
foaming out their own shame. The God of Peace requires pacatum animum, a quiet
composure of our spirits; and in the execution of any office, then especially
must we love mercy, having an eye to softer qualifications rather then more
rigorous exactions. This seems to be added in my Text, to doing justice to
season and temper it to a golden Medium, lest Man should walk up to the
extremities of Draco's bloody Laws, that punished all offenses with death. St.
Ambrose gave excellent counsel to Theodosius after his rash Massacre, he wished
that in all Sentences that concerned life, there might be thirty days before
the Execution; Some space to show mercy if need required. Thus when you sit
upon the Bench in Judgment let mercy give the Sentence. In the height of Jewish
malice St. Paul assures us in order to himself, that they went less still then
the summum jus of the Law, Deuteronomy. 25. 3. Forty stripes says that Text he may
give him and not exceed: compare this with 2 Cor. 11. 24. And St. Paul says,
of the Jews received I forty stripes save one. All things then that are lawful
for us are not expedient for us: He that chooses always to walk upon the
Battlements is in danger of the Precipice. You that are the distributers of
Justice then, be merciful as your Judge which is in Heaven is merciful. Would
you know how that is? So unwillingly does he grieve the Children of men, that
he calls the act of punishing his strange act. Opus suum alienum extorquemus ut
pereamus, says Tertullian. It comes with a sigh, Heu consolabor, ah -- I will
ease me of my adversaies, and avenge of my ennemies: yea and a tear too.
Plangitur Princeps Tyri, quam bonus Deus (says Origin) qui etiam eos deflet
qui se neglexerint. Deas tristatur non de injuria sua, sed de nostra
perditione. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self. Thus our Savior when he
beheld the City wept over it. What a struggling is there in his calm breast, who
says What shall I do unto thee Ephraim? how shall I make thee as Admah? And at
last Mercy triumphs over Judgment: My repentings are rolled or kindled
together; I will not proceed to execute the fierceness of my wrath, with a
remarkable twitting reason, for I am God, and not man -- O let all that have
the signature of God upon them imitate him. St. John says indeed he saw his
Savior with a Sword, Revel. 19. 15. But it came out of his mouth; Oris arma
sunt oscula; No weapons but kisses from the lips. If there had been any danger
of this Sword, the Spouse in the very first words of the Canticles would not so
passionately have broke forth: Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. My
Beloved is white and ruddy, says the Church there. In that dusky Type he is
resembled to a Man, whereon Thomas descants excellently; Candidus in toto
corpore rubicundus in genis, white in all concealed places, ruddy only in the
face, which is obvious to every ones eye, as if it was but a show of Justice
rather to terrify then torment: White when merciful, but in his justice ruddy,
as if he blushed to be constrained to punish by our obstinacy. God ordinarily
reveals himself in the Old Testament by two Names, Jehovah and Elohim: Now the
Hebrews note quando egreditur sententia ad clementiam, he chooses to be called
by his great Name Jehovah, his proper incommunicable Name? but quando egreditur
sententia ad justitiam in any process of Justice or Judgment he always styles
himself Elohim. By which Name Angels, Judges, and false Gods too are once
called. God it seems is jealous of his Name of Mercy. Imitate him, and do acts
of justice with melting spirits and tender bowels. There is no such great
Chasme betwixt Justice and Mercy, as some think, no irreconcilable antipathy,
they may well enough greet each other with an holy kiss; you may bring about
Justice by a high and powerful, yet withal a soft and delicate hand* Mercy need
not disarm your Justice; Moses Rod may be both a Serpent to sting the guilty,
and a staff to support the weak. These may stand together, and yet a third, an
humble heart must be conjoined; all is in vain else. Walk humbly with thy God,
says my Text.

I should not have dared to have detained you thus long from those weighty
affairs I know are incumbent upon you, but that my Text at least pleads my
pardon, when it enjoins you mercy; nor will I retard you much longer now lest I
should be thought guilty of that which I do decry, and pressing humility show
my self ambitious to detain you.

Briefly then come we to the highest step of this Heavenly Climax, even the
must humble posture before the most High: And now give me leave, like that holy
Leveller of Mountains, John the Baptist, to prepare the way of the Lord, by the
language of my Text, commanding humility. Man is a proud Creature, prone to
stand upon his own supremacy, even to Deifie himself. When thus puffed up above
measure, Humility is the thorn to prick that Bladder. How many still think the
Urim and Thummim, the Brestplate of Judgment, is only with them. Humility
teaches such (...), not to be over-wise. I cannot stay to show you the
Lenthenlook of Humility in ancient times, nor the hoof'd knee by continued
prayer; yet with much sadness I cannot but observe humility in our times is
grown more stately. Knees of the soul, those invisible ones she will pretend to
give readily, but Elephant like, wants joints to bow the body: Present their
Souls a living Sacrifice they will, but their bodies are dead. If St. Paul
himself implore them by the mercies of God to present their bodies, he must
pardon them: So humble these are they are afraid to be reverent. How Seraphick
is this Hypocrite in whom the Sword of the Spirit is melted when the Scaberd of
the body is untouched! A Body O Lord thou have prepared me, and if my Body
expect to be glorified, it must be humbled. But the very mention of this new
modeled humility is a sufficient confutation of it.

To give you succinctly the real grounds of Humility in the Text. He is God,
Thy God, Thy God that honors thee to walk with him; Walk humbly with thy God.

The God to whom futurities are present; Nullum tempus occurrit Regi: To the
King of Heaven I am sure. And, we have nothing but a kind of Skeptical (...) of
what is before us: He the allseeing God, we poor Prisoners of the flesh, looking
but out of the Grates. Consider his Purity and Perfection, and thy own
Pollution and Profaneness; How low will thy Language be (as the great
Apostle's was, upon a glance of Christ's Divinity breaking out,) Depart from me,
O Lord, for I am a sinful man. Stars disappear when the Sun arises; Gods
fullness may show us our emptiness.

Thy God -- There is much Divinity in Pronouns: Thy God, to whom thou art
obliged for the dews of Heaven, and the fatness of the Earth, Spiritual and
Temporal blessings; that honors thee to walk with him in his Shecinah, Numbers
17. 4. There will I meet with thee: The Psalmist points us to Eye him there
still; See thou the goings of my God and King in the Sanctuary? That honors
thee to Sup with him, nay of him; Such Honor have all his Saints: therefore
are they humble walkers.

Hac itur; this is the way. Vis capere Celsitudinem Dei? Cape prius humilitatem
Christi, says St. Bernard. Excelsa est Patria, Humilis est via: Qui quaerit
Patriam, quid recusat viam? says St. Austin. This is a duty incumbent upon
all, and especially upon those men whom he has so honored, from them he
expects more Humility.

What then can you render unto the Lord, who has invested you with his Name
and Power? What less can you give him then the full of his expectation, that
you should walk humbly with that God who has placed you Rulers over Men? How
glorious is St. Bernards Humilitas honorata, an Humble Mind in an Honorable
Place? How lovely is this Treasure in our earthen Vessels?

But, because there are other Versions of these last words of the Text, I shall
name them (and only so,) To follow God, says the Syriack: Sollicitum
ambulare, says the Vulgar: Eris ergo Humilis in ambulando in timore Dei tui,
says the Chaldee, and that is most Comprehensive. In the fear of Thy God,
Tremble thou Earth at the presence of the Lord: Did Mount Sinai tremble, and
shall not our hearts? This fear will not suffer a man to cut off so much as a
Skirt, or Lap of Justice.

This holy fear is the principal part of a good Magistrate; yea, the very form
and soul of such a one; for, it troubles me to make it but a part, which
Solomon calls the whole of Man, Eccles. 11. 13. Fear God, etc. This is the
whole Duty of Man: Especially such a Man as is sent of God for the punishment
of evil doers, and the praise of them that dowell. Be instructed therefore, O
ye Judges of the Earth, serve the Lord in fear.

If Judge, Jury and Witnesses stood in this holy Awe, How li^e would our
Assizes be, for Equity, to that Grand Assize where Christ himself is Judge!
Basis omnium Timor plenus Disciplinae, says St. Ambrose: A well Disciplined
Fear is the Root of all Virtue.

Will you then in the fear of God Execute Judgment; and, being lovers of Mercy,
resolve still to walk humbly? Our hopes are no less: If so, then besides that,
the beauty of these Actions carries their reward along with them, and that you
have the Hearts as well as Eyes of men upon you. I Will tell you what hopes you
may have from your God; That, whereas now you are but Commissionated from an
Earthly King for a short time, and a small Circuit, you shall be Translated,
your Circuits enlarged: Shall not the Saints Judge the Earth? When Time shall
be no more, you shall be enthroned eternally: And, instead of this flitting,
sojourning posture, in the Service of your God and King here, to you there
shall be (...), you shall enjoy eternal rest amongst his Chosen. Which God
grant to us all for the Merits of Jesus Christ our Savior.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

