THis Book in the Original, has been so well approved of, by all Persons,
though of different Judgments in Religion, that it has been fifteen times
Printed in France, besides what has been done in Holland, and elsewhere in
other Languages; it is of very great use to Divines for Funeral Sermons; and is
very fit to be given away by well-disposed Persons at Funerals, and of
excellent Use to every Christian Reader.

THE CHRISTIANS Defense AGAINST THE FEARS OF DEATH. With Seasonable DIRECTIONS
How to prepare our Selves to Dye well.

Written Originally in FRENCH, By the late Reverend Divine of the Protestant
Church of PARIS CHAR. DRELINCOVRT. And Translated into ENGLISH. By M. D'ASSIGNY
B. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleetstreet, near
Temple-Barr. 1675.

To the Right Honorable, HENEAGE Lord FINCH, Baron of DAVENTRY; Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal OF ENGLAND.
My LORD,
IT is the common Practice of pretenders to Learning, to seek the Favor of
Persons, of your Lordships Eminency, Nobility, and Piety, and to judge their
Labors imperfect, if they inscribe not in the Frontispice some Great NAME, to
secure them against the attempts of Prejudice and Mistake. I conceive that I
should wrong too much, our Religious and Ingenious Nation, and this Treatise,
if I did entertain any such Feat, and allege it as the Cause of this
Dedication to your Lordship; for I am persuaded, that none will be so great an
Enemy to himself, and so singular in his Judgment, to be offended at that
which intends to protect him against our most dreadful Adversary, Death; at
that which has met with such an Universal Welcome, amongst all our neighboring
Nations, that it has appeared in many Languages, and been generally embraced
in those Countries, by all Men that are named Christians.

But here I must freely acknowledge the Cause of this ambitious Address. Your
Honor is worthily esteemed One of the most Glorious Examples of Religion, and
Justice amongst us: In imitation therefore of the Reverend Author; I do Humbly
entreat your Lordship, to give me the Liberty to show your Honor in the
beginning of this Defense against the fears of Death; That my Christian Reader
may look upon an Original and a Copy together, and see the Practice, as well as
the Discovery of the solid Comforts against Death. I shall not attempt to set
forth this noble Original, my weak abilities cannot so well discover, and
expose it to our view, as our daily Experience and Observation. Your Honors
Virtues, Liberality, and Devotion, are visible to us all; and the whole Nation,
takes notice of your Lordships Family, to have been always very fruitful of the
most experienced Men in the Law, the most renowned for Justice, and the most
remarkable for Piety and Religion. And at present, we see ( by God's Goodness)
several Illustrious Branches, proceeding from your Honor; Branches that
flourish already, to our great Admiration and Joy.

By them the Honor and Reputation of your Noble Family, will be for ever
supported and defended against Death and Unconstancy, as your Lordships Person
and Name, are, and shall be by your Piety and Care of Religion. God Grant unto
your Honor and Family, a Continuance and Increase of his Earthly Blessings,
according to his 1 Timothy 4.8.
Promise and after this mortal Life, God Grant to you, and your Posterity, the
fruition of his Eternal Bliss in Heaven. This shall ever be the Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble, And most faithful Servant, M. D' ASSIGNY.

The CHRISTIANS CONSOLATIONS Against the FEARS OF DEATH.
CHAP. I.
That there is nothing more dreadful than Death, to such as have no hope in
God.

AN Holy Man styles Death very significantly, The King of Terrors; that is to
say, The most terrible of all other things: for there is nothing that we can
imagine in the world more dreadful and more odious than Death. It is possible
to decline the edge of drawn swords, to close the Lions jaws, to quench the
Fires fury; but when Death shoots its poisoned Arrows, when it opens its
Infernal Jaws and when it sends forth its Devouring Flames, it is altogether
impossible to secure our selves; impossible it is to prevent or decline its
merciless fury. There is an infinite number of Warlike inventions, by which we
commonly defeat the evil designs of the most powerful and dreadful Enemies,
but there is no stratagem of the most Renowned General, no Fortification never
so Regular and Artificial, nor Army never so victorious, that can retard but
for a moment, the approaches of Death, this last Enemy. In the twinkling of an
eye it flies through the strongest Bulwarks, the deepest Walls, and the most
prodigious Towns. It leaps over the largest Ditches, the most prodigious
Castles, and the most inaccessable Rocks. It blows down the strongest
Barricadoes, and laughs at all our military Trenches, every where it finds the
weakness of our Armor, and through the best tempered Breastplates it strikes
the proudest Hearts. In the darkest Dungeons it finds us out, and snatcheth us
out of the hands of our most Trusty and Watchful Guards. In a word, Nature and
Art can furnish us with nothing that is able to protect us from Deaths cruel
and insatiable hands.

There is no man so barbarous, but suffers himself to be overcome sometimes by
the Prayers and Tears of such as cast themselves at his feet to implore his
Mercy; Nay such as have lost all sense of Humanity and Goodness, do commonly
spare in their rage, the weakest Age and Sex. But unmerciful Death has no more
regard of such as humble themselves to her, as of others that resist her Power.
It takes no notice of Infants Tears, and cries, It plucks them from the Breasts
of their tender hearted Mothers, and crushes them in pieces before their Eyes.
It scorns the Lamentations of dainty Dames, and delights to trample upon their
most ravishing Beauties. It stops its ears to the Requests of trembling old
Age, and casts to the ground the Gray Heads, as so many withered Oaks.

At a Battle when Princes and Generals of the Enemies Army, are taken
prisoners, they are not Treated as the common Soldiers: but unmerciful Death
treads under feet as audaciously, the Subject as the Prince, the Servant and
the Master, the Noble and the Vassal, the begging Lazarus and the rich Abraham
together. It blows out with the same blast, the most glorious Luminaries, and
the most loathsome Lamps. It has no more respects for the Crowns of Kings, the
Popes Miter, and the Cardinals Caps, than for the Shepherds Crook, or the
Slaves Chains; It heaps them all together, shuts them in the same Dungeon, and
in the same Mortar it pounds them all to powder.

There is no War never so furious and bloody, but is interrupted with some
days, or at least some hours of Cessation and Truce: Nay, the most inhumane
minds are at last tired with their bloody Conquests, but unsatiable Death never
says it is enough: At every hour and moment it cuts down whole Nations and
Kindreds; the Flesh of all the Animals that have lived and died since the
Creation of the World, has not been able to glut this horrid Monster.

All warfare is doubtful, he that wins the Victory to day, may soon after be
put to flight. He that rides at present in a Triumphing Chariot, may become the
footstool of his Enemy; but Death is always victorious, it triumphs with an
insufferable insolency over all the Kings and Nations of the Earth; it never
returns to its Den but laden with spoils and full of Blood. The strongest
Sampsons and the most victorious David's who have torn in pieces and overcome
Lions, Bears, and cut off the Heads of Giants, have at last themselves yielded,
and been cut off by Death. The Great Alexanders, and the Triumphing Caesar's,
that have made all the World to tremble before them, and conquered the most
part of the habitable Earth, could never find any thing that might protect them
from Deaths power; when glorious Statues and stately Trophies were raised to
their Honor, Death did laugh at their Vanity, and make sport with their
Persons. The rich Marbles, where so many proud Titles are Engraven, cover
nothing but a little rotten Flesh and a few Bones, which Death has broken and
reduced to Ashes.

We read in the Revelations of the Prophet Daniel, That King Nebuchadnezar saw
in a Dream a large Statue of Gold, both Glorious and Terrible; Its head was of
pure Gold, its Breast and Arms were of Silver, its belly and thighs of Brass,
its Legs of Iron, and its Feet were partly of Clay and partly of Iron. As the
Prince was beholding it, with astonishment, a little Stone cut out of a
Mountain, without hands, was rolled against the feet of this prodigious Statue,
and broke it all to pieces; not only the Clay and the Iron were broken, but
also the Gold, the Silver, and the Brass; all became as the chafe which the
wind blows to and fro: This great Image represents the four Universal
Monarchies of the World; That of Babylon, that of the Persians and Medes, that
of the Greeks, and that of the Romans; It represents also the Vanity and
unconstancy of all things under the Sun; for what is the Pomp, the Glory, the
Strength and Dignities of this World, but a smoke that the wind drives before
it, and a vapor that soon, vanishes away; All is like a shadow that flies from
us, or like a Dream that disappears in an instant; when crazy Man that was
created in the Image of God, rises out of the Dust, he seems to be very
glorious for awhile, and becomes terrible, but as soon as Death strikes at his
Earthly part, and begins to break his Flesh and Bones; all the Glory, Pomp,
Power, and Magnificence of the richest, of the most terrible and victorious
Monarchs are changed into a loathsome Smell, into contemptible Dust, and
reduced to nothing; Vanity of vanities all is vanity.

Seeing therefore that Deaths cruelty is so notable, that it spares none, and
that its power is so great, that none can escape or resist it; It is no wonder
if Death is become so terrible, and fills with fears, grief and despair, the
minds of all Mortals, who have not settled their Faith and Assurance upon God;
for there is no condemned prisoner but trembles when he beholds the Scaffold
erecting, upon which he is designed to be broken upon a Wheel, or when he spies
in the fire the Irons with which he is to be pincht to death. In the midst of a
sumptuous Feast, King Belshasar saw the fingers of a Man's hand writing these
words upon his wall of the Palace, Mean, Mean, Tekel Vpharsin, which the
Prophet Daniel has thus interpreted: Mean, God has numbered thy Kingdom, and
finished it; Tekel, Thou art weighed in the balances and art found wanting;
Perez or Vpharsin, Thy kingdom is divided and given to the Medes and Persians;
As soon as this Great Monarch had cast his eyes upon this miraculous writing,
it is said that his countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so
that the joints of his Loins were loosed, and his Knees smote one against
another. Certainly; the profound Worldling has a greater cause to be dismayed
in the midst of his Glory and Pleasures, when he may perceive Death writing
upon every wall of his House in visible Characters, and printing upon his
Forehead, that God has numbered his days, and this in which he now breaths,
shall be soon followed by an eternal night; That God has weighed him in the
balance of his Justice, and found him lighter than the Wind; And that the
terrible Creator, unto whom vengeance belongs, will soon divest him of all his
Glory and Riches, to cloth therewith his Enemies; what comforts can be found
by the wretched sinners, who do not only understand the particulars of their
final sentence, but do also hear the thundering noise of the Great Judge of the
world, offended at their impieties; They may now perceive Hell prepared to
swallow them up, and the fiery Chains of that doleful prison ready to receive
them; They may at present feel the hands of the executioner of Gods justice,
that seizes upon them already, and see themselves before stretched and tortured
in that place, where there shall be nothing but weeping, and horrible gnashing
of Teeth: at present they feel the fierceness of that fire and brimstone, for
it may justly be said of these wretched Varlots, That Hell comes to them before
they go to Hell; and that in this life they are tormented with the grievous
pangs of the second Death; therefore some of them in despair, do offer violence
to themselves, and commit an horrid murder upon their own persons, as if they
were afraid not to dye by a hand wicked enough: the expectation of Death to
them, is more insufferable than Death it self, and they had rather cast
themselves into the bottomless pit of Hell, than endure the apprehensions and
fears of Hell in their guilty Consciences, to be delivered of the flashes of
Hellfire, that mounts up to their souls in this life, they cast themselves in
a brutish manner into that unquenchable Burning.

That which is most terrible is, that the horrid and unsufferable fears that
seize upon the wicked, are not only for a moment; for as a Criminal that knows
that there is a sentence of Doom pronounced against him, does continually fancy
and think upon those torments that are preparing for him; as soon as he hears
the door unlocking, or a Fly bussing about his ears, he imagines that some are
entering to drag him from his prison to execution; in some sense he desires what
he apprehends, and hastens the approaches of that, for which he wishes, and
cannot avoid. Thus desperate sinners that know there is a sentence of eternal
Death pronounced against them in the Court of the King of Kings, and that from
this Sentence there is no Appeal nor Escape, must needs be in continual fears.
Such foresee the fearful image of Death, that disturbs their quiet, and as St.
Paul expresses himself. Through fear of death they are all their lifetime
subject to bondage, Heb. 2. That is, They are like so many wretched Slaves that
daily tremble under the inhumane power of a merciless Tyrant.

I am not ignorant that there be some Atheists who talk of Death, with contempt
and scorn, and who make an open profession of braving Death without the least
sense of fear; nevertheless they feel in their souls some secret Thorns, with
which death does often gaul them; some fears and apprehensions with which it
tortures and disquiets them when they dream least of her. It is true, they do
for the most part boast of not fearing the approaches of Death, and laugh at it
when they imagine that she is at a distance from them, but these are they who
are most apt to tremble at the grim countenance of Death; and soonest to
discover their weakness and despair.

If there be any that seem to laugh at Death, their laughter is only in
appearance upon the Lips; they are like a Child newly born, that seems to laugh
when he is inwardly tormented in its Bowels, or like those that have eaten of
the famous Herb, mentioned by the Herbalists, that causes a pleasant laughter
to appear upon the Lips of such, into whose noble parts it conveys a mortal
poison, to bring them to an inevitable end.

There be some, I confess then, die without expressing any fear or dread of
Conscience; but these are either brutish or senseless Persons, much like unto a
sleeping Drunkard, who may be cast down a Tower without any knowledge or
foresight of the danger; or they be pleasant mockers who are like the foolish
Criminals that go merrily to the Gallows; or they be such as are full of Rage
and Fury, whom I may very well compare to an enraged wild Bear, that runs
himself into the Huntsmans snare; such Monsters of Men deserve not to be
reckoned amongst rational and understanding Creatures.

CHAP. 2.
That in all the Heathens Philosophy, there is no solid or true Comforts
against the fears and apprehensions of Death.

THere be certain Physicians that seem at the first discourse to be very well
skilled in their Art, and that talk of the Diseases, and their Causes, most
Learnedly and accutely; and nevertheless, in their practice they are both
unhappy and ignorant: their unscasonable Learning does disturb the Patient,
(...) than their Physic does ease him; they increase (...) sufferings of the
languishing Body, and add affliction to its pangs: These kind of Physicians do
very well discribe unto us, in this particular, the properties of the Heathen
Philosophers, for when they represent the calamities of our humane condition,
they sharpen their Wits, and discover all their Skill and Rhetoric; ^^^e of
them laugh ingeniously at our miseries, others do art ficially weep to behold
them; but in all their Writings, and tragic Expressions, we cannot find any
solid and sincere Comforts, to strengthen us against the apprehensions of
Death; therefore their contemptible and vain fancies oblige us to tell them, as
Job did to his friends, who did disquiet instead of comforting him, Your
remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to bodies of Clay, Job, 13. It is
true, some of these Learned Philosophers have very well spoken, that we begin
to dye, as soon as we begin to breath, and that our Life is like unto a Candle
that lives by its approaches unto death, whereof the Flame does devour and
consume it; for the natural heat that entertains our life, does insensibly
undermine it, for it is that which spends our radical moisture or humidity,
that yields the same benefits unto our life, as Oil does to a Lamp, or Wax to a
Taper.

Others have as well said, that our present life is but a swift Race from one
Mother to another; they meant from the Womb of our Mothers that brought us into
the world, into the womb and bosom of the Earth, that will receive us at last;
for as soon as we are born, we run a swift Race toward our Grave: at that
instant when we fly from death, we do draw insensibly toward it, and contrary
to any intention, we cast our selves into its Bosom and Arms. Some of the same
School have compared Man to a bubble upon Water, that rises and swells, and
immediately decreases and breaks; others make him like to the waterish bottles,
of diverse colors, that Children cause with their breath, and destroy with the
same. In truth, all Man's Beauty is but a vain appearance that vanishes away in
an instant; Isai. 40. All flesh is like grass, and all the glory of man like
the Flowers of the Field, 1 Pet. 1.

One of these great Philosophers being demanded what the life of man was,
answered never a word, because such a question deserved no answer, or rather
because he would imitate the custom of his Age, of speaking by guess, and
symbolick representations; for that purpose he entered into a Chamber, and past
out of it again at the same instant. This he did to express unto his Disciples
that questioned him; how that Man's Life is but an entrance in, and egress out
of the World, the one succeeds immediately the other.

Another of the same Sect walked in a bravado two or three turns, and then
shrunk into a Pit, to signify, That our Life is but a kind of Mascarade, a vain
appearance that soon vanishes; when Men have well admired themselves and their
Beauty, and when they have drawn the looks and esteem of the World, Death
snatches them away, dashes out all their Beauty, and swallows their borrowed
Glory in a mournful Grave. It is with us as with Actors in a Comedy, the one
represents a King, the other an Emperor, the one a Counselor, the other a
Minister of State, but when the Comedy is ended and the Garments changed, you
know not which is which; we are like Counters upon a Table, some signify
Unites, others Tens, others Hundreds, and others Thousands, and Millions, but
when they are gathered together, and put again into the Purse, this vast
difference appears no more; This is a lively Image of all mankind, for in this
life some appear upon the Throne, others are seated upon a Dunghill, some
flourish in Golden and Silken attire; others are clothed with nakedness; some
Command as Princes, others submit as Gally-slaves; some are fed with exquisite
Dainties, others must be content with the Bread of affliction: but when Death
has cast them all into their Graves together, then they appear equal and alike.

All these witty expressions and others of the like nature, are pleasant and
true, they teach well, and flatter the fancy, but they afford no real Comforts;
Therefore to all these Learned Doctors, we may say as Job by way of reproach to
his friends that did add sorrow to his affliction. You are all Physicians of no
value, How then comfort ye me in vain? Job 13.9. and 21.34.

When a poor Patient is stretched with the Tortures of an unmerciful Gout, or
of the Stone in his Kidneys, that forces from him at every moment, most
grievous sighs and groans; If any should offer to paint before him his looks,
and grimness, or that should counterfeit them ingeniously, in his presence, he
would bring him little ease to his torments, rather an increase to his vexation
and trouble: The most beautiful Flower also can give no delight to such as are
rackt in the Executioners hands, or tied to four Horses, that are ready to tear
him in pieces. Thus it is with the most eloquent and florid Discourse, it can
bring no comfort to a soul that is departing. David's Harp alone can drive away
the evil spirits, and appease the troubles of a wounded Conscience.

But some may imagine in this general survey of the wise Follies and Vanity of
the Heathen Philosophers, I should except the Stoics; I confess that in this
particular they express more gravity, but they proceeded no better; nay, when I
have well considered them, I find them to be far more unsufferable, and more
impertinent than the rest; for besides that, they treat of the immortality of
the soul, in a very doubtful and unconstant manne^, the pretended comforts that
they offer, do render Death more dreadful.

They tell us, that Death is the end and center where all humane Afflictions
and Miseries cease, therefore it is rather to be desired, than avoided or
feared. They might have some colorable reason for this conclusion, if they did
but discover beyond the Grave, an happiness which they might here expect and
hope for. Death assures them of no other comfort, but only to put a period to
all the miseries of this wretched life. Therefore such kind of Discourses are
not properly Comforts, and the resolution that they beget in us, is but a silly
Passion, much like unto a Criminal upon the Rack, who impatiently longs for
Death, that he might be delivered from the cruel hands of the Executioners, or
who bears the inferior torments with joy, to get on the top of the Scaffold
where he is to be broken upon the Wheel; Oh miserable wretch! the change of
Tortures will bring no ease to thy Pains, if thou can not endure patiently
the Ropes that unjoynt thy Members, how will thou suffer the bar of Iron that
shall crack all thy bones in pieces. O blind Philosopher! If thou can not
bear the miseries of this life, how will thou endure the pains and tortures of
Death.

Moreover, they tell us, That the most cruel and painful Death is a noble
occasion to exercise our virtue, and to cause our constancy and resolution to
appear with admiration. This discourse seems to be plausible, but in reality it
is nothing but wind, for what avails this apparent virtue, because it does
not stop us from falling into the deepest Abyss of Torments and Misery, but it
perishes, and dies with its Idolaters. Therefore, such as have most admired
it, have at last acknowledged its vanity, witness that famous and worthy
General, who fancied, that his virtue would procure unto him the Victory over
all the Enemies of the Roman Commonwealth, for whose sake he took up Arms;
when the Battle was lost, and all his ambitious hopes had deceived him, being
ready to stab himself with his own sword; he cried out, Oh miserable Virtue
what art thou but a vain and an unprofitable word, a name without a body. He
did thus exclaim against his Virtue that he had formerly adored, because it
could yield him no comfort in the day of his distress, nor free him from
falling into utter despair.

The most ordinary and usual comforts that they commonly bring, are these; That
Death is inevitable, that we all enter into the world upon condition to go out;
that we have as much cause to be afflicted with the day of our Birth, as with
the day of our Death; That Humanity and Immortality are not consistant; That
Death is a Tribute we all owe to Nature; That the Kings, and greatest Monarchs
are forced to pay it, as well as the meanest Subjects; and that this is such an
universal Law, that it admits of no exception.

But these kind of Comforts do but increase our trouble, and add to our
affliction, I have therefore good reason to speak unto these grave Philosophers
Job's language to his troublesome friends, Miserable Comforters are ye all. For
in truth, they don't only search the wound to the quick, without any
application of an healing Plaster, but they also tear and widen it, inflame
and render it far more grievous; when we are in hopes of seeing an end to our
calamities, our soul is comforted and arms it self with constancy, and a
patient resolution; but when we see our selves cast into an Abyss of Evil, and
that no hopes appear of getting out, we are then overwhelmed with grief and
despair; It is a lamentable thing to be born to dye, but it is far more
lamentable and grievous, to know that Death is not to be avoided; that all the
Treasures of the world cannot free us from it, for his affliction is the
greatest, whose misery can never be cured.

This also is a false and deceitful maxim, That the comfort of the miserable
is to have companions in misery, although many thousand drink together of the
waters of Marah, they seem no less bitter; and although thou should be burnt
in a fire where many are consumed, thou shall not find there a milder and a
more easy abode. Thy neighbors grief does not lessen thy Affliction, their
Sickness cannot restore to thee Health, and their Death comfort thee against
the approaches of thine own. On the contrary, if thou have any sense of
Humanity, thou will weep for their Misery, and thine together: It is that which
great Xerxes, King of Persia, did practice; for when he took a view of his
numerous Army, in which there were 1100000 Men, and considered, that within one
hundred years, so many brave Captains and Soldiers would be rotting in their
Graves, he was moved with compassion and wept. I do not mention here the
brutish and foolish opinion of such as imagine, that Man's Soul is mortal, and
dies with our Bodies. This consideration brings no comfort, but casts us into
an irrecoverable despair; for after the torments of Hell fire, there is nothing
that can be imagined more dreadful, than a reducement to nothing.

It is needless also to mention the Philosophers that are Disciples of Plato,
who have discoursed of the Souls Immutability, and of its Blessedness after
this life: they imagine themselves very acute and subtle, but their discourses
of this matter, are so gross and extravagant, that instead of persuading the
Truth they express it to scorn and contempt Let their fond and imaginary
descriptions of the Elysian Fields, be witnesses for whatsoever they have
invented of this kind, has been placed amongst the Fables and poetical
Fictions. Those Chymerical Gardens under ground, contain nothing like to the
Divine Excellencies, and unspeakable pleasures of the Paradise of God.

In one word, seek amongst the rarest and most precious Treasuries of Wit and
Learning, belonging to the Heathen Antiquity; turn over the Writings of the
most Eloquent Orators, of the Subtlest Philosophers, of the most famous Poets;
examine the Secrets of the most expert and experienced Physicians, consider
their Practice, and all the Remedies that they prescribe to the Soul, and you
shall find them too unskilful to perform the least Cure; They do but charm and
divert the Disease, hardens us against the evil; they furnish us with a good
exterior, and teach us to bear a good Mien, but they have no real Antidote
against the Venom that kills the Principle of Life, nor Remedy that reaches to
the Heart. And as the Torrents that dry up in the hottest seasons, such
Consolations that flow not from the Fountain of Life, vanish away without
effect, and dry up to nothing, when a deep sorrow, fear, and affliction, seize
upon a sinful Soul.

It seems, the contrivers of the Heathens Religion, were sensible of this
Truth, for they have dedicated Temples, and erected Altars to all manner of
gods, and goddesses; not only to Virtues and Health, but also to Vices and
Diseases, to Fear, Cowardice, Anger, the Feavor, the Pestilence, and an
infinite more, but they left Death out of their Devotions. This is an open
Declaration, that they knew not how to strike acquaintance with Death, and win
its esteem and favor. They had no Sacrifices nor Incense that could allay its
fury; they looked upon it as their most inhumane and unreconcileable Enemy. The
very name of Death did terrify them, therefore it was one of their most
unfortunate Omens. Adrian the Emperor is a witness of what I say; he was one of
the greatest Princes in former Ages, he had made most part of the habitable
World tremble under his Scepter, and put to death an infinite number of Men;
but at last he trembled, and was astonished himself at the approaches of Death;
he had overcome the most barbarous Nations, and tamed the most savage Beasts;
but when he came to this last Enemy, he had no weapons fit for the Encounter;
therefore in this occasion he discovers the weakness and unconstancy of his
Mind, far more disturbed, than his Body was with the Disease. Sometimes he did
employ the Magic Art, to retard Death, sometimes he did make use of his Sword
and Poison, to hasten it, at last he killed himself by an abstinence from Food,
necessary to entertain his life. He had conquered all the World, and given
Peace and Happiness to his Empire, but he could not overcome himself, or
appease the troubles of his Conscience: he was so far from satisfying the
troublesome thoughts of his Soul, that he suffers himself to be overwhelmed
with despair; he flatters his Soul in hastening its ruin, for when his Disease
did suffer him to breath, he talked unto it in this manner; My little Soul, my
dearest Companion, Thou art now going to wander in obscure Cold, and strange
places; Thou shall never jest again according to the wonted custom; thou shall
never give me any sport or pleasure any more.

But some may say that Adrian was a powerful Monarch, but no great Philosopher;
that he knew how to Govern, and was well acquainted with the Politics; but
that he was ignorant of the Morals, and had no skill to dye well. To answer
this Objection, let us give an example of one without exception, who will
satisfy all Opponents.

Aristotle is generally esteemed to have been the Subtlest, and the most
Learned of the Heathen Antiquity, he was the Prince of all the Philosophers,
the Glory of his Age, and the Founder of his Sect; when his excellent Soul had
viewed all things, examined the Heavens, searched among the excellencies of the
Earth, pryed into all the Wonders of the World, and found out the rarest
Secrets of Nature; He could never find any solid Comforts against the
apprehensions of Death. Notwithstanding all his admirable Subtleties, and his
profound Learning, the fears of this cruel Death terrifies his Conscience in
such a manner, that he confessed, That of all terrible things, Death was the
most dreadful.

CHAP. 3.
Of diverse sorts of Death, with which we must encounter.

WHen David had a design to fight with Goliath, he could not make use of the
Armor of King Saul, therefore he took a smooth stone out of his Bag, cast it
with his Sling, struck the Philistine in the Forehead, and brought down this
proud Giant, who had defied the Armies of Israel. We have already examined, and
tried all the Armor of humane Wisdom and Learning, laid up in the Storehouses
of the greatest wits of former Ages, and we have found that they are not able
to yield us any benefit, when we shall encounter with Death. Let us therefore
now see whither we may overcome this Proud Enemy, with the Sling of our
mystical David, with the weapons of our Divine Shepherd; but before we begin
the Encounter, let us look and behold it in the face. The enemy that I intend
that you should overcome, is a Monster with three Heads, for there are three
sorts of death, the Corporal, the Spiritual, and the Eternal.

The Corporal Death is a separation of the Soul from the Body; although our
Body has been fashioned with the Finger of God, it is but a weak and frail
Vessel made with the slime of the Earth; but our Soul is of an Heavenly,
Spiritual, and Immortal Substance; it is a Sparkle and a Raie of the Godhead,
and the lively Image of our great Creator; for when God had made our first
Parent, He breathed into his Nostrils the breath of Life, Genesis 2.7. that we
might thereby understand, that our Souls do proceed from his immediate hand,
therefore he is named the Father of spirits, Heb. 12. and The faithful Creator
of Souls, 1 Pet. 4. This Soul does raise us a degree above all the Animals, and
above the Celestial Bodies and renders us like to the Angels of Heaven: It is
the Light that enlightens us, the Salt that preserves us from Corruption; In
one word, by this Soul we live, enjoy our Senses, move, and understand; as soon
as this Angelical Guest leaves its Lodging and Earthly abode, it loses all
Beauty, and falls of it self into an inevitable ruin: For this Flesh that we
entertain with care, and pamper with all manner of Dainties, does then corrupt
and rot; after that, it has been stretched awhile upon Beds of Gold, and richly
attired in Purple and Scarlet, it is cast upon a Bed of Worms, and covered with
the vilest insects of the Earth; notwithstanding all its former perfumes, it
yields then a most horrid stink; before it did ravish the eyes of the Beholders
with its admirable Beauty, but now it becomes so odious and horrible, that the
living care not to see it; at last it is reduced to ashes, according to the
Sentence that was pronounced in the Earthly Paradise, Dust thou art, and to
Dust thou shall return. The Spiritual Death is the separation of the Soul from
God our Creator, for he being the Soul of our Souls, and the Light of our Life;
as soon as we depart from this source of Light and Life, we fall into an Abyss
of Darkness and Death, For all those that depart from God shall perish, Psalm.
73. As the Members when they are cut off from the Body, do commonly rot, and as
the Twig withers when it is separated from the Vine, so in a separation from
God, we can neither live, move, nor have a Being; and as it is with the Body
separated from the Soul, it nourishes a nest of Worms that devour it, and
sends forth a most insufferable stench: so it is with our Soul, when it is at a
distance from God, it brings forth a multitude of evil affections, that torment
and consume it, and the ill scent of its crimes are odious to Heaven and Earth;
of this kind of death our Savior speaks to the Jews in this manner; If you do
not believe that I am he, you shall dye in your sins, John 8. And to the Angel
of the Church of Sardis, Thou have a name that thou live and art dead, Rev.
3. This same Death St. Paul mentions in the 2 Chap. of the Coloss. and 2 of the
Ephesians. When you were dead in your trespasses and sins, God has quickened us
together with Christ, and elsewhere he exhorts a sinful man, Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead and Christ shall give thee Light, Ephesians. 5. And
it is of the same kind of Death that St. Paul speaks of concerning the
Lecherous Widow, that She is dead while she lives, 1 Timothy 5.

It was this kind of Death that Adam suffered as soon as he had tasted of the
forbidden Fruit, according to Gods threatening; In the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall dye the death: For not only his body became subject to
Death and Corruption, but his Soul also was cast into the death of Sin, and
enslaved to corruption. It happened to him as to a Lamp newly put out, the
snuff yields a most ill-favored scent.

As the life of Grace is a preparation to the life of Glory, as it furnishes
us with a fore-tast of the Heavenly joys; so on the contrary, the Spiritual
Life is, as it were, the Suburbs of Hell; it is the first beginning of an
Eternal death, and the mouth of the infernal Pit. The Eternal Death is nothing
else but an entire and irrecoverable separation of the Soul and Body from God,
accompanied with infinite Torments; Torments indeed, unto which all the
sufferings of this mortal life are but light and inconsiderable scratches;
nevertheless as the spirit of God does represent the Heavenly joys and
felicities by the things that are most pleasant and delightful; thus to express
unto us Hells Torments, it borrows the things that are the most dreadful and
painful in this life. We are told of an Abyss, or Furnace full of flames, a
bottomless pit, burning with fire and brimstone. The Scripture mentions,
Chains of darkness; an Eternal night, and an Hell fire, where there are
weeping and knashing of Teeth; it tells us that Tophet is ordained of old, yea
for the King it is prepared, he has made it deep and large, the pile thereof
is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of Brimstone does
kindle it. Isai. 30.33.

Fancy to your selves a Man devoured with Worms, burning in hot Flames, who is
broken and tortured continually, in whose wounds kindled Brimstone is poured
without intermission, with boiling Lead and burning Pitch, and if there be any
other Torment more grievous and horrid, fancy it also; All this will give us
but a light, and an imperfect image of Hell torments, for all the pangs of the
Body are nothing in comparison to the horrors, troubles, and incredible griefs
that shall, for ever, rack and torture the damned Souls in Hell.

As sname does aggravate our sufferings, and render them more terrible, the
damned shall be laden with Shame and Infamy for all Eternity, their names
shall be hateful to God, and his Holy Angels and they, shall be cursed with an
endless Curse. And as it is an increase to our Torment to suffer in the company
of abominable Varlets, and to become a companion of the most infamons
Executioner; they shall suffer with Hells Executioner, and shall be sent to the
fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: All their senses shall share in
these horrid Torments, they shall be crushed in the Wine Press of Gods Eternal
Wrath, and they shall feel for ever and ever, the strokes of Gods vengeance,
and of his Almighty hand; They shall then learn by experience what a terrible
thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God, and how unsufferable that
fire is that shall consume his Enemies; their Eyes shall perceive nothing but
the bottomless pit, the Devils image, and the Furies of Hell: their Ears shall
hear nothing but the horrible outcries and fearful roarings of the Tormented
Devils, and damned souls. They shall be choakt with the noisome smell and fumes
of the bottomless pit; they shall then drink the very Dregs and the bottom of
Gods anger and indignation, and they shall suck the venom of his Arrows, Fire
and Brimstone shall be the portion of their Cup. Psalm. 11.

The sufferings of this life are but short, and for a moment, but the Torments
of the damned shall never end, Their Worm dies not, and their fire shall never
be quenched, Mar. 9. Revel. 20. They shall be tormented day and night for all
Eternity; when they shall have suffered as many thousand Ages as there be drops
of water in the Sea, or grains of Sand on the shore; it shall be but the
beginning of their grief; they shall live for ever to dye continually, and they
shall dye and never be consumed; in the midst of those hot flames, they shall
beg a drop of water to cool their tongue, Luke 16. but we may say of this Fire
that shall torture the damned, what the Spouse in the Canticles says of the
Divine love that had enflamed her Soul, Many waters cannot quench it, neither
can the floods drown it, Cant. 8. And St. Paul tells us, that the things that
God has prepared for them that love him; eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, nor did it ever enter into the heart of man, 1 Cor. 2. So on the
contrary we may say, that those things that God has prepared for them that
hate him, Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, nor did never enter into the
Heart of man. From hence shall proceed their Rage, Madness, and despair; they
shall cry in Cains Language, My punishment is greater then I can bear, Genesis 4.
when they shall see nothing but an extreme misery, and woeful darkness, they
will curse God the King of all Creatures, Isai. 8. In their fury and rage they
will eat their Tongues, and blaspheme the great God of Heaven and Earth. It had
been far better for such persons, that they had never been born, therefore they
shall seek death and shall not find it, Mat. 26. They shall desire to dye, that
is, to be reduced to nothing, Revel. 9. but this death shall fly from them, who
of you can dwell in everlasting burning? Is. 33. who of us can dwell in Eternal
Flames? Revel. 6. If the viols, and little cups full of Gods wrath, do force
the wicked to cry out, how much more shall the Rivers and the Ocean of Gods
vengeance force from them; O mountains fall upon us, O rocks cover us, and hide
us from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb, for the day of his anger is come, and who may abide it? Prove. 1. But as
they have stopped their ears to Gods gracious calls, and hardened their hearts to
his invitations to repentance, then God shall also stop his ears to their
outcries, and his eyes to their horrid sufferings, and when they shall be
overwhelmed with fear and despair, God will scorn and mock at their
insufferable misery.

CHAP. 4.
That Jesus Christ our Lord has redeemed us from Eternal Death, and by degrees
does deliver us from a spiritual Death.

WE read in the fifth Chapter of the Revelation of S. John, That this beloved
Disciple wept bitterly, because no being in Heaven and Earth, nor under the
Earth, was able to open the Book, sealed with seven Seals, that was in Gods
right hand; at that instant, one of the 24 Elders spoke to him, Weep not,
behold the Lion of the Tribe of Juda has overcome to open the Book and to
loose the seven Seals. Thus we have until now wept bitterly, because we could
find no body in the Armies of Israel, to encounter with that horrid Monster
Death. But let us also wipe our Tears, and take good courage my beloved, for
this same Lion of the Tribe of Juda has order to fight with this dreadful
Enemy, our victorious and triumphing David, who has torn in pieces the
infernal Lion, bruised the ancient Serpents Head, and spoiled Principalities
and powers, triumphing of them in his Cross, Col. 2.15. It is he that has
undertaken this glorious combat; It was for that purpose that he left for a
while the Throne of God, the Father, and the company of his Holy Angels; 1 Samuel
17. It was for that intent that he came into the Camp, and confusion of Israel,
contemning the shame and reproaches of his brethren. He has not borrowed the
weapons and assistance of the world, Heb. 2. all that he has taken from us, is
our frail nature. But he, has armed himself with righteousness, as with a
breast plate, and has put on the Helmet of salvation. He has clothed himself
with vengeance as with a garment, and has covered himself with Jealousy as
with a cloak, he has alone trodden the Winepress, and no body has assisted
him; Isa. 59. Isa. 63. but his arm has saved him, and his hand has upheld
him. As David cut off Goliahs Head with his own sword, Jesus Christ has
overcome Death by Death; like unto the powerful Sampson, he has destroyed all
the Enemies of his Glory by his Death, 1 Samuel 17. He has overcome in dying,
him who had the Empire of Death, that is the Devil, Heb. 2. and has delivered
them, who through fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage,
then was fulfilled this proof out of Hosea. O death I will be thy plague, O
grave I will be thy destruction, Hos. 13. and that of Isaiah, He will swallow
up death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces,
and the rebuke of his people shall be taken away from off all the Earth. Isai.
25. 1 Timothy 6. This blessed Prince, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only
has immortality, and dwells in an inaccessible light, has destroyed death,
and brought to light life and immortality by the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1. O death
where is thy victory, O grave where is thy sting; The sting of death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the Law, but blessed be God who has given us the
victory by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.

This great God and Savior has perfectly redeemed us from Eternal death, as
he himself does teach us in the Gospel of St. John, He that hears my word and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death unto life, chap. 5.25. I am the living
bread which came down from Heaven, if any man eat of this bread, he shall live
for ever. Chap. 6.51. v. 40. Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness and
are dead, This is the bread which comes down from Heaven, that a man may eat
thereof, and not dye, Chap. 8. Verily verily I say unto you, If any man keep my
word, he shall never taste of death. I am the resurrection and the life, he
that lives and believes in me shall never dye, and he that believes in me,
although he were dead, yet shall he live, Chap. 11. The wages of sin is death,
but the gift of God is eternal life by our Lord Jesus Christ: Blessed and holy
is he that has part in the first resurrection, Revel. 20. the second death
shall never have any power upon him. In one word, the Gates of Hell, that is to
say, Death, can do no prejudice to them that are built upon Jesus Christ, the
rock of Eternity. This merciful Savior has also delivered us from the
spiritual death, Ephesians. 2. For we being dead in our trespasses and sins, he has
quickened us, and raised us up together unto newness of life, Colos. 2. He has
carried our sins in his body upon the Cross, that he dying unto sin, we might
live unto righteousness. We are buried with him in his death by Baptism, that
as Jesus Christ is raised from the dead by the Glory of God the father, we also
likewise should walk in newness of life, 1 Pet. 2. Awake thou that sleep,
and rise from the dead, and Jesus Christ shall enlighten thee, Romans 6. For by
his death he has not only reconciled us to God the Father, Ephesians. 5. Colos. 11.
but he has also procured unto us the Holy Spirit, that creates in us a new
heart, and imprints the image of his Holiness, Ezekiel. 36. 2 Cor. 5. He makes us
become new creatures, and regenerates us by the uncorrptible seed. 1 Pet. 1.
This is that which the Scripture names the first resurrection, Revel. 20. St.
Peter was ravished in admiration at this great and wonderful benefit, and
therefore he acknowledges it. Blessed be the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 1. God
discovered to the Prophet Ezekiel, a field covered with dry bones, and
commanded him to prophecy upon those bones, Ezekiel. 37. At the Prophets Command
they began to draw near one another, then the Nerves began to appear, the Flesh
to grow, and to be covered with skin, but there was no life until God Commanded
the Prophet to prophecy again, Thus says the Lord, Spirit come from the four
winds, blow upon these dead bodies, and let them rise from the dead. Then the
Spirit entered into them, they began to revive, and they stood upon their Legs.
This is the lively and true image of the first resurrection; for the Spirit of
God that blows whither it lists, does regenerate us by degrees, John 3. and
the new man is created in our hearts, by little and little as the Child grows
in its Mothers Womb.

When Joshua brought the Children of Israel into the Land of Promise, he did
not destroy all the Cananites, Josh. 23. there remained some who became
Scourges in their sides, and Thorns in their Eyes. Thus our true and Spiritual
Joshua, who has led us into the kingdom of his Grace, has not altogether
destroyed all our evil affections; some yet remains that are like prickles in
our sides, and like swords that pierce through our souls; They do yet render
our life bitter and unpleasant, and therefore we often desire death to come and
put a period to this combat. Sin was in possession of us, as a strong man armed
in an House, but Jesus Christ is entered into our Souls, and become the Master;
He has therefore bound and chained sin, and has nailed it to his Cross: But
this furious Beast, although it has received a mortal wound, and is ready to
give up the last gasp, it strugles and fumes within us, our blessed Savior
has extinguished with the Red Stream of his Blood, the infernal flames of all
our cursed affections, but yet there remains in the ashes some sparkles of this
devilish fire, that do cause in us some furious fits. This only merciful
Redeemer of his infinite mercy, has loosed us from the Devils Chains, but that
we might have cause to be humbled, to desire the increase of his Grace, and to
long for the advent of his Glory, he leaves about us some of the troublesome
Fetters; by his Holy Spirit he files them off by degrees, but one day he will
take them away from us. He does now receive us as his beloved Children, into
the Celestial Kingdom of his Grace, Joh. 11. nevertheless he suffers in us some
ill-favored relics of sin and corruption.

At the voice of this Prince of Life, that reaches to the very bottom of our
hearts, we are risen from the sepulcher of our Vices with our Grave-Cloaths
about us, as Lazarus, when he came out of his Tomb; we are like the ancient
Slaves that were set at liberty, we bear upon our Forehead the visible marks of
our ancient slavery, but one day our Lord Jesus Christ shall cover these marks
of infamy and disgrace with an heavenly Diadem. If you desire another image of
our spiritual condition, fancy to your selves a dead man cast into a foul Pit
or Sink, unto whom life is restored in a moment; afterward by degrees he is
washed and cleans'd of the filth that covers his body. We were not only dead of
a Spiritual death, but we were also overwhelmed in an Abyss of corruption and
filth. The Son of God has pulled us out of this Abyss, and has already
restored unto us life, but the dirt and putrefaction with which we were
disfigured, he washes it away by the waters of his Grace, Za^. 13. For there is
a fountain opened for sin in the House of David, Isai. 4. in the which God has
promised to wash away all the filth of the Daughter of Sion, and all the blood
of Jerusalem, and as it happened to the cruel King Adonibezech, when the Tribe
of Juda took him prisoner, he lost the Thumbs of his Hands, and the great Toes
of his Feet, but he did not suffer death until he was come to Jerusalem; Thus
our great God and Savior, the Prince of the Tribe of Juda, has cut off the
strength and power of the old man that did tyrannize in our souls, and has
deprived him of his venomous nails, with which he did wound our hearts; he has
also given him his mortal wound, but he suffers him to enjoy a languishing
life, and will not take away his last breath, until we bring him to the Gates
of the heavenly Jerusalem.

But to speak more openly, sin is yet in us, but he does not Reign, for our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has broken its Scepter, and has pulled him from
his Throne; and as he has taken from it all Command in us, he constrains it to
leave the possession of our souls by degrees. As a strong and mighty King, who
having won the Battle, pursues and drives his Enemy, until he has totally
exposed him out of his kingdom, so does our Savior deal with sin.

And as it happens with a Woman with Child in her old age, there is in her Body
two contrary lives, that of the Mother, and that of the Child, the one decays
and dies insensibly, the other, that is, the Child's life, grows and increases
by degrees: So it is in the faithful and regenerate Soul; There are two lives,
that of Sin, that the Scripture names the Old man, and that of the New man,
which is created according to God in Righteousness, and true Holiness; the one
diminishes, and approaches to its final end, but the other grows and gathers
strength until we arrive to the perfect stature of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Spirit of God every day gets ground of our corruption and darkness. As it
happens with the Rivers of fresh water, that encroach upon the Earth, they
undermine the nearest Banks; or as the Sun when he rises upon our Horison, he
drives before him all shadows, until the Air be perfectly enlightened, so it is
with the Grace of God in our Souls.

CHAP. 5.
Why we are yet subject to the Corporal or Natural Death, and what advantage we
do thereby receive in Jesus Christ.

THe wise King teaches us in the 9 of the Ecclesiastes, That the same accident
happens to all to the righteous and to the wicked, and to the clean, and to the
polluted, to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not. These words
are to be understood of the several afflictions unto which we are exposed,
during this mortal life; but we may apply it to the Natural Death, for it is
appointed unto all once to dye, and after that the judgment follows, Heb. 9.
By one man sin is entered into the World, and by Sin Death, and thus Death is
come upon all men, because they have all sinned, Romans 5, Therefore when Joshua
felt himself feeble and decaying, he told the Children of Israel, That he was
going the way of all flesh. Josh. 23. and Job complains unto God, I know that
thou will reduce me to death, and to the house appointed for all living. Job
30. It was upon this subject that the Royal Prophet was exercising his
Meditation, when he cried out, Who is he that lives and shall not see death,
shall he free his soul from the power of the Grave? Eccles. 12. And to speak in
the language of Solomon, or ever the Silver Cord be loosed, or the Golden Bowl
be broken, or the Pitcher be broken at the Fountain, or the Wheel broken at the
Cistern. That is to say, The Backbone, whereof the Marrow is as white as
Silver be unloosed, when the Scull, which is like a precious vessel of Gold, be
broken, when the Vena Cava receives no more Blood from the Liver, the fountain
of Life, when the Lights that draw in and push forth the breath, move no more;
or when the Kidneys that extract the humidity from the Veins, and cause it to
drop down into the Bladder, as into a Cistern, begin to fail, Then shall the
Body return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return unto God who
gave it.

To express unto us this inevitable fate, Moses reckons up all the ancient
Fathers, that have lived longest in the first world; he mentions some who lived
700, others 800, others 900 years, and some near a thousand, Genesis 5. But when
he has well spoken of their deeds, and of the Children which they left in the
world; he adds in the conclusion of all, And then such an one died; So that our
Creator does execute upon all men, the Sentence once pronounced against Adam,
the Father of all Mankind; Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, Genesis 3.

By this means God declares his Justice and Truth, and accomplisheth what was
signified by the ancient Types, Levit. 14. For according to the Laws which God
gave to Israel by Moses, the house that was infected with the Leper, was to be
demolished and cast into a noisome place; There was a far more important reason
for man's body to be destroyed, and laid in the Sepulcher, because he was
created to be the Palace of the living God, the Dwelling of his Glory; But Sin
that is a kind of infectious Leper, has insinuated it self, and disfigured it;
it has entered the Skin, corrupted the Blood, disordered the Spirits; it is
crept into the Joints and Marrow, and has speard its venom in such a manner,
that there is none of our Members, but is an instrument of iniquity and
unrighteousness, Romans 6.

For the same reason, we cannot sufficiently admire the difference that God had
put between the Vessel that were clean, and such as were unclean; for he
commanded, that the earthen Vessel that was infected should be broken to
pieces, Levit. 11. but that such as were of a more precious substance, should
be only washed with water and purified with fire. Numb. 11. The Commands and
Laws of the great God, are excellent Commentaries upon his actions; our Soul is
like a Golden Vessel, because it is of a Spiritual and Heavenly substance;
therefore God does not altogether destroy it, although it be infected with sin,
but causes it to be washed and cleansed at the fountain of his infinite mercy;
he purifies it with the blood of his Son, and causes it to pass through the
fire of his Holy Spirit; but for this miserable Body, that is but an earthly
Vessel and Tabernacle, he does break it to pieces, and reduce it to dust and
ashes. It is my judgment, that death is an excellent means to demonstrate the
infinite power of our great God and Savior; for the greater the disease is,
the more admirable is the Cure; without doubt the finger of God, and his
infinite power, is far more visible in raising one man from the dead, than in
preserving many thousands alive.

As God is wont to draw light out of darkness, so he makes use of death to
cause his infinite wisdom to shine and appear to all his Creatures. Sin has
brought forth death, and death on the contrary, by a most fortunate paricide,
kills and destroys its Parent Sin, for it is Death that totally roots out of
our Souls all corrupt affections.

Moreover, God, who is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. will
have all his Children pass through the same path, to take possession of his
eternal Inheritance, and enter by the same Gate into his Royal Palace; All the
faithful of the Old Testament are gone already this way, through many
tribulations, Acts 24. they are arrived to the kingdom of God, and through
death they are come to the abode of life and immortality. The Holy Scriptures
that are inspired of God tell us, That the Reubenites, and half of the Tribe of
Manasseth, Numb. 32. Josh. 1. left their dwellings which they had beyond
Jordan, to go over and fight in the Army of Israel, and that they did not offer
to return, until God had given rest to their brethren, and put them into a
peaceable possession of their inheritances; If I may make some stop, at such an
excellent Allegory, I may say that these passages represent unto us a lively
image of the faithful that dye before the end of the world, for they leave
their bodies, the abode and dwellings of their souls, and they pass through
death, as through another Jordan into the Celestial Canaan, to encounter with
God by their Prayers, in the society of the firstborn, whose names are
registered in Heaven, and they will not return to the bodies, that they have
quitted, until the number of the Saints be complete, until the building of the
Church be finished, and until our great Joshua has introduced us into his
Eternal Rest, and put us in possession of the incorruptible inheritance
reserved for us in Heaven; Then we shall not need to fight, but to enjoy
peaceably the fruits of our victories, and to rest for ever from all our
labors. We shall have no cause to offer unto God Prayers and Supplications,
but our business shall be to sing unto him Praises and eternal Thanksgivings.

The strongest and the most considerable Reason in my judgment, of this our
destiny is, That God has predestined us to be comformable to the image of
his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren; he will have us
baptized with his Baptism, that we drink in his Cup, and that we enter into
Bliss by that same Gate, through which he has already past through Shame and
Disgrace he is arrived to Glory, and through Death he is ascended into life; he
has drunk of the bitter waters, before that he has tasted of the Rivers of
Celestial Joys, and he is gone down into the Grave before he would mount up to
the right hand of God.

Although it is appointed unto all men once to dye, Heb. 9. I dare maintain
that death has no cause to boast it self, and that it cannot sing Songs of
Triumph with any Reason, because that it loses the most glorious and happiest
victory; for we read in the Book of Esther, that King Ahasuerus would not
abolish nor recall the Proclamation that he had set forth against the Jews, but
that he gave them full liberty to take up Arms to defend themselves, to attack
their Enemies, and to make them suffer all the evils that they intended against
them: I find something like unto this proceeding, for God would not call back
the sentence of Death that he had pronounced against Mankind, in the Garden of
Eden; nevertheless he allows us, nay he commands his true Israel to take up
Arms against Death, to conquer and trample it under feet.

In the first place, Jesus Christ who is our head, has encountered with Death,
and conquered it, he has pursued it into its Trenches, and overcome it in its
own Fortification; Death thought to have devoured him, but it has been
devoured it self; as the Fishes are taken by the Hook that they think to
swallow; and as the Bees do hurt those whom they sting, and do greater harm to
themselves; for they cause but a present pain in our body, and a heat that soon
cease, but it causes to it self greater damage, for it breaks its sting and
loses thereby its life. Thus Death by fixing its sting in the Humanity of
Jesus Christ, has put him to a great deal of pain for a time, but it has
thereby lost all strength, vigor, and sting, by this means.

The men of Juda to satisfy the furious Philistines, delivered into their hands
Sampson, bound with Ropes, when they saw him, the Philistines gave several
joyful shouts, but the Spirit of God came upon him in such a manner, that he
tore in pieces the two Ropes wherewith he was bound, and overcame them by whom
he was led away prisoner, and killed a thousand of them. Thus the miserable
Jews for fear of the Romans, delivered unto them our Lord Jesus Christ, their
Brother according to the flesh, bound like a Malefactor: when Hell saw him
nailed to the Cross, and afterward laid in a Grave, it did wonderfully rejoice
the Devil and his Angels began to sing Songs of Triumph. But it was altogether
unpossible, that the Prince of Life should be detained in the Prisons of Death;
he has not only broken out of the Grave by his infinite power, but he has
also trampled under feet all his most furious enemies, and overcame millions of
infernal Fiends; and to declare how Life and Death were in his power, he has
Commanded Death, when he was, as it were a prisoner, shut up in its Dungeon. He
has broke open the Gates of this black prison, and torn in pieces all its
Fetters, for when he was yet in his Grave, he raised to life many that were
dead, who were seen in the Holy City, and yet at present he holds in his hand
the keys of Death, and of Hell: Therefore, as Children do rejoice at their
Fathers Victory, and as the Subjects are concerned at the prosperous
proceedings of their King, and as the Members are the better for the Glory and
Honor of their Head; thus we may justly glory in the most notable Victories,
and famous Triumphs of Jesus Christ, who is our Father, King, and Head we may
also justly glory, that we are Lords of Death, and that we have overcome it in
the person of our Great God and Savior; I say this after the Apostle St. Paul,
That God has quickened us together, and raised us together, and made us sit
together in Heavenly places with Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.

Moreover, as our Savior has once overcome Death for us, he continues to
overcome it in and by us; he does not suffer us to encounter with our enemies
alone, nor does he leave us in time of need; but as in a day of Battle, a wise
and provident General has an eye in every place, and encourages by his action
and voice, his Soldiers whom he perceives at handy-blows with the Enemy, some
he loads with praises, others with promises, by that means he encourages such
as behave themselves bravely; rescues the weak and feeble, and to such as are
overborn, he furnishes them with fresh Supplies; Thus deals with us our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ the great God of Hosts, who sits above in the Heavens
in his triumphal Chariot, and beholds all our combats and encounters; when he
perceives us too weak, that we might not be overcome by our most dreadful
Enemies, he furnishes us with his Holy Spirit, and his own Armor, as Jonathan
did to David, when he delivered to him his Cloak, his Bow, his Belt and Sword;
besides this merciful Savior disarms Death of its most hurtful weapons, and
takes away all its Arrows and Darts.

As the strength and power of Sampson did lodge in the hair of his Head, which
the Philistines could never have imagined; so the strength and power of Death
consists in such things as the world do least dream of. The most dreadful
weapons with which it terrifies and beats us, are the Thunderbolts, and Curses
of the Law; and our sins are as the poison in which it dips its Arrows; or
rather, our sins are the fiery Dart with which it wounds and destroys us. Now
Jesus Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, when he became a Curse
for us. Gal. 3. He has carried our sins in his Body upon the Cross, 1 Pet. 2.
And as the He-Goat Harazel, he has transported them away into an inhabitable
Desert, Levit. 16. He has removed them from the eyes of our God, as far as the
East is from the West. he has cast them into the bottom of the Ocean, and
drowned them in his Blood, so that we now see fulfilled, what was foretold by
the Prophet Jeremiah, The iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there
shall be none, and the sins of Juda, and they shall not be found, chap. 50.

Therefore being invested with the Grace of God, and armed with the Virtue of
his Holy Spirit; Let us show our courage and defy death; let us look it in the
f^^e without fear, laugh at all its threats, and encounter with it without
dread, for it is now but like a Soldier, who without his weapons carries
himself proudly; It is like a Be that buzzeth about without its sting; It is
like an old Lion that roars, but has lost all his Claws; It is like a Snake
that would cast its poison, but has no venomous Teeth left, because they have
been all pulled out by him who has bruised the Serpents Head.

If you consider nothing but Deaths Exterior, its Face, and fearful appearance,
its frightful Eyes, its meager Body, its iron'd Hands; you cannot perceive any
difference between the death of Gods Children, and that of the most wicked
Varlets; but if you lift up the vizard and examine the Death of the one, and of
the other, more exactly, you will meet with as much difference, as between
Heaven and Earth, the Paradise of God and Hell, for as Moses's brazen Serpent,
which he lift up in the Desert, had the form and appearance of a burning
Serpent, but nothing of the Prison and Fire, thus the death of the faithful
appears, as the death of other men, but has not the deadly and pernicious
consequences, for it is not only a sign and a testimony of Gods Grace and
Favor but the beginning of our deliverance, and the cure of all our Diseases;
As Moses, when he had cast wood into the waters of Marah, they had the same
color, but not the same bitterness and unpleasant taste: Thus the death of
Gods dearest Children has the same tincture and appearance as before, but
Christ's Cross has taken away the danger, the trouble, and extracted out of it
its unsufferable bitterness, and changed it into unspeakable sweetness. As
Pharaoh was drowned, with all his Army, in the waters of the Red Sea; but the
Children of Israel found a secure and a pleasant passage into the promised
Land; When they were arrived upon the other shore of that dreadful Sea, they
sung unto God Songs of Triumph and Thanksgiving; Thus Death opens its Throat to
devour the Reprobates; It is an Abyss where they can find no bottom, but unto
the Children of God* it is a favorable passage into an eternal Bliss; as soon
as they are gone through, they are arrived to a place of Assurance, Joy, and
Rest, where God furnishes them with Songs of Triumph and Thansgiving to the
Lamb, 1 Rev. 15.

Moses's Rod was turned into a Serpent, but Aaron's being laid up in the
Tabernacle, began to flourish and bear Almonds, Exodus 4. and 7. Thus while we
are in the hands of the Law, Death is dreadful and terrible; but when we draw
near to Christ the true Ark of the Covenant, it blossoms and brings Fruits
forth of Joy and Eternal Comfort.

Balaam the Prophet was called to curse the People of God, but he blessed it,
contrary to the vain expectation of Balak, King of Moab. Thus Death has been
brought into the world by the Devil, to destroy, and utterly abolish the Holy
Seed; but God by his infinite Goodness and Wisdom, has changed it into
Salvation and Blessing; Let us not therefore be any longer puzzled to find out
the meaning of Sampsons Riddle, Out of the eater came forth Meat, and out of
the strong came forth sweetness, Judge. 14. For the Church of God unto whom
Christ has discovered the most excellent Secrets of his Kingdom, teaches us
to seek the Honey, the sweetest comforts, out of the Belly of this old Lion.

It is not possible to Judge of Music by a Tone, or of an Oration by a Period,
nor of a Comedy by a Scene. So we must not judge of a Battle by the first
Assault, nor of a wrestling by the first embraces and effects of the wrestlers,
for some in the beginning of the Battle turn their backs, who nevertheless at
the last, do sometimes win the day and the victory; and some in wrestling are
foiled at the beginning, who nevertheless at last supplant their Enemy, and
cast him upon the back; Therefore that we may better understand the great and
notable advantages that we have over death, we must examine it all along, until
the end of the encounter; we must take notice of every Assault that we do give
unto this unreconcileable Enemy.

As Soon as the Taper of our Life, begins to burn, Satan, sends forth his blasts
to extinguish it: Death labors to undermine 'this poor Dwelling, from the
first moment that it was built, it besieges it on all sides; it makes its
approaches, in time it saps the foundation, it batters us with several diseases
and unexpected accidents, every day it opens a breach, and pulls out of this
building some stones: But if Death labors to demolish on her part, we on ours
labor to repair; And as those who built the Walls of Jerusalem, held with one
hand the Trowel, and with the other a Sword to sight; so we defend our selves
as well as we are able, against the assaults of Death; Therefore we do not only
endeavor to preserve this earthly Lodge that God has Let and Set to us for
a term, and to mend up the continual Dilapidations that happen in it; but at
the very sight of death, when it gives us the Assault, we do then also advance
our Spiritual building, and labor to bring it to perfection, so that we may
say as the Apostle St. Paul, If our outward man decays, the inward man is
renewed day by day. 2 Cor. 4.

To speak true, Death meddles with nothing but with the exterior part of Man,
for our principal Fort and chief Bulwark, does neither fear to be undermined
nor sapt, nor to be won by Assault, for it is raised above the Heavens, and
built upon the Rock of Eternity; it cannot be battered, for as the
Thunderbolts, the storms of Hail and ill weather cannot prejudice the Sunbeams,
because they are of a Spiritual nature, so all the Fury of the World, all the
Powers of Hell, and the Rage of Death can never wrong the Soul, that is of a
Spiritual and Immortal Nature. This Castle can never be famished, for God
furnishes it with Manna from Heaven, and from the Rock upon which it is built,
there runs a source of living waters, that rises to everlasting life. In one
word, as the Serpents do crawl only upon the Dust, Death has no power but upon
the earthly part of Man; therefore our Lord Jesus Christ advises his Apostles,
To not fear them that kill the Body, but cannot kill the Soul.

At the very instant of our Souls separation from the Body, Death see^s to have
a great advantage upon us, but when I consider all, I find that it has no
cause to glory, and that it is without reason that it chalenges the victory.
When a valiant Captain marches out of a Town almost destroyed, to another more
secure, and better fortified, with his weapons in his hand; we say that he has
quitted his station, and not that he is overcome: Thus when this wretched Body
decays, and that our Souls depart well armed with Faith and Hope, to lodge in a
more secure place in the highest Heavens, no body can say, to speak properly,
that we have been overcome; And as it happens with such as sail on the wide
Sea, when a violent storm threatens them with Shipwreck they think themselves
very happy, if they can quit then Vessel, leave it to the mercy of the Winds
and Waves, and escape to Land with their Riches and Lives safe: Thus it is with
us who sail upon this tempestuous Sea of the world; for when Death raises its
most cruel storms; we think our selves happy if we can leave this miscrable
Body, which seems as a ship to our Souls, and if we can secure our Spiritual
Life and our Heavenly Riches; Therefore we may justly say to the faithful Souls
that are frighted when they see Death threatening to drown them in its depths,
as St. Paul to his Ship-company, who did tremble for fear, at the sight of a
roaring and furious Sea; Take good courage my brethren, for I do assure you in
the name of the living God, that your lives are secure, and that you shall
loose nothing but this Ship, Acts 27. We may yet furnish them with stronger
comforts, for these good Mariners lost their Ship without any hopes of
recovering it again; but we are assured that God will one day, gather up every
piece of these broken Vessels of our Bodies, and will join them together in a
more perfect estate.

Therefore Death does not carry away our bodies by violence, but we leave them
willingly, we do not stay for its summons, but we do prevent Death, and give it
a License, when we have packt up our Bag and Baggage, we are ready to depart
out of this wretched abode, where we endure all manner of calamities, for in
this house defluxions do rain down, If Vapors do arise, the Pillars and
Foundation does tremble, the Joints do open, the Windows are darkened, and the
burning Fevers, like violent fires, consume it.

I must not forget that the faithful do name their death, not only a removal of
their Lodging, but a removal from a Tabernacle: this teaches us that we must
depart from hence with as much joy and readiness, as a Soldier does out of his
Tabernacle, at the end of a laborious and bloody warfare; and with as much
pleasure as the Children of Israel did out of their Tents, under which they had
remained in the Desert, to enter into the sweet and comfortable dwellings of
the Land of Canaan.

Not only this Body is like to an hired House, or to a Tabernacle transported
up and down, but it is by Sin, become to our Soul a woeful prison; Therefore
Death may be compared to the Messengers sent by King Pharaoh, on purpose to
take Joseph out of his Dungeon, and bring him to his Palace; The Body that was
created to be a noble Pavillion of Joy and Honor, is become, to our Soul, a
wretched and incommodious Prison; Death is like to the Furnace of Babylon, that
burned and consumed the Bonds of the three Children, without prejudicing their
Persons or Attire, Dan. 3. for it consumes those sad Bonds that detain our
Soul, en^laved to the Earth, but it does not meddle with the O^naments of our
Justice and Sanctification; it is like the Skin that encloseth the Child in his
Mothers Womb, or like the Shell where the Chicken is formed, for of necessity
it must be broken before we can enter into immortal Life: In short, we may say,
That the Body which was given to the Soul, to be its Palace, is become, by Sin,
its Grave and loathsome Sepulcher, far more noisome than that of Lazarus; and
that Death is like the voice that calls upon us, Lazarus come out. Faithful
Souls, you see then, that as Sampson carried away the Gates of the City of
Gaza, and transported them to the top of the Hill, so has Jesus Christ our
true Sampson, transported and carried the Gates of death to the highest pitch
of Glory. Therefore, whereas before we did look upon it with horror, as the
very entrance of Hell; now we may behold it with Confidence and Joy, saying as
Jacob did of Bethel, This is the Gate of Heaven.

Seeing therefore, that this is the nature and condition of Death, I find that
Men do give it too much advantage, for we should not offer to say, that such
are dead whom God has admitted into Eternal life; because the qualification
should be derived from the chief and noblest part; as it is in nature, there is
no generation without corruption, and we commonly say, that it is a Generation
when the thing engendered is more excellent than the thing corrupted, as we say,
that it is a corruption when the thing corrupted excels the thing that is
engendered; Therefore our change and removal out of this world, should be rather
styled a Life than a Death; for if our Body Dies and Rots in the Earth, our
Soul revives and mounts up to Heaven; and this mortal life that we leave in
leaving the Earth, is nothing in comparison of that life that we shall enjoy
with Christ and his Holy Angels: God is named the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and
of Jacoh. Now he is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living, Exodus 4. Matt.
22.

I may also, without any Figure, say, That Death in respect of the Body, is no
real Death, but a kind of sleep, as it is said in the Prophet Daniel, Many do
sleep in the dust of the Earth, chap. 12. and in Isaiah, that the Just sleep in
their beds,: Therefore our Savior speaking of Jairus's Daughter, declared, The
Child is not dead but sleeps, Mat. 9. and of Lazarus his friend, Lazarus our
friend sleeps, but I go to awake him. Beloved, if thou art of the number of
such as Christ loves, thy Death will be but a kind of sleep, of a short
continuance, and a few days; The Lord will raise thee up again, For the hour
comes, and is already, That the Dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God,
and they that shall hear shall revive, John 5. During this Life the assaults of
Death are no better than light skirmishes, the most sensible and most dangerous
blow that it strikes in appearance, is when Death separates the Soul from the
Body; but the last and most signal encounter, which will put an end to all
disputes, will happen at the day of Judgment, Jesus Christ will then appear
from Heaven in the company of all his immortal Angels and Saints, to encourage
us to the encounter; He will come with a terrible voice of an Archangel, and
the last Trumpet shall sound, then Death will endeavor to keep us still in its
black prison, and our Bones will be found without life or motion, but the
Spirit of God shall breathe upon these dry Bones, and will cause them to
revive; As the Prophet Jonas was three days and three nights in the belly of
the Whale, God Commanded the Fish to vomit him up again upon the ground. Thus,
when we shall have made so long our abode in our Graves, as God has appointed
in his wisdom, Death shall be constrained to restore all that it has
swallowed; and as Daniel came out of the Lions Den by break of day, these
savage Beasts having done him no harm; Thus, at the break of the last day, at
the Rising of the Sun of Righteousness, we shall all go out of Deaths deep Den;
and as if God had sent his Angel on purpose to shut the mouth of this old Lion,
we shall then find that he shall have done us no harm; instead of devouring of
us, he will prove a faithful keeper of our bones; therefore the faithful may
speak unto Death in the language of the Prophet Micah, Rejoice not against me O
mine Enemy, when I shall fall I shall rise, when I sit in darkness the Lord
shall be a light unto me. Mic. 7.8. As Moses said to Pharaoh, we will go into
the Wilderness to sacrifice unto God, we will go out of thine Egypt with our
young, and with our old, with our Sons and with our Daughters, with our Flocks,
and with our Herds, there shall not an Hoof be left behind. Exodus 10. Thus we,
in an Holy Confidence, may talk with Death, maugre thy Rage and Fury, we will
go up to Heaven to sacrifice unto our God immortal praises, we shall get out of
thy slavery; We, our Wives, our Children, our Brothers and Sisters, our Parents
and Friends; all the People of God whom thou do at present keep in a close
restraint; notwithstanding the infernal attempts of thine inhumane power, there
shall not remain so much as an handful, no not so much as the least grain of
our Ashes behind us. When the Son of God shall appear in his Glory from Heaven,
he shall consume all Death's Trophies and Monuments, with irresistible Flames,
so that it shall happen to this imperious Enemy of Mankind, as it happened to
the Kings of the Amorites mentioned in the Israelitish History, Josh. 10. for
as Joshua suffered them to live until he was returned from his victory, and
then, when he had perfectly overcome all his Enemies, he Commanded them to be
brought forth, and gave order to his Captains to tread upon their necks, and
then with his own sword he dispatched them, cast them into a Cave, and caused
great stones to be rolled at the entrance of it: Thus shall our true and
Celestial Joshua deal with Death, he suffers it to reign while he is gone to
pursue his Enemies; for the last Enemy that shall be destroyed by him is Death;
when he shall have perfectly subdued all other Enemies, he will then conclude
all his victories with a glorious end, and accomplish the Churches Triumph, by
causing us to trample upon Death; that shall be cast into the bottomless pit,
whereof the entrance shall be shut up for ever, Rev. 10. then shall be
accomplished this glorious Prophecy, Death is swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor.
15. for the Spirit of God assures us in express words, That Death shall be no
more. By what we have said, it may easily appear what is become of the Rope
thrice twisted by the Devil, with an intent to strangle therewith all Mankind;
for the Son of God has cut in pieces the first of these unhappy ties, by his
Almighty power, by the Spirit of Sanctification he loosens the second by
degrees, and by the last he draws us to himself, and then he burns and consumes
it altogether; therefore we have no reason to fear an Eternal Death, nor to
tremble when Hell opens wide its mouth: If we resist the Devil he flies away
from us, Jam. 4. at last we shall trample him under our feet, Romans 16. It is
true, that the sad and doleful effects of the Spiritual death, do commonly draw
out of us many a sad Groan and Tear, whilst our Soul remains in this sinful
Flesh, we are already got out of the Tombs of Corruption and Sin, but yet bear
about us, as it were, our Winding Sheet, and some odd Relics of our natural
Misery. But we have this consideration to comfort our drooping spirits, That
Christ will shortly give the same order from Heaven for us, as he did for
Lazarus, Loose him and let him go, Joh. 11. So that instead of the corruption
of our Nature, that is so incommodious to us, he will invest us in Estate of
Glory, Incorruption. Immortality, and perfect Happiness; for the Corporal
Death, we may justly say, That our Lord and Savior has freed us from all the
fears that it might beget in us, so that it is my judgment, that we may not
only affirm, that we have not the least apprehension of it, but expect it with
assurance, for if we be truly of the number of the faithful, and Gods adopted
Sons, we hope, desire, and hasten Deaths arrival by our most carnest, and most
passionate wishes.

What I have already declared in this Chapter, might satisfy any Christian
Soul, and furnish it with sufficient considerations to strengthen it against
all apprehensions of Death; But as one that is wont to buy Stuffs in a Shop,
when he cheapens such as are slight, and of a small value, he casts his eye
only upon a piece or a pattern, and by that judges of the rest; but when he
intends to purchase a rich Tapestry of great value, he desires to visit and
consider every part, one after another, and make an estimation of the value and
beauty of every corner; So I judge, that the Wise and Religious Reader will
desire now, that I have discovered to him in gross, the Body of Consolations
against the fears of Death, that I should in the next place unfold these hidden
Excellencies, produce every part of them by degrees to his contemplation, and
with my Pen, make him take notice of all the Rarities.

CHAP. 6.
From whence proceed the fears of Death.

AS a wise and discreet Physician usually examines with care, the causes of the
Disease before he prescribes a Remedy; and as an experienced Surgeon
searches the wound before he claps the Plaster to it; Thus I judge it
necessary to seek with diligence from whence the fears of death proceed before
we shall appoint the Remedies to the faithful Souls; for when we shall have
perfectly understood the nature of the Disease and its principal Causes; we
shall without difficulty be better able to assign a convenient Remedy; when we
shall have searched the wound, and washed it clean, we will, with Gods
assistance, pour into it the true Balm of Gilead.

First, we have just reason to accuse our selves of too much unmindfulness of
Death; we don't meditate, so often as we should, upon the misery and frailty of
our poor and despicable nature; we acknowledge it, I confess with our tongues,
that our life is but a breath in our Nostrils, a vapor that soon disappears, a
shadow that quickly vanishes away; but in the mean time we flatter our selves
in our hearts, with more pleasant thoughts and desire, as Herod, that Men
should look upon us as so many little Gods, Acts 12. We suffer our selves to be
deceived by the flattering insinuations of our corrupted Flesh, and by the
artificious suggestions of the old Serpent, that whispers to us as to our first
Parents, You shall not dye, Genesis 3.

2. We commonly affirm, that Death is inexorable without Ears; nevertheless we
live as if we had concluded an agreement with Death, and had secret
intelligence with the Grave, Is. 22. Death approaches with Feet of Wool,
without noise, we imagine therefore that it will never come near us, as that
wicked servant of the Gospel, Matthew. 24. that gathered from his Masters delays
of coming, that he would not come at all. We hate and abominate the sight of
all those things that represent to us any appearance of Death, or that calls
into our minds its remembrance, if at any time its Image comes in our way, we
turn from it our Eyes, and banish out of our fancy, all imaginations of it, as
of a most odious and deceitful illusion. Death seizes upon us before we have
well thought whither we be mortal or no; Therefore we are sooner surprised and
astonished at its approaches, and we become like the foolish Israelites, that
trembled and fled before Goliath, because they were not accustomed to behold him.

3. We have too great confidence, and depend too much upon second Causes; we
look upon Death as a thing that happens by chance, or as an evil that may be
prevented, or at least put away from us for a time; whereas we should be fully
persuaded, that God has determined and appointed, not only Death it self, but
also all the causes and means by which it commonly happens; Therefore we are
often filled with displeasure, and reduced to murmr and repine against God;
we grin, and bite the stone, instead of adoring, in all humility, that wise
Hand that casts it: In a word, when ever Death comes to us, we are ready to say
to it, as the Devils to our Savior, Wherefore art thou come to torment us
before the time, Matthew. 3.

4. We are too much wedded to these earthly vanities, we are inseparable from
the World, we would willingly make here our abode for ever, and cannot abide to
hear, that Death will remove us; Our unlawful affections have no bounds, and we
often spend our selves in the pursuance of the miserable advantages of the
Earth. When we come almost to the end of our life, and of our mortal journey,
it is then, that many of us are most earnest to make a large provision of
Worldly Vanities; we build stately dwellings, and sumptuous Palaces at that
very moment, when we should think of nothing but of building our Tomb, and
preparing our Winding Sheet. We have so violent a passion for all the
advantages of this life, that to separate us from them, it is to pluck out our
Hearts, and tear our tenderest Bowels. When Death comes to our Bedside, and
offers to pull us out, we are ready to say as the Sluggard in the Proverbs, A
little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands, Prove. 6. When
our Divine Bridegroom knocks at our Gates, we are scarce willing to abandon our
Delights, as the Spouse in the Canticles; what says the Worldling, Must I
leave my sumptuous Palaces, my pleasant Dwellings, and my delightful Gardens?
Must I relinquish all this rich Tapestry, these precious Movables, and all
these rare and exquisite Ornaments that enrich my Parlors, Chambers, and
Closets? Must this unmerciful Death divest me so soon of all my Offices and
Dignities, and hinder me from a full and peaceable enjoyment of all these
Riches and Treasures? Must it ravish from me, in an instant, all my Delights
and satisfactions? Is there no remedy, but must I be plucked from the embraces
of my beloved Wife, from the sight of my dear Children, and from the sweet
company of all my friends? Must I receive no more the services of my
Domestics? When we are in this miserable disposition, it is no wonder if death
is terrible to us, and if it causes us to resent the sharpness of its sting,
for as Absalom when he was hanging by the hair of his Head, in a Tree of the
Forest, Joab took three Darts and struck him through the Heart; thus when our
affections are too much wedded and entangled with the World and its vanities,
and filled with the expectation of earthly contentments; it is then that they
are miserably exposed to all the Darts and violent attempts of Death.

5. Another principal cause of the fear of Death, is our ill Life; We give our
selves over to the vices, debaucheries, and licenciousness of this unhappy Age,
we suffer our selves to be corrupted by ill company, and carried away with the
Torrent of vicious Customs. It is therefore no wonder if death fills our Souls
with apprehensions, for it comes to us armed with our sins, and is preceded by
the remorse of Conscience, and horror of our Crimes; How came it to pass, that
such a terrible astonishment fell upon King Belshazzar, when he saw the fingers
of an hand writing upon the Wall of his Palace, the Sentence of his doom, Dan.
5. It was because he did profane the Holy Vessels of God's House; and because
he did riot in the company of lascivious Women. Wherefore did Felix tremble,
when he heard St. Paul discourse of Justice, Temperance, and of Judgment to
come, Acts 24. It was because he was a wicked Varlet, given over to all manner
of filthy and unjust living. Thus, because we profane the Members of our Body,
that are as the Vessels of Gods Sanctuary and House, and because our life is
vicious and disorderly, we cannot abide to hear death mentioned, and when it
comes to us, we are ready to speak to it in Felix's language to St. Paul,
Depart for this time. So that the love of Sin, and the fear of Death, are as
two Sisters that hold one another by the hands; or rather, they are as Twins
that are born and dye together. As the Prophet Amos said to the Israelites, Ye
put for away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near; Amos,
6. So may we say to the Men of this age; Ye put far from you the day of Death,
as much as you are able, and draw near to all manner of Impurity, Covetousness,
Ambition, Pride, Vanity, Usury, Rapine, Violence, Envy, Malice, and such like
Soul-plagues. You don't only draw near to these abominable Vices, but you do
also worse, to lodge them in your Bowels, and to plant them in your Hearts;
Certainly we may very well apply to all vicious persons, what the Prophet
Jeremy tells of Jerusalem; Her filthiness is in her skirts, she remembers not
her last end, Lam. 1.

6. I have taken notice of another imperfection in us; we mistrust the
Providence of God, and know not how to repose our selves upon his Fatherly
Care; we have a too worthy esteem of our selves, and of our own sufficiency; We
cannot resolve to dye, because we fancy our selves very useful in the world, and
that our Death would bring a considerable loss to the Church of God to the
State, or to our Family.

7. Because the Soul and Body are linkt together in a very strict union; we
cannot imagine how they can be separated without great and unspeakable pangs;
our infidelity is so great, that we cannot rest satisfied upon the promise of
God, who engages to succor us in our distress, and to deliver us from all our
troubles, Is. 50. It is true, Jacob's Ladder that reaches from the Earth to
Heaven, does fill us with admiration; but it seems, most difficult and uneasy
to ascend. Paradise is Rich, Glorious, and Delightful to the uttermost; but its
Gate is strait, and choakt up with Thorns and Briars.

8, I judge that one of the chief causes of the fear of death, is, because we
look upon God as a most severe and merciless Judge inflamed with anger and fury
against us, and armed with vengeance. Whereas we should consider and
acknowledge him to be a merciful Father, full of compassion and kindness for
Mankind. Every Slave trembles at the sight of his Lord, and there is no
Malefactor but is afraid, when he appears before his Judge, to be put to the
question; and can I who am all spotted with sin, and black with my horrid
crimes: can I appear before that Glorious Throne, that causes the Seraphims to
cover their Faces with their Wings, Is. 6. How can I that am but stubble
subsist in the presence of the God of vengeance, who is a consuming fire, Heb.
10.

9. There is another visible fault in us we don't embrace with a true and
lively Faith, the Death and Passion of our Lord and Savior; we all speak of
Jesus Christ crucified, but we don't know the Divine Virtue of his Crucifixion,
nor feel its Efficacy; we don't consider that his death has torn in pieces the
partition that did shut us out of the Heavenly Sanctuary, and that his blood
does trace us a way to Paradise, and procure an entrance into that place of
Eternal Bliss.

10. We don't represent to our selves as we ought, to remove from our fancy the
horror of the Sepulcher, how our Lord and Savior has bin laid himself in the
Grave, and perfumed it with his Holy and Divine sufferings. We don't imprint
into our imagination, that it is just and reasonable that we should be
conformable to Christ in his abasement, if we will have any share with him in
his Glory and exaltation.

11. Besides, that which nourishes in our Souls the fears of Death is this, we
look upon it as if it were in its full strength and vigor; whereas we should
remember that Jesus Christ has overcome and disarmed Death by his powerful
Resurrection, and that for our parts we need but follow the footsteps of his
Glorious victories, and fasten that furious Beast to his Triumphant Chariot.

12. We don't consider as we should, with a serious and religious application
of the mind; How our Savior Christ is not only risen from the Sepulcher,
victorious of death, but that he is also ascended up into the highest Heavens,
as our forerunner, to prepare a place for us, and that by departing out of our
miserable bodies, we follow the footsteps of our ever Blessed Savior, to reap
with him the fruits of his most Glorious Victories.

13. We stoop too much to consider our frail, corruptible, and mortal Nature,
and we seldom enter into this most useful Meditation; That by the Holy Ghost we
are nearly and unseparably united with Jesus Christ the Prince of Life, and the
Source of Light; and that we have already in us the Seeds of Blessedness, of
Glory and Immortality.

14. As the Children of Israel did murmr against Moses in the Desert, and did
wish to be again in Egypt. This did proceed from a forgetfulness of their
bitter slavery, under which they had groaned, and of their painful laboring
amongst the Bricks, and the heat of the Furnaces, and from their mindfulness of
the pleasures alone, which they had lost; They dreamed of nothing, but of the
plenty of Bread and Flesh, of the Cucumbers, Onions, and of the Meats, with
which they had so often filled their bellies; Thus we do repine at death,
because we don't dream of the evils from which it delivers us, but think only
upon the vain pleasures and seeming advantages, of which it robs us.

15. We imagine that Death destroys and reduces us to nothing. And we don't
consider, that it never meddles with the principal part of our being, but only
pulls off from us Sin, and breaks the rest of the Chains of our Spiritual
Bondage; so that Death is rather the Death of Sin, than of the faithful.

16. Here is another great fault in us, We don't lift up our minds to consider
the Glory prepared for us at the Egress of our Souls, out of our mortal Bodies:
However we may demean our selves, and what ever we may say, we don't firmly,
without doubting, believe the Felicities which God promises to us in the
contemplation of his Face. Sometimes we may think upon the joys of Paradise,
but it is a thought that does pass through our Souls with too much speed, and
don't take any root, so that there be many, if they were not ashamed, would be
ready to speak in that Emperor Adrian's Language, My little Soul, my dearest
darling, O Guest and Companion of my Body, whither art thou now going?

17. To these former causes of the fears of Death in us we may add another;
That we cast too much, and suffer our eyes to dwell upon the rottenness and
corruption that threatens our Body; whereas we should carry our eyesight to
behold its Glorious Resurrection, that shall soon follow. Pleasant Abode, and
delightful Companion of my Soul, must Death, this cruel Death, separate it from
thee with so much violence? Must thou part with thy dear and sweet company?
Must my Soul leave thee upon such grievous and lamentable terms? That of so
many Honors which have been heapt upon thee, thou shall not carry so much as
their shadow to the Grave? That of so many rich Movables and Treasures, thou
shall bear away nothing but a Winding Sheet, a few Boards, or at the most, some
pounds of Lead? When thou have lived in so much splendour and magnificence, must
thy covering be at last the Worms? When thou have walked so proudly in Palaces,
Gilded with Gold, and perfumed, must at last thy confinement be in a stinking
and loathsome Sepulcher? Must these beautiful Eyes be closed? These Lips of
Coral become pale? This Golden Mouth be stopped? and must this dainty Flesh rot
and become odious to the eyes of the World?

18. In the last place, We don't think as we ought upon that Eternal Bliss and
Glory, that has been prepared for us from the foundation of the World, and
into which we shall enter, when Christ Jesus shall come from Heaven with his
Holy Angels, to judge both the Quick and the Dead; when he shall reunite our
Souls and Bodies together for all Eternity; that he may be glorified in his
Saints, and wonderful in all the faithful.

CHAP. 7.
The first Remedy against the fears of Death, is to Meditate often upon it.

WE become acquainted with the most dreadful things by custom and
conversation, fresh Soldiers do commonly quiver and shake at the sight of an
Enemy; they tremble at the Volleys of Shot, and, half dead, fall to the ground
at the horrid noise of the great Ordnance; but when their courage has been
hardened by a long exercise, they can then, without fear, seek the Enemy in his
greatest advantages, and can go as merrily to the Combat as to a Feast, or to a
Triumph; The showers of small shot, the Lightning and Thunder of the Canon,
cannot make them so much as to shut their eyes, or stoop their heads; They do
then laugh at their former apprehensions; Thus the first conceits of Death do
commonly terrify us, but when we seriously meditate upon it, and look it in the
face, we shall not only contemn it, but we shall also seek it boldly in its
retreats, and with an assured and undaunted countenance, we shall behold Death
let fly all its Arrows and Lances, all its Thunderbolts, without the least
apprehension; As it is with them who are not wont to see Savage Beasts, they
dare not draw near to them, and can scarce look upon them without fear; but
such as are familiarly acquainted with them, can touch them without
apprehension, and freely play with them. Thus it is with those who have never
had the confidence to look Death in the face, they tremble and are filled with
astonishment, as soon as they see its approaches, but those who do often behold
Death, are familiarly acquainted with it, and therefore they can with
confidence thrust their Fists into its jaws. Moses fled away from his Rod, when
it was first turned into a Serpent; but when he began to take it into his
hands, and saw that it returned to its former shape and being, he was far from
running from it, or entertaining the least apprehension of it; but rather he
made a very happy use of it, and by Gods Command he wrought many great
miracles. Thus it is with Death, it frights us at first, but if we can but take
hold of it with the hands of a true and lively faith, it will be so far from
scaring or frighting of us, that it will discover to us a world of delightful
Wonders.

Death therefore is so far from terrifying such as are accustomed with it, that
it fills them full of comfort and joy; as a Child that looks upon his Father,
who has a Vizard on his face, is frighted, and begins to cry, but if he has
but the confidence to pull off the Vizard, and take but notice of the loving
smiles of his Parent, hid under that horrid deformity, he will not only cease
from weeping, and settle his mind, but he will also leap for joy, and embrace
him. Thus if we look upon Death with a timorous countenance, and behold its
hideous appearance, we shall be struck with a sudden horror, but if we can with
any assurance lift up its ugly Vizard, we shall soon discover our heavenly
Father, and with tears of Joy we shall run to embrace him: as the Apostles when
they espied our Savior in the night walking upon the Waves of the Sea, cried
out in a fright, thinking that it had been a Spirit; but when he drew near to
them, and heard his voice, they perceived him to be their Savior, when
therefore they took him into their Ship, the storm ceased immediately; Thus if
we look upon Death at a distance, the blindness and ignorance with which we are
possessed, will represent to us a frightful Spirit, but if we examine and
behold it nearer by the help of the Gospel Light, we shall find it to be our
Salvation, and the accomplishing of our Redemption. All our fears will then be
calmed, and our Souls will return to their former repose: In a word, as he that
runs from his Enemy, increases his courage, and renders him more earnest and
resolved to pursue him; Thus when Death sees us tremble and decline its
approaches, it becomes more proud and imperious over us. We must therefore
think betimes of Death, represent it to our selves continually, and enter into
an acquaintance with it; it was holy Job's practice, for he cried unto the Pit,
thou art my Father, and to the Corruption and the Worms, you are my Mother, and
my Sisters, Job 16. And imagine that this was the chief reason of Philip of
Macedon's commanding a Page every morning to rouse him up out of his sleep,
with O King, remember that thou art a mortal man. For by this often repeated
Lesson, he labored to humble his lofty mind, and teach his frail nature not to
glory too much in the splendour of his Crown and Scepter, nor to abuse the power
committed to his Trust. By this means also he became acquainted with Death,
that it might not seem strange when it should come in earnest to snatch him
away. This was also the design of that Emperor Meruaan, or Meruanes, who
caused this Motto to be Engraven upon his Seal, Remember that thou must dye.
These words did call to his mind that which his Courtiers did not dare to
mention to him. So that this great Prince never confirmed with his Seal, the
death of any man; but at the same time he did represent to himself, that his
own death was not to be avoided; for the same reason, the Noblemen of China are
wont to have their Coffins ready made betimes in their Chambers, that at every
moment they might look Death in the face; for the same cause the Egyptians in
their most sumptuous Feasts, did commonly place a dead man's Scull in an eminent
corner of the room; by this spectacle they intended not only to oblige the
Guests to a moderation of their Joys, and to a curbing in of their unruly
Lusts, but also to bring them acquainted with, and to accustom them to behold
it amongst all their Delights. They treated Death, as if their design had been
to invite it to their most delicious Feasts, that they might rejoice together
with it, John. 19. I conceive that the Jews for the same cause did build their
Sepulchers in their Gardens of Pleasure, that they also might have the image of
death continually before them; and that in the midst of all their
divertisements, it might be their most pleasant and ordinary entertainment. For
us Christians, to oblige us to think upon Death, there is no need that a Page
should remember us every day that we are Mortal, nor that the Motto of a Ring
should call to our minds, that we must dye; there is no need of a Coffin to be
placed in our Chambers: in such things there is many times more Ostentation
than Piety; nor is it needful that a dead man's Skull be put before our Eyes, or
that a Sepulcher be built or hewn in our Gardens, and places of Recreation and
Delight; for as Alexander the Great, understood that he was a Mortal Man, by
the Blood that ran out of his Wounds; Thus the Diseases unto which we are
subject, and the daily infirmities that we feel, do sufficiently instruct, and
assure us, that we are Mortals; And as a famous Philosopher when he received
the unhappy news of his only Son's untimely death, answered the Messenger with
a settled countenance; I knew, said he, that I had begot him a Mortal man,
Xenoph. Thus will the faithful say, without change of countenance or appearance
of fear, when his death is declared to him; I knew that my Mother had conceived
me a Mortal Man; I knew very well that Death is the Tribute that we must all
pay to Nature, and that upon this condition, I am entered into the world.

If we will make use of any exterior help, to imprint this Lesson into our
Fancy, we must practice with care the advice of the wise man, It is better to
go to the house of Mourning, than to that of Feasting, Eccles. 7. for that is
the end of all Men, and the living will lay it to his heart; never look upon a
diseased Body stretched upon a Bed, nor upon a dead Corpse in a Coffin; but
remember that this is an universal Law, unto which all Mankind must pay
obedience; and that it is the broad Road of all the Earth, and that there thou
may behold the lively image of thy future Estate. I conceive that this may
be a good expedient and very successful to entertain in our minds the continual
thoughts of Death, to make our last Will betimes, and frequently to peruse it;
for as it happens when we meditate upon a farewell, that we are to take of our
friends, we feel in our souls the same affections and motions, as are in us at
the moment of our separation. Thus, will it be with us when we seriously
meditate upon the last farewell, that we are to bid to the World. Death appears
to us upon our Lips, or rather we fancy our selves at that instant, already in
the sweet embraces of our Divine Jesus, our Glorious Redeemer.

Besides those things that are unusual and extraordinary, I find nothing in,
nor out of us, nothing that we feel, taste or relish, in short, nothing that
passes either in our, private or public conversation, but is able to renew in
our minds the serious consideration of Death. The Flesh that thou do eat, the
Wool that clothes thy nakedness, the Silk that adorns thy Body; in general,
all thy Garments and Ornaments are but the sparkles of the Dead Creatures; the
sight therefore of all these things, must call to thy remembrance thy frail and
mortal Estate, and cause thee to meditate upon the Preachers saying. The same
accident that happens to the Beast, the same happens to Mankind, as is the
death of the one, so is the death of the other. They have all the same Breath,
and Man has no advantage above a Beast, for all is vanity, all goes to the
same place, all proceeds from the Dust, and shall return to the Dust again.

Never pull off thy Clothes, but remember that thou must shortly quit this
miserable Body, and lay it down in the Grave: When thou art entering into thy
Bed, think upon thy Sepulcher, where thou must one day be stretched; If thou
do awake in the night, consider that Death will shortly come, and put out the
Taper of thy Life; let thy Sleep be an image of thy Death, and let it call to
thy mind, how thou must within a few days, sleep in a bed of Dust, when thou
awakest, think upon the delightful sound of the Arch-Angel's Trumpet, that
shall rowse thee out of Deaths long sleep: say within thy self when thou
arisest, It may be that I shall never rise again till the Son of God shall come
from Heaven, to lift me up out of the Grave with his Almighty hand; when we
cast our Eyes upon the rising Sun, Let us say within our selves, it may be I
shall never behold any other Sun rise again, but the Son of Righteousness, that
carries healing under his wings; Consider when thou do put on thy Garments,
that the time is coming, when thou must be clothed with a more Magnificent and
Glorious Robe, a Robe of Light and Immortality; when thou do sit down to eat,
think upon the hour that is drawing near, in which death will feed upon thy
Carcass; imagine that it may be, that this is the last time that thou shall sit
at the Table, that next thou may sit with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with all
the blessed Martyrs, who have washed and whitened their Robes in the Blood of
the Lamb, and that it may be, that thou shall never taste any more but of the
food of Angels, and of the fruit of the Tree of Life, and that thou shall never
drink but of the new Wine in the Kingdom of Heaven, and of the Rivers of
Eternal pleasures, that run from the Throne of God.

Every time that thou go out of thy dwelling, or changest thy abode, fancy
to thy self that in a short time thou must depart out of this Mortal
Tabernacle. Art thou alone, and separated from humane Society? remember that
within a few days, Death will separate and divide thee; art thou going to any
meeting, or entering into any company, or marching to the Holy Assemblies;
discourse with thy self in this manner, It may be, that I shall never go to any
other company, until I come to the Church and Congregation of the Firstborn,
whose names are written in Heaven. Art thou invited to the marriage of a
friend? Say unto thy Soul, It may be I shall never go to any other Feast, but
to the marriage of the Lamb offered from the foundation of the World. Do thou
see a rich and glorious Palace, or a pleasant Garden? say to thy self, It may
be, I shall never see any other Palace, but that where the living God does
dwell, and it may be I shall never behold any other place of pleasure, but the
Celestial Paradise.

If thou do cast down thy eyes to look upon the Earth, upon which thou do
tread; Consider at the same time, that this Earth, or some like to it, shall
afford thee a Grave, and that thou shall sleep there the sleep of death:
Remember what God told Adam, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, Genesis
3. or say with the Holy man Job. Remember I pray thee, that thou have formed me
of Clay, and that thou shall reduce me to dust. I shall sleep in the dust, and
if thou seek for me in the morning, I shall be no more. Job 20. Job 7.

If thou take a view of the Plants, of the Herbs and Flowers; don't forget
what the word of God speaks concerning our Life, in the 90 Psalm. That Man is
like the Grass which grows up, in the morning it flourishes and is green, in
the evening it is cut down, and withers. And in the 103 Psalm. As for man his
days are as Grass, as a Flower of the field, so he flourishes, for the wind
passes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more.
And elsewhere, All flesh is like Grass, and the Glory of Man like the Flower of
the field. Is. 40. 1 Pet. 1.

If thou do behold the Currants of Water, the Rivers and the Torrents;
remember at that time what is said in the 14 Chapter of the second Book of
Samuel, for we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground. And in the
90 Psalm. Thou carriest them away, as with a flood.

If thou take notice of the shadow of the Needle in a Dyal that follows the
swift motion of the Sun, or to the shadows which solid bodies cast upon the
Earth; In the evening they stretch a great way, and a little after vanish;
consider seriously, and engrave in thy mind this excellent Sentence. Man is
like to vanity, his days are as a shadow that passes away. Psalm. 144. and say
as David, I am gone as the shadow when it declineth, Psalm. 109.

If thou hear the roaring of the Winds, that God takes out of his
Storehouses, Lift up thy Soul unto God thy Creator, and say with Job, Job 7.
Remember that my life is but a wind, mine eye shall no more see good. Job 30.
that is, the imaginary Good of this miserable World. And elsewhere, Thou
liftest me up to the wind, thou causest me to ride upon it, and dissolvest my
substance.

If thou take any delight in the sight of Birds that fly in the Air; Let this
excellent thought enter into thy mind. My days are passed away, as the Eagle
that hastes to the prey, Job 9.

If thou look up to the Glory and Beauty of the Heavens, and see the
ravishing light of the Stars; consider that thy God who has formed thee after
his Image, is so good and noble, that he will not suffer thee to dwell for
ever, or perish amongst this slimy and miserable Earth, but to dwell with him
for ever in the Heavens; and that at the end of thy Race, he will raise and
carry thee into the Palace of his Glory, where thou shall shine as the Sun in
its greatest splendour.

If thou do meditate upon the changeableness of the seasons, remember that
the spring of thy infancy, the hot Summer of thy Youth, the Autumn of thy
Maturity, and the sad countenanced Winter of thy cold and decrepid age, shall
succeed one another in the same order.

Let him who travels by Land, think upon Job's complaint, My days have been
swifter than a Post, they flee away, they see no good, Job 9. Let him call to
mind the Apostles excellent saying, This one thing I do, forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before,
I press forwards toward the mark, for the prize of the high Calling of God in
Christ Jesus, Phil.

Let him who sails upon the Sea, fancy the whole World as a great Sea tossed up
and down with several furious Waves, our Life as a dangerous Voyage, and our
Days as Ships, that pass away in a moment; and let him consider that the last
breath of Death will drive us into the Haven of Eternal Felicity, to the
enjoyment of immortal Glory, Job 9. Does God bless us with Children? let us
understand that we are minded by them of our Mortality, for they come to take
our room, and to succeed to our Estate; Does God take them away to his Rest,
and those of whom we are most fond? Let this advertise us, That God intends
thereby to cut off all the lower Roots, that tie us to this Earth, to unloose
our hearts and affections, that we may offer them up to him alone. Instead of
spending our selves in Tears, and indulging our foolish humor in needless
displeasures; Let us comfort our selves with this consideration, That, by this
means, a part of our selves is entered into Heaven, and that the other part will
follow apace. Let us say with David, We shall go to them, but they shall not
return to us. 2 Samuel 11.

Let the Rich Man when he reckons his Money, remember that God has reckoned
and appointed his days; and let this Order sound continually in his Ear Give an
account of thy Stewardship, Luke 16.

Let the Magistrate, when ever he delivers his Vote, or pronouce a Sentence, be
armed with this consideration, That he who sits in the Judgment Seat here
below, shall stand at the Bar, and be judged himself above. That one day he
shall appear as a poor prisoner at the Tribunal, of his great God; That the
Books will be opened, and that the universal Judge of the World will peruse
every particular of his accusation: That he must tender an account, not only of
his words and actions, but also of his most secret thoughts, and that without
any examination at the Rack, God will discover the very bottom of his heart.

Let the Gentleman, whenever he receives his Rents and his Revenues, call to
mind the Tribute that he must needs pay to death. Let the Prince and the Lord
when he handles his Royal Parents, and his ancient Charters, or when he
examines the Homage and Duties to be paid to his House and Family, take notice
that he must go in person to Heaven Gates, and pay his Homage to the Divinity:
Let the King who sits in his Seat of Justice, or Chair of State, think upon the
Throne of the King of Kings, before which he must appear, as well as the most
wretched Caitiff, and the meanest of his subjects; and that he must give
account before a just God, who is no respecter of Persons.

Let the Minister be never employed about the Duties of his Function, but let
him Long and wish for that happy day, in the which, the Lamb shall instruct and
feed him in person, and lead him to the Fountains of living water.

Let the Christian Soldier engrave upon his Sword this Sentence of Job, Is
there not as it were a warfare appointed to all Mortals on Earth? Job 7. And
instead of thirsting after humane blood, let him prepare to encounter with
Deathit self.

Let the Husbandman when ever he sows his Seed, or when he reaps the Corn of
his Fields, be mindful of the season that comes on apace, in which his Body
must ^ot in the Earth, that it might grow up to Eternity; Let him think upon
what St. Paul says, O fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it
dye, 1 Cor. 15. and let him meditate upon David's comfortable persuasions, They
who sow in Tears, shall reap with Songs of Triumph, Psalm. 126.

Let an Handy craftsman that works in his shop, imprint in his mind, this
excellent Sentence, Our days are like the days of an hireling; and when he has
ended his Task, and that he is departing to his Rest, let him comfort himself
with this assurance, That as soon as he shall have ended that work that God has
given him to do, he shall rest from all his labors, Job 7.

When ever the Physician visits his Patient, or when the Chyrurgeon tends upon
his wounded Bodies, let them consider, that they have no Secret nor Art able to
protect them from Death, or to cure the wounds that it strikes in our
corruptible Nature.

Let the most cunning Lawyers, the most advised Counselors, and the most
eloquent Orators, remember that all their Rhetoric and subtilty will never
obtain for them, their Suit against Death, nor procure a moment of respite and
delays.

And let the most Learned Philosophers, learn, That the soundest Philosophy is
the meditation of Death.

In short, What ever be our Employment, Condition, or Age, let us lift up our
minds and hands unto God, to speak to him in the Language of the Prophet David;
Lord, let me know my end, and the number of my days, that I may know how long I
am to live. Or of Moses, So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.

A Prayer and Meditation upon the Consideration of Death.
O my God and Heavenly Father, seeing that it has been thy good pleasure, that
I should be born of a mortal Nature, and that this wretched Body that comes out
of the Dust, should return to Dust again; Give me Grace to be continually
mindful of my frail and dying condition, and seriously to meditate upon the
changes of Time, that consumes all things, the variety of the seasons, the
unconstancy of the World, and the strange disturbances of the Earth, as
remembrancers of the last Change that shall happen to our Persons; Give me
Grace to look upon my bodily infirmities, and the Diseases which commonly
afflict me, as so many Bailiffs and Messengers that call upon me, that the time
of my departure, out of this earthly Tabernacle, draws near. Let the Bed where
I sleep mind me, that when I have ended my great days work, my Body must repose
it self in a bed of Dust; O that I might consider as often as I cast off my
Clothes, that within a few days I must cast off this mortal and corruptible
Body; that the sleep that benums my Senses, is an image before me of Death,
that shall destroy all the functions of this animal life. Let the Graves and
Sepulchers of my Friends and Parents, represent to me my future abode. O
merciful Lord, give me Grace and Courage to look so often upon Death, and the
Grave, that they may never fright nor terrify me; That this consideration be so
natural to me, and so pleasant by custom, that it may fill my Soul rather with
joy, that with grief and displeasure. It is true, I am born to dye, but I am
satisfied, that I shall dye to live for ever with my God, the Author of my
Life, and the Fountain of Blessedness, Amen.

CHAP. 8.
The second Remedy against the fears of Death, is to expect it at every hour.

IT is not sufficient to think often upon Death, and to discourse of it in an
excellent manner; for there be some that mention death very frequently, and
with many pious reflections; yet nevertheless they cannot boast of being free
from all apprehensions of Death; their Tongue is always ready to speak of
Death, but their Heart cannot yield to expect it; they know that Death will
seize upon them, but they entertain this dangerous opinion, that the time is
not yet come; they acknowledge that they are indebted to God and Nature, but
they delay the payment of the Debt from day to day, as if they were able to
corrupt the Sergeants of Death, and obtain a Reprieve at their pleasure. There
is no man so old and decrepid, but flatters himself with the fancy of having
yet at least a year to live in the world. In short, we imagine always, that we
perceive Death at a vast distance from us, and that we shall soon enough fit
our selves to receive it as we ought; therefore when ever, or where ever it
comes to drag us out of the World, it surpriseth and astonisheth us.

If we will prevent this mischief, we must not only consider that we are
mortal, but that our life is short and of no long continuance; we must
continually say with Job, Are not my days few? Job 10. and imprint in our minds
this Sentence of David, The Lord has made my days as an hand-breath, mine age
is as nothing before him, Psalm. 39. or that of Moses, The best of our days are
but labor and sorrow, for they are s^^ cut off, and we fly away, Psalm. 90.

The Ancients painted Time with Wings, to express its inevitable swiftness. The
Holy Spirit compares our Life to a Weavers Shuttle, to an hired Servant, to a
Post that runs apace, to a Packet-Boat, or to an Eagle that flies after its
Prey. The Sacred Writers speak of our Life, as of a Torrent of Waters, of a
Cloud, a Vapor, a Wind, or a Breath: They tell us that our days are gone as a
Dream, they fly away as a Shadow, they vanish as a Word in the Air, and that
they perish as a thought. In a word, all the Lightness and the most unconstant
things of the World, whereof the motion is very sudden and quick, are employed
in Holy Scripture, to express the vanity of our Life, and the shortness of our
days.

Besides that, our Life is of a short continuance, it slides away insensibly,
like to a Clock, the Wheels move without ceasing, although the Hand appears to
us to be steady; or to a Plant that grows continually, although the increase
and growth is not to be discerned by our Eyesight, or like to a Man who stands
in a Ship under Sail, he goes forward whither he will or no; Thus whether we
Sleep or Wake, whether we Go of Lie down, whether we Eat or Fast, whether we
Work or Rest, we proceed on continually forward toward our Grave; our Body is
like a Tree eaten continually by Worms, for the day and the night feed upon it,
without intermission; in vain do ye banish out of your minds the thoughts of
Death, if ye will not call it to your remembrance, it will not fail to mind and
remember you; the more ye fly from it, the more it follows and pursues you at
the heels, and when ye imagine Death to be farthest off from you, it is nearest
to you.

As the Canker when it infects and enters into the Breast, it devours the Flesh
without interruption; so Time consumes and devours us continually: The Meat
that we swallow, and that nourishes us, brings us by degrees into the embraces
of Death, as the Oil that causes a Lamp to burn, leads it to its end; or as
when a Torch is lighted, it begins to dye, as soon as it begins to burn; thus I
may say without excess, that the very first moment of this Animal Life, is the
first moment of our Death. As we say of all sublunary Bodies, that the
Generation of the one, is the Corruption the other: so is it with Time, The
birth of an hour, of a day, of a week, of a month, or of a year, is the death
of that which precedes; It is like a wheel, that mounts to no other end, but to
fall down again.

Seeing therefore that our Life is nothing else but a continued Death, in
proper terms we are mistaken to name only the moment of the separation of the
Soul and Body, the hour of death; for as when many Canon shot are discharged
against a Castle, to open a breach, we don't say that the last has done the
work; or as when an hard stone is cut with Chiswel and Hammer, or insensibly
cav'd or undermined with Water, the last blow or drop don't carry away alone
the glory of the performance: Thus when our Bodies decay and crumble away to
dust, we must not only consider the last struglings against Death, or the last
attempt of this Enemy. Of a Ladder by which we ascend and descend, we view
every stop from the top to the bottom; Of an Hourglass we look to every grain
of Sand; Of a Voyage or Journey, we reckon the first League, as well as the
last; And in a Race, we take notice of the first step that we go out, as well
as of the last when we stop: Thus we must reckon our Death to begin from the
first moment that we draw our breath, until the last when we yield up the Ghost.

Besides what happens every moment to this poor and despicable nature, an
infinite number of strange, unwonted, and unexpected accidents, do stop and
shorten our Race. The Taper is not always consumed by its own flame, many
blasts of wind and showers of rain do extinguish it. If our Life is short, it
is no less weak and uncertain. The Body in which we lead a languishing life, is
like Jonas's Goard, for if it be but moved with a contrary and unwholesome
blast, or touched by an unhappy Worm, it withers upon a sudden, Jonas 4. This
was the thought of Eliphas, when he says, We dwell in houses of Clay, our
foundation is in the Dust, we are crushed before the moth, Job 4. When God
intends to destroy Mankind in his wrath, and kill multitudes in his
displeasure, he does not always employ the agency of Angels, as when he cut off
all the firstborn of the Land of Egypt, when he stretched forth the sword of
his vengeance upon Jerusalem, and when he killed of Senacharib's Army in one
night, one hundred fourscore and five thousand Men; he does not always let
loose the wicked Spirits, as when he gave them leave to raise a furious
Tempest, which cast to the ground the House where Job's Children were, and
buried them in the ruins, Job 1. He does not always open the fountains of
Heaven, as when he washed away the first wicked world with a fearful deluge,
Genesis 7. He does not always cause fire and brimstone to rain from Heaven, as he
did upon Sodom and Gomorrah, upon Adma and Zeboim; he works not always miracles
in the waters, as when he drown Pharaoh, and his Egyptian Host in the waves of
the Red Sea; He prepares not always Whales to devour us, as he did Jonas; He
sends not always burning Serpents, as to the murmuring Generation of Israelites
in the Deserts; He commands not always the Earth to open and swallow us up, as
it did Corah Dathan and Abiram; He sends not always from above great
Hailstones, as when he knocks down the Amorites; He destroys us not always by
flames that proceed from his presence, as he did Nadab and Abihu, who offered
unhallowed Fire upon his Altar; He Commands not always the Lions and the Bears
of the Forest to issue out and devour us, as he did when the rebellious
Prophet was killed, and when the ill-tutor'd Children of Bethel mocked Elisha;
In short, God employs not always the Plagues and Judgments of Pestilence, of
War, and of Famine; the unpleasant smell of a fuming Snuff, a flying vapor of
malignant Smoke, is able to choke and kill us in a moment: A Fly, the Kernel of
an Apple, an Hair of the Head, or the Seed of a Grape, or Ashes, or Sand, or
some other Atom, may stop the breath of our life. Therefore God advises us by
the Prophet Isaiah, Cease ye from Man whose breath is in his Nostrils, for
wherein is he to be accounted of? Isai. 2.

It is to be considered that these mischances happen very frequently, and in
every place Death lays for us its snares, every where, as well in the bosom of
our tender hearted Parents, and in the embraces of our dearest friends, as
amongst the most barbarous and savage People, and amongst our most inhumane
Enemies; Its invisible Darts fly up and down every where; and as the Psalmist
informs us, The pestilence walks in darkness, and destruction wastes at
noonday. Psalm. 91. Death is as busy on the solemn Festivals, as well as in the
working days; it drags us as easily from the Table, where we take our delights,
as from the bed of Sorrow, where we sigh and groan; there is no sacred retreat
where we may find a refuge, it has no more regard of the Temples dedicated to
Gods service, than of the common houses; All the Riches of America, and the
power of the greatest Monarchs, are not able to protect us from its pursuance;
it requires a present payment of the debts that we owe; and it is not possible
to appear by an Attorney, at the Summons that it sends to us.

Death claps not its warnings on the posts of Doors, it thrusts them not into
the hands of Messengers or Lacqueys; there is not one Summons, but it may write
down upon it those words, Speaking to him in Person: it surpriseth us ^t home
and abroad in our Closets, and in the Streets, in our Beds, in our Sedans, in
the midst of our Feasts, and all our Pomp. It offers violence to the Sacred
Person of the greatest Kings, in their most sumptuous Palaces, in their most
flourishing Cities, and in their strongest Fortifications, in the midst of
their most faithful subjects, and most victorious Armies, upon their Thrones,
and in their triumphing Chariots. As King Ahab when he was going to take
possession of Naboth's Vineyard, told the Prophet Elijah in a rage, Thou have
found me mine Enemy, 1 Kings 21. Thus when the profane Worldlings dream of
nothing but of the pleasant enjoyment of their unjust possessions and of
swimming in the Blood and Sweat of the meaner people, they meet unexpected
Death, which they curse in their hearts, and if it did not stop their mouths,
they would say also in their rage, Have thou found me out mine Enemy?

This Holy Meditation caused the wisest King upon Earth to tell us, Man knows
not his time, as the Fishes that are taken in an evil Net, and as the Birds
that are caught in the snare, so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil time
when it falls suddenly upon them, Eccl. 9.12. This same consideration has
caused this excellent Sentence to be written in the Book of Job; In a moment,
shall they dye, and the people shall be troubled at midnight, and past away,
and the mighty shall be taken away without hand, Job 34. That is, that to
destroy Kingdoms and whole Nations, and to carry away the most lusty and mighty
Men, Death has no need of other assistance, but its own Arm.

Do you desire, Christian Reader, the design of all this discourse? Let me tell
you then, that seeing Death is certain, and not to be avoided, and that there
is nothing so uncertain, as the hour of its arrival, we must so live as if we
were to breathe forth the last gasp at every moment; We should behave our
selves, as if we had always our Souls upon our Lips, ready to yield them into
the hands of our great Creator, and to speak in Job's Language, Having our
Flesh between our teeth, and our Souls in our hands, Job 13. Seeing that we
know not at what time, nor in what place Death intends to come upon us, let us
expect it at every moment, and in every place. Seeing that we lodge in this
Earthly Tabernacle, without any loss or assurance of Time; let us be ready to
depart at the first warning; for it will be far better for us to go out
willingly than to be dragged out against our wills; it is not convenient that
Death should carry us away in the same manner as the Sea bears and tosseth a
dead Corpse upon its ways; But we must in this occasion imitate the discreet
Pilate or Mariner, that trims his Sails, and helps by his Art the Winds and the
Tide, to drive him to his desired Haven: We should not follow Death as the
Malefactor follows the Executioner that leads him to suffer; but as the Child
follows his Father that conducts him to a Feast; we should not engage him in a
combat with Death by constraint, as the ancient Slaves did with the wild Beasts
in the Roman Amphitheaters; but we should imitate David's generosity, who, of
his own accord, marched out of the Camp of Israel, to fight with Goliath: It is
better for us to attack and seize upon Death, than to be surprised and devoured
by it unawares.

Come when thou will, O Death! thou shall never surprise me, for I wait for
thee at every moment with my weapons ready in my hand; Thou shall never drag me
forcib^y, for I will follow thee willingly and joyfully; Although thou art mine
Enemy, yet will I speak to thee in the Language of the Spouse, in the
Canticles, to her beloved. Draw me and I will run after thee. Nay, I will meet
thee in the way and receive thee with hearty embraces; for instead of dreading
thy coming, I desire it passionately, and hope for it; for at thy first
arrival, as soon as I shall have seen thee, I shall have overcome thee, O
blessed and happy day, that assures me of such a glorious Victory, and of such
an Eternal Triumph.

A Prayer and Meditation upon the continual expectation of Death.
O Gracious God, in whose power alone, and at whose pleasure are the Times and
the Seasons; I know that it is appointed to all men once to dye, and that the
Grave is the dwelling which thou have prepared to receive all Mankind; we
understand sufficiently by the experience of former Ages, that none is able to
say, I shall live, and shall not see Death. Thou O Almighty God, our Supreme
Judge have pronounced our irrevocable Sentence in the Earthly Paradise, that we
must dye; so that I should be guilty of the greatest folly and madness, if I
did not firmly believe that I must dye as others, and follow at my turn in the
way of all flesh: But Lord, thou have been pleased to hide from our knowledge,
the wonderful proceedings of thy providence, and do not suffer us to see the
Hand that marks out the last hours of our Life: We can perceive no shadow to
discover to us with certainty, when shall be the going down of our Sun; we know
not at what hour of the day, or of the night, thou will call us away to appear
before thy great Tribunal. Give us therefore Grace, O merciful God, to be always
ready to answer to thy Call, and to obey thy Holy Commands; that I may be as a
Ship at Anchor, that stays only for a Wind to set her Sails forward; or as a
Soldier who waits only for the Signal to march to the Encounter. Give me Grace,
O good Lord, that I may be like the good and faithful Servant, who expects his
Masters coming, and hears his voice as soon as he calls; Or like the wise
Virgins, who were ready to meet the Bridegroom, and to follow him into the
Marriage Chamber, seeing that I can never know, neither the time nor the place,
when Death will come to me. O that I might expect and wait for it at every
moment, and at every place! O that I might live in such a manner, as if I were
always ready to dye. That my Soul were always upon my Lips, prepared to fly
away. That I were continually in readiness to commit it into thy hands. O my
God, my Faithful and Merciful Creator. By this means I shall receive Death with
Joy, when it comes as thy Servant and Messenger, and I shall follow it
willingly, being certainly persuaded that it will lead me into Eternal Life,
and introduce me into thy Glorious and Immortal Palace. Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation for Youth.
O Almighty God, and Universal Light, that enlightenest every Man coming into
the World, the only Author of my Being, by whose Gracious allowance I breath,
Thou, O Lord, have formed and fashioned my Body, with thy Divine hand, and have
put into it an immortal Soul, created after thy likeness. Thou have not only
bestowed upon me a Life, but have, by thy continual care, preserved my Soul,
and kept my Body from all the dangers, unto which this weak and frail Nature is
always subject. Although I feel my self lusty and strong, if thou withdrawest
away from me thy Spirit, and that Divine Virtue that sustains me, I shall
instantly fall away, and return again into nothing, from whence thine Almighty
Hand has taken me. O merciful Lord, seeing that I live by thee alone, make me
to live only to thee, and for thee, that all my actions may tend to thy Glory,
and Praise thee; That I may consecrate to thee with all my heart, the
First Fruits of my Life, and the Flower of my Age, that I may remember my
Creator in the days of my Youth, and that I may abstain from Vice before the
Time come, in which I shall say, That I have no pleasure therein. O Father of
Mercies, pardon and forgive all the Sins and Infirmities of this foolish and
unconsiderate Youth. Give a stop to all the unruly motions, and repress the
violent attempts of this boiling Age, tame this miserable Flesh, that is not
obedient to the will of its God. That if the dread of thy Holy and great Name,
and the respect that I owe to thy Sacred Eyes that behold me, are not
sufficient to recall me from the Commission of sin, and to oblige me to
obedience; Give me Grace to look continually upon Death, that appears round
about me, and it may be in my very bosom; Give me Grace to listen daily to the
Heavenly voice that calls me to come forth before the Tribunal of the Great
Judge of the World, who spies my most secret actions, who reads the most inward
thoughts of my mind, and examines all the passages of this most wretched life.

O that this flourishing Age, and this perfect Health that I enjoy, might never
flatter me with the conceit of being free from, and out of the reach of Deaths
merciless Darts. But let me remember that there are more Flowers and Blossoms
that fall to the ground, than Men gather of Fruits; and that more tender and
young Plants are taken up by the Root, then are hewn down of old, and
overgrown Trees. O that I might have always in my mind this consideration, That
a greater number of Babes and Children are buried, than of old Men; and that
the first person who was dead and buried in the Earthly Paradise, was but a
young Man in the flower of his Age. Great God of the Spirits of all flesh, wean
my Heart and Affections from the World, from all deceitful Pleasures, and from
these inferior Vanities, that I may find in thee all my Joy, and my most
ravishing Delights. Let me not feed my fancy with the vain hopes of having yet
many years to spend in ease, and in the pleasure of this life; but let me
remember that there is no part of it free from evils, from crosses, cares and
displeasures. That the greenest Fruit has many times a secret Worm that
devours it, as well as the rip^st, and that the freshest blossom has prickles,
as well as the most flourishing or decaying Roses. The more I shall live in
this miserable and corrupted Age, the more evil I shall suffer, and the more
bitterness I shall drink, and the more I shall spot my Soul, and offend my God;
I shall have lived sufficiently, if I have learnt to live well, and to prepare
to dye well. I shall do both, if thine Holy Word become my guide, and if thine
Holy Spirit Sanctify me, and Direct me in thy Will, which is Good, Holy,
Pleasant, and Perfect. Assist and strengthen me O Lord, that I may find thy
Yoke easy, and thy burden light. O good God, if thou prolongest my days,
increase in me the Riches of thy Grace, and inflame my Soul with thy Love; but
if thou do cut me off betimes, let me not be so great an Enemy to my self, as
to be sorry, because thou will so soon transport me into an happy and immortal
Estate, because thou art pleased to abridge my Labors, to put a period to the
cruel War against my filthy Lusts, and to bestow upon me the Crown in the
middle of my Race. I shall obtain sufficient Glory and Comfort, if thou do
grant me strength enough to overcome the Devil, vanquish Death, and triumph
over the Enemies of my Salvation. O let me not be so mad and foolish to lament
for the loss of a moment, that flies away apace; Seeing thou do promise to
introduce me into an Eternity, where there is no alteration nor shadow of
change, and where thou shall bless me with an eternal, flourishing, and happy
Youth. O my good God, I am ready to Glorify thee, either in Death or in Life,
seeing that thy Son Jesus Christ is to me gain, whether I live, or whether I
dye, Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation for Old Age.
O God, the Ancient of days, and Father of Eternity, it is thy pleasure, that
in every Season and Age, thy Children be prepared for Death; I have therefore
good cause, O Lord, to prepare and dispose my self for that last hour; I who
have already a foot in the Grave, Grant, I beseech thee, that the more this
outward Man decays, the more the inward man may be renewed day by day; That
this weak and infirm Body, that stoops toward the Earth, teach me to lift up
my Mind and thoughts toward Heaven. Grant, that old Age that has furrowed my
Face, and wrinkled my Skin, may also wipe off all the spots of my Soul, and
drive from my Heart, all displeasure and grief: That Age that causes my Knees
to quiver, and whitens my Skin, may strengthen my Faith, and refresh my Hope
and Assurance upon thee; and that Death that pursues me close at the heels, may
cause me to seek a shelter under the protection of the Prince of Life. O
Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, thou see the pitiful condition unto which
I am reduced; I am become a trouble to my self, and useless in the world; my
Soul is weary of its abode, by reason of the griefs that it endures, for I do
but lead a dying Life, or rather a living Death. My Good God and Creator, I
have been under thy protection before I was born from the Womb of my Mother;
thou have bin my God, and assured Refuge. Thou, O Gracious Lord, have blessed
my Infancy and Youth, and crowned all my years with thy Fatherly Grace, and
laden me with thy Blessings; Leave me not, I pray thee, in my white and
decrepid old Age; and now that my strength fails, be thou the Rock of my
Soul, and the strength of my Life: My years are passed as a Torrent of Waters;
at present, I am nothing but the shadow of a shadow, that cease to be, but
thou art always the same, and thy years shall never fail. As thou have no
beginning, thou shall never have an end. Renew my days, as the Eagles; Animate,
I beseech thee, and quicken this Death, these Ashes that I carry, but rather
reach to me thy hand, and take me out of this Dwelling of Clay, that rots and
decays with age, into thine Heavenly Jerusalem; I have lost all taste of earthly
Meats and Drink; It is now high time that thou should satiate me with the
Dainties of thy Holy Table, and give me to drink of the Wine of thy Kingdom. I
am already as out of the World; my life holds but by a weak string. O Gracious
Lord, now let thy Servant depart in Peace, according to thy word, for mine Eyes
have seen thy Salvation, Amen.

CHAP. 9.
The Third Remedy against the fears of Death, is to consider, that God has
appointed the time; and the manner of our Death.

EIther we are Hypocrites, who draw near unto God with our Lips, and honor him
with our Tongues, whilst our Heart is far from him, Matthew. 14. as we must
desire the accomplishment of the Will of God, and resign our selves wholly to
it, for every day we say to him in our Prayers, Thy will be done in Earth as it
is in Heaven; Therefore we cannot abhor, nor fly from Death so cowardly, if we
be rightly persuaded as we ought. That God has limited the Time, and appointed
the manner of our Death: That which moves us for the most part to complain of
this last Enemy, is a continual eye that we have sixed upon the Flesh, and its
Power, and a too great confidence upon second causes. We are like the dog that
bites at the stone that strikes him, for we commonly curse the means that God
employs to call and withdraw us out of the World.

It will easily appear that God has numbered our days, and that, by his
wonderful and eternal Wisdom, he has decreed the hour and moment of every man's
death; for besides what our Savior Christ says in general, That God has
reserved the Times and the Seasons in his own power, Acts 1. Job tells us
expressly, The days of Man are determined, the number of his months are with
thee, thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. Job 14. The Royal
Prophet speaks to the same purpose in the 31 Psalm. I trusted in thee, O Lord,
I said, Thou art my God, my times are in thy hand. He is of the same judgment
in the 39 Psalm. Behold, thou have assured me my days as an band breadth. and
in the 68 Psalm, Unto God the Lord belong the issues of Death. Moses teaches
us the same Lesson in his Divine Hymn, Psalm. 90. for when he has represented,
how that it is God who reduces Man to Ashes, and makes him return to his
first substance; he tells us, speaking unto God, Thou turnest man to
destruction, and say, return ye Children of Men.

King Hezekiah's comparison is very notable, he compares the Life of Man to a
Thread that God has twisted, and that he cuts off at his pleasure, Isai. 38.
Mine Age is departed, and removed from me as a Shepherds Tent; I have cut off,
like a Weaver, my life, he will cut me off with pining Sickness, from day even
to night, will thou make an end of me. Hannah, Samuels Mother removes all
difficulty, and confirms this Truth sufficiently, 2 Samuel 2. It is God, says
she, who kills and makes alive, he brings down to the Grave, and brings
up; There is nothing more significant to the same purpose than our Lord and
Saviors words, I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I am alive for
evermore, Amen; and have the Keys of Hell and of Death, Apoc. This great God
and Savior closes the Gates of the Grave when he pleases, and it is not
possible to open them against his will; In short, Whether we live we live to
the Lord, whether we die we die to the Lord, whether therefore we live or die,
we are the Lords, Romans 14.

And our Reason being enlightened with a Divine Revelation, teaches us this
good and profitable Lesson; for if God has a hand in our Conception and Birth,
and if he appoints the time of our entrance into the world, wherefore should
not he also have an hand in our Death, mark out the time of our last departure.
David speaks thus to God in the 139 Psalm, My substance was not bid from thee,
when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the
Earth. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being imperfect and in thy Book,
all my Members were written, which in continuance, were fashioned, when as yet
there is none of them; we may therefore for the same reason, say to God, My
substance will not be hid from thee, when this miserable Body shall fall to
pieces, as rotten Wood, and as a Moth-eaten Garment; thine Eyes shall see me,
when Death shall cut off the Thread of my Life, and separate what thou have
joined together, so wonderfully thy Power and Wisdom shall have an hand in my
last hours, and nothing shall happen to me, but that which thou have before
ordained in thine unsearchable Decrees.

If God appoints the time of our Resurrection, and if it be certain, that
without his express Commission, the Holy Spirit will not breathe upon our dead
bones, to cause them to revive; is it probable that the breath should depart
out of our Nostrils, and our Bodies should fall into the Bed of corruption,
without the Orders of this great and living God? Ezekiel. 37. He has appointed to
the Sun its course, and to the Stars that shine in the Heavens, their several
motions and stations, Isai. 40 and should not he also appoint to his Children
their motions, seeing that they are to shine for ever in the Heaven of Heavens,
where justice dwells, as so many immortal Stars He has measured the Waters in
his hand, he has compassed the Heavens with his Span, he has weighed the
Mountains in Scales, and the Hills with a Balance, he has fashioned the Earth
with a Hive, and given bounds to the roaring Sea; and is it possible that he
has not not measured the time of our Life, and that he has marked out with
his finger the last moment? He who has numbered the Kingdoms of Heathen
Princes, has he not also numbered the days in the which he intends to reign in
our hearts by his Holy Spirit; has he not appointed the time for us to ascend
up into the highest Heavens, where we are to reign with him in the Kingdom of
his Glory.

If it be certain that God has unmbred the Hairs of our Head, Matthew. 10. it is
not to be doubted, but that he has also numbered the days of our Life. And if a
Sparrow does not fall to the ground without his order, how can it be that a
Soul should take its flight up to Heaven without his express Commission? He
bottles up our Tears, he keeps a Record of all our afflictions, and takes an
account of our Sorrows, Psalm. 50. and can we imagine that he does not keep an
account of the life and death of Men, and that he minds not the time that we
are to spend in this valley of Tears. He takes notice of our uprising, and of
our down-sitting, he compasses thee round about whither thou do stop or go,
Psalm. 59. and can it be conceived, but that he observes thy rising at thy
birth, the several passages of thy Life, and thy going down at thy Death?

In short, if God has appointed in his eternal Council, the continuance of the
great World; he has also, without doubt, limited the Life of Man, the little
World, and the Image, and Compendium of the Great As our Lord and Savior
teaches us, Man is not able by his solicitous care to add one Cubit to his
stature; and our experience sufficiently demonstrates, that we cannot add a
year, a day, nor a moment, by all our labor and industry, to the continuance of
our Life.

If Life and Death were not in Gods hand, there would be nothing settled, nor
constant, neither in the Kingdoms of the World, nor in the Church of Christ.
The Prophets would be often found in grievous errors, and the eternal Election,
would be totally abolished; for the most weighty affairs of a Commonwealth,
depend upon the Life of Princes. The death of one Man is able to turn an Empire
upside down, and to change the state of a Kingdom. If Alexander the Great had
been stifled in his Cradle, what would become of the Prophecy of Pani^? who
declares the glorious victories that this Prince should obtain against King
Darius, the Persian Monarch, under the Emblem of an H^-Goat that should run at
a Ram with all his might, that should break his two horns, and trample him
under his feet. And if King Cyrus had died before the obtaining of the Kingdom
of (...); how should Isaiah's Prophecy be accomplished, for he paints out this
young Conqueror in his most lively Colors, and calls him by his name in this
expression, I have said of Cyrus, He is my Sh^pheard, and shall perform all my
pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, and to the Temple, Thy
Temple shall be laid. Isai. 44.

If the Devil could have taken away St. Paul's Life, before his journey to
Damascus, where he was strangly converted by a Miracle; how could Gods
immutable decree be accomplished? for he had designed him from his Mothers
Womb, to be a Noble Vessel of his Grace and Mercy, and a faithful Ambassador of
his Son, Gal. 1. If the good Thief had died before he had seen the Light, or if
he had been killed in one of his Robberies, how could he have been converted
upon the Cross, where he Repented of his Crimes? Or how could he have heard
from our Savior these blessed and comfortable words? Verily I say unto thee,
Thou shall be with me this day in Paradise, Luke 31.

The Heathens have perceived and understood this Truth, but they have darkened
and defaced it by their impertinent and ridiculous Fictions, for their Poets
tell us, that there are three Parcae, or infernal Goddesses, the one holds the
Distaff and Spins, the other winds up the Thread, the third cuts it, and puts a
period thereby to the Life of Man. By this Fable they intend to teach us, that
God lengthens or shortens at his pleasure Man's Life. As it is therefore
certain, that God has numbered our days; he has also appointed, in his
infinite Wisdom, the means to convey us out of the world. If one dies in
Peace, another is killed in War; If one departs in his Bed, another hangs upon
a Gibbet; If one perishes by Famine, and another is stifled with the Plague;
If one is struck with the Thunder, and the other is torn in pieces by wild
Beasts; If one is choked in the Waters, and the other perishes in the Flames;
In short, if the separation of the Soul from the Body, happens in a different
manner, it is not without the express Leave and Orders of our Heavenly Father;
Therefore when we see the strangest accidents come to pass, and the most
unexpected and tragic Deaths before our Eyes; We must remember the saying of
the Prophet Jeremy, when he saw the burning and plunder of Jerusalem, Who is he
that says, and it comes to pass when the Lord commands it not? out of the
mouth of the most high proceeds not evil and good? Sam. 3. We must then
consider with the Prophet Isaiah, That it is God that creates the Light and the
Darkness, and that sends Prosperity and Adversity, Isai. 15.45. Or with Amos,
who enquires whither there be any evil in the City and the Lord has not done
it, Amos 3. That is to say, that there is no Affliction, nor Death that
happens, but God has appointed it, and fore-ordain'd it by his wise
providence. If the Devil cannot destroy Job's Flocks of Sheep, nor hurry
headlong into the Sea the Herds of Swine without his leave, who holds him fast
in Chains, Matt. 8. Let us persuade our selves that all the powers of Hell and
the World, cannot cause us to dye by a violent Death, if God has not ordained
it before in the resolutions of his infinite Wisdom; so that if at any time a
Prince or a Magistrate speaks to us in Pilats language to our Savior, Know
thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and power to save thee, John 19.
being strengthened with an Holy Confidence, Let us answer him as our Savior.
Thou should not have that power over me, were it not given to thee from
above. Without the leave and pleasure of my God, thou can not take from me an
Hair of my Head.

We read in the Book of Judges, that when Abimelech assaulted the Tower of
Thebez, with a resolution to win it; upon a sudden, a Woman cast from the top
a piece of a Millstone, that fell upon his Head and broke his Scull, Judge. 9. If
we look only upon the second Causes, this accident may appear to be strange,
and unexpected, but we must lift up our Eyes to the Almighty hand of an
al-seeing Power and Wisdom, far more dextrous than that of this poor Woman: for
the same Relation declares, That God by this means brought to pass Jotham's
Prophecy, and rendered the wickedness of Abimelech which he did unto his Father
in slaying the seventy Brethren with his merciless hand, upon his own guilty
head.

Ahab King of Israel was disguised with a design, to fight with the Syrians, 1
Kings 22. An unknown Soldier lets fly by chance an Arrow out of his Bow, which
struck him in the weakest part of his Armor, wounded him to death, and the Dogs
lickt the Blood that gushed out of his Wounds: At this sight a carnal and an
earthly Mind will say, That this was but a mischance of War, an unfortunate
accident; But the Spirit of God informs us better, that this happened to fulfill
the Prophecy of Elias, and the dreadful threatenings which he had pronounced
against this wicked Prince, who labored, by Tyrannical and devilish attempts,
to invade other men's Possessions; Thus says the Lord, in the place where Dogs
licked the blood of Naboth, shall Dogs lick thy blood, even thine, 1 Kings, 21.

When we cast our eyes upon the Tragical death of Josias, King of Juda, at the
first sight it appears, but the effect of the boiling fury of Youth, which
carried him against all reason, obstinately to fight with Pharaoh Neco King of
Egypt, or of the strength and swiftness of his Enemies, according to the
complaint of Jeremiah the Prophet; Our persecutors are swifter than the Eagles
of the Heaven, they pursued us upon the Mountains, they laid wait for us in the
Wilderness; The breath of our Nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken in
their pits, of whom we said, under his shadow we will live among the H^^then.
Lam. 4. But to understand the Truth we must enter farther into the Sanctuary,
and adore the wisdom of Gods Decree, that had resolved to take away this good
and religious Prince, into his Eternal Rest, and bestow upon him a more noble
and a richer Crown, before he took in hand the sword of his vengeance, to
punish the people of Israel, for the many Idolatries, and horrid Crimes, of
which they had been guilty: By this means God fulfilled the Prophecy of Husda,
Behold, I will gather thee unto thy Fathers, and thou shall be gathered into
thy Grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will
bring upon this place, 2 Kings 22.

When we look upon the Death and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, we may
imagine at the first view, that only the Pharisees envy, Judas's Treason, the
mutiny of the rude Rabble, Pilates Injustice, Herod's Jests, and the cruelty of
the Roman Soldiery, were the causes of his Tragedy; but the Holy Apostles Peter
and John, unto whom our Savior had discovered the rarest secrets of his
Wisdom, consider these outward Agents but as the Instruments to bring Gods
great design, Man's redemption to pass. Therefore they speak of it in this
manner, in the fourth of the Acts, Against thine Holy Child, Jesus whom thou
have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people
of Israel were gathered together, to do whatsoever thine Hand and thy Counsel
determined before to be done.

If it happens by mischance, that a friend strikes another, for example, If in
a Wood where they are felling of it, the head of the Axe should slip out of the
handle, and kill the dearest friend of the Agent; there can be nothing imagined
to be more casual, in regard of the second Causes, Exodus 21. But God declares
in express terms, That he causes such an one to happen under the hand of his
friend that killed him against his will: To secure the innocent Author of the
unexpected Murder, God appointed Cities of Refuge for such to fly to, Numb. 35.

As when the hour of our Death is come, all the Riches of the world cannot pay
our Ransom, all the wisdom of the most prudent Councils, nor strength of a
Kingdom, are not able to free us from the power of death, On the contrary, when
it pleases God to shelter and preserve our Life, all the subtilty and cunning
of the Devil, all the power and fury of the world cannot take it from us.

Esau in his rage, full of vengeance and displeasure against his Brother,
resolves to kill him; on purpose to accomplish this cruel design he goes to
meet him with four hundred Men; But God who holds in his hand the hearts of all
the Men of the World, God that dissolves the stony Rocks into Fountains of
Water, and the Stones into Rivers of Oil, forced out of this hardened heart
Tears of Compassion and Love. The same Esau, instead of drawing out his sword
against his Brother, embraced him with expressions of kindness, kissed and wept
over him.

Jacob's Sons had wickedly intended to destroy their Brother Joseph, they were
ready to imbrue their cruel hands in the Blood of this innocent Lamb, but by a
Secret and a most wonderful Providence, God stopped their hellish design. This
great and Sovereign Monarch of the whole World, who draws Light out of
Darkness, made use of their most damnable malice and hatred, to accomplish his
good purpose, and to raise his Servant to a considerable d gree of Honor and
Glory, which was prepared for him: These inhumane Souls, full of envy and
displeasure, did conspire together, how to hinder the fulfilling of Joseph's
Dreams; but contrary to their intention they made way, and were instrumental to
the accomplishment of that which God had revealed to his Prophet; Therefore
when his Brethren were afraid lest he should revenge himself upon them, when he
had power in his hand, he answered them with an heart full of Charity and Love,
Am I in the place of God, as for you ye thought evil against me, but God meant
it unto good, Genesis 50.

David, a man after Gods own heart, fell into many fearful dangers, so that he
was reduced often times to the very Gates of Death, but God preserved his Soul
from Death, his Eyes from Tears, and his Feet from Falling, Psalm. 116. In the
Wilderness of Mahon, King Saul had surrounded him with his Men on every side,
so that no help nor succor was to be expected from Man, 2 Samuel 23. but by a
wonderful Providence God delivered him, for when he was ready to be caught, a
Messenger comes to inform Saul, Make haste and come, for the Philistines are
entered into thy Land; So that neither the inhumane persecutions of this
Tyrant, nor the abominable plotting of his unnatural Son, nor the Tumults and
Revolts of his People; nor the most furious Tempests of Hell and the World,
have ever bin able to extinguish his Life before the time appointed; when he
had spent all the days allotted to him by Gods good providence, he fell asleep
as a Man that lays himself down to rest quietly, after a long and laborious
Task.

Queen Jezabel was enraged against the Prophet Elijah, she had sworn by her
Gods, that he should surely be put to death; but by a miracle, God kept him out
of the bloody hands of this incarnate Devil; and by another Miracle he
preserved from Famine and Hunger, him whom he had before preserved from
Jezabels Sword and Fury; he sent the Ravens to feed him with Bread and Meat,
morning and evening; and for his sake God increased the Widow of Sarepta's Oil
and Meal; when he was ready to be famished in the Wilderness, he dispatched an
Angel to him, to carry him Meat and Drink. In short, all the storms that the
Devil raised against him, could not destroy his Life, so that when God resolved
to crown his Labors, he fetched him in a Chariot of Fire, and carried him up
into Heaven.

The Syrians were resolved to take the Prophet Elisha, because that he
discovered the most secret Counsels, and frustrated all their designs,
therefore they besieged the Town of Dotan, to seize upon this Man of God; When
his Servant beheld the dreadful number of Horses and Chariots that surrounded
that weak City, he cried out in a fright, Alas, Master what shall we do? and he
answered, Fear not, for they that be with us, are more then they that be with
them, 2 Kings 6. At these words of Elisha, the eyes of the poor Man were
opened, and he saw an innumerable company of Chariots of Fire, and Horses of
Fire, that God had sent from Heaven, to guard his Servant the Prophet.

The Jews did often plot against our Savior Christ, and attempt to kill him,
John 10. They came so near to the execution of their bloody design, as to take
up stones to cast at him, and knock him down, as to bring him to the sides of
an high Mountain to throw him headlong, but he did always escape out of their
hands, and passed through the midst of them without any harm: It was impossible
for them to lay hands on him when they had undertaken and resolved it; The
reason that the Spirit of God gives, is because that his hour was not yet come,
John 7.18.

The High Priest and the Saduces did burn with an enraged fury against the Holy
Apostles, which caused them to lay hands on them, and to cast them into the
public Prisons, Acts 5. But because the time of their Martyrdom appointed by
God, was not yet come, he sent his Holy Angels to free them from their Chains,
and to set them at liberty. Wh^^ King (...) saw that the Jews thirsted for the
blood of Gods Servants the Apostles, Acts 11. and that they delighted in their
execution, he cut off the head of Ja^^s, afterward he took Peter, clapped him in
prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of Soldiers, with intention to
bring him to execution after the Feast of (...) but the hour was not yet come,
in the which this Holy Apostle was to be cru^ified, for the Glory of him who
was crucified for his Salvation; therefore the night immediately before his
designed execution, Peter was sleeping between two Soldiers, bound with two
Chains, and the Keepers before the door; on a sudden a great Light shined in
the Prison and the Angel of the Lord came and smote him on the side, and raised
him up, saying, A^^se up quickly; and his Chains fell from his hands, and the
Angel said unto him, G^ed thy self, and bind on thy Sandals, and so he did;
then he says unto him, Gast thy Garment about th^^ (...) follow me; and he went
out and followed him, and he knew not that it was true, which was done by the
Angel, but thought he had seen a ^^ision; but when they were past the first and
the second Ward, they came to the Iron Gate, that opened of its own accord, and
when they had passed through one street, the Angel departed immediately from
him; Then Peter being come to himself, said, Now I know of a surety, that the
Lord has sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and
from all the expectation of the People of the Jews.

I short, the hour is not yet come which God has marker (...) and appointed to
take unto himself his faithful Servants; there is no miracle so great, but he
will show it for their sake; he dries up the Seas, he stops the Lions Mouths,
he de^ieth t^ the Fire its usual Heat, he keeps them alive in the midst of the
Floods and Flames, in the Whales Belly, in the fiery Furnaces, and in the
deepest Gulphs.

If we did but examine the Memorials of our forefathers, and consider the
things that we have seen with our Eyes, and experienced from our Infancy, we
should find, that the means which God has employed, and which he does daily
employ for our deliverance, are no less wonderful then those of former ages;
God's Arm is not shortened, his Almighty Power is not lessened, he has yet as
much Authority as ever upon Men and Devils, and his Divine Providence is no
less watchful for the preservation of such as fear and worship him; If we had
the Eyes of the Soul as open as the Eyes of our Body, or if we could but
perceive the things that are of themselves invisible, we should see that God
looks upon us continually with the Eye of his Love, and of his Fatherly care,
and that he covers us with his hand, as with a Buckler of proof, against all
the Darts of the World and of Hell; We should see that we are encompassed about
with a Wall of Fire, and that the Holy Angels do guard us on every side. We
should then acknowledge, that it is God that holds our Soul in Life, and
suffers not our Feet to be moved, Psalm. 66. And we should cry out as David, O
God, who is like unto thee? thou who have showed me great and sore troubles,
shall quicken me again, and bring me up again from the depths of the Earth;
Thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side, Psalm. 71.

Although this wholesome and most useful Doctrine, be plainly taught in Holy
Writ, and sufficiently confirmed by so many examples out of the Word of God;
some there are that oppose it with many needless objections.

In the first place they say, That God promises length of days to such
Children as shall be obedient to their Fathers and Mothers; from whence they
think to infer, that our Life has no certain time limited, and that it is
prolonged or shortened, as we prove obedient or disobedient to God, and his Holy
Laws; There is no difficulty to give an answer to this Objection:

That in the Language of the Holy Spirit, the word that signifies there to
prolong, means not always to render a thing longer then it was, or should be,
but only to make it of a long continuance; so that God does not promise here,
that the Children who shall obey his Sacred Laws, shall enjoy a longer life,
than otherwise it ought to be, but only that he will do them the favor to live
long and happily in the World: We may prove this Exposition by St. Paul's words,
who paraphrases this first Commandment of the second Table, in this manner,
Children obey your Fathers and Mothers in the Lord, for it is just, Honor thy
Father and thy Mother, which is the first Commandment, with promise, that it
may be well with thee, and that thou may live long upon the Earth: This
promise is to be understood with some exception; If God should judge it
expedient for his Glory, and for the good of his Children; for there are many
pious and obedient Children, whom God withdraws out of the World, in the flower
of their Age, to give them an happier life, which shall have no other limits
than Eternity.

In the next place, they allege the remarkable History of King Hezekiah, unto
whom Isaiah was sent with this message; Set thine house in order, for thou
shall dye and not live: Nevertheless God was entreated by his Prayers and
Tears, and prevailed upon to suffer him to live longer; therefore the Prophet
told him, that God had added 15 years to his days. To this Objection I answer,

That according to the ordinary course of the World, and the disposition of the
natural Causes, Hezekiah was to dye of that disease, for the Scripture says
expressly, That Hezekiah was sick unto Death; That is to say, that this disease
was mortal, in regard of the second Causes, and the ordinary course of Nature;
Therefore these words, Set thine house in order, for thou shall dye and not
live, ought to be understood with this exception; Thou shall dye if I don't
deliver thee by a miracle, and if I don't employ mine Almighty Power to heal
thee, and restore unto thee thy former health.

This may be also understood in another manner, Thou shall dye if thou do not
repent and turn unto me with Prayers and Tears. In the same sense God caused it
to be proclaimed in the streets of Ninivy, within forty days Ninivy shall be
destroyed.

Let not any man conclude from hence, that Hezekiah's repentance was the cause
of the lengthening of his days; and therefore that it was a casualty very
uncertain. On the contrary, we may understand, that God who had appointed by
his Eternal Decree, that this Wise and Religious Prince, should live more than
the disposition of his Body would suffer him, had also resolved to draw from
his Heart Sighs, and Groans, and Tears from his Eyes, for God knew all his
Works from Eternity. Acts 1.

Others do argue against this Doctrine more impertinently; That if God has
numbered our days, and prescribed to our life its bounds, that it is in vain to
take so much pain, and make so much ado about Bodies distempered with a
sickness, and that it is to little purpose to administer any Remedy to them, or
to pray for the recovery of their health. In like manner, such may affirm, that
it is to no purpose to eat or drink, and to hinder the mad persons from casting
themselves down a Precipice, or from swallowing poison, because they shall live
neither more nor less, than God has ordained from all Eternity. This Objection
may seem very plausible at the first, although it be most absurd and so
foolish, that it must needs proceed from a great ignorance or malice; for it is
not to be doubted, that when any does aim at one end, he designs and
supposes, by consequence to attain unto it, by the ordinary means. For example,
God had appointed in his Eternal Council, to preserve Jacob and his Family,
from that furious Famine, that raged the space of seven years; in order, to
that end he sends Joseph into Egypt, to gather up Provision the seven years of
plenty. Isaiah the Prophet had told Hezekiah from God, that he should live the
space of fifteen years more; therefore he Commanded to apply to this Prince's
Sores and Boils, a lump of dried Figs: God had promised to David, that he
should be King over the House of Israel, to confirm this promise, he had been
anointed with Oil by the Prophet Samuel. This promise don't hinder him from
seeking the means to preserve himself from a Saul's unjust pursuance. And when
Nathan tells him that God had decreed to establish his Posterity upon his Throne
after him, this don't stop his Prayers, or cool his Devotion; on the contrary,
it was that which did quicken him the more, and enslame his Soul with Love and
Thankfulness to God, therefore he expresses himself in this manner, O Lord of
Hosts, God of Israel, thou have revealed to thy Servant, saying, I will build
thee an house, therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray this
Prayer unto thee, etc. 2 Samuel 7.

Our Lord Jesus Christ knew for certain all that should happen to him;
nevertheless we find him spending the days and the nights in Prayer, and when
his life was in danger, he did not neglect the lawful and harmless means. He
told his Apostles, Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them
shall not fall to the ground without your Father, but the very hairs of your
head are all numbered. This consideration hinders him, not from Commanding them,
that when they are persecuted in one City, they should fly to another.

God had appointed to save St. Paul's life, and of all his company; therefore he
revealed it to him by an Angel; nevertheless, when he saw the Mariners (...),
he told the Centurion, If these don't stay (...) you cannot be saved, Acts 27.
In short, the Means and Causes are subordinate to the end, in su^^^ ^^^nner,
that it is mere folly and extravagancy to offer to divide them, or to suppose
them to be contrary.

It is without reason, that some bring the History of King Asa, against this
undoubted Truth; Such affirm that this Prince was reproved for seeking to the
Physicians in his sickness: These are the words of the Holy Scripture, Asa in
the thirty ninth year of his Reign, was diseased in his feet, until his disease
was exceeding great, yet in his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the
Physicians, 2 Chronicles. 1. The Spirit of God does not blame this Prince, because
he desired the assistance of Physicians, but because he did not seek help from
God, nor did not implore his aid in the day of his distress. He that is sick,
may as freely take Physic, as he that is well may eat and drink; I confess, we
must not altogether repose our confidence and trust upon the Remedies, but
rather upon God, who sends both sickness and health; As Man does not live by
bread alone, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God; so it is
not by the Physic alone that a Patient is cured of his distemper, but by the
Blessing and Power of him who gives the wound, and binds it up, who strikes and
heals when he pleases, Job 5. Therefore as we ought never to eat nor drink
before we pray unto God to vouchsafe his Blessing upon our Meat and Drink, that
he may grant to them the virtue of recruiting the decayed strength of our
Bodies; likewise we should never take any Physic, without lifting up our hands
unto God for a blessing, that the Remedy may have the strength to expel our
Disease. All Gods Creatures are good, when they are received with thanksgiving,
for they are sanctified by the word of God and by Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.

Take notice here, how much such persons are to be blamed, who when they lament
for the loss of their friends or kindred, instead of looking up to Heaven, look
down upon the Earth, and consider nothing but the inferior causes of their
displeasure; instead of adoring and submitting with all humility, to the wise
Providence of God, that disposes of all worldly events, and appoints the
meanest circumstances, they fret and murmr, they delight to nourish in their
minds, grief and displeasure, that consumes them, and break forth into many
needless complaints, that serve but to open their wounds, and to render them
more miserable; If he had not been in such a place, if he had not been engaged
in such a way, if such a Physician had not been called, or if another had been
sent for, if this or that had not been done, if this Physic had not been
administered to him, if less or more Blood had been taken from him, if he had
been suffered to eat more meat, or if less had been given, my Brother or my
Sister, my Wife, my Child, or my Husband, had been yet alive, It may be thou
art mistaken Friend; the Disease could not be cured but by a Miracle, but when
it should be otherwise, we must nevertheless lift up our Eyes to God, and
acknowledge his finger with all reverence, for often times he blinds the
Physicians, so that they cannot understand the nature of the Disease, and
suffers them to apply Remedies contrary to the distemper; As God threatens to
take away the staff of Bread, that is to say, the nourishing strength and
virtue of the Bread; Levit. 26. likewise he takes away his Blessing from the
most Sovereign Remedies, and renders them altogether useless; it is thus with
all the other accidents that happen to us, and that bring us to our Graves, for
when it plaseth him to remove any body out of the World, he suffers him to shut
his eyes to all the light of Reason and Prudence, and to cast himself away
headlong into the most apparent dangers; as when he designed to destroy
Absalom, and to cut him off, he caused him to be led away by evil Council, and
disappointed the discreet and prudent advice of Achitophel. Therefore, seeing
that God has appointed or fore-ordain'd before man's Creation, the time and
manner of his Death, at what hour, in what place, and by what means soever God
calls away our friends, or strikes at our persons, it is always our Duty to
possess our Souls with patience, and not to suffer the least repining, and
despairing word to creep out of our mouths.

If Death suddenly snatcheth away thy dearest Children, or thy most intimate
friends, complain not of its inhumanity. Remember that it does put in execution
the decrees of Gods everlasting Will, and that it carries with it a Commission
sealed with the Signet of the living God. Adore therefore with all humility the
supreme Monarch of Heaven and Earth, and say to him as David with a profound
submission, Lord, I held my tongue and said nothing, because it was thy doing,
Psalm. 39.

I don't wish thee to have an Heart of Flint, without natural affection; Piety
and Religion are not barbarous, they don't deprive us of our Bowels; the
affection that thou bear to thy Children is not displeasing to the Father of
Mercies, if it be but well governed, and don't exceed the natural bounds; It is
lawful for thee to be sensible of their griefs, to weep for their distempers,
and to pray for the recovery of their health; But when God has disposed of
them, and received them into his Eternal Rest, thou must stop all thy Sighs,
wipe all thy Tears, and say as David did, after the death of his beloved Child,
We shall go to them, but they shall not come to us. 2 Samuel 12.

Do they dye of a violent death? stop not thy consideration at the evil blasts
that have carried them away, but lift up thy mind to the great God that draws
these winds out of his Treasuries, and being armed with an Holy constancy, say
with the patient Job, The Lord gave and the Lord has taken them away, blessed
be the name of the Lord. I am but a weak instrument which God has employed to
put them into the World; but he is their King, their Father, and their Creator;
he is also their Savior and Redeemer. Now it is both just and reasonable that
God should dispose of his Subjects, of his Children, of his Workmanship, and of
those whom he has redeemed with his precious blood.

The Master of a Family gathers at his pleasure the Flowers and the Fruits of
his Garden; sometimes he cuts off the Buds, sometimes he suffers them to
blossom, sometimes he gathers the green Fruit, sometimes he stays till it be
ripe, and shall not Almighty God have the liberty to dispose, at his Will, of
all that grows in his own Territories? The Master of the Family has not
created the Trees and Plants that are at his Command, but God has made and
fashioned with his Almighty hand, all his Children, and all the Men of the
World; our Flowers wither and spoil in a moment, and our Fruits are soon
rotten, and become unprofitable; notwithstanding all our care and skill to
preserve them But the Flowers that God cuts or pulls off, he transplants them
in his Heavenly Garden, and gives them a perfect and a Divine Luster and Glory,
that shall never fade; and the greenest fruits that he gathers, he preserves
them for all Eternity in unspeakable sweetness.

Does this Death draw near to threaten thy person, when it has dispatched thy
dearest friends? be not frighted at its appearance, for it is not able to
anticipate, not a moment, the hour appointed by the wisdom of Almighty God, and
when that moment shall be come, that he shall call thee to himself from Heaven,
offer no resistance, and stop not thy Ears at thy Creators voice; say with the
Prophet Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3. Exodus 33. O
merciful God, seeing that thy Glorious presence goes before me, I am ready to
depart out of this crazy Tabernacle, and to quit this miserable wilderness, to
enter into the Heavenly and happy Canaan; Say with our Savior, Father, the
hour is come, Glorify thy Son, that thy So^may Glorify thee, John 17.

Have thou lived many years upon Earth? ascribe not the cause to the
constitution of thy Body, to the manner of thy Living, nor to the skill of thy
Physicians; but remember that it is God that lengthens thy days, and come and
humble at his feet thy Reverend gray Hairs, which the Holy Scripture styles, a
Crown of Silver, or a Crown of Glory, Prove. 16.

Art thou threatened with Death in the Flower of thine age? Fret not thy self
at it, and let not the least words proceed out of thy mouth, but what is
seasoned with the Salt of true Piety. Remember that it is God alone that cuts
off the thread of thy Life, and puts a period to thy mortal Race; Thou have as
much reason to be grieved, because thou art born too late, as to be sorry that
thou die too soon; Instead of spending thy self in useless complaints, which
is, as if thou that art but an earthly Vessel newly formed, should cast thy
self against the Rock of Eternity; remember to adore and praise thy Great
Creator, and return him hearty thanks, in that he is so well pleased to crown
thee in the middle of thy Race, and so bountiful, as to bestow the Salary of
the whole day, upon thee, who have labored but a few hours; He shows thee much
favor to transplant thee before thou have felt the heat of the day, and the
scorching of the Sun: Remember that is it the pleasant gale of his Divine
Mercy, that drives thee so fast into the secure Haven of Eternal happiness;
think not therefore that Gods calling thee away in thy strength, is a testimony
of his displeasure and hatred; for to hasten and render a person most happy, is
no sign of ill will. It may be that God calls thee, because he has found some
good thing in thee, as in Abija the Son of Jeroboam, King of Israel; because he
loves thee dearly, and favors thee, he intends only to remove thee from the
approaching evils, as he did Josias, one of the Holiest and most Religious
Princes, that has ever been, because thou do walk before him, and seek to
please him, he will take thee up into his Holy and Heavenly Paradise, as he did
Enoch, for fear that the temptations of the World should alter thy Religious
disposition, and for fear that the Enemy of thy Salvation should prevail upon
thee, by his continual and wicked suggestions, to leave the way of
Righteousness, in which thou do walk at present. As there are some rich
Stuffs, whereof the Ashes are most precious, and others, whereof the Cinders
are good for nothing but to be cast away; Thus there are some happy gray Heads,
where the rich and precious Relics of Justice and Piety do shine, whereas
others are only fit to discover the follies and vanity of our humane Nature As
there is some sort of Wine that grows better by old age, and preserves its
strength, until it comes to the Dregs; whereas other Wine there is, that soon
becomes sower and useless; Likewise there are some Men, whom old Age makes
better and wiser, so that they are like to the Indian Trees, that yield
precious Persumes and Frankincense, only when they begin to decline and wither:
The old Age of such is most Honorable, and sends forth a m^st blessed perfume
of Piety; Whereas others do but corrupt with Age, and give out a most silthy
stench; under a white Head they hide a black Soul, and a wicked Conscience: In
the decay of their Age, the vices of their Mind gather strength and flourish.
Instead of weeping for the sins of their youth, they add sin to sin, and are
more hardened in evil: Old Age imprints more furrows and wrinkles in their
malicious Hearts, than it does upon their Foreheads. Neither Men nor their
Lives are to be measured by a Yard or an Ell: We must not only consider how
long we have lived, but how well we have lived, and employed the course of this
Life; for there are some young Men, who have the Wisdom and Prudence of Gray
Heads; and there are Gray Heads that become as weak as Infants; and some that
scarce go out of that simple Age; The first are twice Children, the other
continue always in their Childhood; Some young Men have performed such brave
and Glorious Deeds, that one would judge by the passages of their Lives, that
they have lived several Years or Ages: on the contrary, Some old and decrepid
persons can scarce prove that they have bin long in the World, unless it be by
their Church Register, by their Gray Hairs, or by the great number of their
wicked and abominable actions. This consideration causes the Author of the
Book of Wisdom to say, That that old Age is not the most Reverend, that can
show a number of years, but Wisdom is to be reckoned old Age amongst Men, and a
Life without spot. Chapter 4. It is certain he has lived sufficiently, who has
learned to live well, and has prepared himself to dye well: To what purpose
should this miserable and languishing Life be lengthened a few days? Art thou
afraid to be happy too soon? and fear thou to see the end of thy Torments?
Does the Traveller endeavor to lengthen out a painful and dangerous way? Does
the Workman grieve to have finished betimes his laborious Task? Does the
Soldier murmr because he comes off from his Watch and Guard? Miserable Man!
What are all the years for which thou do so impatiently afflict thy self, and
vainly desire; for a day with God, is as a thousand years, and a thousand years
in his sight, are but as one day.

He that sails upon the Seas, admires the spacious extent of the Waters, the
difference of the rolling Waves, that mount up sometimes to the Clouds, and
then fall down again into an Abyss. And such as travel by Land, are delighted
to see on one side deep Valleys, and on the other high Mountains, that reach
above the Clouds; but if God had but taken us up into the seat of his Glory,
and that we should from that high Heaven, cast down our Eyes upon this base and
unworthy Globe of the Sea and Land, to behold the proud and stately Mountains,
with the most swelling Waves, they would appear unto us but an even Plain, or
rather they would seem altogether very little. Thus when we compare the Men of
the World, the one with the other, we shall find that some have lived long, and
others but a little while, that some are old, others are young; but in respect
of God, there is no difference between the young and the old, between an
over-aged Methusalah, who lived Nine hundred threescore and nine years, Genesis 3.
and a Child that has only seen the Light of the Living, for the life of all
Mankind is but a moment in comparison of Eternity.

If thou art ready to dye, for Righteousness, of a violent Death, meditate
seriously upon the saying of the Prophet David: Psa. 116. Precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of his Saints, Arm thy self with an Holy confidence,
and say with Eli, 1 Samuel 3. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good,
Imitate the generosity of St. Paul, Acts 20. and grave in thine heart these
Divine expressions, The Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, That Bonds
and Afflictions abide me, but none of these things move me, neither count I my
life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the
Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the
Grace of God. Remember always the Prayer that our Lord and Savior offered up
unto God in the greatest Agony; Father, O my Father, if this Cup may not pass
away from me except I drink it, thy Will be done. Forget not also at this time
Christ's advertisement; He that loves his life shall loose it, and he that
hates his life in this world shall save it to eternal life, John 12. O Great
and Glorious Lord God, the Enemies of thy Truth and Glory are met together
against thy dear Children whom thou have sanctified by the blood of the
Covenant, but they are not able to do any thing, but what thou have appointed
to be done in thine Eternal Wisdom.

A Prayer and Meditation upon the time of Death.
O Merciful Lord, who do govern all things by thine infinite wisdom, and have
reserved the times and the seasons in thine own power, thou have not only
written my name in the Book of the living, but thou have also measured the
length of my life, and appointed the hour of my death; Thou have numbered my
days, and prescribed to me my bounds, that I cannot pass beyond them. O
Sovereign Lord of the World, that have from all Eternity marked out with thy
finger, the moment of my entrance into this life, and the time of my going cut;
This miserable body is but a crazy Tabernacle made up of Earth, subject to all
manner of infirmities: Nevertheless none is able to destroy it without thy
Divine assistance; the same hand that has fashioned and formed it, must break
it to pieces; if a Sparrow falls not to the ground without thy leave, it is not
possible that my soul should fly away into Heaven, without thy express Command.
My God and Father, give me Grace not to be of the ^^^ber of such wretches as
are in daily apprehensions of Death, but let me rest upon thee, who do kill
and give life, who do cast into the Grave, and fetch him thence again. Let
Satan and all the enemies of thy Glory plot against me what they can, they are
not able to do any thing but what thy Wisdom has ordained and appointed before
the f^undation of the world; Without thy leave and permission, they are not
able to pluck an Hair from my Head, nor diminish a moment from the time that I
am to live in this earthly Tabernacle. O Almighty and most merciful God, I
recommend unto thee my Soul, as to my faithful Creator, and leave it wholly
into thine hands; Here I am to accomplish thy Will, and to submit my self to
thy pleasure, without any resistance; whether this Soul which thou have created
after thy likeness, and which is an Image of thy Divinity, remain in this Body,
that I may be able to serve thee on Earth, or whether thou do call for it,
and take it up into Heaven, that it may glorify thee in the company of thy
Saints, and of thy blessed and Glorious Angels, Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation upon the manner of our Death.
O God the Creator of all flesh, and Father of the immortal Spirits, I know
that all manner of Deaths of thy Children, are precious in thy sight; and that
howsoever they shall happen, thou will take care of my Soul; when I consider
all things, I sind that it matters not, whether my Soul gets out by my Lips, or
by a wound, so that it enters into thy Glory to enjoy thine Eternal Happiness:
What difference is there? if my Lamp goes out of its own accord, or if it be
blown out by some envious blast, so that it be lighted again by the immortal
beams of the Son of Righteousness, and continu^, for ever, Glorious in the
highest Heavens. I shall be sufficiently happy if I dye in the Lord, and enter
into mine Eternal Rest, from all my Labors, in what manner soever Death
assaults me, from all Eternity. O Lord, thou know all thy works, and with a
glance of thine Eye, thou discoverest the depths, and see the bottom of
Eternity. As thou have marked out and appointed the moment of my death, thou
have also ordained the manner of it. I must, O Almighty God, repose my self
upon this wonderful and wise Providence, and be contented with thy
uncontrollable Decrees: but O my God and Heavenly Father, if thou will give me
the liberty, who am but Dust and Ashes, to speak unto thee, and to send up the
thoughts of my Heart; I beseech thee to be so Gracious as to let me know my
end, that I may not be surprised on a sudden, by an unexpected death, as Job's
Children, and so merciful as to give me timely notice of my departure, as thou
did to thy servant Hezekiah. I desire not the notice of many years, but of a
few days, or at least of a few hours immediately before, that my Soul may not
be disturbed with evil thoughts, nor frighted with false conceits, and
malicious suggestions of the Devil; but that I may end my days with all
tranquillity and satisfaction of mind: that I may always have a perfect use of
my senses, of my reason and understanding, and a certain persuasion of thy
Grace and Favor; that I may glorify thy name, and edify my acquaintances, until
the last moment of my departure. Suffer not therefore my Soul to be snatched
away by force on a sudden, but that I may have time to commit it into thy
merciful hands, Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation for one that dies in a strange Country, in the midst
of Infidels.
O My God and Heavenly Father, how painful and grievous is this trial? who can
express the troubles of my mind? at the moment of my most urgent necessity, and
of all the troubles of my mind, at the time of my Agony, I see my self
destitute of all humane assistance. Here I am at a distance not only from my
natural soil and fare, from the pleasant company of my friends, and deprived of
all spiritual Comfort, of which I have at present greatest need in my
extremity, but also, to my unspeakable grief, here I am in a barbarous
Country, in the hands of my most inhumane and unreconcileable Enemies; I have
no body to comfort and rejoice me, nor to strengthen me in the faith of my
Savior Christ; all things that appear before me, do increase and add to my
trouble: I am here among the Enemies of the Truth, who labor to destroy my
interest in Christ, and to cause me to perish, now that I am entering into the
Haven of Eternity I must encounter with Death, with Hell it self, and with the
subtle insinuations of the infernal Spirits. O Almighty and merciful Lord,
suffer me not to lose courage and to yield to the present temptations. By thy
wonderful Providence, and out of the Treasuries of thy Mercy, supply all my
wants and infirmities, and grant that I may with the Shield of faith, quench
all the siery Dorts of the Devil. I am beset with many visible and invisible
Enemies, but they that are for me, are more in number then they that are
against me: It is true, I am far from my Native Country, but I am not one jott
farther from Heaven, whereof the Earth is the Center; I am at a distance from
all my Earthly friends, but nothing can put me at a distance from thee; O good
God, who love me with an unchangeable affection; I am in the embraces of mine
Heavenly Father, and of my God, I have not the comfort of a Minister to assist
and help me in my grief and pain, but I know that thou will send to me thine
Holy Angels, as once to thy beloved Son, in his bitter Agony; These Angels
shall protect me against all the power of the Prince of darkness; Thou will
administer unto me thy self, the sweet comforts of thy Salvation; thy Rod and
thy Staff will assist me in this Valley, and Shadow of Death. O Lord, thou do
things that are not to be searched out, and so many wonders, thot it is not
possible to number them, Thy Grace is sufficient for me, and thy power is made
manifest in mine infirmities; thine Holy Spirit who is the true comforter, and
the great Power of the Almighty, shall refresh me in these my afflictions, and
in all things shall made me more than Conqueror: Thou art stronger than all
other beings, so that I am persuaded, nothing can ravish me out of thine hands;
I am certain, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, can separate me from the love that thou have declared to me in
Jesus Christ my Lord; This precious faith with which thou have enabled my Soul,
shall vanquish the World, triumph over Hell, and destroy Death in its own
Empire, Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation upon the death of a beloved Person.
O My God, I acknowledge that there is nothing certain nor unchangeable on
Earth, but thy precious and Holy Promises, therefore it becomes us to enjoy the
things of the World, as not enjoying them; Thou have snatched out of my
embraces, and pulled from my bosom my greatest Darling, and most intimate
friend; by this means thou have opened my Heart, and torn my Bowels, thou have
separated me from my self, so that my life is but a burden, and a pain to me, I
did often look upon this pleasant object of my love, as a gift from above, and
a mark of thy favor and liberality; It was my greatest joy and my seetest
comfort The day that it took away, loaded me with sorrows, and overwhelmed me
in a Sea of grief; That which does most disturb me, is, That I am afraid, that
this is a streak, and an effect of thine anger and justice. Lord my God, I must
needs acknowledge, that I have grievously offended thee, seeing thou do thus
chastise me with so much severity, and make me to feel so sharp an
affliction; I am unworthy of all thy favors, seeing thou do take from me such
a precious jewel which was shown to me as a Lightning. I am afraid to have been
wanting in my Duty, and that this death that kills me, is the effect of my
stupidity and blindess: Methinks I could have hindered this doleful accident,
for if I had behaved my self otherwise than I have done, my Life and Soul
should not be now in its Grave. O God of all comfort, pardon my excessive
grief, pacify my sighs, stop the current of my Tears, remove all these vain
displeasures that consume me, deliver my Soul from this unmerciful, grief and
torment, that it suffers, and from these troubles that are more than humane:
Instead of looking to these inferior Causes, and to the circumstances of the
death of this person, that I did love as mine own Soul; give me grace to
remember, that the least things as well as the greatest, are governed and ruled
by thy wise Providence, and that the good and the evil proceed from thy Divine
appointment. Give me Grace to consider, that thou do hold in thine Almighty
hand, the Keys of Life and Death, and that thou alone do cast us into the
Grave, and lift us up from thence again. Thou, O Sovereign Monarch of the
Universal World, who do not only let death loose, but do also appoint all
the means to talk us out of the World; make me truly submissive unto thy
Sacred Pleasure, and to put the Finger upon my Lips, because it is thy doing;
If I open them, let it be to adore thy Justice, and sing forth thy Praises; the
person for whom I lament so much, was nearly related to me, like another my
self, but it was also thy Creature, thy Child, and a Member of our Saviors
mystical Body. We for our parts believe, to have the right of disposing of our
Workmanship, and of that which we have bought with our Money; and have not
thou, O God, the liberty to dispose of that which thou have created after thy
likeness? bought, not with corruptible things, as with Gold and Silver, but by
the precious Blood of the Lamb, without spot or blemish. Thou had a Son who
is the brightness of thy Glory, and the express image of thy person, whom thou
have not spared for me, and shall I Lord refuse thee my Heart and my Bowels?
Thy only begotten Son came down upon Earth to suffer the most cruel and
ignominious Death of the Cross, but thou have taken up into Heaven the person
whom my soul did love, to crown it with a glorious and ever happy Immortality;
Shall his or her Felicity be the cause of my Misery? and that his or her Rest
occasion my displeasure? It is the property of true love to prefer the
happiness of the beloved Persons, to our own satisfactions; Therefore our
Savior told his Apostles; If you did love me, you would rejoice, because I go
to my Father, for my Father is greater than I. Between thee, O great and living
God, and us miserable Worms of the Earth, there is a vast difference, as there
is between the innocent and harmless delights of this world, and the unspeakale
pleasures of thy presence; for these are but as drops of Water, that are dried
up with the least wind; whereas the satisfactions of Heaven are like a
bottomless Sea of Delights, in which we shall swim for ever. Do I therefore
weep for him or for her, whose tears thou have wiped away? Do I wear a mourning
Apparel, and a black Scarf, for him who is now covered with a Glorious Attire
of Joy and Gladness, and who is adorned with an Habit as white as Snow? Do I
delight my self in darkness, and does he solace himself at the Fountain of
Light and Glory? Do I seek a solitary and melancholy Retreat, and does he
rejoice amongst the thousands of Angels, and the Glorious company of the
immortal Spirits? I sigh and groan, and he sings a new song, the Song of the
Blessed, which is always in his mouth. All my complaints and groanings cannot
bring him back upon Earth; but when that were possible, it is not just to
attempt it; my kindness would be cruel, and my love most inhumane: How could I
resolve to make him leave the Haven of Eternal Felicity, to expose him again to
the furious Waves and storms of this troublesome Sea of the World? How can I
have the heart to pull him down from his Triumphing Chariot, and from the
magnificent Throne, unto which thou have raised him, to engage him in new and
fresh encounters, and to bind him again with a chain of misery; how could I
pluck off from him the Habits of Light and Glory, to cloth him with darkness,
and cover him with our infirmities; Is it possible that I should be so
inhumane, to draw him out of Rivers of pleasures, to cast him again into a Sea
of Gaul and Bitterness? to take from him the Bread of thine Heavenly Kingdom,
and the Fruits of the Tree of Life, to give him the Bread of affliction, and
the Apples of Sorrow and grief? Can I be so cruel to pluck him from thy bosom,
from the Breasts of thy most tender favors, and from that fullness of Joy,
which he has in the sight of thy Countenance, to make him languish in our
embraces, swallow the poison of this miserable Life, and groan under the burden
of our mortal afflictions? In short, can I be so senseless, as to remove him
out of that Eternal Life, to cause him to become again the sport of Death? He
is passed from Death to Life, is it my desire that he should return back from
Life, into the merciless hands of Death? we shall go to him, but he cannot come
to us; seeing that this life is so short, that it is spent and gone as a
thought, we shall see one another shortly in the light of the Living. O Lord,
how wonderful art thou in thy Works? how Magnificent in the means that thou
employest? and how various is thy Wisdom in all things? I see that what thou
have done, is not only for thy Glory, and for the advantage of this happy
Creature, a that thou have received into thy Rest; but it is also for my
happiness, and the instruction of my neighbors; for in taking from me my most
dearly Beloved, my Joy, my Pleasure, and my Hopes, thou have put my Obedience
and faith to a Trial. As thou did heretofore try the Father of the faithful,
in requiring from him his only Son Isaac, in whom thou had promised to bless
all the Nations of the World: I confess, good Lord, to the praise of thy Grace
and Goodness, that my trial is loss than his, for thou did command Abraham to
sacrifice his Son with his own hands, to spill his Blood in thy presence, and
to reduce his Body into Ashes; but thou requirest of me no other Sacrifice, but
that of my Obedience, and of my Submission to thy Holy Will. Thou will have me
say with good Heli, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good; or with
thy Servant Job, The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name
of the Lord. Thou have plucked out that strong root that did tie me to this
Earth, and have out the pleasant string that did bind me so fast to the world,
that thou might transplant my heart in Heaven, and lift up my affections to
the things above. A part of my self, which I looked upon as my Treasure, is
already with thee, and the wings of Divine Love that enflames me, caries me
thither also, at every moment; Instead of continuing in my Sighs, Groans, and
Tears, for him, or for her that I loved with all the affection and tenderness
that I am capable of, Give me Grace to employ my self in preparing to depart
out of this earthly Tabernacle; Enable me to imitate the Piety, Zeal, Faith,
and Constancy, and all the other Noble Virtues of those whom thou have received
into thine Eternal Rest, and crowned with Glory. Let me dye the death of the
Righteous, and let my last End be like his, Amen.

CHAP. 10.
The fourth Remedy against the fears of Death, to separate our Hearts from the
World.

THe Children of Israel did leave the Wilderness with a ready mind, and went
joyfully over the River of Jordan, when God Commanded them so to do. The cause
of this their readiness, was an earnest longing for the Land of Canaan, and
their unsettled condition in the Wilderness, having nothing but Tents to live
in. Death is to us the same, in regard of our Heavenly Paradise, as the River
of Jordan was, to the Children of Israel, in respect of the promised Land;
Therefore from hence it appears, that the best means of obliging our selves to
a resolution of entering into this passage willingly, is to free our selves from
all those things which might incumber, as stop or tie us to the World, and to
keep our selves always in a readiness to depart.

For that purpose it is not necessary that we should go out of the World, but
that the World should be banished, and driven out of us, and that we should
renounce all the vanities and unruly affections, so that we may be able to
speak with the Apostle, The world is crucified to me, and I am crucified to the
world; for there be many who depart out of the World, but leave there their
Hearts and most tender Affections; as Lot's Wife that went out of Sodom, but
left therewith her Treasures and Delights, her most earnest desires; as the
Israelites, who when they went out of Egppt, left behind them their cursed
affections, with their pots of Flesh and Onions.

The same thing happens to many, who separate themselves without any necessity,
from the acquaintance of Mankind, and who affect a strange and austere kind of
life; They leave the society of wise and virtuous persons, and the lawful use
of the Blessings which Heaven has vouchsafed to them; and they deprive
themselves of all that deserves our esteem, and the means of glorifying God,
and edifying our neighbors: but many times they carry with them their
Corruptions, their Vices, and a legion of wicked Thoughts, and carnal Desires;
By this means they give place to the Devil, and expose themselves to all his
temptations; for that wicked Serpent delights himself rather in the Dens of
Wild Beasts, and in the Caves of the Earth, than in the Palaces and Dwellings
of Princes and Kings. The most horrid and abominable Vices creep, and breed
rather in the Deserts, and places of Retreat, than in Public, and in the great
Cities that are full of Inhabitants. Lot remained chaste in the most execrable
City, that was in the World, but when he went aside to the foot of a Mountain,
and into a Cave to dwell, he defiled himself with a monstrous Incest: When
Satan intended to tempt our Savior Christ, he carried him into a Desert, and
to the top of a Mountain. From hence we may gather, that this subtle Enemy of
Mankind has learnt by his long experience, that the places of Retreat, and the
most solitary, are the fittest for to lay his snares. If our Savior, who was
wholly innocent, and free from Sin, has been able to overcome all manner of
Temptations; we are not of the same temper, we are not furnished with such
Armor as he was, of Proof, against all the enflamed Darts of the Devil; for our
miserable Flesh delights in its own destruction; it opens the Ears and the
Heart wide, to the deceitful promises of Satan, and suffers it self to be
cheated, by his damnable Enchantments; It flatters us, and causes us to be
^ull'd aslcep in its bosom, then, like a treacherous Dalilah, it betrays us
into the unmerciful hands of our great Enemy.

Some cloth themselves with Hair, and wear at their Girdle a knotted Cord,
whom the Devil drags to Hell with the invisible Chains of Lust; Others climb up
to the top of frozen Mountains, and yet their Hearts do burn with impure
Flames; Some fret themselves in a mournful solitariness, whose desires and
longings, are for the world, and its vanities: Others have their hands lifted
up to Heaven, whose mind is enslaved to the Earth, and rooted in the rotten and
filthy pleasures of the Times; Some have a Lamp burning before them, whose
understanding is wrapped in gross darkness, more palpable than that of Egypt:
Others have an empty Stomach, whose Soul is full of abominable Passions. In
short, Some live in appearance like Angels, and yet they are possessed by
legions of infernal Spirits: Other seem to have no concernment in the World,
and yet lodge the whole World in their Hearts.

Under a course Habit, there dwells oftimes more Envy, more Vanity, and
Ambition, than under the glorious attire of Silk and Gold: Through a torn
clothing some Souls may be perceived swelled with Pride and Arrogance, and in
the company of Beggars, are to be found many times the Designs of Kings, and
the lofty thoughts of the greatest Monarchs: To speak plainly, the good things
and advantages of this life, don't stop and wed us, of themselves, to this
World, but rather that Love and Affection which we bear to them; for without
doubt, there be many that are more earnest and affectionate, for the things
that they want, than others that enjoy them: Some poor people have a far
greater longing for Riches, than ever Solomon had in the midst of all his great
Treasures: Some silly Women that are covered with old Rags, and some
contemptible Joanes have more Vanity and Pride in their Brains, than ever had
Queen Esther, in her Richest and most Glorious Attire. The Prophet Daniel was
raised to an high and eminent Honor, for he was the Governor of the third part
of the Monarchy of the Persians, and of the Medes; nevertheless, he was no more
concerned in Babylon, than if he had had there but a Sepulcre, and worn the
Chains of a Slave; he sends forth as many Sighs, and pours as many Tears, as if
he had been lying upon the Ashes of Jerusalem.

Some pitiful Beggars, are more loath to quit their Rags, than the Sovereign
Princes, to lay down the Ensigns of their Dignity and Honor: Such are more
enslaved to their filth and baseness, than the greatest Monarchs to the Glory
and Splendour of their Empire. Death labors as much to free a man from his
Prison, and to take him out of his Dungeon, as to drive him out of his Palace,
and to tumble him from his Throne; The Poor and the Indigent, who have no other
Bed to lie upon than the hard ground, does make as much resistance, as the
Rich, who are stretched upon the softest Couches: The Galley-slaves are as
unwilling that Death should loose them from their Chains, and take them out of
their misery, as the Kings and Princes are to leave their Scepters and their
Crowns. I am fully persuaded that David was more willing to go from his
Command, and from his Riches, than many poor wretches are to depart from their
Dunghils, and their meanness. Some persons are tormented with the Gout, the
Stone, and other grievous and sensible pains; they desire nevertheless, more
passionately, to live, than many that enjoy a perfect and a flourishing Health.
Carnal and Earthly Souls, are so much bound to the Earth, that they feel an
horrid reluctance, and an unspeakable displeasure, when they are to depart from
a Body, rotten, and falling to pieces with old Age; whereas others that are
more spiritualized, and that have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and of the
powers of the World to come, depart most willingly out of young and lusty
Bodies, flourishing in their Strength and Beauty.

We must not therefore remove out of the World our Legs and Arms, but our
Affections and vain Lusts; If God bestows upon us his Earthly Blessings, we are
not to follow the example of that extravagant Philosopher, who cast into the
Sea his Silver, and his precious Stones, that he might not have the trouble to
keep them, and who lost them willingly, that he might not be in any further
danger of loosing them afterward; but we must take heed, that they cause not
our Faith to make Shipwreck, and that we regard them not more than our
Consciences, for the Soul is a far more precious Jewel, than the Body, and
Life, far more considerable than Clothing. Seeing that God bestows upon us so
many good things, with an intent that we should enjoy them; we should show our
selves unthankful to his goodness, contrary to his wise Providence, and unjust
and cruel to our selves, to refuse the means of ever using, and employing these
Blessings. All Gods creatures are good, and none are to be rejected, so that we
take them with thanksgiving, for they are sanctified by the word of God, and by
Prayer.

The Honors and Riches that we receive from our Birth, or that we obtain by
lawful and just means, are to be ranked amongst the Blessings of God; therefore
Esther who was but a poor stranger, received with joy, as a favor from Heaven*
the Imperial Crown that was put upon her Head, and she refused not to be the
Wife of the greatest Monarch of that time. Joseph accepted willingly the power
and dignity, with which King Pharaoh had invested him; and the Prophet Daniel
did not only receive the honorable Commands which were bestowed upon him by
the King of Babylon, but he employed his Power and Credit, to raise also his
Companions, to the places of Trust, and to the Government of that Empire. God
does sometimes give the Scepters into the hands of cruel and profane persons,
such as was Pharaoh, Ahab, Nebuchadnezar, Belshasar, and Herod, to teach us,
that it is not the chief good of Man, and that we must aim at a more excellent
Kingdom, and at more solid and constant Felicities; He does also place upon the
Throne, Men according to his own heart, whom he cherishes as the Apple of his
Eye; as David, Solomon, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Josias, to teach us, that the
fear of God, and the expectation of an immortal Crown, is not inconsistant with
the Honors of this Life, nor with worldly Glory, For true Piety has the
promises of this life, and of that which is to come.

The Riches of the Earth are no more hurtful than the Honors and Dignities,
unless it be by acciddent; they are very useful and advantageous to such as
employ them well, and that dispose of them with an Holy discretion; They are
powerful helps to true Piety, and excellent means to glorify God, and to
exercise our Mercy and Compassion; I may say that they give a Lust to the Zeal
and Charity of God's Children, Riches turn into evils, and are ill bestowed in
the hand of a Brute, and sordid Nabal at the disposition of a merciless and
voluptuous Glutton, as the rich Man of the Gospel, of a perfidious and
treacherous Judas, of a silly and debauched Youth, as the prodigal Son; but
they are the Blessings of Heaven, when they happen in the hand of a Joseph, who
nourished therewith his Father, and all his kindred, in the hands of a David,
that employed them in offerings to Almighty God in the sight of his people, of
a Solomon, who built a magnificent Temple, and of a Mary Magdalen, who spent
them not in Luxury and Vanity, nor in curious Trinkets, but to buy a box full
of precious Ointment, which she poured on the head of the Savior of the World.
They are blessings indeed, when such an one enjoys them, as Cornelius the
Centurion, who employed them in Alms, whereof the perfume ascended up to the
Throne of the God of Mercies. In short, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
Eternal Wisdom of his Father, has uttered out of his Sacred mouth, that It is
more blessed to give than to receive, Acts 20.

I am not ignorant of the Oracle pronounced by this Great God and Savior, That
whosoever does not renounce Father, Mother, Houses and Lands for my sake is not
worthy of me. Mat. 10. This was said to teach us, that we must renounce with
Heart and Affection, all things in the World, and of this present Life, and
that we must be always ready to abandon all, in case we cannot keep them
without offending God, and giving a scandal to his Church; but without such an
absolute necessity, God does not require from us in any place of Scripture,
actually to quit and leave our worldly Possessions.

I know also very well, that when a young man did enquire from our Savior,
What he was to do to inherit Eternal life; Luke 18. This wise Teacher returned
him this answer, Sell all that thou have and give it to the poor, and thou
shall have Riches in Heaven, then come and follow me. Luk 18. This was a
particular Commandment made only to that man, upon a singular occasion, from
whence it is not possible that we should gather any conclusion to oblige others
to the same action; for otherwise this might oblige all Christians in general
to sell what they have without exception, and to give it to the poor: The
Commandment was given upon this occasion, This vain glorious Pharisee did boast
of having kept all the Commandments of God from from his youth up. To remove
this good opinion of himself out of his mind, and to give a vent to the
swelling of his Pharisaical Pride, our Lord puts him to a Trial, enjoining him
to sell all his Goods, and to give them to the poor. At these words the poor
young man went away, very sad in a confusion, because he had much Riches, and
his Heart, and greatest affections were with his Treasures. By this proceeding
he discovered that he was far from loving God with all his Heart, and with all
his Soul, and with all his Strength, because that it did appear, that he did
love his worldly possessions more than Christ and his Blessedness. You may
therefore understand without difficulty, devout Souls, that this Commandment
that was made to this young man, extends not to all in general; If it had been
otherwise, the Holy Apostles who were mindful of every thing that did tend to
perfection, would not have rested satisfied with the loss of their Goods, to
follow Christ, as they declared to him themselves, We have left all, and have
followed thee, Matthew. 19. But they would have totally quitted all their
enjoyments, and would have reserved nothing for themselves, which they did not;
for St. John, Christ's beloved Disciple, had a Dwelling House, where he
entertained the Holy Virgin, after our Saviors death, John 19, And the other
Apostles had their Ships, their Nets and Tackling, therefore after Christ's
Resurrection, they returned to their Fishing Trade.

Our Savior, upon this occasion of the young man's refusing to obey this
express and particular Command of selling his goods, and giving them to the
poor, Informs his Disciples, That it is hard for a Rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. But he explains in another place this passage in such a
manner, that he leaves not the least difficulty in it; when he says, That it
is hard for them who put their confidence in Riches, to enter into the Kingdom
of God, Mat. 19. By this we may understand, that he speaks not of all rich Men
in general, but of such only who put their trust in their Riches; therefore the
Apostle St. Paul don't Command the rich Men to cast away their Estates, and
Goods, but he advises them not to put their confidence in them, so as to become
more vain and prouder. In this manner he speaks to Timothy, Charge them that
are rich in this World, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain
Riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy. 1 Timothy
6.

Here are therefore the best directions, according to my judgment, for a true
Christian who desires to be acceptable to God, to attain to the dispositions
necessary for an happy Death.

First, we must employ our most assidual and earnest endeavors and affections,
for the Eternal advantages of the Soul, and of the Life to come; we must thirst
impatiently for the Graces of God, and for the Gifts of his Holy Spirit, we
must sigh and long for the spiritual Riches of the Soul, and labor with all
our strength to attain to the uncorruptible Crown, and the immortal Glory of
Heaven. Christ gives us this Holy and safe advice, Seek, says he, first the
Kingdom of God-and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
you, Mat. 6. And elsewhere, Labor not for the Meat which perishes, but for
that Meat which endures unto everlasting life, John 6.

2. As the good King Solomon built first the Lord's House, and then laid the
foundation of his own Palace. Thus we ought to proceed to labor first for the
advancement of God's Kingdom, and the edificatiof his Church, then we may have
liberty to employ our selves about the affairs of this present life, and about
our worldly concerns; but our Employment and Calling, must be just, and allowed
by the Laws of God and of Man, for he that gains Riches by unlawful Arts, is
but a Thief and a Robber.

3. Before we engage in any work, we must pray to God to vouchsafe his Blessing
to it, and speak to him as Moses, Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon
us, and establish thou the work of our hands upon us, yea the work of our
hands, establish thou it, Psalm. 90. For without his Assistance and Blessing,
all our labors will be in vain, and to little purpose. It is God that makes
poor and makes rich, that lifts up, and abaseth, 1 Jam. 2. Neither is he that
planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the increase,
1 Cor. 3. The Royal Prophet is of the same judgment, when he says, If the
Lord builds not the City, their labor is but lost that build it.

4. Our Labors must be without murmurings, and mistrusting God's Providence, we
must banish out of our minds, all idle thoughts, and groundless expectations
that disturb us, Psalm. 107. We must pluck out of our hearts all the cares and
displeasures that trouble us. We must imprint in our minds that excellent
Sentence of David, Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee,
Psalm. 5. and that of St. Peter, Cast all your care upon him, for he cares for
you, 1 Pet. 5. We must remember our Saviors charge, Take heed to your selves,
least at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness,
and cares of this life, Luk 21.

5. Above all things we must beware of the slavish vice of Covetousness, that
denies God's good Providence, and his fatherly Care; To that purpose St. Paul
exhorts us in express words, Let your conversation be without covetousness, and
be content with such things as ye have, for he has said I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. That he might beget in us an aversion of this
infamous Vice, St. Paul tells us, They that will be rich, fall into temptation
and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in
destruction and perdition; 1 Timothy 6. He adds next, For the love of Money is the
root of all evil, which, which some coveted after, they have erred from the
faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. Colos, 3. The same
Apostle declares, That Covetousness is Idolatry, and that it shall never
inherit the kingdom of God, Ephesians. 5. Therefore we ought to follow the wise
King's advice, Labor not to be rich, but forbear from any such design, Prove.
25.

6. If God is pleased to afflict us with poverty, and to cast us down in the
dust of a mean Estate, notwithstanding our continual labors in a lawful
Calling; Let us endeavor to possess our Souls with patience; look upon Christ
our Savior, who for our sakes became poor, although he was rich, that we might
be enriched with his poverty; Let us beseech him to grant us the blessed
disposition of St. Paul, that we may be able to speak as he did, I have learned
to be content in whatsoever estate I am, I know both how to be abased, and I
know how to abound every where, and in all things; I am instructed, both to be
full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need, I can do all things
through Christ, which strengthens me. Phil. 4. Remember, Christian Souls, to
settle your Treasure in Heaven, where neither the Moth, nor Rust can corrupt,
and where Thieves cannot break through and steal; Labor to be rich in Faith,
and in good Works, that you may inherit the Kingdom that God has promised to
them that love him.

7. But if it has pleased God to bless thy labors, and if his powerful and
liberal hand has raised thee up to great Honor, so that thou enjoyest Riches
in abundance, thou must remember to possess them in such a manner, that they
may not enslave thee: and according to St. Paul's advice, thou must remember to
enjoy them, as if thou enjoyest them not, and that the fashion of this World
passes away; we must not trust upon them, nor pride in them; we ought to glory
in something else, as God himself exhorts us, Let not the wise man boast of his
wisdom, nor the strong of his strength, Let not the rich man glory in his
Riches, but he that glories, let him glory in that he has understanding, and
knows me, Jer. 9.

8. We must not only take off our hearts and affections from the world and its
vanities, trample upon them and esteem them like Dung, in comparison of the
unspeakable Treasures of Heaven; but we must also be ready to leave them at
every moment, as so many trifles, vain, and perishable things; as we are to
possess them without displeasure and fear, so we must part with them without
grief and murmuring. When we should loose in a day all that God has bestowed
upon us in the world, it becomes us to strengthen our selves with an Holy
confidence, and resolution, saying with Job, The Lord gave, and the Lord has
taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1.

9. If we happen to part with our Goods, Honors, and Dignities in the service
of God, and for the profession of Christ's Gospel; in such a case, we ought to
endure the loss with a Christian patience, and an excessive joy, because that
such a loss for a just cause, will prove at last to our advantage and glory:
This was the practice of the faithful Hebrews, of whom St. Paul renders this
testimony You have received with joy the spoiling of your Goods, knowing that
you have in Heaven a better and a more lasting inheritance, Heb. 10. Christian
Souls represent unto your selves the example of the Prophet Moses, who esteemed
the reproach of Christ greater riches, than the Treasures of Egypt, for he had
a respect unto the recompense of the reward, Heb. 11.

10. Whilst we enjoy our Goods, we must take care of the poor, and be bountiful
in Alms, and to speak in St. Paul's language, Whilst we have any time, let us
do good, especially to the household of faith, Gal. 6. Whoever has compassion
of the poor, makes God his debtor, he will assuredly return him his good Deed,
Prove. 19. Our Savior promises to recompense a Cup of cold water, that shall
be given to the meanest of such as believe in his name, Matt. 10. Alms is a
Seed that is cast upon Earth, but its Flowers and most excellent Fruits are to
be gathered in Heaven, He that sows liberally shall reap liberally: It is not
therefore as that other Seed, mentioned Psalm. 126. That they that sow in Tears,
shall reap with Songs of Triumph, 2 Cor. 9. For whosoever bestows his Alms
sparingly, and unwillingly, he shall be Treated in the same manner as him that
refuses to part with it; therefore St. Paul declares, When I should give all
my Goods to nourish the poor, if I have no Charity I am nothing, 2 Cor. 13. God
loves a cheerful Giver, and delights in such Sacrifices, 2 Cor. 9. Remember
therefore Christians, that God shall judge you at the last day, not by your
Learning, Knowledge, Riches, or Dignities and Honors of this life, but by your
Alms, Deeds, and acts of Charity and Hospitality, and by the distributing of
your Goods, to the necessities of the Saints. Make to your selves friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when you fail they may receive you into the
everlasting Habitations, Matt. 25. Romans 12. Luke 16. That upon your Tomb, one
may justly engrave. He has scattered, he has given to the poor his
Righteousness, that is, his Charity and Alms-deeds remain for ever. Psalm. 112.

11. Finally, we must not only take off our Heart and Affections, from the
Riches, Honors, and Vanities of this World, but we must also deny our selves,
tame and overcome our passions, and crucify our Flesh with its Lusts. Therefore
our great God and Savior Jesus Christ, calls upon us from Heaven. He that will
follow me, let him deny himself, take up his Cross daily and come after me,
Matt. 10.

That we may be able to imprint this good Lesson in our minds, we should
seriously consider in the first place, that we are but strangers and pilgrims
in this world, and that we have no lasting City, Heb. 13. The Houses that God
grants to us, are no perpetual Dwellings, but only Inns for our present
accommodation: This was the frequent consideration of the great Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who saw the promises afar off, believed and
embraced them; for St. Paul informs us, that they did ingeniously profess, that
they were no better than strangers and pilgrims upon earth, and that their
intention was to march forwards to their Celestial Country. This was Jacobs
language when he appeared before Pharaoh; The days of my pilgrimage have been
short and evil, they have not attained to the years of the life of my Fathers,
and of the time of their pilgrimage, Heb. 12. Genesis 47. And not only the ancient
Patriarchs, who never had any other possessions in the world, than a Tomb, or
some small piece of ground, have acknowledged themselves to be strangers and
pilgrims, but Princes and Kings also whom God has sanctified by his Holy
Spirit, have freely confessed the same; for David declares not in the time of
his banishment, nor of his flight, nor in his calamities and misery, but in his
most flourishing Estate, and in the midst of his Triumphs, Glory, Plenty, and
Prosperity, he declares unto God, I am a stranger and a forreigner with thee,
as all my Fathers were, Psalm. 39. and 119. And when he speaks, not only of
himself, but also of the rest of God's Children that are upon Earth, he makes
no difficulty to confess, We are strangers and foreigners with thee, as all
our Fathers were, and our days are as a shadow upon Earth that have no stop, 1 Chronicles. 29. Rich and Poor, Masters and Servants, Princes and Subjects, all of us
in general, we may, with reason, say to the Men of this World, as Abraham to
the Children of Heth, I am a stranger and a forreigner in the midst of you. Now
he that travels in a strange Country, may gather some Flowers in his passage,
or take with him a few Ears of Corn, but if he be wise, he will never tarry to
build a Palace. If he be well Treated in his Inn, he must not cast away the
good cheer, but if his Entertainment be bad, he must endure with patience, the
inconveniences, and contemn all the disorders that happen during his abode; if
the way be deep, full of Mud, Briars and Thorns, he must get out of them as soon
as he can; and if it be good and pleasant, he must not stop in it, nor busy
himself with needless inquiries. Every one that is a Traveller dreams of
nothing but how to advance in his journey, and go forward: Likewise, we being
accustomed to Plenty, and Want, to Riches and Poverty, to Honor and Dishonor;
we ought to leave the things that are behind, and proceed forward to such as
are before, that we may attain to the end and reward of our Heavenly Calling.
Phil. 3.

2. Consider, not only, I beseech you, that we are strangers and forrainers in
the world, but that we are not to inhabit always in this foreign Country, but
that our passage will be but of few days, Revel. 7. We need but little to
nourish and entertain us in this short race; at the end of it we shall neither
hunger nor thirst, and the Sun shall burn us no more. As it happened with Jacob
and his Family, when they went into Egypt, they had no other Corn nor Food, but
what was needful and necessary for them in the way; because they were certain
to meet with plenty of all manner of good things in Joseph's House: Likewise we
need not make any great provision for our selves in this life because we are
marching apace toward our Savior Christ, our elder Brother, unto whom God
has given all power in Heaven and in Earth Matt. 28. We are marching into a
Country that abounds with all manner of true Riches, Excellency, Glory, and
Happiness.

3. Consider, that we are not only strangers, but Soldiers to fight under the
banners of Christ our Captain, who judges and fights justly, Revel. 19. Job
acknowledges That there is a warfare appointed to all Mortals upon Earth; Job
7. But I may say that this War is chiefly for such as aim at the glorious
immutability. For God calls them to endure grievous and violent encounters;
Therefore St. Paul exhorts his beloved Disciple Timothy to behave himself as a
good Soldier in this just War, and to fight the good fight of faith, 1 Timothy 1.
Now he that goes to War, must not incumber himself with the affairs and
enjoyments of this life.

4. Moreover, consider, that we are like to Soldiers that are engaged in an
Enemies Country, not with a design to conquer, and establish our Selves, but
only to obtain a free passage, having only an intent to pass thorough into our
own Native Country; We don't desire to get into our hands, the Inheritances
and possessions of the Worldlings, nor to rob them of their Crowns and
Scepters; We have no other request to make to them, but that which the Children
of Israel made to the Inhabitants of Edom, when they were going to the promised
Land, Numb. 20. We desire leave to pass peaceably, and go along by the Kings
high way, to take possession of the Inheritance which God has prepared for us
from the beginning of the World; We would not so much as taste a bit of Bread
without paying for it, nor drink a cup of water without leave.

5. Consider that this Life is a Race, and the World the place to run in; now
such as are in a Race, must take heed that the Thorns do not catch hold of them
in their Course, nor that their Feet sink into the Mire or the Clay; and that
they may run swifter, they must cast off all burdens and encumbrances. If
therefore we will run in this Race in such a manner, as that we may obtain the
Prize, we must see that the Thorns and Briars of the World do not take hold of
us, and that we sink not into the mire of the dirty Pleasures of this life; we
must cast away all the burdens that overcharge us, and especially the burden of
sin, which is so grievous, that Nature it self gr^ns under it. It is the design
of St. Paul's exhortation, Seeing we are compassed about with so great a cloud
of witnesses; Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the Race that is set before us, looking
unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who, for the joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross, Romans 8. Heb. 12.

6. Consider, that our life is a continual wrestling; for we must wrestle, not
only against Flesh and Blood, but also against Principalities and Powers,
against the Lords of the World, and the Rulers of the darkness of this age,
against spiritual wickedness in high places, Ephesians. 6. 1 Cor. 10. Now he that
intends to wrestle well, must diet himself accordingly. If therefore for a
corruptible Crown, Men tame their Bodies, render them supple and pliant, and
abstain from Delights and Pleasures; how much more reason have we to do the
like for an uncorruptible and a Glorious Crown?

7. Consider, that God will have us to be conformable to the image of his Son,
and that we should follow his footsteps; Now this good Savior represents to us
his own condition, Romans 8. 1 Pet. 2. The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the
air have Nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to lay his head, Luke 9.
Therefore he made this confession before Pontius Pilate, My Kingdom is not of
this World, John 8. and for that reason he reproves the gross and carnal
imaginations of the two Disciples, as they were going to Emaus; O fools, and
slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken, Luke 24. ought not
Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his Glory; according to
his blessed example, we must have little part and concernment in the World, and
enter by many afflictions into the kingdom of God, Acts 24.

8. I judge, that it is also necessary that we should represent at every moment
unto our selves, that to speak exactly, we can have but the (...) and not the
right enjoyment of Gods Creatures; We are entrusted with his favors, as the
Stewards of his Blessings and Riches. At every moment he may call us to an
account, and require from us a reason of our behavior, and take from us our
enjoyments: we should therefore look upon our Houses and Possessions, as upon
things that are let unto us: for as we are not displeased to restore what we
had borrowed, and what we enjoy, as long as it pleases the lawful owner to
lend it; thus we shall freely leave this present life, and all our worldly
possessions, in case we can but persuade our selves, that all belongs to God,
and that he has lent them but for a moment.

9. Moreover, it is necessary for us, to consider the fruitless labors and
pains that we are at, when we purchase the Riches of the Earth, and ascend up
to the Dignities and Honors; for as the Husbandman, when he has spent himself
in manuring his Field, and watered it with his sweat, is many times deceived of
all fair hopes, and his expectation frustrated. Thus it commonly happens to the
covetous and ambitious; they toil and labor in vain; the Goods which they
think to grasp, slides away between their fingers as Water, or as Wax, that
melts at the first approach of the Fire, and all the Honors which they expect
to enjoy and embrace, are as a shadow that soon vanishes, or as a smoke that
flies up out of their reach: when they have well sown these vanities, they rerp
nothing but grief and displeasure.

10. Take notice of the little contentment and satisfaction, that there is to
be found in the most entire and perfect enjoyment of the advantages of this
World. They are like a Drink that leaves us still a Thirst, and like an empty
Meat that cannot satiate our Longing; Like the Waters of the Weli of Sychar,
whereof our Savior said to the Woman of Samaria, He that drinks of this
Water shall thirst again, Joh. 4. It happens to the Worldlings, as to him who
sleeps hungry, and dreams that he is eating, when he wakes his stomach is
empty, Isaiah 29. or like to another that thinks in his sleep that he drinks,
but when his eyes are open, he finds himself weary, and his Appetite
unsatisfied; for he that hungers for Money is never contented with the
enjoyment of it, and he that thirsts for vain Glory, can never be pleased with
all the great Honors and Grandeur of the World, Eccl. 5. Instead of satiating
his longing Appetite, these things serve but to increase and augment it. The
whole World was not large enough to satisfy the foolish ambition of Alexander;
for it is said, that he wept when a Philosopher told him, that there were yet
many Worlds to conquer; This Man, to whom six foot of Earth, was sufficient,
had a mind to command over a thousand Worlds, if there had been so many in
being.

11. Consider, that all the Treasuries and Riches of the Indies, and the pomp
and grandeur of the World, are not able to bring Peace to the Soul, nor quiet
to the troubled Consciences; when a poor man has got together a little Silver
and Gold, or when a mean person is raised to the highest Offices, and greatest
Dignities, his misery continues still, although it changes its appearance,
oft-times it is so much the more unsufferable, in that it puts on a false
luster, and a deceitful Gloss, in that such are constrained to live always
masked, to suppress the pangs, the grief, the sighs and groans, that often
interrupt their profane smiles, and carnal delights and pastimes.

Therefore our Savior compares Riches to Thorns, for they prick and gaul, not
only the Hands but the Heart and Bowels of such as embrace them with affection;
it may be said also that they are like Lions and Bears, for they are not to be
caught without much difficulty, and they are as uneasy to be kept, because we
must take heed, that we be not bit with their venomous and deadly Teeth. If you
had but tried the horrible displeasures, the sensible griefs, and the secret
fears, with the tormenting cares that attend upon the most glorious Scrpters,
and the richest Crowns; you would never judge the saying of that Prince
unreasonable, who exclaimed against his Royalty in this manner, O Crown, if any
did but know thy weight, he would never lift thee up from the ground. The most
part of the pleasures, and the satisfactions of this life, depend much upon
man's imagination, and all this grandeur and humane Glory, is nothing but wind.
The Royal Prophet teaches us this Truth with much elegancy, when he says,
That every man at his best state, is altogether vanity; surely every man
walks in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain, Psalm. 39. Solomon,
the most Learned of all Kings, the Richest, and most Magnificent Prince of his
time, had refused nothing to his Eyes, to gratify his Lust, he had tasted of
all the delights and pastimes that can be imagined, but at last he found so
little satisfaction, and solid content, that he was forced to acknowledge That
all things under the Sun are but vanity and vexation of Spirit, Ecc^es. 8.

12. Chiefly, we are to consider, that if our Enjoyments have been wrongfully
gotten, as Balaams reward, Achans wedge of Gold, and Scarlet Cloak, Gehazis
changes of Raiment, Ahabs and Jezabels Vineyard, Judas his Thirty pieces, Numb.
22. Josh. 7. they can bring no real content, nor peace to the Soul, but they
rather fill us with horrors of Conscience, and with a fearful despair; 2 Kings
5. 1 Kings 21. If the voluptuous Worldling that has enriched himself by
Rapine, Usury, and Extorsion, did wring with his hands his sumptuous Garments,
where his pomp and pride appear, he should visibly squeeze out the Tears of the
afflicted and poor People, Matt. 27. If he did but relish the right taste of the
Liquors, that he drinks out of his Cups of Jasper and Crystal, he should find,
instead of Wine and Lemonade, the sweat and blood of many wretches, and if he
did but seriously look into the Silver and Golden Vessels that are put upon his
Table, he should perceive the Marrow and the Bones of such as he has devoured.
Whosoever becomes fat with the substance of the Widow and the Fatherless, shall
never open his Coffers, but he may spy there the Image of the Devil, and the
Hellish Furies; he may hear the cries and groans of such, whom he has destroyed
by his unjustice and cruelties; If such escape unpunished here upon Earth, they
shall surely feel the severity of God's vengeance hereafter. If there be no
Sword to strike them, nor Fire to consume them, nor Leprosy to gnaw them, nor
Dogs to tear them, nor Halter to hang them; they have a guilty Conscience that
will perform more than this, for it will be their witness to accuse them, their
judge to condemn them, their Rack, their Wheel, and Executioner to torture
them; The time will come when the Worm that never dies, and the Fire that shall
never be quenched, shall torment and burn them.

13. Consider, that it is possible to be very indigent in the midst of a great
plenty; The Poets have had a design to represent this by the fiction of a Man
thirsting in a River, whereof the Waters did reach up to his chin. The covetous
Miser is like to this miserable wretch, He may be also compared to the Figtree
of the Gospel, cursed by our Savior Christ for it brought forth no fruit for
others, and it withered for want of nourishment: Therefore a pleasant poverty
is better worth than riches with discontent; Nature is content with a little,
Piety with less, but covetousness has no measure; The Heathens have very well
acknowledged, that he was the richest who was most content, for the more things
you desire, the more are wanting to you. It matters not much, if the Cup which
is presented to you, be of Gold or of Earth, so that there be liquor enough to
quench your thirst; I would rather drink of a little clear stream of Water,
than out of a great River all muddy and troubled. A little quantity of ground
is sufficient to nourish a Man in his life, but less is necessary to cover him
when he is dead; A little Money satisfies to subsist honestly in the fear of
God, but less is required to dye happily, in the favor and love of our good
Savior. Kings, and the greatest Monarchs have but one body to nourish and to
cloth, as well as the meanest of their Subjects; They who enjoy least in the
World, do use, or rather abuse the most of any, the things that they possess;
Instead of envying the Worldlings opulency, let us meditate upon St. Paul's
excellent saying, Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content, 1 Timothy
6. and let us imprint into our minds that other Sentence, Piety with
contentment is great gains, 1 Timothy 1.

14. Christian Souls, cast your eyes upon all the things of the World that are
most esteemed, and you shall find that their possession is but uncertain, and
of a short continuance, for Riches have wings to fly to Heaven as an Eagle; All
Flesh is like Grass, and the Glory of Man as the Flower of the Field, the World
passes away with all its Lusts, Prove. 23. There needs but the pillaging of a
Town, the breaking of a Merchant, or an unsuccessful and contrary suit in Law,
to render thee poor, and bring thee to want; A little sparkle of fire, is able
to reduce all thy Riches into Ashes, and to bring thee to extreme poverty: The
least ill look can cover thy face with shame and confusion, and cast thee down
from the highest humane Glory, into the deepest Abyss of Disgrace and
Ignominy. The wise Man informs us, that He who trusts in his Riches shall fall.
We may say so of such as rely too much upon great men's favor, for it is like a
broken Reed that pierces the hands of such as lean upon it. There is nothing
here below so constant as unconstancy; if the Earth did not often change its
face and appearance, it would not be Earth as it is, and if the world were not
unconstant, it would cease to be World; therefore it is no wonder if the
Heathens, who understood not God's wise Providence, that governs the natural
Beings, and draws Light out of Darkness, have represented Fortune blind,
mounting sometimes on a Wheel, and in an instant tumbling down again. How many
persons do we meet with reduced on a sudden to beggary, who a little before
did flourish in all manner of Plenty? How many are cast down into the dust, and
become the scorn of the World, who were once raised to the highest Dignities,
and the greatest Honors? How many fall into the contempt and derision of the
Vulgar, whose praises were once exalted up to Heaven? In a word, how many do we
see before our Eyes dragged along the streets, shut up in close prisons,
brought upon the Scaffolds and Gallows, who were once the Glory of the World,
admired of all men, and the scourge of honest Men? When we run over, and
consider the strange, unexpected, and sudden changes that we have seen in our
days, they seem to us as Dreams. St. Paul represents this great unconstancy of
the World, to take off our Hearts and Affections from it. The time, says be,
is short, it remains, that both they that have Wives be as though they had
none, and they that weep as though they wept not, and they that rejoice, as
though they rejoiced not, and they that buy, as though they possessed not, and
they that use this world, as not abusing it, for the fashion of this world
passes away, 1 Cor. 7. Because of this great unconstancy of all Worldly
advantages, St. Paul invites us to think upon the immortal Riches; Charge,
says he, them that are rich, that they put not their trust in uncertain
Riches, but in the living God, laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. For the same reason the Son of God advises us, Not to lay up for our
selves Treasures upon Earth, where the Moth and Rust do corrupt, but lay up for
your selves Treasures in Heaven, where the moth and rust don't corrupt, and
where Thieves don't break through and steal. Matt. 6. A wise Persian was well
acquainted with this truth, therefore he has left this Lesson for posterity,
The world is constant to no man, my Brother, apply thy self and thy heart to
the great Creator of the world, and that shall suffice thee.

15. Consider, that if the Riches and Honors do not leave us in our life time,
or in case none takes them away from us by violence, it is most certain, that
death will deprive us of all, and will separate them from us for ever, Psalm.
49. For when Man dies, he carries nothing with him, his Glory accompanies him
not into his Grave, 1 Timothy 6. We brought nothing into this world, and it is
certain, that we can carry nothing out, Job 1. The King and the greatest
Princes may speak in this language, as well as the meanest Soldiers of fortune,
Naked I came from my Mothers womb, and naked I shall return. All the Treasures,
Riches, Scepters and Crowns shall never advantage us after our decease. What
was Nebuchadnezzar the better for having had so great a number of People within
his Dominions? they could not hinder him from lying down upon a Couch of Worms,
nor preserve him from being eaten with Vermin, Isaiab 14. To what purpose did
the rich glutton swim in a Sea of all manner of Riches in his life time? after
his decease he could not obtain a drop of cold water to assuage his violent
thirst, Luk 16. The Author of the Book of Wisdom was entered into this
Meditation, when he represents the Worldlings, spending themselves in
lamentations for their former follies, and voluntary blindness, What has pride
profited us, say they, or what benefit has Riches brought us? all these things
are passed away as a shadow, as a Post that runs swiftly, or as a Ship that
slides through the troubled Waves, Wisd. 16. Our Heirs give us nothing of all
our substance, but a Winding sheet, a few Boards, or it may be some pounds of
Lead, all consumes with us, and rots in our Graves in time. In short, we must
not only quit and abandon all our Honors, Dignities, Treasures and Riches, but
we must also quit this Body, this Flesh and Bones, covered with this beautiful
Skin. O Man! remember that thou art but dust, and that thou shall return to
Dust.

16. Saladine the famous Sultan of Egypt, has left to posterity, an
illustrious Testimony of the vanity of all Riches and worldly Grandeur; for
upon his Deathbed he Commanded that his Winding Sheet should be carried at the
end of a Lance by an Herald, who was to proclaim, Here is all that this great
Prince has carried away of his Riches, Glory, Principalities and Lordships,
which he has enjoyed on Earth.

17. Consider that it is a great cause of grief, that we know not who shall
inherit the Fruits of all our Labors, which we keep with so much care, and
restless fears. Who knows but our greatest Enemies, and that which is worse,
Gods enemies shall cloth themselves with our spoils, and that which we have
been so long gathering many years, shall be spent in a moment? of this vanity
and evil, the Royal Prophet complains in the 39 Psalm. Surely every man walks
in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain, he heapeth up Riches, and
knows not who shall gather them.

18. Consider well, Christian people, the dangerous effects wrought in us by
the love of the World, and the deceitfulness of Riches, it stifles in our
Hearts the good seed of the Gospel, Matt. 3. it hinders it from growing up to
salvation; it keeps many from glorifying God, and making an open profession of
the truth. As it is said, of some of the chief Pharisees, that they believed in
our Lord Jesus Christ, but they would not confess him before Men, because they
did love more the glory of Men, than the glory of God; therefore when Cyrus
made Proclamation, that the Children of Israel should have full liberty into
their own Country, to rebuild Jerusalem, to repair God's Temple, and to
re-establish his neglected service; there were many Jews that cared not to obey
this Prince's Command, nor God's Call, because they were settled in Babylon,
they were too much wedded to the pleasures and delights of that City, and
therefore loath to part with their Concerns there for Jerusal^m: for the same
cause that young man mentioned before, would not follow the Savior of the
World, nor obey his Command, because he had much Riches, and had settled his
Heart and affections upon them. As God's Ark and Dagon cannot dwell together
under one roof, 1 Samuel 5. so the love of God, and the love of the World, can
never subsist together; therefore St. John advises us, Love not the world, nor
the things that are in the world; If any man love the World, the love of the
Father, is not in him, 1 John 2.

19. Take notice, that this is the passion that stops so many in their first
beginnings of Piety, for as Lots wife was changed into a Statue of Salt, as soon
as she had looked behind her; so when God sends us his Angels to take us by the
hand, and drag us out of the spiritual Sodom, there is nothing more dangerous,
than to look with regret, and longings for carnal Delights, and worldly
advantages, which we are then totally to quit: that alone is able to stop our
proceeding forward, to stifle our zeal, and to cause all our pious intentions
to vanish into the Air; Therefore we must imprint in our minds, this excellent
sentence of our Savior, No body that puts his hand to the Plow, and does look
back, is fit for the kingdom of God.

20. From hence it is, that so many persons, esteemed well-grounded in Religion
and Piety, are persuaded at last, to turn their backs to God, and to make
shipwreck of their faith. What was the cause of the Israelites murmuring so
often, and desiring to return into Egypt? was it not as we have already taken
notice, because their Hearts and Affections were settled and fixed in that
cursed Land, from whence God had delivered them, by so many miracles; and
wherefore did Demas leave St. Paul and Christ's Gospel; It was because he loved
too much this present World; In short, our own experience confirms to us the
saying of our Savior, No man can serve two Masters, for he will hate the one
and love the other, or he will cleave to the one, and despise the other, you
cannot serve God and Mammon.

21. Consider, that if these worldly Goods, and Honors, don't produce in us
these woeful and lamentable effects, they produce them in our posterity; many
would live happier in the World, and be honester Men, if their Parents had not
left them so much Riches, and so many Honors to possess; Their Riches and
Honors therefore do occasion many evils, and oft-times they cast them headlong
into several debaucheries and insolences: it is that which fills them full of
a ridiculous vanity, and of an unsufferable pride, that renders them hateful to
God and Man. In a word, it is that which makes them forget God, and unmindful
of the Treasuries and advantages of his Kingdom, Prove. 30. Therefore Agar
presented this excellent Prayer unto God, Give me neither poverty nor Riches,
feed me with food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who
is the Lord? or, lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.
Wretched Man! to what purpose do thou labor so carefully to gather up Riches
for thy Children? It may be that these Riches which thou do snatch from
others, or which thou do get with the loss of thy Soul, shall serve but to
get Golden Calves, be the substance of infamous Idols, as Gideon's Gold
plundered upon the Midianites, was employed in an Ephod, which became a snare
to his House, and to all Israel; Thus it happens many times, that the Goods
which are gotten with the expense of much blood, and sweat, and the Honors unto
which we climb up with so much earnestness and passion, become snares to our
posterity; they cast them headlong in an Abyss of misery.

22. I should not forget that death is a kind of sleep, therefore in Holy
Scripture, to dye, and to fall asleep, are to be understood in the same sense;
now, as we cannot conveniently fall asleep, unless we set aside and forget all
the troublesome affairs of the World; Likewise it is altogether impossible to
dye comfortably and peaceably, if we don't banish out of our hearts betimes,
all the foolish fancies that disturb us, and all the cutting cares that
undermine and consume us.

23. To this purpose, profane History tells us of a remarkable passage of
Cyneas, a great Minister of State, to Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, That when he saw
his Master so busy in raising of an Army, to march against the Romans, he began
to argue with him in this manner; Sir, If it please God, to grant you the
victory over the Romans, how will you employ your self next? The King answered,
We will then endeavor to conquer the rest of Italy, and when we shall have
Italy in our possession replied Cyneas, what shall we do afterward? we will go
against Sicily, says the King; the discreet Cyneas continued to demand, and
when we have all Sicily, what shall we do? Pyrrhus answered him, we will pass
into Africa, and take Carthage and after that we may recover Macedonia, and
command all Greece without control; But Sir, replied Cyneas, when we shall
have got all into our possession, what shall we do then? The King answered him
with a smiling countenance; My friend, we will then repose our selves. and take
our fill of Delights and Pleasures: then Cyneas began to tell the King. What
hinders us now, Sir, from taking our Rest and Delights? for we have all that in
our hands, that we are going to seek so far, with so much Bloodshed and Danger.
We may apply this to our selves, we have most of us intricate and hidden
designs, which cannot be accomplished in the age of one Man. We are afraid to
dye, as if Death had already caught us by the throat and yet we have so many
desires to fulfill, as if we were all immortal; we build and adorn our sumptuous
Dwellings, as if we were never to leave the World; And we are always gathering
so much, as if we had the charge of providing for a Royal Army; Let us
therefore in this case imitate this wise Minister of State; Let us ask our
selves for what purpose are these vast designs? what end do we propose to our
selves of all our labors and care? what do we aim at when we run so many
dangers, and endure so many inconveniences? our Souls will answer us, without
doubt, that it is with an intention, at last, to rest our selves in peace, to
live at ease, and enjoy the fruits of our labors; Let us enjoy that happiness
and that satisfaction at present; Let us not stay to rest our selves, until the
time when Death shall stretch us in our Graves; Let us be satisfied with the
goods that God has already bestowed upon us, and let us use them with
thanksgiving. Miserable wretches that we are! why do we labor and torment our
selves for so many things? seeing that there is but one thing necessary, and
that is Piety; the fear of the Lord, and the expectation of his eternal
Felicities; Let us therefore make election of this good part, and it shall
never be taken from us. Luk 20.

24. If we desire to imprint in our minds the contempt of the World, and of its
Vanities, we must often meditate with serious attention, upon the excellency of
our Nature, sanctified by Grace, upon the worthiness of our spiritual calling,
and upon the Riches and Glory of that eternal Happiness, which God has
prepared for us in Heaven. It is impossible to look upon these things as we
ought, but we must conclude with the Apostle, that the World with all its
Pleasures and Treasures, is not worthy of us. The Woman that appeared to St.
John in a vision, was clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her feet,
and a Crown of twelve Stars upon her Head; This is a lively Image of Christ's
Church in general, and of every faithful Soul in particular, for when we are
clothed and adorned with Jesus Christ the Son of Righteousness, we ought to
trample upon all the pomp and magnificence of the World, and laugh at the
revolutions of the Ages, at the Vanities and unconstancy of the Earth; we must
seek our greatest Glory, and our most ravishing Delights in the Doctrine of the
twelve Apostles, who are as so many Stars shining in the firmament of the
Church; Let the World alter its face, as often as the deceitful Laban, we ought
to be as the Rays of the Sun, always like our selves, for our Glory is not as
that of the World, and of the Princes of this age, that is reduced to nothing;
it is not settled upon a vain and failing foundation, but upon the living and
true God, who is the same yesterday and to day, and who shall be the same for
all Eternity, Heb. 14. Some glory in their Chariots, others in their Horses,
but we will boast in the name of the Lord our God, Heb. 13. Psalm 29.

25. Consider that God has lifted up our countenance, and turned our face to
look up to Heaven, that he might thereby teach us to lift up thither also our
Hearts, and carry thither our Affections and Desires. He has created our
Souls, and given them a spiritual Being, that they may take their flight above
all earthly substance. He has adorned them with immortality, that they might
contemn all things that are not immortal as themselves, all decaying and
perishing enjoyments; In short, seeing God has prepared for us his Heaven, his
Paradise, his Glory, his Treasures, and the Rivers of Eternal Delights; how can
we yet stop our desires, and be content with this dust of the Earth, where
Serpents crawl.

26. When Alexander was preparing to leave Mace^onia, and go to the Conquests
of the Persian Monarchy, he gave away all his Goods to his faithful friends and
servants; Perdicas, one of his Favorites demanded of him, what he had reserved
for himself; The King answered, that he had reserved HOPE. Thus ought we to fit
our selves to depart out of the World, by leaving our Parents, Friends, and
Estates that we now enjoy; and if our Flesh enquires of us, what we kept for
our selves, let us confidently answer, That we have kept our HOPE. I may assure
you Christian Souls, that this your answer shall be more rational and better
grounded, than that of Alexander to his Favorite, for this Prince did leave his
Patrimony and Kingdom without any need, but whether we will or no, we must
leave the World. Alexander did quit his certain Goods for a doubtful Hope, but
we abandon perishing enjoyments for an Hope more secure and settled, than Heaven
and Earth. Alexanders expectation was but of a temporal Kingdom; and of a short
and vanishing Glory, but our expectation is of an uncorruptible Crown, and
eternal Triumphs; Death has seized upon Alexander in the flower of his Age,
put a period to all his Victories, and consumed all his Trophies; but we are in
hopes of conquering Death it self, and this hope will not deceive us, Romans 5.
This therefore being our assurance, it is no wonder if St. Paul tells us, That
Hope is as a sure and unmovable Anchor of the Soul, piercing into the Vail,
that is, into Heaven it self, where Jesus Christ is entered, as our forerunner.

27. God has hid in the Earth, Gold, Silver, and Jewels, to teach us to
trample upon all the Riches and Pomp of the World; but he has raised up to the
highest Heavens, our spiritual Treasure, and our immortal Crowns, that we might
lift up thither our Hearts, and our most earnest Affections; he desires that we
should imitate the Prophet David, who did always comfort himself, with the
expectation of the Kingdom promised to him, and confirmed by Samuels anointing,
in his flight and grievous persecutions. God would have us do as the true
Israelites did in the Babylonish Captivity; they had always their Hearts and
Affections in Jerusalem, and in the midst of their deepest sorrows, Jerusalem
was all their comfort. Likewise we, who are wandering up and down in this
miserable Wilderness, that live in the World as in a Babylon, in a kind of
Captivity; we ought to comfort our selves and rejoice, in expectation of the
Kingdom of Heaven, that has been prepared for our fruition from all Eternity,
and whereof the Holy Spirit is the true Unction that has confirmed the promise
of it, and given us the earnest, Psalm. 137. Gal. 4. The Eye of our Faith should
always be fixed upon our Celestial Jerusalem, that is, the Mother of us all,
and the place of our Eternal Rest, Colos, 3. The Apostle does therefore exhort
us, If you be risen with Christ, seek those things, that are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God; Think on things that are above, and not
on things on the Earth, for you are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in
God.

28. When Men are going to live in another Country, where their Money will not
pass, they furnish themselves with Bills of Exchange, and find the means of
receiving it in other Coin: Therefore, seeing that our Gold, our Silver, and
our present Jewels, will not pass in Heaven, the place of our Eternal Abode,
let us send thither betimes, all our Riches and Treasures, by Bill of Exchange;
and that we may entrust them with an assurance of a notable advantage, and of a
lawful gain; let us put them into God's hands, for he will restore one hundred
times more in his Kingdom: Let us now distribute them to the poor, to the
Members of Christ's Mystical Body, and this Divine Savior will then
acknowledge, that they have been given to his own Person. You that fear so much
to loose your Money, get such Purses that will never decay, and make to your
selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when you fail, they may
receive you into Eternal Habitations.

29. Lastly, as the Israelites, when they had tasted of the Fruits of the Land
of Canaan, desired with a most earnest Passion, to enjoy such a noble and
delicious Country, and their Abode in the Wilderness became tedious and
unsuffererable: Likewise we who have the First Fruits of the Spirit, and a
fore-taste of our Heavenly Paradise; let us aspire with all our Heart to the
Heavenly Canaan, and let us long continually for those unspeakable Delights.
All worldly Pleasures have no relish with us, and the greatest sweetness of
this life, is turned into bitterness, so that we do often present David's Prayer
unto God, Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy
people; O visit me with thy Salvation, that I may see the good of thy chosen,
that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation, that I may glory with thine
Inheritance, Psalm. 106.

To conclude this discourse, Seeing that we have no lasting City here below,
but that we seek for that which is to come, seeing that we know not the hour
when God shall take us out of the World, to introduce us into his Holy
Jerusalem, Heb. 11. Luk 21. Let us take heed that our hearts be not
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and with the cares of this life,
least that day surprise us unawares, And as the Holy Apostles left their Nets
to follow Jesus Christ, Matt. 24. Let us also leave the vain cares, the
ill-grounded fears, and deceiving hopes that entangle our Souls, that when it
shall please God to call us, we may be ready to answer his Heavenly Message;
Let us accustom our selves betimes, to Will what God wills, and to obey him
without resistance; Let us cast all our cares upon God, and repose our selves
upon his wise and fatherly Providence, 1 Pet. 5. Let us look with contempt upon
the World, upon its vain Grandeur, and decaying Riches, esteem not any thing
upon Earth, nor that which Man is able to promise, or to procure, but esteem
and value the blessed advantages that we expect in Heaven, and that are
disposed and entrusted in God's own hands, 2 Timothy 1. Tit. 2. Let us prefer
Job's Dunghill and Ashes, before the proud Throne, and Glorious Monarchy of
Nebuchadnezar; Let us fancy the begging Estate of poor Lazarus more happy, then
the overflowing abundance of the rich Miser. Imprint in your minds, that
blessed saying of the Son of God, What will it profit a man if. he gains the
whole world, if be destroys himself, and loses his Soul, Luk 9. Let us have
always before our eyes the image of that rich Worldling, who had gathered much
wealth for his Soul, but his Soul was not wealthy nor rich before God; Remember
what he says ^o his Soul, Soul, thou have much Goods gathered up for many
years, rest thy self, eat and drink and be merry; but what does God say to him?
Thou fool, in this very night thy soul shall be taken away from thee, and the
things that thou have gathered, whose shall they be? Instead of studying how to
enlarge our Barns and Cellars, and to increase our Revenues and Treasures; let
us labor to set some bounds to our desires, and let us be content with what we
have at present, seeing that we have but a breath in our Nostrils, and that we
are clothed with a mortal Body, let us not entertain such great designs and
suffer not our longings to be immortal; Let us always, and in every place, be
ready to end our life, to put the last stone to this building, or rather let us
be always in a disposition of dissolving this earthly Tabernacle; let us
willingly break all the bands and ties that unite us to this miserable Earth,
that when Death shall come, it may have nothing to do, but to cut the last
string, by which our soul is naturally joined to this languishing Body. Settle
and fix your strongest affections in Heaven; that where your Treasure is, your
Hearts may be there also. Let us not be lulled asleep, as the foolish Virgins,
but having our Reins girded, our Candles lighted; Let us be prepared at every
moment, to go to meet our Heavenly Spouse, and follow him into the Marriage
Chamber. Let us be like a Ship at Anchor, ready to set sail with the first
favorable wind; and as a Soldier entirely armed that waits for the day of
Battle, and for the Signal, to mount upon his Horse, that he may appear in the
field at the sound of the Trumpet. Let us send beforehand, all our most
precious Jewels, into the most glorious Palace of Eternity; that our Bag and
Baggage being ready prepared, we may have nothing to do, but to take our last
farewell. If any consideration of Flesh and Blood hinders us, let us break
asunder all these Bands by the strength of our Nazareth, that is, by the virtue
of Gods Divine Spirit, which he has bin graciously pleased to grant unto us;
and if the persons that we love and cherish, as tenderly as your souls, or
those whom we are to reverence and honor, labor to stir up the bowels of our
compassion, and to impede us in our Holy resolutions, by base and earthly
considerations: let us tell them, as our Savior did to Mary Magdalene, Le me
alone, for I am going to my Father, John 20. Stop not my course, for I hold
already the prize, and the promised Crown. In short, as Abraham let the Ram
loose whereof the Horns were taken in a Thicket, and offered it up in Sacrifice
to God, Genesis 21. Likewise let us free our minds from all worldly cares, and
carnal affections; Let us offer them up all to God, as a sweet smelling
Sacrifice, let us present them as a Burntoffering, consume them in the Flames
of an Holy Zeal, and love of his Divine Majesty. When the Christian shall be
thus prepared, he shall never stand in fear of Death, he will say to it with an
assured countenance, Come when thou will, O Death, I desire no reprieve; for
along while ago I have settled my affairs, and wait for thee with patience: the
chief part of my self is not here below, my Heart is already ravished into
Heaven, where God expects me with Arms wide open; Therefore notwithstanding thy
fearful darkness, and the design that thou have to destroy me, I will follow
thee as courageously, and as joyfully as St. Peter did the Angel of Light, that
opened to him the Gates of his Prison, and freed him from his Chains. Acts 12.

A Prayer and Meditation for such as prepare for Death, by a renunciation of
the World.
O Infinite Lord of Heaven and Earth, who dispossessed of good and evil, by thy
Divine Providence, and admirable Wisdom, thou have not suffered us to have here
a lasting City, that we might seek for that which is to come; Thou do
discover before our eyes the vanity and unconstancy of all things under the
Sun, that we might labor to attain to solid and everlasting advantages; Thou
have placed and reserved in Heaven, an inexhaustible Treasure of Riches
uncorruptible, Crowns of Glory, and Eternal Triumphs, that thither we might
transport our Heart and affections. The source of Heavenly pleasures is with
thee, that we might always be athirst for the strong and living God; and that
we might desire, with an Holy earnestness, to look upon thy beautiful and
glorious Face. Most Glorious Creator, seeing thou have bestowed upon me an
^mmortal Soul, suffer me not to be so wretched, as to content my self with
these mortal vanities; and seeing thou have made it of a Spiritual and Heavenly
nature, suffer me not to be so unhappy, as to wallow in this miserable dust of
the Earth, or to cast my self into the puddle and dirt of carnal Lusts. Give me
Grace to renounce the World, and all the Vanities that the World adores. Give
me Grace to possess all these decaying and perishing things, as not possessing
them; that I may tramble upon all the pomp and glory of the Age; that I may
consider that the Gold, the Silver, the precious Jewels, whereof the apparent
beauty deceives the carnal eyes of Men, is nothing else but hardened Earth,
that will crumble away, and dissolve into Dust; that I may remember, that after
my decease, all these things will profit me no more than that vile Earth, and
the Stones that shall cover my dead Corpse, or the Wood or Lead which shall be
given to it for a Coffin. Give me grace to despise all the Honors and
Dignities, after which the Men of the World run so impatiently, for they are
but like a shadow that passes away, and like the smoke that ascends up put
of our reach. Pluck out of my heart the cares of this life, and all
solicitousness for the Earth, that Death may never surprise me unawares, and
that there may be nothing to stop or hinder from going to thee, when thou shall
be pleased to call me: that my soul being totally disengaged, and freed from
all these Briars and Thorns, I may be always ready at every moment, to be
offered unto thee as a living and a burnt Sacrifice. The Children of Israel did
fix and raise their Camp at thy Command; Give me also Grace to be as ready
prepared to live and dye, to remain in this Tabernacle, and to depart out of
it, when thou shall send thine Orders: and as this people did pass over the
River Jordan, with a wonderful joy, to take possession of the promised Land; O
that I might also leave this miserable Wilderness with transports of joy, to
enter into the Celestial Canaan, where the Milk and Honey of Divine Pleasures,
and of Eternal Comforts flow, as in their natural Channel. O God, who art my
portion, and mine inheritance, cast me not away with the men of the World,
whose portion is in this life. Thou do fill their paunch with thy good
things, they are full, and leave sufficient for their Babes; but for me, all my
comfort is, that I shall behold thy face in Righteousness, and shall be
sanctified when I awake with thy likeness, Amen.

CHAP. 11.
The Fifth Remedy against the fears of Death, is, to renounce Vice, and to
apply our selves to the practice of Piety and Sanctification.

GOd is so wonderful in all his Works, and he governs all his Creatures in such
a manner, that his very Enemies are constrained to acknowledge this Truth; You
have an excellent example in Balaam, who beholding the Tents of the Children of
Israel, breaks out into this passionate wish, Let me dye the death of the
Righteous, and let my last end be like his, Numb. 25. He was a wicked Varlot
that loved the wages of iniquity, nevertheless he perceived by that Prophetical
Light, with which his Soul was enlightened, how sweet and comfortable Death was
to such as addict themselves, in this life, to the service and fear of Almighty
God, and how different it is from the death of the profane Worldlings, who give
themselves over to their Lusts and Delight, in the unlawful pleasures of the
Flesh: for as the Drunkards sleep with a disturbed and unquiet fancy; likewise
such as are drunken and full with the base and rotten pleasures of this life,
if they be not hardened by Atheism, do commonly depart out of the World, with
strange frights, and horrid gripings of Conscience, that cannot be expressed.
It is otherwise with a good Christian, for as the Handicrafts man who has
worked all the day in his Shop, and the Husbandman, who has wearied himself in
following his Plow, lays himself down at night in peace, so it is with a good
Christian, who has carefully attended the works of Piety and Mercy in this
life; he sleeps his last sleep with a great quiet of mind and satisfaction of
soul, as righteous Jacob, when he traveled a journey to his Mothers friends,
with his Fathers command, was not frighted to behold the Sun go down, although
he was in the midst of an open field, Genesis 28. but he laid himself down in
peace, and slept sweetly, having no other Bed but the Earth, no other Pillow
but a Stone, no other covering than the Heavens, nor other Curtains, than the
dark shadows of the night. Likewise a Soul sanctified by the Spirit of God that
walks in all the Commands of his Heavenly Father shall never be astonished; for
wheresoever his Sun goes down, wheresoever Death Arrests him, he will look upon
himself as in another Bethel; he will sleep quietly in the Lord Jesus, in the
most cruel death, he will feel unspeakable and glorious joys, and a Peace of
God which passes all understanding, Acts 23.

We may take notice of this blessed disposition in the Apostle St. Paul, who
had behaved himself with a good conscience toward God and toward Man, 1 Cor.
15. He had labored more in his Ministry, than all the other Apostles, therefore
he stands in no fear of deaths approaches, but rather we may see him full of
expectation, and desires to pass through Death into Glory, and Eternal
Felicity. This disposition is no less remarkble in Stephen, the first Martyr of
Christ, Acts 6. in the midst of his most grievous torments, he had a
countenance shining, as that of an Angel, which was a certain testimony of his
inward peace of Conscience, and of the extraordinary joy of his Soul, for as
the Wise man informs us, A merry Heart makes a cheerful Countenance, Prove. 15.
From the same wisdom proceeds this other Oracle that foretells unto every one
what shall happen unto him. The wicked is driven away in his wickedness, but
the righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14. Eccl. 1. Unto this is agreeable
the excellent saying of Jesus the Son of Syrach, It shall be well at the last
with him who fears God, he shall sind favor at the day of his death. This life
is but a moment that flies away apace, and yet it determines our Eternal
Estate; it raises us to the highest Glory of Heaven, or else it casts us
headlong into the deepest Abyss of Eternal Misery, for what Man sows that
shall he reap, he that sows in the flesh shall reap, of the flesh,
corruption, but he that sows in the Spirit shall reap, of the Spirit, Eternal
Life.

If you are afraid of a cruel and unhappy death, keep your selves from an evil
and a profane life, for commonly, as Man's life is, so is his death. The most
part of those who live in foul Lusts and Profaneness, dye in hardness of heart,
or in grievous despair. God's patience, wearied out, changes it self into a
just resentment and fury: Commonly God leaves at the hour of death, such as
have left him in the course of their lives; he is inexorable to the cries and
sighs of such as have shut their Ears and Hearts to his Holy Word, and his
Fatherly Instructions; he laughs at the horrid fears and most sensible torments
of those that trample upon his sacred Commands, according to his own words,
Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man
regarded, but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof, I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes.

King Ahab was desirous to hear a pleasing Prophecy of happy things, of the
victory over the Syrian Army; nevertheless he did continue in his Impieties and
Tyranny; therefore the Prophet Micah was not afraid of his displeasure, but
tells him boldly of the approaching Judgments of God, which did hang over his
guilty Head: likewise some sinners desire to be flattered and soothed up in
their extravagancies, they expect, notwithstanding their crimes, declarations
of Joy and Prosperity: but we should be false Prophets, possessed with a lying
Spirit, if we did not foretell to such people that a most lamentable and
miserable death, hastens apace upon them, we should have a cruel charity for
them, if we did not labor to save them by fear, as out of a fire; if we did not
show them Hell with its jaws open ready to swallow them up, and the Eternal
Torments wherewith God will punish all impenitent and hardened sinners. Knowing
what God's vengeance is, we must persuade Men to embrace Faith and
Righteousness, and if we did fail in this our duty, their Blood should be
required at our hands.

To what purpose have the Heathen Philosophers discoursed so Learnedly of the
shortness of our life? To what purpose have many of their Princes entertained
things on purpose to mind them of their mortal condition? Such kind of thoughts
did fly in their fancy, but they reapt but little benefit from them, because
they did not oblige them to an Holy and Reformed Life, and by consequence they
did not prepare them to a blessed Death. It was also to no purpose that Balaam
desired so passionately to dye the death of the Righteous, and that his last
end might be like a just man's, Numb. 23. for because he lived the life of a
sinner, and continued in his Abominations and Idolatry, Numb. 31. therefore he
died as they, and was comprehended in their punishment; as he was a partner in
their crimes, it was but just and reasonable that he should share in their
calamities, and be a partaker of their torments.

To abandon Vice and Sin, is to take from Death its Venom, and all its fiery
Darts. It is to pluck from this furious Beast, its Teeth and Claws; it is to
break the Cords and Chains by which the Devil drags us into Eternal damnation.
It is to destroy the Monsters that fright us, and stifle the Furies that pursue
us In short, it tends, to change Hell and its grievous Torments into an Heaven
and its Glory. There was never yet any person that lived an Holy and Religious
Life, but he died happily in the favor of his God. Now that the Lord knocks,
open unto him the door of your hearts, and at the hour of Death he will open
unto you the Gates of Heaven; present, and give unto him, whiles you are alive,
your Bodies and Souls, and doubtless he will accept them, and confirm the Gift
with his own Seal; here below he will enrich you with his Graces, and crown you
at last with his Glory, Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, but to dye in
the Lord we must live to the Lord, that we may be able to say with St. Paul,
Whether we live we live to the Lord, whether we dye we dye to the Lord, whether
we live or dye we are the Lords.

To persuade us to this Religious Duty, we must consider in the first place,
the Command that he gives us of loving him, fearing him, of repenting of our
sins, and of walking in his Holy ways; unto this he exhorts us in the Holy
Writings of the Old Testament, as in the 6 of Deuteronomy, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And
in the 26 of Isaiah, Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your
fear and your dread, and in the 55 Chap. Let the wicked forsake his way, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. In the 2
Chapter of Joel. Turn ye to the Lord with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning. And in the 1 Chapter of Malachi, The Son
Honors the Father and the Servant his Lord; If therefore I am your Father,
where is the Honor due unto me? If I am your Lord, where is the fear of my Name?

2. Jesus Christ is not come to abolish the Law, but to fulfill it, Matt. 5.
Therefore in the New Testament, he calls upon us as frequently to study Piety
and Virtue. As in the 5 Chapter of St. Matthew, Let your Light so shine before
Men, that they seeing your good Works, may Glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. And in the 1 Chapter of St. Mark, Repent ye and believe the Gospel. And
St. Paul to the Romans exhorts in this manner. I beseech you Brethren by the
Mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service, and be not conformed to
this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may
prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God, hate evil and
cleave to that which is good. Romans 12. And in the 13 Chapter. W^lk honestly as
in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, (...) chambering and wantonness,
not in strife and envy^^^ but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no
(...) for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. And in the 1 Ep. Corinth 15
Chap. Awake to Righteousness and s^n not. And in the 4 Ephesians. Put off,
concerning the former conversation, the old man which is corrupt, according to
the deceitful Lusts, and put you the New man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness. And in the 3 Coloss. Mortify your Members
which are upon Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil
Concupis^ence, and Covetousness, which is Idolat^y. In the 1 Ep. Thessalonians
5 Chap. Watch and be sober, abstain from all appearance of evil. And in Phil.
4. Wh^tsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any Virtue, and if there be any Praise,
think on these things. I might with as much ease number the Stars of the Sky,
as to reckon up all the passages that call upon us, and exhort us to an Holy
life.

3. God does not only Command us to apply our selves to Holiness, Justice, and
Innocence of life, but he proposes himself also for our example, That as the
obedient and good Children delight to imitate their Fathers Virtues, we also
might endeavor to copy out in our lives, the Divine perfections of our
Heavenly Father, and imprint in our Hearts his Sacred Image; Therefore in the
11 Levit. he tells us, Be ye Holy, for I am Holy. And St. Peter repeats the same
passage in this manner, As he that calls you is Holy, so be ye also Holy in
all manner of conversation, for it is written, be ye Holy for I am Holy. 1 Pet,
2. And our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ gives us the same Lesson. Love your
Enemies bless those that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for
them that persecute you, that you may be the children of your Father that is in
Heaven, Matthew. 5. for he causes his Sun to rise upon the good and the bad, and
sends his Rain upon the just and the unjust, be therefore perfect as your
Father in Heaven is perfect. The Apostle St. Paul speaks in the same manner to
the Ephesians; Be followers of God as dear children, put off the old man, and
put on the new man, which is created according to God in justice and true
holiness. Chap. 5. And in the 3 Coloss. Now put off all these, Anger, Wrath,
Malice, Blasphemy, filthy Communication out of your mouth. Lie not one to
another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his Deeds, and have put
on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that
created him.

4. Meditate seriously upon the excellent and precious promises that God has
given to such as addict themselves to Piety and good Works. As in the 20 Ex. I
show mercy unto thousand generations of them that love me and keep my
Commandments. And in 1 Samuel 2 Chap. I will honor them that honor me. And in the
3 of Isaiah, Says to the Righteous, that it shall be well with them, for they
shall eat the fruit of their doings. And in the 5 of St. Matthew, our Savior
says, Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God, and in the 6
Chapter, Seek first the kingdom of God and its Righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you over and above, And in the 7 Chapt. Whosoever
shall call me Lord shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does
the will of my Father which is in Heaven. St. Paul speaks thus to the Romans,
If by the Spirit you mortify the deeds of the flesh you shall live, Chap. 8.
And in the 1 Ep. to Tim. Piety or Godliness is profitable unto all things,
having the promises of this present life, and of that which is to come. And in
the 21 Revel. Blessed and Holy is he who has part in the first Resurrection,
the second death shall have no power over him.

5. Consider that the whole World trembles at the denunciation of the
judgments with which God threatens to punish all impenitent Sinners, as in
Exodus 20. I am the Lord thy God, strong, jealous, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers, upon the Children, unto the third and fourth generations of them that
hate me. And in 1 Samuel 2 Chap. I will honor them that honor me, and will
despise them that honor me, And St. Matt. Chap. 12. Of every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give an account at the day of judgment. And St. John,
Chap. 3. Except a man be born of Water and of the Spirit, that is, of a Spirit
purifying like water, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. And in Romans 8.
They who are in the flesh cannot please God. And in 1 Cor. Chap. 6. Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate,
nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
And the Apostle to the Hebrews is not content to tell us, That without Holiness
no man shall see God, but he says something more; That if we sin wilfully
after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sin, but a terrible expectation of judgment, and fiery
indignation which shall devour the adversaries, for our God is a consuming
fire. Chap. 10. And in the Revelations it is not only said, that in the Holy
Jerusalem there shall no unclean thing enter, or that commits Abomination,
or a Lie, and that God will shut out the Dogs, the Witches, the Fornicators,
the Murderers, the Idolaters, and whosoever does love, or do a lie, Chap. 2.22.
But the Spirit of God assures, that the timorous, that is such as are more
afraid of Man than of God, the Unbelieving, the Execrable, and Murderers, the
Fornicators and Witches, the Idolaters and Liars shall have their portion in
the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second death, Chap.
13.

6. When we should speak the language of Angels, when we should give all our
Goods to nourish the Poor, and when we should give our Body to be burned, if we
have not charity, we are but like the sounding Brass, and like the thinkling
Cymbal. When we should be able to perform Signs and Wonders, if we be not
clothed with Innocence and Holiness, if we be not adorned with Meekness and
Love, Christ will at last treat us as the foolish Virgins with a Depart from me
I know you not. When we should be able to cast the Devil out of other Men, it
will avail us nothing, unless we can cast him out also of our own hearts, with
all the wicked Lusts that he nourishes there. To what purpose shall such cry
out at the great day? Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name? have not
we cast out Devils in thy name? have not we done many miracles in thy name?
Jesus will return them this sad answer, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

7. Consider, that whatsoever be your share of the advantages of this life,
when you shall come to dye, you shall not carry away with you your Riches, your
Honors, nor your Pleasures, but if you be rich in Faith and good Works, if you
be clothed with Holiness, and crowned with Righteousness; If Piety, and the
service of God be your delight, you shall carry away out of the World, this
Spiritual Treasure, this Celestial Glory, and this Angelical Satisfaction. It
is what the Holy Spirit teaches, when it tells us; Blessed are the dead that
dye in the Lord, for they rest from their Labors, and their Works follow them.

8. Let us always have before our eyes the blessed examples of so many Saints,
who have traced us the way to Heaven, by their Piety and good Works, they are
entered into the Paradise of God, and the Glory of his Kingdom. It is reported
of a Painter, that when he had a design to represent an accomplished Beauty,
he borrowed from diverse Objects the Excellencies and Perfections with which he
was to adorn his Picture, from the Lillies he took their whiteness, from the
Roses their red tincture, from another Object the wonder of the Eye, from
another the coral of the Lips, and so of the other parts. Likewise to restore
in our Souls the Image of God defaced by sin, we must borrow the Virtues and
Excellencies of former Men; for example, Represent always to your selves Abel's
Innocence, Henoch's Holy life, Noah's Justice, Abraham's Faith, Lot's
Hospitality, Isaack's Obedience, the Faithfulness of Jacob, the Chastity of
Joseph, the Patience of Job, the Meckness of Moses, the Zeal of Phineas, the
Constancy of David, the Wisdom of Solomon, the Piety of Josias, the Prayers of
Daniel, the Tears of Jeremiah, the Fastings of Hester, the Holy Earnestness of
the Woman of Canaan, the Devotion of Cornelius, the Charity of the Samaritan,
the Alms of Dorcas, and of the poor Widow, the Publicans Humility, the good
Thiefs Repentance, the Tears of Mary Magdalen, the Weepings of Peter, the
undaunted Courage of St. Paul, and his indefatigable disposition, and the
glorious Martyrdom of St, Stephen, and of so many noble Souls, of all Ages and
Sexes, who have gone to the torments with as much joy, as to Feasts and to
Triumphs; and who have sealed with their Blood the truth of the Gospel, with an
undaunted resolution. Seeing therefore that we are encompassed about with so
great a cloud of witnesses, let us pursue with constancy, the Race that is set
before us.

9. Chiefly, Let us look to Jesus the Author and finisher of our Faith, for he
has left us an example that we might follow his footsteps; All the Virtues
that we admire in these faithful Souls, are but like so many little beams of
the Sun of Righteousness, and a weak Image of his Glory. There is no Fire so
perfect, but it sends up a Smoke, nor Righteousness so accomplished, but has
its Imperfections, whiles we are clothed with this weak flesh. The behavior
of the most Holy and Perfect, is defiled by many infirmities; but our Lord and
Savior is the Lamb without spot or blemish, in whose Mouth there is no guile;
for it was necessary that we should have such an High Priest, who is Holy,
Blameless, separated from Sinners. The perfect image of all Virtues was never
found in any mortal Man on Earth, but Jesus Christ is the fairest amongst the
Sons of Men, his Lips are full of Grace, in him alone we have a perfect model
of all Virtues, and of all Perfections that we can imagine. Therefore when the
Apostle had persuaded the Romans to renounce the Lusts of the Flesh,
Drunkenness, Anger, Envy, and such like sins, instead of making an enumeratiun
of the Virtues opposite to these Vices, he thinks it sufficient to propose
Christ's Holy example, Put on the Lord Jesus Christ, says he, to teach us,
that all the Virtues and Graces do enter and meet in the Sacred Person of our
Savior Jesus Christ, in the highest degree of perfection.

10. We are so much the more obliged to imitate Jesus Christ, and to imprint in
our hearts his Holy Image, because that he is not only our Father, our Lord,
and our King, but he is also the blessed Head of that Body, whereof we are
Members; It is not just to unite defiled and profane Members to an Head so
Glorious, and so Holy; Whosoever gives himself over to his Lust and Delights,
in the corruption of sin, maimes, as much in him lies, the Sacred Body of the
Son of God. This consideration drew from St. Paul this expression, Shall I take
the Members of Christ for to make them the Members of an whore?

11. The Divine Spirits dwelling in our Hearts, is a great obligation to
Holiness of life; know you not that you are the Temple of God? and the Holy
Ghost dwells in you? Ezekiel. 8. Shall we be so base as to uncover our filthy
and dirty thoughts, before so Holy and Divine a Guest? Shall we be so bold as
to erect upon his Altar, Idols that may provoke him to jealousy? His eyes are
so clean and pure, that they cannot suffer the sight of iniquity and sin; it is
that which does most afflict and grieve him; Therefore when St. Paul had
advised the Ephesians, That no corrupt Communication should proceed out of
their mouth, but that which is good, to the use of edifying, that it may
minister Grace unto the hearers, he adds immediately after, Grieve not the Holy
Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. And if there
be any that are not moved with the presence of such a Glorious Person, let him
tremble at this fearful threatening, If any destroy the Temple of God, God will
destroy him, 1 Cor. 3.

12. There was two Tables of Stone in the Ark of God's Covenant, where God
himself had written his Law, which he gave to his People by the Ministry of
Moses, 1 Kings 6. Seeing that the God of all mercy has chosen thy Soul to be
his Sanctuary, and the pavillion of his Glory, his Sacred Commandments must be
there engraven upon the Table of thy Heart, thou must be moved with an earnest
desire for the service of God, and for an exact conformity to his Holy Will,
that we may be able to say to you, what St. Paul said to the Christians of his
days. Ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, written not with
Ink but with the Spirit of the living God; not in Tables of Stone, but in
fleshly Tables of the Heart, And that you may say with the Royal Prophet, My
God, my Delight has been to do thy Will, thy Law is within me, 2 Cor. 3.

13. Let us represent to our selves continually, the great and many Obligations
that we have to fear God, to love him, and to serve him; he is the most perfect
of all Beings, he is perfection it self, infinitely lovely, so that if there
were neither Hell to punish us, nor Heaven to reward us, he ought to be served
and reverenced, because of Himself, and of his Divine Perfections. This
consideration causes Jeremiah to break forth into these lofty expressions, Who
would not fear thee, O King of Nations, for to thee does it appertain,
forasmuch as among all the Wise Men of the Nations, and in all their Kingdoms,
there is none like unto thee, Jer. 10.

14. Whilst we are traveling here below, we are not capable of such an high
and Celestial Meditation; it belongs only to the Angels, whom God has invested
with Light and Glory, and to the Heavenly Spirits whom he has admitted to the
contemplation of his Face. Let us therefore seriously consider the Blessings
and Favors which we have received from this great God, who has created us in
his own Image, and who has made us to be the Masterpieces of all his inferior
Wonders. He has placed in us a breviation of all the Beauties and Perfections
of the World, he has given us a Being, as to the Sun, Moon, and Stars. A Life
like the Plants, Sense as to the Animals, Understanding as to the Angels. In
short, he has infused into this Body, fashioned with his own fingers an
immortal Soul of an Heavenly Substance, a beam of his Glory, and a living Image
of his Godhead. My Soul therefore bless the Lord, and all that is within me
bless his Holy name, my Soul, bless the Lord, and forget not all his benefits,
Psalm. 103.

15. It is for man's sake that God has stretched out the Heavens established
the Earth, poured out the waters, and prescribed Limits, to the roaring Sea. It
is for Man's sake that this Gracious Creator has adorned the Heavens with such
a number of Beautiful Stars, that he has given to the Moon its unconstant
Motions with its wonderful influences, that he has settled in the Sun such a
bountiful source of Light, and that he has appointed the unvariable succession
of the seasons, of the Days, Months, and Years. It is for Man's advantage and
lawful recreation, that so many Birds sing and fly in the open Air, that such
prodigious numbers of Fishes swim in the Seas and Rivers; that the Earth is
beautified with so many delicate Flowers; that it brings forth so many wholesome
Herbs, and pleasant Fruits; that it nourishes so many kinds of Animals, and
engenders in its Bowels, Gold, Silver, and precious Stones. In a word, it is
for Man's sake, that God has created the World, and has filled it full of so
many Riches, and beautified it with so many excellent Perfections; Therefore it
is no wonder if the Royal Prophet is ravished into an Holy Admiration, and
bursts forth into these expressions. O God, what is mortal Man that thou art
mindful of him, or the Son of Man that thou do regard him? Thou have made him
a little lesser than the Angels, thou have Crowned him with Glory and Honor,
Thou have established him Governor over the Works of thine Hands; Thou have put
all things under his Feet, the Sheep, and the Oxen, the Beasts of the Fields,
the Birds of the Heavens, and the Fishes of the Sea. If the example of this
great Prophet has not power sufficient to stir you up, and persuade you to the
fear and worship of God, by the consideration of the wonderful Works of the
Creation; Hear what the Angel declares, who took his slight through the middle
of the Heavens, having the Eternal Gospel in his hand; Fear God and give him
Glory, worship him that lives for ever and ever, for he has made the Heaven
and the Earth, the Sea, and the Fountains of Waters.

16. We have not only in God our Life, Motion and Being, but he has not left
himself without witness, in doing good and sending Rains from Heaven, fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with Food and Joy. He does nourish us with his
Manna, and gives us to drink of his abundance, he overshadows us with his
Protection, and enlightens us with his Heavenly Fires; He has always his Eyes
open to our Miseries, and his Ears to our Sighs and Groans: He is always near
them that call upon him; yea them that call upon him faithfully. Let us
therefore say as David, I love the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my
Supplication, for he has inclined his Ear unto me, therefore will I call upon
him all the days of my life, Psalm. 14. Psalm. 116.

17. Meditate often upon the advantages that are common to thee with the rest
of Christians, and upon the Blessings and Favors which God has vouchsafed to
thy Person in particular. Remember how many times he has sent his assistance
from above, how he has wrought Miracles to deliver thee from the Evils that
did threaten thee. Consider how liberal he has been to thee in the whole
course of thy life, what admirable and noble means he has employed to crown
thee with his most precious Favors, then thou will say with Jacob, O God, I am
not worthy of the least of all the Mercies, and of all the Truth which thou
have showed unto thy servant Genesis 32. And with David, Many, O Lord my God, are
thy wonderful Works, which thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to
usward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee, If I should declare and
speak of them, they are more then can be numbered; and being ravished into an
Holy Admiration, thou will say in the language of the same Prophet, O God, who
is like unto thee, who when thou had made me see many distresses and evils,
at last thou have restored me to Life, and drawn me out of the depths of the
Earth, Psalm. 71. Thou shall increase my greatness again, thou will comfort me.
And elsewhere, What shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits that he
has done unto me. Psalm. 116.

18. The Consideration of God's redeeming us, does chiefly require us to deny
our selves, and consecrate our selves to his service, for the Slave don't
belong to himself, but to him that has redeemed him and paid his ransom. As
when God had delivered the Children of Israel from the bondage of Egypt, he
gave unto them his Law and his Ordinances in Mount Sinai. Thus God has
redeemed us from the Tyranny of the Devil, of the World, of Sin, of Death, of
Hell, and from the power of all our Enemies, that we might serve him without
fear, in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our life, Luk 1. He has
given himself a ransom for us, that we might become a peculiar people to him,
given to good Works. Tit. 2. You are bought with a price, Glorify then God in
your Bodies, and your Souls, that belong unto God, 1 Cor. 6.

19. One love must kindle another; the Sacred Fire that is come from Heaven
must inflame our hearts with an Holy Zeal for his Glory. God has loved us so
much that he has given his Holy Son, that believing we might not perish, but
have everlasting life. He has not spared him who is the brightness of his
Glory, and the express Image of his Person. He has delivered him to death for
us, yea, to the ignominious death of the Cross. And is it not just that we
should love him above all worldly things, a God so good and merciful? Is it not
just that we should love nothing but him, and for his sake? Is it not
reasonable that we should offer unto him our Bodies and Souls, as a Living and
Holy Sacrifice, pleasing to his Eye? And if we have any Lust that offends him,
is it not just that we should willingly leave it betimes, when it should appear
as useful to us as our Hands and Feet, and as dear as the Apple of our Eyes?
Whosoever he be that does not deny himself, is not worthy of him, Matt. 10.

20. We must treat the body of Sin, which the Holy Scripture styles the Old
man, and the First Adam, almost in the same manner, as Christ the New Man; and
the Second Adam was treated upon the Cross, Romans 6. Instead of flattering it,
and seeking to satisfy its Lusts, we must deprive it of all its pleasures, make
it drink Vinegar and Gaul, tear its Head with Thorns, bind and chain its
Affections, and nail them to the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all its
inordinate and brutish desires: Mortify therefore your Members that are upon
Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry, Gal. 5. Coloss. 3.

21. To live in sin, and to delight our selves in iniquity, is to frustrate, as
much as in us lies, our good Lord, from that principal end which he designed in
leaving, for a while, the Celestial Abode of his Glory and Immortality; for he
is come into the World to destroy the Works of the Devil. Now the chief Work of
the Devil, the great Enemy of our Salvation, in which he takes most Delight and
Glory, is Sin, with which he ensnares Mankind, for by Sin, Death and all kind
of Calamities are entered into the World, John 3. Romans 5.

22. It is to trample upon the only Son of God, to affront the Spirit of Grace,
and esteem the Blood of the Covenant, a profane thing; It is to destroy the
Fruits of the Death and Passion of our good Redeemer, and pull down his Cross,
for he has carried our Sins in his Body upon the Cross, that dying unto Sin we
might live unto Righteousness. He has given himself for his Church, to
sanctify it, and to render it a Glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle,
nor any such thing. If the Blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the Ashes of an
Heifer sprinkled, did Sanctify the uncleanness of the Flesh, how much more
shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit, offered himself
without spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead Works, to serve the
living God? Heb. 9.

23. Our Lord and Savior was not only Dead, but also buried, to teach us to
bury also with him our sins, and shut up in his Sacred Tomb all our carnal
Lusts. Don't you know, all ye that have been baptized in Jesus Christ, that you
have been baptized in his Death; we are then buried with him in his death by
Baptism.

24. This Glorious Savior is risen from the Dead, and has left his Sepulcher
with his Funeral Attire, to teach us to rise to newness of Life, and to leave
in our Grave, that sin that encompasseth us, and the ties of our corruption,
that bind us so fast. To speak in St. Paul's language. As Jesus Christ is risen
from the dead by the Glory of the Father, we also ought to walk in newness of
life; for if we are made one Plant with him, by a conformity to his Death, we
shall also be One, by a conformity to his Resurrection; and as Christ who is
risen from the Dead, dies no more, Death has no more Dominion over him.
Likewise we ought not to apply our Members as instruments of iniquity unto sin,
but we ought to apply them unto God, as being made alive from the dead, Romans 6.
He is dead and risen again, that he might have dominion over the dead and the
living; If any be in Jesus Christ, let him be a new Creature, old things are
passed away, behold all things are become new, Romans 14. 2 Cor. 5.

25. Jesus Christ after his Glorious Resurrection, is ascended up into Heaven,
to lift up thither our Hearts, and to draw thither our affections, and to teach
us to reform our manners, to live an Holy, Angelical, and Celestial life. If
you are risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, where Jesus Christ
is sitting at the right hand of God, think upon things above, and not upon
things upon Earth, Coloss. 3.

26. There is nothing in the World so lovely as Virtue; It is the delight and
pleasure of Heaven; it is the Daughter of the living God, and the true and
lively Image of our great Creator. O blessed decking of a Christian Soul, O
rich and precious Ornament of God's Children; O Heavenly Grace, what rare and
strong Charms have thou to win the Hearts and Affections of all such as behold
thy Perfect and Divine Beauty.

27. On the contrary, there is nothing so ugly and illfavour'd as sin; it is a
woeful Monster of Hell, and a frightful Image of Satan; It is true, that it
disguises it self, and takes a beautiful appearance, but if you lift up this
borrowed Mask, you shall perceive the Devils fearful looks, and the depths of
Hell.

28. Faithful Souls, weigh in the balance of the Sanctuary, the fearful evils
that sin has brought into the World; it has blotted out God's Image, and
defaced the Beauty of the Creation, it has put a division between Heaven and
Earth, and kindled a grievous War between God and Man; it is an heavy burden
under which Nature it self groans, for because of sin, all Creatures sigh, and
are in labor until now.

29. It continues yet its woeful Effects, for it is Sin that grieves the Holy
Spirit, that afflicts the Angels, that offends the Weak, that hardens the
Ignorant, and that gives an occasion to the enemies of God, to blaspheme his
Holy Name, and to curse his Gospel, Romans 8. It is Sin that pleases the Devil,
that rejoices Hell, that upholds the tottering walls of Babylon, that
strengthens the Kingdom of the Prince of Darkness, and that causes him to work
with efficacy in the Hearts of the Children of Rebellion, Ephesians. 2.

30. Lift up your Eyes to the Cross of Jesus Christ, and you shall perceive how
abominable sin is, for neither in Heaven nor on Earth, there could not be found
an offering able to make expiation for it. God has chosen rather to punish it
in the person of his only begotten Son, than to leave it unpunished. O that the
stain of sin is grievous and deep, seeing that nothing but the Blood of a God
can wash and cleanse it!

31. When you meditate upon our Lords Death and Passion, make it not your
business to cry out against Judas's Treason; the Pharisees envy, the Peoples
mutiny; don't lay the blame upon the Impiety of Caiphas, the unjustice of
Pilate, or Herod's Scoffs and Jests, nor upon the cruelty of the Roman Soldiers;
but be angry against your own Sins, and let an Holy Displeasure rise in you
against your iniquities and crimes. Say to your selves, our sins, our sins
alone have betrayed Christ's innocent Body, bound and fastened the Lord of
Glory, to this ignominious Cross, and delivered him into the Executioners
hands; our sins have crowned him with Thorns, nailed him to the Wood, delivered
to him Gaul and Vinegar to drink. In short, our sins have pierced his Hands and
Feet, and opened his Side. You would abhor the sight and acquaintance of the
Hangman, that should have fastened your Father to the Gallows, and you would
scorn to kiss his bloody hands; how much more abominable shall we be to God and
his Holy Angels, if we do cherish and delight to entertain Sin. whereas we
should be stirred up against it, with an Holy Zeal, and an earnest desire of
Revenge? Instead of nailing to the Cross this unmerciful Parricide, and
crushing to pieces this hellish Monster; if we feed and nourish it in our
bowels, we shall then be guilty of crucifying afresh the Son of God, and of
putting him to an open shame, guilty of treading him under feet, and of
esteeming the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith we were sanctified, an unholy
thing.

32. Consider seriously the fearful effects that Sin produces in you; have you
never been sensible of the horrid and cruel torments of a poor Soul, disturbed
with the sight of its crimes? How sharp and piercing are the remorses of a
Conscience, awakened from a profane sleep? It is a pain and an anguish that
cannot be expressed; it causes our head to dissolve into water, our eyes to
become a Fountain of Tears; it causes our Blood to be congealed, our Skin to
become black, our Bones to be cracked and broken: It is a common saying, that
the punishment follows the sin close at the heels, but imagine that it keeps
always its company, and that it is a Rack and Torture that never leaves the
guilty; for there is no peace for the wicked, says my God, Isai. 48.

33. Whereas there is no satisfaction like unto that of a good Christian; who
loves his God sincerely, and worships him in Spirit and in Truth. There is no
kind of delight to be compared to that of a regenerate Soul, that applies
himself without hypocrisy to the works of Piety and Holiness, John 4. for the
quiet of the Soul, and the peace of Conscience, are more worthy than great
Treasures, than Scepters and Crowns; therefore the wise Solomon tells us, That
the Righteous man's Heart is a continual Feast, Prove. 15. To persuade us that
there is nothing like to this hidden Manna, to this spiritual Food, that the
world knows not, and to these Angelical and Divine Pleasures, the Holy Apostles
inform us, that it is an unspeakable and glorious Joy, and a peace of God that
passes all understanding, Phil. 4.

34. If any Delight or Pleasure accompanies Vice, it is but in appearance
superficial, as a dream it vanishes away, for the Triumph of the wicked is of
a short continuance, and the Joy of the hypocrite is but for a moment. There is
always some Thorn, some Grief hidden, and secret in their laughter, their Heart
is afflicted, and their Joy is cut off by Sorrow, Prove. 14.

35. But the Holy Joys and Celestial Delights of one that fears God, and that
worships him in purity and innocence of life, are solid and lasting, they cast
a deep Root into the very bottom of our hearts, and enter into the Joints and
Marrow, and disperse themselves all over the inward parts. The Gibbets, the
Wheels, It is the French custom to break notable offenders upon a Cartwheel.
and the most grievous torments of this life, cannot pluck these joys from us,
but they comfort the soul in the midst of the greatest distresses, and heal up
the broken bones.

36. The Worldlings become weary, tired with the accomplishment of their Lusts,
and are afflicted at their greatest success, they loath at last, all their
carnal sports, and their greatest sweetness turns into bitterness; we grow out
of taste with the pleasures of sin, so that we begin to loath and abhor them.
It is what Zophar intends to show us, when speaking of the wicked, he says,
His meat in his Bowels is turned, it is the gall of Aspes within him, he has
swallowed down Riches, and he shall vomit them up again, God shall cast them
out of his belly, Job 20.

37. It is otherwise with them who apply their hearts to the fear and service
of God, and that find his Yoke easy and his burden Light, Matthew. 11. They take
great satisfaction in the ways of Righteousness, they run with an holy freedom
to their happy end, and to the price of their spiritual Calling, the more they
drink of the Waters of Siloah, the more they thirst; their Zeal is like an Holy
Fire, that never says that it is enough, Prove. 10. As the Prophet Moses, after
that he had been 40 days and 40 nights conversing with God in his Holy
Mountain, came down with a Glorious Countenance, shining as bright as the
Light, with two Tables of the Law in his hands, Likewise a Christian Soul that
has bin lifted up to God by fervent Prayers, and bin conversing with him in
devout Meditations, cannot hide its spiritual Joys, and its unspeakable
Delights; it burns with an earnest desire of glorifying God, and of pleasing
him in all things; when the Apostle St Peter saw our Savior transfigured upon
Mount Tabor, he was ravished and transported in such a manner, that he cried
out, Lord, it is good for us to dwell here, let us make three Tabernacles; Thus
the good Christian who is enlightened from above, is never weary in the company
of his God, when he should live several ages, he would not believe that he has
too much time to serve his Creator, to worship his Divine Majesty, and to
refresh himself with the unspeakable pleasures of his presence. As the time of
Jacob's service seemed to him but a few days, because of the love that he had
for Rachel; thus the days that we spend in the service of God, seem to be but
of a few hours or moments, in case our love for God be earnest and sincere.

38. Represent unto your selves the fearful curse denounced against the wicked
and the profane, Genesis 29. they carry about them every where the Works of God's
anger, and just revenge; they are the objects of his hatred, and execrable to
the public; they who flatter and fawn upon them most for their own advantage,
do abominate and curse them in the bottom of their hearts; and they who out of
a servile fear, seem to honor and worship them in the light of the Sun, would
be many times very joyful to dance upon their Graves, and erect a Gallows to
hang them thereon.

39. It is not so with good Men; they are honored by God and Man, and their
greatest Enemies admire their Virtues; let us be never so poor and contemptible
in the World, we are rich, and noble enough, if we fear God as we ought, and
obey his Holy Will, for the fear of the Lord is our chief Treasure, it is our
Crown, our Diadem, and our greatest Ornament,

40. The wicked Man is frighted and troubled of his own accord, he trembles in
the midst of his Guards, and he flies when no man pursues, all things scare
him, he is jealous, and distrusts his best friends, his Children are suspected,
and in the embraces of his dearest Wife, he slumbers with an unquiet Soul.

41. It is otherwise with a good Man, he marches every where with an Head
lifted up, and his Heart rejoices in a perfect tranquillity of mind, for there
is no Bulwark like that of a good Conscience; it is like a Wall of Brass, that
abides and withstands the injuries of the times and seasons; He that fears God,
is free from all other fears, Psalm. 125. The finger of God that has settled in
his Soul, the dread of his Holy Name; banisheth all other apprehensions, Psalm.
112. He is like Mount Sion that cannot be moved, he fears no ill report, his
Soul is firmly settled upon God; in the midst of his greatest dangers, and
violent storms, he says with David, The Lord is my light and my deliverance,
of whom should I be afraid? the Lord is the strength of my life, whom then
should I fear? O God, thou art a Buckler round about me, my Glory, and the
lifter up of my Head, I have laid my self down, I have slept, and I have
awaked, for the Lord upholds me, I will not fear thousands of People when they
should set themselves round about against me, when a whole Army should camp
against me, my heart would never fear. Psalm. 117.

42, Let the wicked be never so great and honorable, and never so highly
advanced in the world, their Fame shall perish Eternally. It Is to no purpose
that they rear up stately Trophies, and fill whole Volumes with the remarkable
passages of their lives, making the Marbles to speak forth their Praises,
whatsoever they do, to render their Glory Eternal, their name shall be always
abominable to God, and all his Holy Angels, and Mankind shall never remember
it, but with curses and detestation: these infamous persons are like unto a
stinking Lamp, that gives light for a time, but when it is put out, it leaves a
most odious stink; they may be also compared to certain Devils that never go
out of a place, without causing an ill smell to be behind them.

43. It is otherwise with good Men, their Fame shall flourish for ever, and
like the Palm, the more Men press it down, the more it will rise, their name is
Engraven in Heaven it self, in the Glorious Temple of Eternity, it shall always
be blessed by God and the Angels of his Glory, and the example of their
Christian Virtues shall remain after them, for a Model for their posterity, to
imitate a faithful Christian; whose Soul is sanctified by the Spirit of the
Lord Jesus, is like to the Alablaster-box af Ointment, which when it was
broken, spilt upon our Savior's Head a precious Liquor that perfumed all the
room, for such an one lives after his death; when his Body is broken and
reduced to Ashes, his good name spreads abroad, to the Glory of God, and the
edification of his Church. Mary Magdalene's Perfume filled only the Chamber
where they were sitting, and was soon spent; but the good Perfume of an
innocent and Holy life, fills both Heaven and Earth, with a sweet scent, and
continues for ever and ever.

44. I judge that another powerful means to withdraw us from Vice, and to
induce us to Virtue, is to represent unto our selves at every moment, the
Excellency and Dignity of our Calling, to take a delight in beholding with the
Eyes of our Soul, the white Stone where our new Name is written, which none
know^, but he who receives it. It is the noble and high quality of the Children
of God, and of Believers, which he bestows upon none, but upon such whom he
has elected from all Eternity, for the eternal enjoyment of Bliss in his
glorious Kingdom; It is reported of a certain young Prince, that when he had a
design to disgrace himself by lustful actions and debauchery, a wise
Philosopher reclaimed him from his wicked purpose, by telling him, Remember
that thou art a Kings Son. Thus you Christian Souls, when Satan, the Flesh, and
the World, shall tempt you to filthy and unjust actions, or to any other sin,
call to your remembrance, that you are the Children of the King of Kings. Take
heed you defile not such a precious Crown; and as our Savior said to him who
should have followed him, but was desirous first to go and bury his Father,
suffer the dead to bury the dead; likewise we say unto you devout Souls, who
have consecrated your selves willingly unto God, and to his Service and
Worship; cast away these vain and base actions, and all these dead works, leave
them to such as are dead in their trespasses and sins; but for you, behave your
selves according to your Celestial Calling, and apply your selves to
Righteousness and Holiness, and to the practice of all other Virtues, as such
who were dead, but now are made alive.

45. We must continually meditate upon the Holiness and Purity of our future
abode in Heaven, and the expectation that we have there, Romans 6 For as Jesus
Christ is gone to prepare a place for us, in the House of his Heavenly Father,
John 14. It is but just and reasonable that we should fit and prepare our Souls
for such Holy and Glorious Mansions, Revel. 21. It is not possible to go to
Heaven by treading the paths of Hell. Nothing impure nor filthy, shall enter
into the Holy City, which is the new Jerusalem: As in Solomon's Temple, there
was no way to the Holy of Holies, but through the Sanctuary, thus if we will
one day enter into the Heavenly Sanctuary where Christ dwells, the true Ark of
the Covenant, and the Mercy seat, Ephesians. 2. It is absolutely necessary, that we
should tread in the paths of good Works, which God has prepared, that we
should walk in them, Tit. 2. It is upon this consideration, that St. Paul
grounds this exhortation to Piety and Christian Virtues, The Grace of God that
brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men, teaching us, that denying
ungodlines and worldly lusts, we should live soberly righteously, and godly in
this present world, looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing
of the great God and Savior Jesus Christ who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity and purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good Works; seeing that we have such promises, let us cleanse our
selves from all filth of the Body, and of the Spirit, finishing our
Sanctification in the fear of God. 1 Cor. 7. St. John makes use of the same
reason, to persuade us to Holiness, Beloved, we are now the Children of God,
but what we shall be, does not yet appear; now we know, that when he shall
appear, we shall be made like unto him, for we shall see him as he is, and
whosoever has this hope in him, let him purify himself as he is pure, 1 John
2. The Apostle St. Peter employs the same consideration, to kindle in our
hearts this pure and celestial fire, We, according to his promise, look for new
Heavens, and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness; wherefore beloved,
seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him
in peace without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3.

46. You know Christians, that God created our first Parents, in his own Image,
and Likeness, before that he brought them into his own terrestial Paradise;
there is a greater reason, that this Divine Image should be imprinted in our
Souls, before we enter into the Celestial Paradise; unto this the Apostle has
a regard when he tells the Ephesians, be ye renewed in the Spirit of your mind,
and put on the new Man, created according to God in Righteousness and true
Holiness, Chap. 4.

47. If the place of our future Abode, unto which we are designed, does require
from us Sanctification, the quality of the persons, with whom we shall spend an
Eternity does no less oblige us to the same behavior, for they shall be Angels
of Light, and the Blessed Saints who have washed and whitened their Robes, in
the Blood of the Lamb, Revel. 5. It is a glorious Church that has neither spot
nor wrinkle, nor any such thing, Ephesians. 5. It is the Spouse of the Son of God,
clothed in fine Linen, clean and white, which are the Righteousness of the
Saints, Revel. 19. St. Paul had this same consideration, when he says, That we
are fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, and That our
conversation ought to be as becomes Citizens of Heaven, To wean us from the
filthy Deeds of the Flesh, and from the profane disposition of Esau, he
employs the same reason to persuade us, in the 12 of the Heb. You are come,
says he, to the Mount Sion, to the City of the living God, to the Celestial
Jerusalem, to the thousands of Angels, and to the Assembly and Church of the
firstborn, who are written in Heaven, and to the Spirits of the Just
sanctified.

48. As it is with a Child in his Mothers womb, he begins to live there the
same life, that he leads when he is come into the World; likewise the Christian
ought to begin to live in the same manner upon earth, as he hopes to live for
ever in Heaven; if we will live and Reign with Christ above in his Kingdom, we
must at present have him Live and Reign in our Hearts here below by faith.

49. The chief happiness of Man consists not only in the true knowldge of God,
and of him whom he has sent to save us, nor in the Spiritual Peace, nor
Celestial Transports of the Holy Spirit, but it consists in Holiness, without
which none shall see God, John 17. Romans 5. Therefore the Apostle inquires from
the Romans of his time, What fruit had you in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed, but now being free from sin, and become servants of God, ye have your
Fruit unto Holiness, and the end everlasting life, Heb. 12. Romans 6.

50. I find also, that this is a very good remedy to keep our selves free from
the Debaucheries and Corruptions of the Age, to abstain from the company and
acquaintance of vicious persons, for as he who did touch things unclean, did
become thereby unclean, and as such as haunt amongst the sick of the Plague,
are infected with their Disease; Likewise it is the property of evil company to
corrupt the best manners. 2 Cor. 15.

51. Whereas we should accustom our selves to the company and acquaintance of
good Men, and Delight in the society of such, who like the Seraphims, excite
and inflame one another, to glorify God, and sing forth his praises, we must
frequent such unto whom we desire to be like; for as Jacob's Sheep Ewned Lambs,
spotted and marked, as the Rods upon which they did cast their eyes; Thus, if
we have our joys fixed upon the Holy examples of Piety and Virtue, we shall
see our selves insensibly transformed into their Image and Resemblance; we must
delight our selves in the company of them with whom we hope to live for ever in
the highest Heavens.

52. The most powerful, and the most effectual means to oblige us to the
practice of Piety and of Holiness, and purity of Life, it is to look with the
eyes of faith upon him who is invisible, and to represent unto our selves the
great world as a large Temple where he dwells; Let the voice that came unto
Moses out of the burning Bush, sound continually in our ears, and in our mind;
Put off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place where thou stand is holy
ground, Exodus 6. Cast off there thy base and earthly affections, and renounce
thy sottish and filthy Lusts, for thou art always before my eyes, that are too
clean and pure to suffer the sight of evil, and the place where thou stand
is sanctified by my presence, Heb. 1. Remember that I see thine Heart, that I
search thy Reins, and that I read thy most secret thoughts, Revel. 2. Christian
souls imagine that God calls unto you from Heaven continually, as head id unto
Abraham, Walk before me and be perfect, Genesis 17. Let therefore the dread of
this Divine Majesty, seize upon thee, and possess thee. When Potiphar's Wife
tempted chaste Joseph to defile himself with Adultery, she perceived nothing in
the room but this object of her Lust; but this Holy man perceives the Glorious
Godhead between him and this lascivious Woman; he perceives God's Eye, that
sees into the greatest depths: This made him break out into this expression,
How can I do this thing and sin against God? Thus, if our Flesh tempts us, and
if the vicious and profane entice us into secret and shameful retreats, to
share in their filthy crimes; Let us then remember, that God is every where,
and wheresoever we hide our selves, God has an Ear to hear us, an Eye to see
us, an Hand to record our Deeds, Words, and Thoughts; God is all Ear, all Eye,
and all Hand: he discovers us as easily under the dark shadows of the night, as
at break of day; he spies us through our Fig Leaves, and beholds us in our most
subtle disguises; he understands our most inward thoughts, and listens to the
silent language of our Hearts, he searches into all the Clossets of our Souls,
and into all the foldings and windings of our Consciences, In a word, all
things are naked, and altogether open to the Eyes of him with whom we have to
do. An ancient Philosopher did persuaded such as desire to be virtuous, to
choose some grave and virtuous person, and to represent him always in their
presence, and to live as in their sight, Seneca. We need not represent unto our
selves imaginary appearances, for in every place where we are, and what ever we
can do or think, we are always in the sight of the Holy of Holies, who is both
our Witness and our Judge; It was David's Meditation when he cried out, O Lord,
whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whether shall I fly from thy presence?
If I mount up to Heaven thou art there, if I go down into the pit thou art
there also; if I take the wings of the morning and fly to the uttermost parts
of the Sea, thither shall thine hand guide me, and thy right hand uphold me, If
I say, the darkness shall cover me, behold, the night shall be like light round
about me, darkness shall not hinder me from thee, and the night shall shine as
the day, the night and the day are to thee alike.

53. If the Devil and the World have ensnared us in their Nets, and if we have
been unhappily lulled asleep in the bosom of some deceitful pleasure. This
consideration alone, that God sees and understands us, is able to awake us with
an Holy dread and fear, Let therefore the words of St. Paul sound continually
in our minds, Awake thou that sleep and arise from the dead, and Christ
shall enlighten thee; or, Awake to Righteousness and sin not, Ephesians. 5. 1 Cor.
15. Truly if we be not stupefied and besotted above measure; This dreadful
voice that God thunders from Heaven, is able not only to awake us from the
sleep of iniquity, but to oblige us also to cry out with Jacob, God is here,
and I knew it not! O that this place is dreadful! it is the house of God, it is
the Gate of Heaven Genesis 28. As Soon as Peter had taken notice of our Saviors
looks, that were cast upon him, he went out of the High Priests Hall, and wept
bitterly, for his Apostasy; Thus if we could but perceive and acknowledge, that
God casts his eye continually upon us, we should repent of our Vices, and our
Hearts would quickly melt into Tears of Contrition.

54. And because it is sometimes necessary to retain our selves with an Holy
awe, and to withdraw our selves out of Lust, as out of the Fire; you Religious
Souls, keep always in your mind a short Collection of the Judgments of God,
that have happened from time to time, upon all manner of sinners; Consider how
God dealt with the Celestial Spirits, who have not kept their original purity,
they are reserved for utter darkness, and for eternal Chains, until the great
day of Judgment, and say unto your selves, If God has not spared the Apostate
Angels with he spare Man that rebels against him, and offends him with delight;
remember the dreadful fall of our first Parents, who although they had been
fashioned with Gods own hand, and instructed by himself, have lost both
themselves and all their posterity, by listening to the deceitful suggestions of
the old Serpent. Cast your thoughts upon the first wicked World that was
destroyed by a Deluge, and upon the Cities of Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and
Zebolim, upon whom fell the Fire and Brimstone of God's hot displeasure. Look
upon Pharaoh, and the Egyptians overwhelmed with all their pride, in the waves
of the Red Sea. Consider the three thousand that were killed with the Levites
Swords, because of the Idolatry of the Golden Calf, and the four and twenty
thousand, whom a sudden death swept away, because they went a whoring after
Paal-Peor. Look with fear upon the burning Serpents of the Wilderness, that did
cast their poison upon the Murmurers against God, and their Superiors upon the
Earth, that opened its mouth to swallow Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; upon that
Heavenly Fire that consumed Nathan and Abihu, who offered strange Fire unto the
Lord, upon the Bears that went out of the Forest to devour two and forty young
Rascals who mocked Elisha the Prophet; upon the Lion that devoured the Prophet,
who disobeyed God's Command, and hearkened to a lying Brother. In short, cast
your eyes with astonishment upon Nebuchadnezzar, feeding amongst the Beasts of
the field, Jezabel eaten up by Dogs, Agrippa consumed with Worms, and the rich
Miser burning in the flames of Hell. Dan. 4. 2 Kings 9. Acts 12. Luke 16.

55. Above all things, think upon the last Judgment, and consider this last
day, in which we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to
receive in our Bodies that which we shall have done, whether it be good or
evil; remember that in this dreadful day God will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, the secret contrivances and thoughts of the Heart; before
this Throne of Fire, the Books shall be opened, not only God's Books, where all
our Sins and Impieties are Registered, but also the Books of our Consciences,
where the frightful Image, and grievous remorses of Conscience will appear. In
the day of this glorious coming, the Heavens shall melt, the Elements will be
dissolved, the Earth and all its works shall be burned with fire, and every man
shall give an account of every idle word, how much more of every wicked action,
and profane discourse? Matt. 5.12.

56. That we may not be confounded nor ashamed in this fearful day, in which
God will judge the world by the man whom he has ordained; Let us be inwardly
persuaded, that it is not sufficient to abstain from outward sins, but we must
also hate, and inwardly abhor them, Acts 17. For as the Leopard in Chains
leaves not his Skin nor his Spots, and changes not for all his restraint his
rapacious and cruel nature, for it continues nevertheless to be a Leopard; and
as a Thief in Fetters shut up in a Dungeon, remains a Thief in his heart and
disposition; likewise such as abstain from exterior sins, for fear of Man, and
the severity of the Laws are nevertheless esteemed to be vicious and abominable
in the sight of God, and of his Holy Angels; if every time that he thinks upon
his crimes, he is not moved with a true contrition, and an inward abhorrency of
his soul, to abominate them. The best means to render our Conscience whole, is
to tear it in pieces with the sorrows of repentance.

57. It is not sufficient to abstain from the thoughts, words, and actions that
God prohibits, but we must also apply our selves to the study of true Piety, of
Virtue, and generally of all the good Works that God requires: for as the
Praise and Honor of a good Bow-man is never bestowed upon one who has only the
skill of not breaking his Bow, his Arrows, or his Quiver, but to him who
strikes the mark, and aims well, and he is not to be reckoned a good Artist,
who works not ill, because he does nothing at all, but he who works well, and
shows excellent pieces of worknanship: likewise he is not to pass for a good
and Religious Christi-who only abstains from evil, and commits no outward sins,
but he who does good, and applies himself to Virtue: Every Tree that brings
not forth good Fruit, although it bears no evil Fruit, is hewn down, and cast
in the fire, Matt. 2. our Savior cursed the Fig Tree, not because that it
brought forth evil Fruits, but because it brought forth no good Fruit, but was
altogether barren. The wicked servant was cast out into utter darkness, where
there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, not because he had lost, or misspent his
Talent, but because he had not employed it well, and turned it to his Lords
advantage, Matt. 25. Not only such shall be condemned to the Flames, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, who afflict God's Children on Earth, and spill
the blood of his servants; but such as have not clothed his Members, visited
and comforted them, nor given them to eat and drink. In short, if you enquire
from the rich Miser, how he comes to be condemned to Hell, tortured in the
Flames, he will not tell you it was because he took what was not his own, or
because he committed no Murders, Violences, and other horrid Deeds, but because
he lived without Charity, and had no pity of the poor.

58. And because God requires, that we should proceed daily forward, until we
become to the measure of the perfect stature in our Lord Jesus Christ, we must
very frequently take a view of our former life, and feel the pulse of our
Lusts, to see whether they be not more fervent and violent than before, whether
the old Man continues to decline, and how much we have gained upon our wicked
affections, and reformed our corrupt disposition; for as those who swim against
the stream, if they slack but a little, are carried downwards by the violence
of the Current. Likewise if we employ not all our strength to swim up to our
Heavenly Source, Integrity, and Perfection; the torrent of our Lusts, and of
evil Customs, will hurry us down into the deep Abyss of Death, and Eternal
Destruction; we must therefore often examine every day, what progress we have
made in Piety and Holiness; and whether since so many years that God speaks to
us and instructs us to discover to us what is pleasing to hime if we have more
Piety, Zeal and Charity, and mors Holiness, than before; we must imitate the
solicitou, care of such as have transplanted some rare plant of the East, in
this Northern climate; they have always the eye upon it, to take notice of
every thing that happens to it. We must propose for our example a Steward who
has a great account to make up, he looks often upon his Memorials and his
Registers. An Heathen Philosopher was highly praised, because he did never lay
himself down to sleep, until he had well examined what progress he had made in
Philosophy, and Moral Virtue: Likewise a good Christian should never cast
himself upon his Bed to sleep at night, until he has seriously considered how
he has proceeded forward in Piety, and the love of God: In a word, a true
Christian by this means shall never be less alone, than when he is alone; for
thon he shall entertain himself with his God, and shall discover unto him his
Heart, and his most secret thoughts, then he shall speak seriously unto his
Soul, and shall examine exactly his Conscience, then he will look to his wicked
deeds, to weep and lament for them with Tears of a sincere repentance, then he
will cast himself upon the infinite Mercy and Goodness of his God, to embrace
it with a lively Faith and assurance; then he will make a reflection upon God's
Commands, to walk in them with an Holy Zeal and Earnestness all the days of his
life.

59. Amongst these directions that I intend to give to him that desires to
apply himself to the practice of Piety, and to abandon Vice; I must not forget
this advice, that he must never satisfy his carnal Lusts and Pleasures, but he
should rather check and bridle them, for when we grant them what they desire,
we are so far from extinguishing the feavorish Flames, and satisfying these
hellish longings, that we do but increase and encourage them the more; as he
that loves Money is not satisfied with Money; and as the ambitious is never
exalted high enough in Honor: Thus the lustful Worldling is never contented
with the fullest enjoyment of the carnal pleasures; It is a Fire that kindles
another, and a Flame that never says. It is enough. These filthy Lusts are
like the Serpent that stings the bosom of the person that warms it in his
Breast; or as the Furnace of Babylon that burnt up those who had first lighted
it: for such as entertain the Flames of their fleshly Lusts, they keep in their
bosoms a Fire, that will at last burn and totally consume them.

60. We must resist the first motions of the Flesh, and with the shield of
Faith, extinguish the first enflamed Darts of the Devil; for as it is very easy
to put out the first sparkles of an increasing fire, but if we neglect or
cherish it, it may come to be a fearful burning, and as we can without pain
pluck up with one hand a young Tree planted but a few days, but if we suffer it
to take root, and to get strength, we shall not be able to pluck it up with
both our hands, but must be forced to employ the Axe, the Wedge, and the Saw.
Likewise, if we resist sin in its beginning, we shall easily overcome and tame
it; we shall put out without labor these first beginnings of a strange fire,
and we shall pull up with ease this bitter plant that will grow to our sorrow,
but if we suffer this infernal Fire of Lust to increase all the Water of the
Sea will not be able to extinguish it, and if we give leave to this cursed
Plant to grow, it will never be plucked up without much sweat and labor; Sin
never begins by the same means that it ends, and it discovers not all its
poison at once; As the Child in his Mothers Womb is not made in an instant:
Thus this Monster of Satan is formed by degrees, one Chain of Hell is linked
into another, when Lust has conceived it brings forth sin: from the thought
proceed the suggestion, and from the suggestion pleasure and delight, and from
delight consent, and after consent then follows the deed, which begets the
Habit; from thence, the sinner proceeds to be hardened in a custom of sin; thus
the Devil aggravates the yoke of Tyranny, and of our Bondage, and strengthens
the tie and chains, by which he drags us into eternal damnation.

61. As amongst the Planets, there is always one that rules and causes its
influences to be felt upon earth, more than the rest; thus amongst Sins and
Lusts there is always some one or other that rules in us, unto which we are
more addicted, than to the rest by a natural propensity; unto this therefore we
must chiefly take heed here we must declare our strength and industry, for fear
that the Devil should employ it as a means to enter into our Souls, and
establish there his Tyranny; we must imitate the wise and valiant Captains, who
having a place to defend against a vigilant and an active Enemy, do fortify the
places that are naturally the weakest, and furnish them with the best Soldiers,
causing there a watchful and continual Guard to be kept. Christian Souls be
sure you take all the Armor of God, that you may be able to resist in the evil
day, and having overcome all, that ye may continue steadfast. Ephesians. 6.

62. We must not neglect any sin, nor imagine that there are some light and
unconsiderable, that God regards them not, for a little Leaven, seasons and
Leavens the whole Lump, and the least dead Fly corrupts and causes several
confections to bubble up and spoil. The least scratch may cause a feavorish
Inflammation, and but little poison can lay us in our graves; The Devil cares
not by what Gate he enters into our Souls, and by what tie he takes hold of our
Hearts; This cursed Serpent slides through the least, and the narrowest cranies
and holes of the House, as well as through the widest Gates. Christian Souls,
give not place to the Devil, but shut your Ears to all his Enchantments.

63. We must not only eschew all manner of sins, and abstain from all
appearance of evil, but for our better security, that we may not endanger our
Salvation, we must take heed of all those things whereof our Souls are
doubtful, and upon which our consciences cannot resolve. We must never do any
thing, but we must be fully persuaded, that it is acceptable unto God, and
agreeable to his Holy Will, for Whatsoever is done without Faith, is sin.

64. As those who intend to stop the current of a running Water, are wont to
cut for it a new Channel and Gutter; Thus if your vicious Lusts and Passions
are too violent, you must divert them, and propose unto your selves new and
fresh objects: are you Choleric? be angry and sin not, fret and fume against
your own Sins and Lusts, and crush in pieces these Children of Babel. Are you
oppressed with sadness and grief? Let the causes of your sadness be your offenses
against God, and the scandals of his Church. Are you furious and violent?
Remember to be of the number of those blessed violent persons, who ravish the
Kingdom of God by violence. Are you inclined to Covetousness? Covet and be
greedy for the Riches and Treasuries of Heaven. Matt. 21. Are you lifted up
with ambitious thoughts? Let your ambitious aim be to raise you upon the
immortal Throne, and to attain to the uncorruptible Crowns of Glory. Are you
lustful and given to your pleasures? Labor to enjoy the Divine and ravishing
Delights of the Holy Spirit, and meditate often upon the eternal pleasures that
are reserved for you in Heaven.

65. Devout Souls, who sigh and groan for your infirmities, who labor to attain
to perfection, apply your selves to read and meditate upon God's Holy Word,
with a Religious attention, and before you enter into this Holy Reading, say
with the Prophet David, Lord open mine eyes, and I shall see the wonders of thy
Law, Psalm. 119. Entreat your good God to open your Hearts as he did Lydia, to
receive this uncorruptible Seed of your Regeneration, and that he may give you
a filial obedience, Acts 16. In such a case, as soon as you shall hear the
Lord's voice, you will find your Souls enflamed with his Holy Love, 1 Pet. 1.
When we do but only behold a beautiful countenance, we become not more
beautiful thereby, nor do we take from it its excellent features, 2 Cor. 3. but
it is otherwise with us, who behold as in a Glass openly, the Glory of the
Lord; we are transformed thereby into the same image of his Glory, as by the
Spirit of the Lord.

66. Take pleasure to meditate often upon God's wonderful works, and to sing
forth his Praises. The Spiritual Songs inspired by the Holy Ghost, do commonly
appease all the evil notions of our mind, and beget in us an Holy Joy, and
Celestial Peace; as when Saul was tormented with a wicked Spirit, David was
appointed with his Harp to play before him, and by that means he quieted his
troubled mind. Likewise when Hatred, Anger, Revenge, Covetousness, Ambition or
Lust, or any other of the unruly passions, which are as so many evil Spirits
that disturb and torture our Souls within us; we must seek a remedy from
David's Harp, and sing unto the Lord in Spiritual Songs and Hymns.

67. We must carefully attend at all the public exercises of Devotion, and not
leave off the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is; for
where there are but two or three met together, in the name of Jesus Christ, he
is there in the midst of them. St. Thomas, who was not with the Apostles when
Christ first appeared amongst them, lost the comfort then of seeing him risen
from the dead; And if this merciful Redeemer had not had compassion of him, he
had perished in his unbelief for ever. If upon the day of Penticost, any of the
faithful had been found absent from the Holy company of the Faithful in
Jerusalem; they had not seen the Glorious appearance of the Holy Ghost; who
knows but in a Sermon that we have neglected, we have lost some pious advice,
some seasonable exhortation, by which God might have brought our hearts to
repentance? Who knows, but instead of that Fire that devours us, we might have
felt the Holy Flames kindled in us, like unto those Flames of the burning Bush,
that would burn in us and not consume us? Who knows, but at the breaking up of
the Assembly, we might have said as the two Disciples of Christ going to Emaus,
Did not our heart burn within us when he spoke to us, and opened the Scriptures.

68. We must be fervent, zealous, and persevering in Prayers, and other Holy
Duties, and embrace our Lord and Savior with the Arms of Faith and Repentance,
and say unto him as Jacob, I shall not leave thee until thou have blessed me;
especially, we ought to apply our selves to these blessed exercises, when we
feel the inward and troblesome struglings of the Flesh against the Spirit; we
must imitate that Holy and virtuous Woman, who feeling two Children stirring in
her Womb, fell to her Prayers, and unburdened her sorrows in the bosom of our
Heavenly Father. And as St. Peter when he began to sink, lifted up his Hands in
Prayer, saying, Lord save me, Matthew. 14. Likewise we who walk upon this
dangerous Sea of the World, as soon as we feel our selves sinking into the
Delights of the World, or as soon as the Waves of vicious examples and dangerous
customs do hurry us away; Let us cry out from the bottom of our Hearts, O
merciful God, stretch out thine hand from above, and deliver me from these
Waters of Hell that carry me away, accomplish thy virtue in mine infirmities,
and give me Grace in resisting against sin, to resist unto Blood, Psalm. 69.
Heb. 50. 2 Cor. 22. Let thine Holy Spirit overcome mine let Heaven command the
Earth, and let Paradise lead Hell in Triumph. If we make this Petition with all
our Hearts, God will grant it from his Holy Sanctuary, He will extinguish the
Fire that burns us, He will shut the Lions mouth that intends to devour us, He
will appease the Winds and the Storms that the Devils have raised in us, and at
his first entrance into our Ship, tossed up and down with fears and
apprehensions, he will bring Peace and a blessed tranquillity, and will lead us
to the safe Haven of Eternal Happiness; as the Prophet Moses when he had been
familiar with God, came down from the Mountain with a shining countenance; and
as our Savior when he was in Prayer upon Mount Tabor, was transfigured, his
Garments were white as the Light, and his Face appeared as glorious as the Sun;
Likewise if we lift up our selves above all these earthly and corruptible
things, and pray unto God with an Holy Earnestness and Zeal, we shall see that
our Souls shall be thereby clothed with Holiness and full of Glory and Light;
they will be transformed into the blessed Image of the great God whom we adore,
for as soon as we behold him, we become enlightened.

69. To the end that we may tame this Body, and reduce it to obedience, and to
overcome all our wicked and dangerous Lusts, Psalm. 69 34. It is necessary that
we should join Fasting to our Prayers; we must not always expect a time
appointed by the Rulers of our Church upon solemn accasions, but we must order
unto our selves a Fast, according as we shall see it expedient and useful; for
if this Flesh is unruly, it is rebellious against God and his Holy
Commandments, if because it is fed in Ease and Plenty, it is Lustful, Impure,
and Insolent; Let us cut off from it all its dainties and labor to mortify it
by Fastings and Abstinence, and remember what our Savior Christ says in the
Gospel, That there are some evil spirits that are not to be driven out but by
Fasting and Prayer, Matthew. 27.

70. If God gives us the Grace to overcome Sin and weaken our Lusts, by fervent
and earnest Prayers, and by austere Fasting, and hot tears of Repentance, and
by the assistance of his Divine Spirit, that will pour his Blessings upon our
Devotions; take heed that we become not careless and negligent in good Works;
deceive not your selves Religious Souls, and be not surprised, for many times
the old Man looks as if he were dead, that we might not offer to strike him
again to the Heart, and give him the last blow, that he may recover more
strength; there is always in the Ashes something of that infernal Fire, that is
able to do much mischief. Lust is not rooted out so perfectly, but that there
remains some strings in our Hearts that may grow again. This source of Iniquity
is not so dry, but that it may run afresh. As it is during the time of Peace;
Men exercise themselves in feats of Arms, and prepare new Armor for the War
Likewise during the calm and rest of our Souls, we must prepare some Armor for
our Spiritual Warfare; And as it is not sufficient to win a place by Assault,
and to have driven out the Enemies Forces, but we must also watch day and
night, and keep a constant, and a strong Guard, that we may not be surprised
and driven out again. Thus when we have forced out the Devil, and banished him
out of our Hearts, we must be always upon our Guard, and stop all the Avenues,
for fear that this evil Spirit should come upon us, accompanied with seven
worse Spirits, and that our last condition should be worse than the first.

71. To these Works of Piety and Devotion, in which we cannot be always
employed; we must remember to add a lawful Calling, for Idleness is the Mother
of all Vices; when we are doing nothing, the Devil prompts us to evil; this
happened to David, a man after God's own heart, for when he gave himself over,
contrary to his former practice, to an unworthy idleness, whilst he was looking
into his neighbors House, the Devil entered into his Heart, and, by the
assistance of a lustful Object, inflamed his Soul with an unlawful desire: as
the Iron that is not used becomes Rusty, as the standing Water putrifies, and
as the Earth that is not manured, begets insects and venomous Serpentss.
Likewise a Soul that is not employed, is soon covered over with the rust of
Vice: It is easily dragged along into the corruption of the age, and apt to
beget and bring forth Monsters; therefore the Prophet Ezekiel examines the very
beginning and first spring of Solomon's Sin, saying,, That it was the plenty of
Bread, Ease, and Idleness, Ezekiel. 16. Christians, if you desire to keep your
Souls pure and undefiled, that the Holy Spirit may Reign in them, give no
entertainment to the Devil, let him find you always well employed, and let him
never see you at leisure, to assault you with his hellish temptations, Ephesians. 4.

72. After all, we must seriously think upon death, and represent it always
before our Eyes; for as a Pilate that will govern and steer the course of this
life as we ought, we must consider our latter end, live always as if we were
ready to dye, and to breath forth the last gasp; therefore this Sentence is
worthy to be Engraven upon Cedar- in Golden Characters, What ever thou say,
or what ever thou do, remember thy latter end, and thou shall never sin,
Eccl. 7.

Wonder not, Christian Souls, if in this Treatise, where I am to furnish you
with Remedies, against the fears of Death; I would have death it self to be a
Remedy against Sin, for these things are united and linked together, or rather
they hold one another by the hand: for as a good and Holy Life is a safe
preparation to an happy Death. Likewise Death is a strong motive to oblige us
to live well, for there is none, unless it be a brutish and a furious Varlot,
but at the hour of Death laments at the consideration of his former wicked
Life, and grieves that he has not applied himself to the fear of God, and to
the practice of Christian Virtues. If a Malefactor after that he is condemned
to dye, and has heard the Sentence of his doom, did mind nothing but drinking
and playing, and neglect Prayer and Repentance, by which such an one is to
dispose himself, to go to God, every one would wonder at him, as at a Monster
and a Madman, likewise if we consider as we ought, that Death is certain and
unavoidable, and that God has pronounced the Sentence in his anger, and that
not one shall be excepted; this will be able to withdraw us from Vice, and to
persuade us to Holiness, without which none shall see God, Heb. 12. Therefore
at every moment, when Satan, the World, our own Flesh, shall solicit us to any
evil action, let us think within our selves, would I have death find and seize
upon me in this employment? Am I in a good disposition to go thus unto my God,
and to appear before his Tribunal? Jesus the Son of Syrac had well considered
this when he pronounced this excellent Sentence, which I could wish were
engraven in the Soul of every Christian. Remember thy latter end, and thou
shall not sin.

We must therefore live in the World without being guilty of its corruptions
and abominations: As the Fish preserves its sweetness in the midst of the Salt
Waves of the Sea; and as the Sheep never learn to bark nor to bite, although
they be always with Dogs; Likewise, although our conversation be in the World
amongst the profane and vicious Men of this Age, we must not imitate their
filthy Words, their Oaths, their Blasphemies, and less Reason have we to follow
their wicked and abominable Deeds, we must live among them as Lot lived in the
City of Sodom, as Joseph in Egypt, as Daniel in Babylon. Blessed and Holy is
he who has part in the first Resurrection, the second Death shall have no
power upon him.

When Jacob by God's Command went to Bethel, he Commanded his Wives, his
Children, and all that were with him. Put away the strange Gods that are among
you, and be clean, and change your Garments, and let us arise and go up to
Bethel, Genesis 33. And I will make there an Altar unto God, who answered me in
the day of my distress, and was with me in the way which I went. Then they
delivered into Jacob's hands, all the strange Gods that were in their
possession, and he hid them under an Oak in Sechem. Thus before we go to the
true Bethel, to the dwelling where we shall eat our fill of the Bread of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Before you offer unto God the Sacrifice of your Souls, you
must, if you be true Christians, renounce Sin, and all wicked Lusts, which have
been formerly your Idols; I shall desire of you willingly, that you would bury
them deep in this base Earth, but you had better do as God Commands you from
Heaven, Trample under foot all these abominable Vices, and all these worldly
Lusts that are to you as so many false Gods that you worship, Ezekiel. Put away
from before me these Idols of jealousy that provoke me to jealousy and
sanctify this Temple of my Holiness. Cleanse your hands ye Sinners, and
fanctify your selves ye double-minded; put off the Old man with all his Deeds,
and put on the New man created according to the Image of God, Righteousness and
true Holiness, and then you shall be admitted to the Holy Temple of my Glory,
to offer unto me in the innumerable Companies of Saints, the acceptable perfume
of Praises and Thansgivings, Jam. 4. Ephesians. 4.

This is a Duty so just and necessary, that natural reason it self, enlightened
by Grace, acknowledges it to be so; nay the most wretched Varlets are
constrained to give Glory to God, and to condemn themselves; they confess that
they are indebted to the Divine Majesty, but the payment of this debt they put
off from day to day, and when ever you come to them, they are ready to demand a
delay, they acknowledge their faults, the hainousness of their Crimes, and the
necessity of Repentance, but they are always putting off Repentance and
Reformation of life; As when a sluggard is newly awaked out of his sleep, he
desires yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep, Prove. 24. Thus when ever Death appears, the Voluptuous are yet
requesting to enjoy their carnal Delights, when the Lords Messengers are
calling upon us to repair the breaches that the Devil has made in our Souls,
we could willingly answer as the Jews did to the Prophet, That the time is not
come that the Lord's house should be built, Hag. 1. The young man in his Youth
and Strength is apt to say, that it is not yet time to busy himself about
Wisdom and Reformation, and that when he comes to be old, he will then repent
of the sins of his Youth; and the old man he endeavors to put his Repentance
until the hour of his departure: He expects to make then a general confession
of all his crimes, to satisfy all his neighbors, and to restore what he
possesses so unjustly. In short, all Men in general do flatter themselves in
their evil courses, and most are so extravagant, as to be persuaded, that when
they have lived in sin and iniquity all their life, misspent, God's Blessings,
abused his Mercies, a Tear or a Sigh at the time of our Death will make a
sufficient amends for all, and that he will be fully satisfied, if we say then
as the prodigal Child, My Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and against
thee. Or as the good Thief, Lord remember me, Luk 15. Luk 23.

I have much to say against so great a mistake, so dangerous and profane a
persuasion; First, what reason have we to believe that God will accept our
Repentance, when we cannot endure to accept of his Graces and Redemption; that
he will hear our Sighs, and grant our Prayers, when we will by no means give
ear to his voice, nor obey the Command that he sends us of repenting?

Wretched Man! do thou stay to glorify God till the moment when thy breath
shall fail thee? Is it just that thou should then begin to serve him, when
thou shall be able to serve and please thy flesh no longer, nor satisfy thy
foolish Lusts?

This great God who had Commanded, during the Shadows and Types of Moses Law,
that the Children of Israel should offer unto him their Firstborn, and the
First Fruits of their Inheritances, will he take it well now in this admirable
Sunshine of the Gospel, that thou should offer to the Devil, and to the
World, the First Fruits of thy Youth, the strength of thy years, and that thou
should reserve for him only the dregs and the corruption of a decaying old
age?

It is to mock God and Man to dream of living well when our life is far spent
and gone. To lift up our Eyes and Thoughts to Heaven, when the Earth fails us
under our feet. To restore other men's Goods, when we can keep them no longer.
To renounce all desires of Revenge, when we have no power of being revengeful.
To abstain from the foul Lusts of the Flesh, when we are able to continue in
them no longer, to abhor Theft, Usury, Rapine, and Extortion when a Coffin is
preparing to receive us, and that Death looks us in the Face. Such persons
cannot be said to leave Sin, but rather Sin leaves them as the Ravens leave a
Tree that falls down by age, or that is struck with the Thunder.

By our unreasonable delays, Evil and Sin grow older, and the cure becomes
every day more uneasy, for the more thou shall be hardened in thy corruption,
and confirmed in thy sins, the harder it will be for thee to break and melt thy
corrupted Heart. The more Lust shall have sunk its Roots in thy Soul, the more
labor thou will find in plucking them out. In short, he that gives too much
liberty to his unlawful affections, makes his Vices, by custom, become natural,
and cannot be converted without a great miracle.

Man's most important and difficult affair in the world is his Conversion to
God, Therefore it is a notable folly to put it off to such a time as we shall
be in the feeblest and weakest condition; to a time, when we shall have most
business to do, and most trouble. Certainly he does not order his affairs well,
who puts off his praying unto God, and his thoughts of Heaven, until he comes
to be stretched on his death bed, for then we know not to whom we are to turn.
An account of our worldly Concerns is then required from us; we are then to
make our last Will and Testament, we call for a Scrivener, and are inwardly
vexed to behold him; the visit of friends trouble us, and their absence does as
much displease us; Pain does seize upon us, Defluxions are ready to choke us,
Fevers burn us and disturb our minds, Physicians oppress us with unpleasant
Remedies, the noise is a trouble to us, and silence is suspected; our Parents
and Friends torment us by their officious in officiousness, our Children, and
our greatest Darlings melt our Hearts, and their Tears do force us to weep. But
the worst is, the Devils are then most busy and active. These hellish Fiends,
like the devouring Ravens, fly about us, endeavoring to fright us. In short,
it is then that the Prince of the Powers of the Air stir up against us furious
Storms and Tempests, to cause us to perish in the very Haven. In the midst of
so many disturbances, and of so many powerful Waves, it is a difficult task to
possess our Souls in peace, to think upon our Consciences, to hear God speaking
to us to fear death as we ought, and to keep our selves from sinking, and from
being swallowed up with its apprehensions and frights.

Old Age has infirmities enough, we need not defile it with youthful Sins and
Lusts, for many times it causes more wounds in our Souls, than there are
wrinkles upon our Skin. When the Body decays and grows weak, the Lusts of the
flesh become stronger, and oft-times when it whitens the Face, it spots the
Conscience In a word, The bones of old Age are weak enough, and sufficiently
full of pain, that we need not over-burden them with the sins committed in the
flower and strength of our Age.

Moreover, we know not when, nor how Death will assault us, nor what favor we
are to expect from it; who knows but that it intends not to give us the liberty
of speaking to our Friends, nor of thinking upon our Consciences, for it sends
not always a warning to us, as to the good King Hezekiah, Set thine House in
order, for thou shall dye, 2 Kings 20. For as we have already taken notice, it
surpriseth us in every Age, in every Time and Place, and in the midst of all
manner of Employments. Old Eli fell down backwards and broke his Neck, when he
heard the unhappy news of the taking of the Ark, and the death of his Sons.
Job's Children dreamed of nothing but of solacing and delighting themselves in
their Feasts and Jollity, when the House, where they were, fell down, and
buried them in the ruins. But besides these unhappy accidents, how many are
there whose mouth Death closes on a sudden, without suffering them to speak a
word? How many are there in the World, who are thought to be in perfect health,
and yet suddenly fall into an Apoplexy, and into other quick diseases, so that
they are seen to be sooner dead, than thought to be sick?

Besides, when we should have a greater strength, and more vigor, so that we
might foresee the time of our departing, drawing near, Repentance, is not at
our Command it is given to us from above, and a special favor of the Holy
Spirit; God works not miracles every day, he changes not, at every moment,
Rocks into Springs of Water, nor Stones into Rivers of Oil; He grants not the
favor to all Sinners hardened in their Lusts, and confirmed in their Apostasy
from him, to be converted, and to be washed with the Tears of Repentance.

If thou see a Thief repenting at the time of his suffering; it is a
particular example that does not abolish the general Rule. By this Man God does
intend to comfort Sinners, who truly Repent at the end of their days, and to
assure them that the Arms of his Mercy is always open to receive them into his
favor. I confess, that true Repentance can never be too late, but I maintain
that it can never be too soon; It is most certain that at every moment when the
Sinner repents, God will show him Mercy, but that moment is not in our power;
for one sinner that repents at the hour of death, there are thousands that
depart in impenitency. And to seek no other example, but that which Mount
Calvary offers to us; If thou see on one side of Christ a Thief converted,
and believe, look on the other side, and thou shall perceive a Wretch, who
having lived in unrighteousness and impiety, expires in his Sins, belching
forth grievous Blasphemies and Reproaches against the King of Glory: So that if
one of these remarkable passages flatters thee, and lulls thy conscience
asleep, the other should move and awaken thee with an holy Fear. Moreover, the
good Thief was converted at the first moment, when Christ called and invited
him; Therefore, now that you hear the voice of God calling, Harden not your
hearts as in the day of provocation, for fear that God should swear in his
anger, that you shall never enter into his Rest. Now, yea, at this very
instant, that you read this, turn unto God with all your heart, and he will
have pity and compassion upon you.

When the opportunity is once lost, it is not easily, and at all times,
recovered, therefore the Painters have represented Occasion with a great Tuff
of Hair on the Forehead, but all bald behind, unto every thing there is a
season; God has vouchsafed unto us a time, and reserved another for himself.
Our time is when we are invited to Repentance, but God's time is when he
manifests and declares his Justice and Judgments. During the space of One
hundred and twenty years, Noah, an Herald of Righteousness preached Repentance
to the old World, this was their time; but when God's abused patience was
justly provoked, it turned into fury; then he sent a fearful Deluge, that
covered all the face of the Earth; This was God's time, and the day of his just
Vengeance. When Lot spoke to his Sons-in-law to persuade them to go out of
Sodem; this was the time of their Salvation and Deliverance; but when Fire and
Brimstone overwhelmed and burned them alive, their cries and gnashing of Teeth
were as useless as their laughter and mocking had been formerly unjust. When
Esau sold the privileges of his Birthright, it was the time of thinking
seriously upon the true and heavenly Blessing, but when lie had sold it for a
sup of Pottage, all his Tears and Weepings were as fruitless as his Gluttony
had been unsatiable, and his Disposition profane: When the Bridegroom in the
Canticles, was at the door with the dew of his Heavenly Joys, and the Myrrh of
his Eternal Comforts; it was the Brides time, and the occasion that was offered
to her, to enjoy the heavenly Delights; but when she had delayed a while,
unwilling to rise from her Bed, and put on her Coat, he was gone, and it was to
no purpose that she sought him about the City; for instead of meeting with the
embraces of her Beloved, she finds her Enemies that beat and wound her. When
the poor Lazarus did beg his Bread at the Rich man's Gate it was the time when
this unmerciful Man should have repented, and showed Mercy to the Poor Man; but
when he is in Hell, burning in the Flames, it is in vain that he lifts up his
eyes to Heaven, to seek for some comfort. When our Savior exhorted the Jews to
believe in him, and that he wept so bitterly upon Jerusalem, that had killed
the Prophets; it was the time and opportunity of this unhappy Nation, it was
the time of their Salvation, and of God's Blessings, but when they had
obstinately rejected this great God and Savior, and desired that his Blood
might be upon them and their Children, God has cast them away from him, and
they are become a scorn and a reproach amongst all the Nations of the Earth.
Finally, as it is to no purpose, that a Malefactor resolves to amend his life
when the Judge is at the door, and when the Sergeants have caught him by the
throat, or when he is upon the Gallows ready to be strangled and executed;
Likewise it is too late to begin to think upon God, when Death seizes us, and
that Hell opens its jaws to swallow us. Miserable wretch! Why despisest thou
the Riches of God's goodness and patience, and of his long suffering, not
considering that the goodness of God invites thee to repentance; but by thine
hardness of thine heart that is without repentance, thou treasurest up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the Righteous judgment
of God, who shall render unto every man according to his Works? Romans 11.

Certainly our Salvation is a matter too important to be neglected, our Life
too uncertain to delay it till the next day, and our Soul too precious to run
the hazard of loosing it; if we had many, we might venture the loss of one, but
seeing that we have but one only, and that if it be lost, all the Riches and
Treasuries of the World cannot redeem it, we should watch night and day to
preserve it; We should be moved with an Holy fear of so great a loss, and
decline whatsoever might cast this our precious Soul, into the second Death,
and Eternal damnation.

It is our Lord and Savior's Exhortation, Watch, says he, for you know not
the hour when your Lord is to come. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation, for the Spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak, Matt. 14. Mark
16. Luk 22. This advice was so necessary, that he does often repeat it, Take
heed to your selves, watch and pray, for you know not when that time shall be.
Take heed to your selves lest your hearts be overcharged with gluttony and
drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and that day surprise you unawares,
for as a snare it shall come on all them that dwell on the Face of the whole
Earth. Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of
Man. Mat. 13. Luke 21.

To awaken us the more from our Spiritual drowsiness, and profane sleep, our
Savior brings the example of the wicked Servant, who said in his heart, My
Lord delayeth his coming, Matt. 24. And therefore he began to beat his fellow
servants, to eat drink, and be drunk; our Savior adds, That the Lord of that
servant shall come in a day, when he looks not for him, and in an hour that
he is not expected, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with
the hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 24. The
Parable of the foolish Virgins has the same intent, they being fallen asleep
without any Oil in their Lamps, were so surpised at the Bridegrooms coming,
that they could not be admitted into the Marriage Chamber; it was in vain that
they did beat at the gate, with a Lord, Lord open unto us, Matt. 25. The door
could not be opened to them, but it was answered from within, Verily I say unto
you I know you not.

I know that the chief and principal purpose of this and other Parables, is to
teach us how we should be prepared to expect the Glorious coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, but they may very well be applied unto Death; for it has pleased
God to keep secret and hidden the day, in the which he will call us to himself,
and that of our Saviors coming to judgment, that we may be equally prepared,
and disposed for the one as well as for the other. As we shall be found at the
time of our death, so shall we be judged at the great day when Christ shall
come down from Heaven with the Angels of his Power, and from that judgment
there shall be no Appeal. Let us therefore put off the Sin that does so easily
beset us and break all the Chains of our filthy Lusts. Let us disarm death, and
take from it its venomous Darts, and its piercing stings. Let us pluck off the
Claws, and the Teeth of this furious Beast, and extinguish all its fires, and
it shall never be able to terrify us Let us live the life of Saints, and God
will give us grace to dye the death of the Righteous, and to end like unto
them. Let us live as we would that we had lived at that instant when Death is
upon our Lips. Let us live, as if at every moment we were to die, and at every
hour God did call unto us from his Heaven, Come and appear to Judgment.

And when Satan, the World, and our own Flesh solicit and draw us to evil, let
us say within our selves, Is it thus that thou will reward the Lord thy God,
and acknowledge all the Blessings and Favors that thou have received from his
bountiful hand? O Fool, do thou conceive that thou can go to Heaven by
marching in the Read to Hell. If thou do wilfully cast thy self away into the
depths of sin, what assur^n^^ ^ast thou of rising again by Repentance? If (...)
^orsakest God, art not thou afraid God will forsake thee? Is it thus that thou
preparest thy self to dye? Are these Lusts the Arms with which thou must
encounter Death? Art thou ready to draw near to the Sacred Majesty of thy God,
and to appear before his great Tribunal. The night is far spent, the day is at
hand. Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the
Armor of Light, Romans 16. Let us live as Children of God, and Heirs of his
Kingdom, Phil. 3. Let us be blameless, and shine as Lights in the World; Let
our conversation be as Citizens of Heaven, from whence we expect the Lord
Jesus, Ephesians. 2. Let us go to the Holy and Heavenly Jerusalem, by the way of good
Works, which God has prepared, that we might walk in them, Zach. 13. In all
our Actions, Words, and Thoughts, let there be engraven Holiness to the Lord.
Let us declare by our Deeds, that we really believe, without doubting,
whatsoever the Holy Scripture declares of the Eternal pains of Hell, and of the
unspeakable joys of Heaven, Gal. 6. Whilst we have time, let us do good to all,
but chiefly to the Household of Faith, Ephesians. 5. Let us redeem the time, for the
days are evil. Do not as Adam did, who to eat of the forbidden Fruit, so
pleasing to his taste, lost the Paradise which God had given him. Let us not
loose the Eternal Delights that God has prepared for us from the beginning of
the World, for a moment of carnal pleasure.

Let us imitate the Holy and Wise Virgins, put Oil in our Lamps betimes, let us
fill up our Hearts with Faith, Hope, and Charity, and put on the Robes of
Righteousness and Holiness. As God's faithful Servants, Let us labor to
accomplish our Task. Let us be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord; that when Death shall appear, or rather when the Prince of
Life shall call us to himself, we may be ready to give him an exact account of
our Talents, with which he has entrusted us, and that we may say unto him in
sincerity and truth, I have done the work that thou have given me, I have
fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. O most
excellent Lord, I have nothing else to do, but to receive from thy hand, the
Crown of Righteousness which thou have promised to all that love thine
appearance; I have nothing else to do, but to enter into thy Glorious Rest,
where thou do embrace, in thine infinite Mercies, all such as have overcome
Sin and Death, and kept thy Works unto the end.

A Prayer and Meditation for him that prepares for Death by Repentance, and an
Holy Life.
O God, the Holy of Holies, who art Holiness it self; Sin has introduced Death
into the World, and rendered this our Enemy so terrible. Strengthen me with thy
Divine Virtue, that I may be able to take from it betimes its mortal Weapons,
and its fiery Darts, and that strength and poison which is so natural to it.
Seeing that since the Creation of the World, thou have prepared thine Heavenly
Kingdom for me, give me Grace to employ the remainder of my life, to purge my
Conscience from dead Works, and to sanctify my Body and Soul, that I may be in
an Estate convenient for such an Holy Abode, into which no impure nor defiled
thing shall enter, that I may be in a disposition fit to behold thy Glorious
Face, that cannot be seen without Holiness. O Heavenly Father, enlighten mine
understanding with the light of thine Holy Spirit, that proceeds from thee,
that I may discover the ugliness of sin, and its dangerous consequences, that I
may abhor and abominate it with all mine heart, that I may look upon it as an
infernal Monster, and as Satan's Image, as a grievous filth which has
disfigured the Masterpiece of thine hands, and blotted out of our Souls the
chief features of thy Divine Image. Give me grace to esteem it as that cursed
Fire that has kindled thy wrath, set the whole world in a flame, as that
unfufferable burden, under which Nature it self sighs and groans, and under
which, Heaven it self complains, as the murderer of our first Parents, and of
all Mankind in general; as the Executioner that crucified the Lord of Glory,
and spilt his precious Blood. In short, give me grace to treat it as our most
unreconcileable enemy that provokes thy vengeance, and that labors to cast us
headlong into the Abyss of Eternal Torments. O Father of Mercies, give me
grace to perceive all the Beauties of Holiness, and the Glory that shall reward
it; that I may be enflamed with its love, and embrace it with all the
affections of my Soul, that I may look upon it as the the offspring of Heaven,
as an image of thy beautiful Face, and as a beam of thy Glory; as the rich
Jewel which the Devil had taken from us, as the highest perfection represented
by thy Son Jesus Christ; and as the chief part of that felicity unto which we
pretend, and into which thou will bring us in thine heavenly Paradise. O God of
my Salvation, how bitter are the fruits of sin? thou see my displeasure, for
having yielded so long to that loathsome Tyrant, and assisted my carnal Lusts
that war against the Soul. Thou see the inward grief of my mind, for having
neglected to employ that life which I have received from thy Mercy and
Goodness, that I might live to fear, serve, and obey thy Sacred and Divine
Commands; What shall I say, O Sovereign Lord of the World? I have sinned
against thee, against thee have I sinned, and done that which is abominable in
thy sight, but I repent in Dust and Ashes, my sins appear before me day and
night, I consider them with horror. Alas O Lord, before whom all things are
naked and open, thou know that my greatest grief proceeds from my not
grieving enough, and that my most sensible affliction is of not being afflicted
sufficiently, because I cannot feel a Repentance answerable to the greatness
and number of mine offenses. O God that searches the Heart and know all
things, thou understandest the greatness of my crimes, and what should be my
sorrow for their Commission; thou desire not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he should turn and live; Turn me, O Lord, and then I shall be
turned. Almighty God, who fetchest Water out of the hardest Rocks, draw out of
my stony Heart the tears of sincere Repentance, which might he acceptable unto
thee? Break and mollify this hard heart, that it may receive the Waters of
Eternal life, but rather pluck out this wicked heart, and give me a new heart,
fashioned with thine own hands, an heart where thy Glorious Image, with all its
most beautiful features, may appear with the most sacred beams that proceed
from thy Divine Face, an heart that may be enflamed with an Holy Zeal for thy
Glory, and burn with a love for thee. O God of all goodness, who have not
spared the blood of thine only Son, to blot out the sentence of my doom, grant
me thine Holy Spirit, that may sanctify me, and make me a new creature, that I
may bear the marks and the Livery of thy chosen, and that I may shine in the
World as a Lamp that burns with an Heavenly Fire. Crucify this miserable flesh
with all its Lusts, that I may live, not I, but that Christ may live in me,
that from henceforth I may live in the faith of the Son of God, who has loved
me, and given himself for me, that he might redeem and cleanse me from all
iniquity; Animate my Soul, enlighten mine understanding, direct and govern the
actions of my life; take possession of me, and rule me in such a manner, that
all mine affections, words and thoughts, may be sanctified by thy Grace, and
tend to the promotion of thy Glory. That I may not only abhor all such things
as are displeasing to thee, but that I may also shun those, which I know not
whether they will be acceptable to thee; that I may not only abominate the
filthy vices, but also hate the Garments infected with sin, and that I may
abstain from all appearance of evil, If the Devil, the World, and mine own
flesh tempt and stir me up to any sin, let the dread of thy Divine Majesty
seize upon my Soul: let Death enter into my mind, and fill me with such an holy
fear, as may stop and hinder me, Give me grace to consider, that I should be
the most miserable of all Creatures, if I did dye in offending and sinning
against thee; if I were buried with my crimes. Let me always think upon St.
John 's saying, Blessed and Holy is he, who has part in the first
Resurrection, the second death shall have no dominion over him. Seeing that thy
saving grace unto all men, has appeared so openly unto me; Grant that
renouncing all impiety, and worldly Lusts, I may live soberly, justly, and
religiously in this present life, that I may apply my thoughts to all those
things that are True, Honorable, Just, Pure, Lovely, of good Renown, and
generally to all things that are virtuous and worthy of praise. More
especially, grant O good God, that I may be possessed with a violent Charity,
which may carry me to actions of Love and Mercy, for thou delightest in such
Sacrifices. Charity covers a multitude of sins. O merciful Lord, the task which
thou have given me, is long and tedious, my life is but short, and I know not
how soon thou will come to knock at the door of mine house. O God, whose
Mercies are for ever, perform in me, that which thou do command, and then
command what thou will produce in me with power, both the Will and the Deed,
according to thy good pleasure. Give me grace to employ myself in thy work with
Diligence, Faithfulness, and Zeal, that I may not be troubled at thy Glorious
coming. Give me the Lamp of thy Sanctuary, lighted at the beams of the Sun of
Righteousness. Fill my Soul with the precious and Divine Oil that runs from thy
Spirit; and cloth me with the Robes of Holiness and Light, that I may be ready
to follow the Bridegroom into the Banqueting Chamber, and sit at thy Table with
the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and the Holy Virgin, and with
all those who have washed, and whitened their Robes in the Blood of the Lamb.
Let me live the life of the Saints, that I may dye the death of the Righteous,
that I may be admitted into thy Glorious Rest with thy Chosen; and that when I
am breathing forth thy last gasp, thy Son Jesus Christ may call to me from
Heaven, Come good and faithful Servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord, Amen.

CHAP. 12.
The sixth Remedy against the fears of Death, is to repose our selves upon
God's good Providence.

SOme persons there are so brutish and stupefied, that they never think upon
the great end and design of their Creation; they are not able to give a just
account wherefore God has put them into the World, they are Carnal and Earthly
minds, who imagine that they were created for themselves, as brute Beasts,
only to eat and drink. Such are of the number of those that are mentioned by
St. Paul, their God is their Belly, and their end is Eternal Misery. But there
are also some wise and virtuous minds, that are continually meditating upon the
favors that they received from Heaven, which they employ to their right and
proper end. Such Celestial understandings being enlightened from above, consider
very well that they are not born for themselves, but for their Country, for
their Parents, for their Friends, and chiefly for to serve God and his Church
on Earth; therefore they desire to live only to glorify their Creator, and
advance his Kingdom.

When this good desire is well governed, it is as acceptable to God, as a sweet
smelling Sacrifice. This was David's earnest desire in the 119 Psalm. Let my
Soul live, that it may praise thee. This Holy Zeal forced so many bitter Tears
from King Hezekiah in his sickness, and caused him to entreat most earnestly to
live yet longer in the World. This Wise and Religious Prince did well foresee
the fearful Evils, the grievous Confusion, and the abominable Idolatry that was
likely to succeed after his Death, in the Kingdom of Judea. He was therefore
very desirous to glorify God on Earth, and to accomplish the Reformation which
he had begun; He desired to have Children whom he might teach to fear God with
all their heart, and to serve him according to his Holy and Divine Will, that
he might cause Piety to continue in his House and Royal Family; he discovers
this Holy desire in his Divine Hymn, which he sung unto God, after his
miraculous recovery. Behold, for Peace I had great bitterness, but thou have in
love to my Soul delivered it from the pit of corruption, for thou have cast all
my sins behind thy back, for the Grave cannot praise thee, Is. 38. Death cannot
celebrate thee, they that go down into the pit, cannot hope for thy Truth, the
living he shall praise thee, as I do this day, the Father to the Children shall
make known thy Truth: The Lord was ready to save me, therefore we will sing my
Songs to the stringed Instruments, all the days of our life in the house of the
Lord. We find the same earnest desire in St. Paul, for when he looks upon
himself, and upon the miseries that attend upon him on Earth, and lifts up his
Eyes to see the Heavenly Bliss that waits for him above, he desires to depart
out of this earthly Tabernacle, and to be with Christ, and acknowledges that
it would be his great advantage; but when he looks upon the Church of Christ,
his desire of the Salvation, and instruction of his Brethren, causes him to
prefer their Comfort to his own Happiness and Joy. It is, says he, more
expedient for you that I remain in the Flesh, and I know for certain, that I
shall abide and remain with you for your advantage, and the joy of your faith.

This desire of Life, with an intent of Glorifying God, is Good and Holy, but
it is no easy task to keep it within its just and lawful bounds, for very often
it becomes vicious, when it is stirred up by a fond love of our own persons,
which makes us so loath to dye.

For example, when a great Prince, animated with an Heroical Virtue, is engaged
in a War for the preservation of his Subjects, and for the delivery of many
afflicted People, from oppression and Tyranny, if God blesses his Armies, and
causes his Glorious designs to succeed, he will not be well pleased, if Death
at that instant offers to cross him, to break in pieces his victorious Arm, to
put an end to his Conquests, and to cast his Crown to the ground, he may justly
complain in this manner, Must I now leave off such a noble and a brave Design?
must I here stop in the midst of such a glorious Race? and must Death bury with
my Body, the expectations of so many good Men? I am afraid that all my labors
will vanish away with my breath; I have just cause to fear, that my fall will
draw after me the destruction of many poor People that depend upon me. I fear
that oppression and Tyranny will resume fresh Spirits, and a greater Boldness,
and prove, for the future, more grievous and unfufferable. O cruel and inhumane
Death! by taking away my Life, thou bring my Friends to Execution, and the
Arrows that thou stickest in my Heart, do pierce the Souls of many innocent
People.

Likewise, he that is promoted to be the King's Vicegerent in a Province, or to
be a Governor of a rich Country, and an important Place, may be grieved
because Death snatcheth him away in the middle of all his business, especially
if it be in troublesome times, and if he sees none of a sufficient ability to
succeed him; Must I, will such an one say? Must I quit so soon this Glorious
employment? Must I so quickly leave my Prince's service, and forsake so many
poor People, as a Flock without a Shepherd? Death, how hateful and odious art
thou? Thou delightest to bring all things into confusion and trouble.

Thus a brave General of a victorious Army, who being full of Courage, manageth
a successful War, for the Honor of his Prince, and the advantage of his
Country, cannot but complain against Death, when it comes to subdue him before
he has totally subdued and overcome his Enemies, especially, if the times be
so unhappy, that none is able to undertake that employment after him; he will
be ready to break forth into complaints: Must I leave off so many Glorious
designs? Must I forsake my most faithful Soldiers, and abandon them to the
mercy of their Enemies, or to the capricious humor of an unexperienced
Successor? O Death, full of envy! will thou pluck out of my hands, so soon,
this conquering Sword, and cut off, with one blow of thy Sith, so many great
expectations? In the same manner, he that sits in the most Honorable seats of
Judicature, as a Judge, a President, or a Counselor, or any other chief
Magistrate, will doubtless mourn if Death seizes upon him in the flower of his
age; especially, if he fears, that after him corrupt Men will succeed, who may
be likened to whitened Walls. Must I, will he say, leave so soon this noble
Office, in which I took so much delight? O inconsiderate Death, why do thou
not suffer me to wear my Purple, until such time as I shall be weary to bear
it? Why do thou not permit me to sit here upon this magnificent Seat, until I
tumble off with old Age?

Likewise a faithful Minister of the Gospel, when he perceives the work of the
Lord to prosper in his hands; Satan falls from Heaven by his means, as a
Lightning, and Dagon to be brought upon his Face to the ground, may justly
wonder at Death's approaches, and speak in this manner; Must I so soon quit the
duties of this Holy Function, in which I took my greatest delight? Must I break
off from this Sacred Work, by which I did advance so happily, the Glory of God;
I am afraid, that when I am gone, ravening Wolves will enter into the Lord's
Flock, and a terrible night of ignorance will involve our posterity.

Thus a Father of a Family, who passionately loves his Wife and Children, shall
never see death, but shall feel all his Bowels move, and his Heart tormented
with grief he will sigh out such expressions as these. Must I forsake a poor
forlorn Wife, swimming in Tears? Must I leave my tenderhearted Parents, who
found my life a comfort, and will find my Death an affliction? Must I abandon
my dear Children whom I love as my Soul, without guide, and in danger of
loosing the small temporal means that I have provided for them; in danger also
of being overcome by the vicious customs of the age, and enticed to Idolatry
and Superstition.

That we may be able to govern this violent passion that prevails so much upon
our minds, we must labor betimes to bring our selves to this; That we may rest
upon the good Providence of our Heavenly Father. Christian Souls, meditate upon
this excellent saying, in the 37 Psalm, Leave thy ways to the Lord, and trust
in him, and he will direct thee. And in the 59 Psalm. Cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and he will sustain thee. Forget not also that blessed exhortation of St.
Peter, Cast all your cares upon God, for he cares for you. Imprint also in
your minds, St. Paul's assertion, All things work together for good to them
that love God. Remember the noble resolution of this great Apostle, According
to my earnest expectation, and my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but
that with all boldness as always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my
Body, whether it be by life or by death.

Thou desire to be instrumental in the service of God, and of the Public; it
is an excellent desire indeed, and praise worthy, but it belongs to God to
appoint the service that he intends to receive from thee; it belongs to him to
prescribe unto thee thy task, and to order thy bounds: he knows when he is to
release thee from thy labor, and how long thou must fight. Is thine eye evil
because thy God is so good and gracious as to shorten thy work and troubles?
All such as follow cheerfully the Banners of the God of Hosts, and never
retreat without the Command of the great General of Heaven and Earth, shall
enjoy a blessed victory, and obtain the honor of the Triumph; as well the
Novice and the fresh Soldier, as the old and long experienced. All such as
labor faithfully in the Lord's Vineyard, shall receive, from him, an eternal
Reward, as well he that continues but an hour, as the other that bear the heat
and burden of the day. When thou should have gone but a few steps in the
paths of Righteousness, thy God is so noble and liberal, that he will bestow
upon thee an uncorruptible Crown of Glory, as well as if thou had continued
there many years.

Great Princes, that yield unto the King of Kings, a Religious Respect, and
that seek your greatest Glory in the Cross of Christ, submit your selves
altogether to the pleasure of your universal Monarch; for seeing the Lives of
all Men are governed by his wise Providence, he has a particular regard, and
an high esteem of the Lives of Kings and Princes, the Sons of his right hand.
Therefore whilst it is expedient for his Glory and their Salvation, that they
should live upon Earth, he places round about their Sacred Persons his Holy
Angels, and encompasseth them with a wall of Fire. Remember, that as soon as
the King of Israel was seated upon the Throne, God commanded him to take in
hand the Book of his Law, and to read in it all the days of his life. Ask from
him that Wisdom and Prudence that is requisite to govern such multitudes of
People, and beseech him to grant unto you the strength and virtue that is
necessary to bear so great a burden. Let the Sword that he has entrusted in
your hands, be to do justice upon Offenders, and to protect the Guiltless. As
you are living Images of God's Sovereign Authority over his Creatures; Remember
that you should also represent his Goodness and Mercy: follow the example of
him who resists the Proud, but gives grace to the Humble. Live in such a
manner, that your Subjects may cherish and honor you, as their common Father,
may obey and serve you as their Lord, and may respect and fear you as their
King. Suffer not your Heart to be puffed up with pride, when you behold the large
Dominions that God has put under your Command, and the People that own you for
their Sovereign; But lift up your eyes to the spacious Heavens, take a view of
their vast Extent, and see how the whole Earth is inconsiderable in comparison
of them, and think upon God, before whom all Nations are but as the smallest
dust of a Balance, and as a few drops of Water. Consider well, that your
Subjects are Creatures that God has made after his own likeness, and redeemed
by the death of his Son, and that they are to Reign with you for ever in
Heaven. Remember that the more God has committed to your Trust, the greater
must be your reckoning, and that you must one day appear in person before his
dreadful Throne, without Scepter or Crown, as so many wretched Sinners to
implore his Mercy. Search into your selves, and examine what you are; your
Bodies are subject to wounds, infirmities, and diseases, as that of the meanest
of your servants; Your Souls also are moved with the same Passions and Lusts as
theirs. In short, you are entered into the World in the same manner, as the
most miserable Slave, and you shall go out of it again as he does; so that if a
crowd of flatterers sooth you up as they did Herod, A voice of God and not of
Man, Acts 12. Mind well what God speaks to you from Heaven, I have said that ye
are Gods, and the Children of the most high, nevertheless you shall dye as Men,
and you that are the chiefest, shall fall as the rest, Psalm. 72. During the
time of your abode in the World, employ your Blood, Sweat, and all the Strength
and Power that God has put into your hands, for the good and advantage of your
States, and for the defense and preservation of the people, that shelter
themselves under your wings. And if, in the midst of your greatest and most
flourishing Prosperities, Death comes to give you a summons to depart; let fall
the Scepter willingly, to join your hands together, and to fall down and adore
the King of the whole Earth. Grieve not for the loss of worldly Glory that
passes away as a Lightning, or as a shadow, for God promises another, that
shall be more lasting than the light of the Sun. If you can but overcome Death
and your selves, God will cause you to sit down upon another Throne, and will
bestow upon you a Kingdom that shall never be moved, Revel. 3. Heb. 12.

Wise and Religious Princes, be not solicitous for the things that shall happen
after your decease. He by whom Kings Reign, and Princes do Justice, is able
enough to enrich your Successor with the Graces and Qualities that become a
powerful Prince. It may be that he will bestow upon him more Glory and
Happiness than upon you. When King David had ended his mortal Race, God took
him into his Rest; it seems at first, that the loss of so good a Prince could
not be repaired; but God caused Solomon to sit upon his Fathers Throne, and
made him the wisest and the most happy Monarch of the World. David did but
remove God's Ark, but Solomon built, for him, a stately and magnificent Temple;
David was a Type of the Encounters and Victories of the Son of God, but Solomon
represented his Glorious Triumphs, and that Eternal Peace, with which he shall
bless his Chosen in the Kingdom of Heaven.

What if you leave your Children under age, be not discouraged, for God will
preserve them, as the Signet upon his Right Hand, or as the Apple of his Eye.
Think upon Josias, who was but eight years old when he succeeded in the Kingdom
of Judea; nevertheless there was never a Prince more Holy and more Religious,
none ever did more good to the Church of God; and that you may be able to
strengthen your Faith, and confirm your glorious expectations, meditate upon
the Life of Joas, who was but a year old when his Father was killed, and an
infernal fury sought to destroy him, but in the middle of so many Tragedies.
God preserved him alive, by a Miracle, and placed him, in a Glorious manner,
upon the Throne of his Fathers. Seeing therefore that it is the pleasure of him
who gives and takes away the earthly Crowns, leave cheerfully this corruptible
one, to receive another that is immortal and uncorruptible. You also, noble
Governors of Countries, and Castles, that represent the Persons of your Kings
and Princes; remember that this Dignity comes not only from the appointment of
your Masters, but from God himself, who holds in his hands the Hearts of all
the Kings and Princes of the world. Remember what our Savior told the Governor
of Judea, Thou should have no power upon me, if it were not given to thee
from above, John 19. Let all the world see, by you, that there is nothing more
consonant and to your suitable than Piety toward God, with faithfulness
Prince. Take heed that you abuse not your Power and Authority in satisfying
your passions, and pleasing your covetousnes or vanity. Protect not the guilty,
and oppress not the innocent. Seeing that you are appointed to punish evil
doers, and to encourage such as do well, behave your selves as if ye were
always in the sight of your Prince, or rather behave your selves, as in the
presence, and in the sight of God, before whom all things are naked and open,
as if you were to give up unto him, an account of your Stewardship. Whilst you
are happily employed in the service of your Prince, and of your Country; if
Death comes to interrupt your prosperity, yield your selves, without
resistance, to the wise Governance and Orders of him, who is both your
Sovereign Lord, and unto whom you must be subject on Earth.

Trouble not your selves with the thoughts of the things that shall happen
after your death, and think not but that there are yet some worthy and able to
succeed you in your employments. When God is pleased to be favorable to Kings,
and to cause their Seats to flourish, he raises up faithful Ministers, and
wise Governors, as when he gave to Pharaoh a Joseph; to Hezekiah, an Eliakim;
to Nebuchadnezzar a Daniel. When he pleases to search into his unfathomed
Treasuries, he can quickly provide Men after his own Heart adorned with all the
abilities required for a worthy discharge of a glorious employment. In the mean
while, if thou have overcome Satan, Sin, the World, and Death, thou shall go
and take possession of a greater, and more lasting Glory. He that bears upon
his Garments and Thighs, this Inscription! The King of Kings, and the Lord of
Lords, has given out this unchangeable promise; he that shall overcome, and
has kept my Works until the end, I will give unto him power over the Nations,
and he shall govern them with a Rod of Iron.

Right Honorable Counselors, that assist your Prince with your wise Counsels;
and you inferior Magistrates and Judges, never forget what Jehosaphat said to
the Judges of his Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 9. Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not
for Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment. Wherefore now let
the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity
with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of Gifts. Psalm. 85.
Whenever you go to take your place amongst the Judges of the Kingdom;
remember that God sits there upon his Throne, and every time that you give a
Charge, or pronounce a Sentence, consider that you are to follow God's
directions, and that this Great Creator takes notice of your Actions, Words,
and of the motions of your Heart, and that he understands your most secret
thoughts, Judge with the same equity and justice, with which you desire to be
judged: If you be tempted to do Wrong, to conceal the Truth, or to commit an
injustice, either by a base compliance, or by an expectation of Worldly
advantage, or for filthy Lucre; remember that it is the Devil that tempts you,
pray therefore to God to deliver you from his power; and that you may be better
able to command your selves with an Holy dread, think upon death that warns you
in person, nay, drags you to appear before the Universal Judge of Mankind, to
give up an account of all your Actions, and of the Sentences that you have
given; but if Death surprizeth you when you are discharging your Offices with
all the diligence and integrity imaginable; stay not till it forces you, but
cast off willingly the Robes of Judicature, to take the Habit of a Supplicant,
and pray to God, that he may not enter into judgment with you, because no
living creature shall be justified in his presence, Psalm. 13.

Let not the consideration of the passages that shall happen after your
decease, obstruct your Christian resolution. There are men enough in the World
of a sufficient ability, to supply your places; And God is able to raise up
some that we dream not of, as when he created in one day threescore and ten
Judges in Israel, whom he endowed with sufficient abilities, and with the
graces of his Holy Spirit; He may produce some that will be as Righteous and
Just as your selves, and, it may, be more enlightened with discretion, and
prudence, than you. Come off therefore willingly from these seats of
Judicature, so beset with Thorns, upon which you should never rest without
horror and dread, if you sincerely fear God, and go with confidence to the
Throne of Grace, that you may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of
need, Heb. 4.

And as true Piety is as soon to be found in the Tents of David, as in the
Temple of Solomon; as the Sword of Gideon agrees well with that of the God of
Hosts, I may make my addresses to you, worthy Generals, brave Captains, and
generous Nobility, unto whom Kings, Princes, and Commonwealths commit the
leading of their Armies; I speak not unto you profane Atheists, that laugh at
the most Holy things, and that are of opinion, that all fear of God must be
banished out of your Troops and Companies, and that the most wretched Varlets
are the best Soldiers; but I speak to you Christian and Religious Commanders,
who forget not, by your promotion amongst Men, that you are nevertheless the
Soldiers of Jesus Christ; and although you wear at your side a material Sword,
forget not to employ also the sword of the Spirit, the word of God that dwells
in your hearts: Neither do I intend to speak to you who manage War, with an
intent only to satisfy your Revenge, your Ambition, or your Covetousness; but I
speak to you brave and worthy Captains, who have purified your weapons in an
Heavenly Fire, who undertake War, only to procure a more lasting Peace to the
public, and who fight only to serve your Prince and Country; you that are the
great bulwarks of States and Empires, by whose labors and watchings Men sleep
in security; Let the whole World see by experience in your persons, that there
is nothing that agrees better with true generosity than Piety and the fear of
God; behave your selves always, as in the sight of your Maker, who is at your
Elbows, and accompanies you in all your actions. Remember that he commanded to
remove all filth from the Camp of Israel, because of his Holy and Divine
Presence. If you will obtain his Blessing upon your persons and designs, cast
out of your Armies the filth of Vice, and Punish, without Mercy, the Rapes,
Burnings, all Impiety and Blasphemies; make your Soldiers put in practice St.
John the Baptist's most excellent advice to the Soldiers of his time, who
enquired what they were to do to be be saved; Do violence, said he, to no man,
neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages. Live as Lambs, and
fight as Lions, Spare as much as you can the blood of your Soldiers, and shed
not that of your Enemies, but against your Wills, because they are God's
Creatures, and Men that bear his Image. Never trust to your own valor and
experience, but remember that it is God who gives Courage, and strengthens the
hands in the day of Battle, who causes Fear and Terror to fly whither he
lists. Look always upon David's example. There was never a Captain more
courageous, nor more willing to venture his life; and yet there was never a
person more zealous in Prayer to God, nor more submissive to his Will, nor more
careful to return unto him, the praise of all his advantages: and if Death
comes to put a stop to your victories, or to call you away in a trice, in which
your Prudence and Courage is requisite, wonder not at it, consider that God
offers you by this means an occasion of a more Glorious Victory, and of a more
Magnificent Triumph; for the victory over thousands of Mortal Men, and of the
whole World, is nothing in comparison of a victory over Death and Hell. Inquire
not who shall succeed you in the Conduct of your Army, out of a distrust of
God's good providence; for he who is able to raise up Children unto Abraham,
out of Stones, can raise up also, from thence, Captains and Soldiers when he
pleases, to give a check to the Enemies pride, and to deliver his People from
their hands; he can make Gideons, Jephtha's, Sampsons, and such like
extraordinary Commanders; Who knows but that he will cause a General to succeed
you, that shall have more Courage and Generosity, and that shall be blessed
with a greater Happiness, and more Glorious Successes? When Moses departed to
his Rest, Joshua Commanded in his stead, and for that purpose God enabled him
with a noble Spirit of Wisdom and Courage; for one Enemy that Moses overcame,
Joshua destroyed thousands; whereas Moses did but coast along the Land of
Canaan, and turn up and down in the Wilderness, Joshua brought the People of
Israel into that pleasant Country, and into a peaceable possession of it.
Seeing therefore that it is God's pleasure, leave to others the care of worldly
Wars, and ye go to gather the pleasant and delicious Fruits of an Eternal
Peace, which has been purchased unto you by the Blood of Christ,

Likewise ye faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ; remember to show the example
of a resignation to God's good pleasure, according to your Doctrine; Let not
Death cause you to draw back: thou have, my Brother, a Will, to Glorify God on
Earth, well, but thou shall Glorify him better in Heaven, with more zeal and
less hindrance; whilst thou art surrounded and fettered with these Fetters of
Mortality, thy Ministry must needs be accompanied with many imperfections. Thou
imaginest, that if it pleased God to prolong thy days, thou may be
instrumental in the reformation of the World; but thou art mistaken, My
Brother, for this World is accustomed to Evil, and this Age is hardened in
Iniquity. Preach as much as thou will to the Inhabitants of this inferior
World, it shall be as in the times of Noah, the Herald of Righteousness, when
the patience of God waited for the conversion of Sinners, for the whole Earth
has corrupted its ways, so that all the thoughts and imaginations of the Heart
of Man are evil continually, from his Cradle they are corrupt and filthy; And
if God does not interpose his Almighty Hand, and declare in us the Virtue of
his Holy Spirit, our thoughts will grow worse and worse, until we tumble into
our Graves. If thou afflict never so much thy just and innocent Soul, and spend
thy self in exhorting the greatest Sinners, to fly from the wrath to come, and
the judgments of God that hang over their guilty Heads; it may be thou shall
be mocked by thy nearest Relations, as Lot was by his Sons-in-law. When thou
would thunder out the threatenings of God's Law against the abominations of
Israel, as the Prophet Isaiah did once, thou should be forced at last to
confess, I have labored in vain, I have employed my strength for naught, Isai.
49. Jer. 6. When thine Eyes should be converted into a fresh Spring of Tears,
and when thou should spend the days and the nights in calling upon the
Superstitious, the Schismatics, and Idolaters, to forsake their false worship,
and their unchristian proceedings; thou shall not be able to soften the
hardness of their Hearts, nor overcome their obstinacy, but they will be ready
to speak to thee in the Jews language to Jeremiah. As for the word that thou
have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee, but
we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouths, to
burn incense unto the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out Drink Offerings unto
her, as we have done, we and our Fathers, our Kings, and our Princes, in the
Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, for then had we plenty of
Victuals, and were well, and saw no evil, Jer. 44. When thou should speak
with a Divine Tongue, and with an Heavenly Wisdom, thou may have good cause
to cry out, Who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord
been revealed? Isai. 5. John 12. In short, as the Rivers of fresh Water that
run continually into the Sea, derive not from thence their natural bitterness;
thus thy good and Holy Life, thy Learned and excellent Sermons will not be able
to remove the corruptions of this present evil Age, nor stop the Torrent, and
hinder the overflowings of Vice, for thy labor and industry, if compared with
the corruption of the World, are as unconsiderable as a few drops of water in
comparison of the Ocean. This cursed Earth may be watered with thy Sweat and
Tears; it will nevertheless bring forth nothing but Briars and Thistles; the
Weeds which thou think to pluck up, will tear thy Skin, and draw blood out
of thy Hands, In short, he that plants is nothing, nor he that waters, but it
is God who gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.

It is justly to be feared, that in staying any longer time in this corrupt and
unwholesome Air; thou may receive some evil impressions from the general
contagion. It is to be feared, that thou may sully thy pure Hands, by
handling so many Wounds and Sores, and that the Thorns of this cursed Earth,
may pluck off the Wool of thine harmless and innocent life.

But when thou should have a thousand times more Gifts and Graces, and that
thy labors should bring far greater advantages and profit to Christ's Church;
it belongs not to thee to give Laws unto thy God, but to follow the motion of
his Will. Leave to him the chief care of his own Household, and rest upon his
Eternal Providence; He has more right in the Church than thou can pretend
to, for he has created it by his Power, and redeemed it by his precious Blood.
He that cares not for his own, especially for those of his Family, has denied
the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel; and can God, who is Faithfulness it
self, and the very Being of Truth; God, who cannot deny himself, and whose
Gifts and Calling are without Repentance, Romans 12. Can such a God cast off all
care of his Church, of that Church which he embraces with an Eternal Love, and
cherishes as the apple of his Eye? Jer. 31. This Father of Mercies, who has
not spared his own Son, but has delivered him to dye for his Church, how
should not he with him freely give her all things? Romans 8. He understands
better than thou, and all the men of the World, what is proper and advantageous
for this Holy Congregation, and for every member that composes it. He knows how
to provide for all its wants, for his Wisdom is infinite, and his Providence is
most wonderful.

When this great God has a design to plague his Enemies, and to declare his
justice, he has always fit Agents ready, and his Quiver full of Arrows; As
soon as he commands the Holy Angels that wait before him, to cast their Sicles
into the Earth, and to reap or pour down the Viols of his wrath; these Holy
Spirits fly with an unspeakable swiftness to perform his Sacred Pleasure,
Revel, 14, and 16. Likewise when he intends to do good to his Chosen, he finds
in every place the Heralds of his Mercy, and his Divine hand is always full of
Blessings. As the Main Ocean of his wonderful Riches can never become dry;
Likewise the Channels by which he conveys them to us, shall never fail.

The cause of thy complaints should serve to appease thy Grief, nourish thy
Faith, and increase thy Hopes, for if thou art graced with extraordinary Gifts,
this proceeds neither from thy Nature, nor thine Industry, but God's Favor and
Bounty. Now thou may be assured that his hand is not shortened, his great
Power is not lessened, the Wellspring of all his Blessings and Wonders, is not
stopped nor dried up. Is. 49. He that sends a desired whiteness, the prognostic
of an approaching harvest to the spacious Fields, John 4. He sends also, into
his Spiritual Harvest, Laborers when he sees it convenient. In this latter Age,
and in this decay of the World, as well as in the first appearance of his
Church, Luk 10. he finds Men to work in his Vineyard, or rather he forms and
fashions them with the hand of his Grace, and enables them by his Holy Spirit,
for he gives the Mouth and the Tongue, he makes deaf, dumb, blind, and restores
the eyesight; he calls things that are not as if they were. Matthew. 20. Exodus
4. Romans 4.

When he designs for himself a Tabernacle, he calls by name a Bezaleel, and
fills him with his Spirit of Wisdom, of Understanding and knowledge, in all
manner of Workmanship, Exodus 31. When he resolves to deliver the Children of
Israel, from their Babylonish Captivity, and to build the Temple of Jerusalem,
he has at his Command Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, Acts 14. He stirs up
Zerobabels, Esdras, and Nehemiahs. Likewise when he intends to repair the
breaches of his House, and to increase the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, he
makes Servants and fit Agents, and bestows upon them sufficient Graces for such
a noble Work, Psalm. 8. Mat. 21. As he has never left himself without witness
in doing good, thus he has never been without witnesses to declare his Sacred
Truth, Luk 19. By the mouth of Babes he perfects his praise, and as our Savior
told the Jews, If these held their peace, the stones would cry out, Luk 19. God
will rather pluck the Pillars of the Idols Temples, to prop up his Church
rather than to suffer it to fall down; he will change the Wolves into Lambs,
and the Lambs into Shepherds rather than that his Sheep should want their
necessary Pasture. He chooses the feeble things of this World, to confound the
strong, the despicable, and such as are not to destroy such as are, 1 Cor. 9.

Thus God never leaves his Church without some testimony of his favor, some
powerful instrument of his Grace; but many times it happens, that when he
removes one good thing from us, he bestows upon us something more rare and
excellent. This consideration glads the Heart of Joseph upon his Deathbed, as
appears by what he said to his Brethren, I am going to dye, but God will not
fail to visit you, and cause you to go up from hence into the Land, that he
swore unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Genesis 50. For instead of a Joseph who had
occasioned their Bondage, God raised up a Moses, who delivered them with a
mighty hand, and a stretched-out Arm, 2 Kings 2. Thus God took up Elijah with a
Chariot of Fire, but he gave unto Elisha a double portion of his Masters
Spirit, and caused his Glorious Miracles to appear with greater admiration.
Likewise our Lord and Savior, when he had finished the great work of our
Redemption, he ascended up into Heaven. A Cloud conveying him up to the Throne
of his Glory; but according to his promise, he has not left us destitute, but
has sent us the Comsorter to dwell with us for ever, namely, the Spirit of
Truth whom the world sees not, nor cannot know, John 14. Christ's Corporal
presence was enjoyed but by a small number of People, but this Divine Spirit is
like a large River that swells and runs over every where, John 7. This Holy
Spirit is not only with us, but also within us, He is poured out into our
Hearts, He Seals us for the day of Redemption, He is the earnest of our
Inheritance, until the full consummation of the Glory reserved for us in
Heaven; Therefore when this merciful Savior saw his Apostles afflicted in an
extraordinary manner for his Leaving of the World, he speaks to them in this
Language, Because I have said these things unto you, Sorrow has filled your
Hearts; Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go
away, for if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto you; But if I
depart I will send him unto you, John 16. When St. Paul took his last farewell
of the Elders and People of the Church of Ephesus, they wept bitterly, being
grieved to the Heart, because he had said, That none of them should see his
face any more. But to comfort them, he assures them that in Heaven they had a
Father and a Protector, and such a Shepherd as would never forsake them; I
commend you, said he, To God, and to the word of his Grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified. Act. 20. Remember therefore O Man of God, seriously to consider all
these things; If the Lord who has called thee to the Sacred Function of the
Ministry, continues thee in the world; labor with courage and diligence in
thine Holy employment; Be not tired in the service of this good Master and
merciful Savior; fight the good fight of the Faith, endure patiently all
manner of Labors, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ; be as earnest and as
careful for the Lord's Sheep, as Jacob was for those of Laban; Here what he
professed of himself, In the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by
night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes, Genesis 20. Jacob endured patiently
these grievous pains and labor, and the time of his service, seemed to him to
be but of a few days, because of the love that he did bear unto Rachel;
Likewise thou will joyfully endure the troubles of thine Office: digest with
patience all the inconveniences, if thou do sincerely love the Lord Jesus,
and his Heavenly Spouse. If thou do esteem the salvation of Souls, for whom
Jesus Christ has suffered death; if thou have well understood the Excellency
of thine Heavenly Reward, and the Glory prepared for thee, when thou shall have
finished the time of thy painful and difficult service, and of thy mortal Race;
for they who bring many to Righteousness shall shine as the Stars, for ever and
ever, Dan. 12. Jacob had to do with a deceitful and unfaithful man; But God is
not as Man, that he should Lie, or as the Son of Man, that he should Repent!
Genesis 23. Be thou faithful until Death, and he will give thee the Crown of Life,
Revel. 2.

If it is the Lord's pleasure to lessen thy task, so that instead of employing
thee in his Vineyard, he intends to take thee up into his Kingdom, to drink
there of his new Wine; if at the time that thou think of sowing with Tears,
thou art transported to the place where thou may reap with Songs of Triumph;
If in lieu of the opposition which thou must suffer from sinners, God will
grant to thee his Eternal Consolations, and receive thee into the harmonious
Societies of the Church Triumphant, adore his Goodness, and his infinite Mercy;
cast thy self into his hands, and resolve cheerfully, to will, what is pleasing
to him; if during thine abode in this Valley of Tears, God has given thee a
livelihood, and if thou have found in him thy joy, thy satisfaction, and thy
greatest comfort, Death will be thy greatest advantage; thou shall find in thy
Savior, thy Rest, thy Glory, and Eternal Delights, Phil. 1. Meditate often
upon the words of the Holy Apostle St. Peter, The Elders which are among you, I
exhort, who am also an Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and
also a partaker of the Glory that shall be revealed, feed the Flock of God
which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but
willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind, neither as being Lords
over God's Heritage, but being ensamples to the Flock, and when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away,
1 Pet. 5.

You also, who are afraid to leave behind you a desolate, afflicted, and
comfortless Widow; Come and learn this Lesson, to rely upon the goodness and
tender compassions of the Father of Mercies, who never fails to comfort the
forlorn in all their afflictions, and who is always near to them that call
upon him in their distresses, 2 Cor. 1. Psalm. 145. He bears so much favor to
the Widows, that he calls himself The Judge of the Widows, Psalm 68. that is,
the Protector of their integrity and right, and severe revenger of the wrongs
that they suffer; Therefore God tells us in express words, That he maintains
the Widow, and establishes her Borders, Prove. 15. Seeing Job was so merciful
as to cause the Widows Heart to sing, Job 28. How much more may we expect from
God's goodness, he will doubtless fill her with his Heavenly joys, and the
ravishing comforts of his Holy Spirit. I mean not the foolish Widows that seek
for nothing but pleasure, worldly diversion, and carnal pastimes, who live in
the delights of the Age, and who are dead whilst they live. But I mean the wise
Widows, who being left alone by their Husbands death, have their confidence and
trust in God, continuing in Prayer day and night.

Our great God and merciful Lord, has not only said in general, that he is the
Judge, the Protector, and Comforter of the Widow; But he has vouchsafed unto
some his most signal Favors and extraordinary Blessings; In the Reign of Abab,
while a cruel Famine overspread the Land; God sent the Prophet Elijah to a poor
Widow of Sarephtah, who was preparing her self and her Son to dye, as soon as
they had eaten a little remnant of Meal and Oil that was left; but the Holy
Prophet comforted her in this manner, Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel,
the barrel of Meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of Oil fail, until
the day that the Lord sends Rain upon the Earth, 1 King. 5. Many Widows have
been comforted, in such a miraculous manner, for God has so ordered it, that
their provisions have not failed; although it may be, that they have not
enjoyed any unusual Plenty: yet this wise Purveyor has furnished them, the
things that have been necessary for them; so that not only, both they and their
Children have subsisted in the greatest calamities, but they have had the Honor
of assisting God's Prophets; and as that poor Widow of the Gospel gave Alms out
of her poverty; such Mites have been more pleasing to God, than the Treasuries
of the wealthy. Morever, when the Son of God was in the World, he was pleased
to express how much care and compassion he had of Widows, for when he met, at
the Gate of the City of Nain, a poor Widow weeping bitterly for her only Son,
that was carried out to be buried, he was moved with a tender feeling of her
affliction, therefore he raised the young man to life again, and restored him
to his Mother. It was also at the solicitation of some devout Widows, that St.
Peter raifed Dorcas from death to life. I must needs take notice here of an
admirable story, proper to comfort every faithful servant of God. The Widow of
a deceased Prophet, made this bitter complaint unto Elisha, Thy Servant my
Husband is dead, and thou know that thy Servant did fear the Lord, and the
creditor is come to take unto him my two Sons to be bondmen, 2 King 4. God,
who hears the cry of the afflicted, had compassion of that poor distressed
Widow, so that he gave unto her, by Elisha's means, in a wonderful manner,
sufficient for the payment of her debts, and for to nourish her Family; by this
glorious example, God declares the care that he will have of his Prophets
Widows, whilst they walk in his fear, and continue in his Holy Covenant.

In short, the modern and ancient Histories, are full of notable examples of
wise and virtuous Widows, that have discreetly governed their Families, and
upon whom God's Blessings have visibly appeared.

Almighty God, who is wonderful in all his Works, does sometimes order affairs
in such a manner, that Fathers don't gather up for their Children, but he gives
to some such Children in his Mercy, that make provision for their Fathers; such
are an extraordinary Blessing to their Family, as Joseph was to Jacob and his
Household. Such wise and virtuous Children, who are so necessary to their
Parents, whom they Love and Honor, might, out of their violent affection for
them, speak unto Death in the language of the young man of the Gospel; Suffer
me to go first and bury my Father. Let me alone awhile in the world, suffer me
to live, O death, until I have accompanied my Parents to their Grave, until I
have closed their Eyelids, and performed the last duties that Nature requires.
But hearken officious Son! what the Lord says to thee, Suffer the dead to bury
the dead, but thou follow me. Leave to them, that remain after thee, the care
of Worldly affairs, but do thou yield thy self at God's Call. Thy Charity for
others must not cause thee to be cruel to thy self, and disobedient to the
Commands of thy God. Fear not to leave thy Father and Mother, when thou art
going to cast thy self into the ravishing embraces of thy Spiritual Bridegroom,
and of thine Heavenly Father. The great God, who has given thee, or rather
lent thee to them, and who caused them to subsist before thou had a Being,
can feed and bless them without thee; his Mercy is not tied to thy Person, nor
confined to thine industry. When our Lord and Savior was upon the Cross,
seeing the Blessed Virgin and the Disciple whom he loved, said to his Mother,
Woman, behold thy Son, and to St. John, Son, behold thy Mother, John 19. and
from that hour that Disciple took her unto his own home. In the like manner
when God calls unto his Eternal Rest, him who was the supporter of his Family,
as Joseph was, he provides for them by some other means; so that if Elkanah had
good cause to say to his Wife, when she wept, because she had no Child, Am not
I better to thee then ten Sons? 1 Samuel 1. we may say with more reason, that
God's Grace, his Assistance, and the Comforts of his Holy Spirit, are better
worth than Ten thousand Children.

The strongest Passion, and that which I judge to be, the most apt to hinder a
good Man, is that which Fathers and Mothers have for their little ones;
especially if they be in an age unable to help themselves; but that this
natural passion may not hurry us beyond the limits prescribed by Reason and
Piety; consider well the promise that God made to Abraham, I am thy God, and
the God of thy seed after thee, Genesis 17. and what St. Peter told the Jews, To
you and to your Children was the promise made, and to all such as are afar off,
as many as the Lord our God shall call, Acts 2. especially, meditate well upon,
and imprint in your minds that which God speaks unto you from Heaven, by the
Prophet Jeremiah, Leave me thy Fatherless Children, and I will give them to
eat, and let thy Widows trust in me, Jer. 49. God is the Father of us all, but
more especially of the Fatherless, he has compassion of them, and provides for
all their necessities; thy Children are more tender to him than to thee, for
thou have been but a feeble instrument in his hand, to put them into the world;
but he is the Creator of their Soul, the fashioner of their Body, and the
redeemer of them both: He loves them with a stronger and more constant Love
than the best Fathers, and the most tenderhearted Mothers; therefore he
assures us by his Holy Prophet, that when the Mother should forget the Child,
unto whom she gives suck; and when she should have no pity of the Fruit of her
Womb, he will never forget us; so that all the Children that fear God, may say
as David, When my Father and my Mother should have forsaken me, the Lord will
receive me. Psalm. 27.

Seeing that Job has had a care of the Orphans, Job 31. and Pharaoh's Daughter
has had compassion of the Tears of a little strange Child, how much more shall
God, who is the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comfort, have pity of
Children, that he has redeemed with the precious Blood of his only Son? Exodus
2. 2 Cor. 1. Seeing that he hears the cries of the young Ravens, he will sooner
hear the Prayers, Sighs, and Tears of his Servants Children, Psalm. 147. Matt.
6. he clothes the Grass of the Fields which to day is, and to morrow is cast
into the Oven, Genesis 21. how much rather will he cloth your Children, O ye of
little Faith? Does your Heavenly Father nourish the Birds of the Air, and will
not he rather feed your Children, that are better worth than all the Birds
together? Jon. 4. In short, seeing God has had compassion of little Ishmael,
and of the Children of Ninivy, how much rather will he regard Children that
have been sanctified to him from their Mothers womb?

Our Lord Jesus Christ when he was on Earth, took up in his Arms the little
Children that were brought unto him, laid his hands upon them, and recommended
them to God his Father; and now that he is in Glory, his Love and tender
compassion for them, is no less; Therefore if we offer him our Children with
all our hearts, he will take them into his protection, he will stretch over
them the Arms of his Mercy, and will never take them away again. In short,
seeing that he promises to them the Kingdom of Heaven, and his Eternal
Felicities, he will never withold from them things needful for this present
life.

We can do nothing without God, but God can do all things without us. A great
many Children become debauched, and are spoiled in their Parents over-fond
tuition, wherecas many that are out of their sight, and that live when they are
departed; show good examples of Piety and Godliness, for example, in Isaack's
House, in the presence of this Holy Man, there was a profane Esau, a Glutton;
whereas Jacob that lived at a distance from his Parents, when he fled for fear
of his Brother, had always before his eyes the fear of Isaac his Father, Genesis
27. Genesis 31. that is to say, the God whom his Father worshipped. In Jacob's
House, Ruben defiled his Father's Bed, in an incestuous manner, whereas J^seph
in Potiphera's House, chose rather an apparent death, and present sufferings,
than to touch his Masters Wise, Genesis 39. David had the unhappiness to see some
of his Children guilty of Incest and Murder; whereas Joas and Josias, two
Orphan-Princes, in their tenderest infancy became Virtuous and Religious Kings,
zealous for the service of God. How many Children are there, who,
notwithstanding all the care and labor of their Fathers, fall into extremity of
misery? How many are taken from their Parents embraces, and dragged from thence
to the Gallows? whereas there are others that without Father, or Parents
assistance, don't only escape grievous dangers, but rise to Honors and
Dignities, as Joseph in Egypt, Daniel in Babylon, and Esther that was
Fatherless, and a poor Captive, became a Queen; and moreover, God made use of
her, and of her credit, to deliver his People from Haman's conspiracy. We see
every day that God blesses, in an extraordinary manner, many Orphans. Cast
your Eyes upon the Children of the blessed Martyrs, and thou shall perceive
many that God has made notable instances of his especial favors, and of the
Mercy that he promises to show unto thousand Generations of them that serve
him, and obey his Holy Commands. Thou shall find some that have much more
happiness in this life, than the posterity of the Persecutors; Thou shall see
them with astonishment, bestow their Alms upon the Children of such as have
plundered their Houses, and spoiled their Goods.

Whilst you are yet in being, exhort your Children to fear God, to serve, and
to addict themselves, with all their Heart, to the study of Piety, that has
the promises of this life, and of the life to come: Teach them first to seek
the Kingdom of God, and its Righteousness, and all these things shall be added
to them over and above.

Finally, when your life should be much more useful to your Children than it
is, remember what our Lord and Savior says, He that loves Son or Daughter,
more than him, is not worthy of him. Heaven is far more excellent than the
Earth. The Salvation and the Happiness of our Souls is to be preferred to all
the considerations of Flesh and Blood. It is not just, that such as have given
us, or to whom we have given the enjoyment of a temporal life, should hinder us
from the fruition of a Spiritual and Eternal Life. Besides, when we recommend
them to God, we put them into the protection of a true, and of a wise Friend,
who is acquainted with their necessities, who is so Good to procure them that
which shall be needful for them, and Almighty to accomplish all things which
may be for their advantage.

Let us therefore conclude, that it is the duty of a good Father that fears
God, not to resist death, not to fly from it when the Lord calls; but according
to the good example of the ancient Patriarchs, he ought to end his days
willingly with the praises of God in his mouth, and with exhortation to his
Children to love him, fear him, and serve him with all their heart, to continue
in his Holy Covenant, and to prefer him to all the Riches and Honors of this
miserable Earth. And as when our Savior had bestowed his Blessings upon his
Disciples, a Cloud carried him out of their sight into Heaven; Likewise when a
good Christian shall have thus given his Blessings to his Children, he will
shut his eyes to all inferior things, and think upon nothing but upon the
Eternal Bliss of the Heavenly Paradise.

If God calls us to himself in a miserable and wretched time, when our beloved
Infants are weeping about our Bed, ready to say to us, as Isaac unto Abraham,
My Father, here is Wood, a Fire, and a Knife, but where is the Beast for a
Burnt-offering? Genesis 22. God causes the visible signs of his heavy
displeasure to appear every where. In every corner we see nothing but Fire and
Sword. Death's frightful Image, and the fearful appearance of Masacres, do
scare and terrify us; Destruction is come into the Holy places, the Fire has
reached as far as God's own Sanctuary, and no body is able to deliver us. The
deluge of God's wrath has overspread our Land in such a manner, that, as
Noah's Dove, we cannot find where to pitch our feet. All our expectation is,
that God would also reach down his hand unto us from above, to receive us into
that Ark which is above the Heavens, and unto which your Soul is now departing,
Genesis 8. If our dear Children speak unto us in this Language; Let us, with the
courage, assurance, and faith of the Father of the Faithful, return unto them
this answer, My Children, the Lord will provide, Genesis 12. Romans 4. It is he that
acts beyond appearance, and against all hope, who causes the dead to live, and
calls things that are not, as if they were; he will send to you his good Angels
to help you in all your necessities when you shall be reduced to the uttermost
misery, ready to receive the last stroke of death; God's hands will stop the
sword of his justice, he will change your crying and fears into joy and Eternal
gladness. There will be some Holy and devout Soul, that loves the public peace
and tranquillity, that will bring to you the Olive Branch of Peace. God can
appease the Tempest with his breath, at his Command the winds will be still,
and the roaring Waves that are ready to devour you, will return to their former
tranquillity. Otherwise he will preserve you miraculously alive in the midst of
the greatest troubles, and most fearful confusion. And as Abraham found a Lamb
entangled in a Bush; Likewise in the midst of the sharpest storms of
affliction, and in the most intricate difficulties that you dread, you shall
find unexpected sweetness and comforts. And as several colors of the beautiful
Rainbow, appear upon the Cloud, whence proceeds the Storms and the Rain;
Likewise thus, in the greatest afflictions, God will give you some testimonies
of his fatherly care, and of his Divine love. The assurance that you shall
repose in God, shall never be confounded, for the love of God is spread in your
hearts by the Holy Spirit, that he has given you. The hotter the fire of
affliction shall be, the greater, and the more miracles it shall bring forth.
The higher the waters of your Flood shall rise, the nearer they will approach
your Souls good, and the nearer you will draw to Heaven, the place of your
Souls birth: Comfort therefore your selves, my dear Children, and assure your
selves, that by the favorable assistance of God's Grace and Mercy, we shall
see one another again speedily. I shall not return to you, but you shall come
to me, for I am going to that large and magnificent Dwelling, whither our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ is gone before, to prepare a place for us, and where
he will embrace us all. I am going up to my Father and your Father, to my God
and to your God.

A Prayer and Meditation for a King and a Sovereign Prince, who prepares for
death, by reposing himself upon God's providence.
O King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who have been Graciously pleased out of
thine especial goodness, to make me a living Image of thine Almighty Power, and
a visible expression of thine Heavenly Glory; suffer me not to be lifted up in
pride, by that Power and Majesty with which thou have clothed me. That I may
not imitate that vain glorious, and profane Monarch, who discovered his
impious mind in these terms. Is not this great Babylon that I have built for
the House of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
Majesty. But give me Grace to adore the Scepter of him who has established me,
to humble my self before the Throne of thine universal Empire, I have so much
the more reason thus to abase my self, because I am to appear before thy great
Tribunal, not only as a man, to answer for my actions, but also as a Prince; I
must there appear to give up an account of my public Stewardship, and of so
many thousand Souls committed to my care. If, at any time, the splendour and
glory of my Crown dazzle my Eyes, and delude my fancy; or if fond flatterers
sing at my ears, A voice of God, and not of Man. O let me then remember the
frailty of my corruptible Nature, I am born as other Men, and subject to the
same passions, and the same infirmities; Death will have no more regard for me,
than for the vilest of my subjects, it will not treat me with more civility
than them; It will enter as boldly into my Palace, as into the Huts of my
meanest Soldiers, and into the Cabans of the most contemptible Shepherds; It
will break my Scepter in pieces, as easily as the Beggars staff, and trample
upon the Flowers and Jewels of my Crown, in the same manner as upon the grass
of the field. My Life. as that of my Slaves and Vassals, is but the breath of
my Nostrils, a wind that vanishes away, a shadow that will quickly disappear.
O God of all flesh! whilst thou continuest unto me my life here below, Command
in my Heart, and amongst my affections, Govern me by thine excellent Wisdom,
and by thy Royal and Divine Spirit. Seeing that by thee Kings Reign, and
Princes do Justice, give me Grace to lift up mine Eyes always unto thee, and to
employ all the Power and Authority which I have received from thee, to thy
Honor and Glory, and to the advance of thine Heavenly Kingdom, that I may look
upon my Subjects as thy Creatures, formed after thine own Image, and as thy
Children redeemed with the Blood of thine only Son, if thou have been pleased
to put a differance between them and me. O that I may also consider that there
is a more vast difference between me Dust and Ashes, a Worm of this vile Earth;
me, a nothing, and less than nothing, and thine Eternal Being. O great and
living God! whose Power is infinite; when thou art pleased to send these Orders
to the richest, and to the most powerful Monarchs, Sons of men return; at the
same instant they are not able to make resistance, but they must needs return
to Dust, and with them all their contrivances, all their high and glorious
purposes vanish away. O Sovereign Monarch of the World, when thou shall
forewarn me by any of thy Servants, or signify unto me by any other means, that
thy pleasure is to take me from my Throne, to remove me from my Principality,
and to separate me from my self; instead of troubling and afflicting my Soul,
as an Heathen Prince, give me grace to show a noble constancy, and a Christian
resignation, to thine Holy and Divine pleasure. If thou do with one hand,
write the Sentence of my Death, I know that thou will sign with the other, the
irrevocable Decree, for me to go and take possession of a life infinitely
happy. Alas great God; what are all these Territories that I must leave, in
comparison of the Celestial Inheritance which thou have prepared for me, from
the Creation of the World; for all the Earth, if compared with the Heavens, is
but a point; and what are all the inferior Crowns that fade away, and fall to
the ground, in comparison of the uncorruptible Crown of Glory that waits for my
coming, at the end of my mortal Race? O how willingly shall I cast off this
Purple, this Royal Attire, to put on the precious Robes of Light and
Immortality, reserved for me in thine Heavenly Paradise? How joyfully shall I
put down this Scepter, to take into my hands the flourishing Branches of Palms,
that I see in the possession of thy triumphing Saints? O Almighty King of
Kings, thou have entrusted me with the Governance of this Kingdom and
Principality; I return it willingly into thy Divine hands; Thou have subdued my
people under me, and taken me out of many Waters, thou have justified my Right
to these Crowns by a gracious and a miraculous Restoration.
O let me never forget thine infinite goodness, so visibly declared to me and
my people. How innumerable are thy Mercies? O Lord! Let therefore the former
experience that I have had of thy goodness, encourage me to cast willingly my
Self, my Life, my Crown, and my Kingdoms, into thy Divine hands. And while I
yet remain amongst the living, give me Grace, O good and merciful Savior, to
wean my self from the world and worldly pleasures. Give me a hearty distaste of
all unsatisfying delights of the Body, and a true relish of the immortal
contentments of the Soul. Let the nearer approach of my death make me to draw
nearer to thee in love and obedience. Give me power to overcome all carnal
temptations. O that the excellency of my Place and Dignity, the precious Blood
of my Savior, with which thou have washed my Soul, and that immortal Bliss
prepared for me, might fill me with an hearty loathing, and contempt of the
vain and unprofitable Delights of the World, that my Soul may not be fettered
and enslaved to these filthy vanities, so far below the excellency of its
Being. O Gracious God! with my Person I leave to thee the disposition of my
Scepter and Kingdoms, thou art able to give to my successor the same Piety,
Zeal, and Love, for thy Truth that I have always expressed; I leave to thee the
care and preservation of that Religion which thy powerful hand has planted
amongst us; thou art able to cause it to flourish in the midst of so many
envious attempts of adversaries. Let me not therefore distrust thy good
providence, but grant to the person that thou have appointed to succeed me, a
Love and Fear of thy Holy Name; enrich his Soul with all Divine Graces, and
Royal Virtues: My God and my King, thou gave me an earnest desire of building
thee a Temple as to David, a Man after thine own heart. I have labored to
recruit, in my days, the senseless divisions of my people, but seeing that it is
not thy pleasure that I should accomplish such a glorious Work; Give to my
Successor the Grace and Wisdom, as to Solomon, that he may perfect the pious
designs that I have begun. Establish his Throne with true Religion, and
sincere Reformation. Let Justice and Peace flourish in his Reign. Let Truth
prosper, Charity and Love inflame the Hearts of thy People. Let all his
neighbors bless him. Let him have as many Guards as Subjects, and as many
Fortresses as Hearts in his Dominions. But especially good God, give him grace
to build thee a settled House in these Nations, and to raise it up to the
highest pitch of Glory and Happiness, that is possible, on Earth. In the mean
while, I shall depart out of this life, and go to Glorify thee in the
magnificent Palace of immortality, where I shall cast down my Crown at the feet
of the Lamb, and adore him who lives for ever and ever, Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation for a Viceroy, or a Governor.
O Almighty Governor of this great World, seeing that thou have granted to me
the honor of representing the Person of my Prince thy living Image; it is but
just that I should return unto thee my unfeigned thanks, for such a special
Favor, for I should not have this Power, if it were not given to me from above;
and if thou who art the King of Kings, and hold, in thine Almighty hand, the
Hearts of Princes, had not caused the superior Powers to favor my Person.
Give me Grace never to forget that the Persons that I am to Govern, are not my
Slaves, but the Subjects of my Prince: moreover, they are thy Creatures and
Children; it belongs not to me to dispose of them at my pleasure, according to
my passions, but to observe the Orders that have been given me, and to obey thy
Divine Commandments. Let me behave my self as if my Prince were always, and
every where, at my elbows, to be a witness of all my actions. But especially,
let me remember that I am always before thine holy Eyes, that behold my Heart,
and read my most secret thoughts. Let me consider night and day, that I must
give an account, to my Great Master, of the Stewardship entrusted in my hands;
and that I must one day appear before thy dreadful Tribunal, where disguising
and lying will never take place, If whilst I am diligently employed in the
Duties of mine Office, and managing my business, with all the care and
faithfulness that I am able, Death comes to call me away out of the World; give
me such a courage that I may not be afraid, but that I may quit my Dignities
without repining: for the Honor of Governing a Kingdom, or a Monarchy, or of
Commanding many Worlds, is nothing in comparison of the Glory and Happiness
prepared for me in Heaven. Let not the care of the time to come, trouble the
quiet of my Soul; thou can raise up other Governors, unto whom thou can
grant a Spirit of Wisdom and Discretion, with an happy and glorious Governance,
whilst I shall rest for ever from all my labors and cares, and when I shall
have overcome Satan, the World, Sin, and Death, and kept thy Works until the
end, thou will give me into my hands a never-fading Palm, thou will put upon my
Head a Glorious Crown, and into my mouth the Songs of the Blessed, in whose
company I shall sing Praises and Tranksgivings unto thee for ever and ever,
Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation for a General of an Army, and for a Captain.
O God of Hosts, I have been persuaded that this employment, in which I have
engaged my self, for the service of my King and Country, would not be
displeasing to thy Divine Majesty; seeing that thou have appointed Military
Laws unto thy People, and have been so Gracious to them, as to govern their
Armies, march out before them, and Command in Chief, when they have encountered
with their Enemies. Although thy Son is the Prince of Peace, his first Minister
and Forerunner did not forbid the use of Weapons to the Soldiers that resorted
to him, but only to be content with their wages, and to do violence to no man;
besides, the Holy Apostles teach us, that it is not in vain that thou have put
the Sword into the hands of Sovereign Princes and Kings, who are the Images of
thine Almighty power; and of thy uncontrollable Justice. Let me never appear at
the head of an Army, or of a Company, but let me imagine my Prince to be there
present, as if I were to sight before his eyes; but let me chiefly remember,
that I am in the sight of thy Holy Angels, and of thee, who art the King of
Kings, of all the Nations of the World; and of their Armies. Let not the power
which thou have given me over others, cause me to neglect the obedience that I
owe unto thee my great God and Creator: Let not the honor of being a Captain,
make me forget that I am a Soldier of Jesus Christ; who Judges, and Wars
according to right. Let not the Sword that I carry at my side, hinder me from
receiving into my Heart, the Sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God;
that is sharper than a two-edged sword, that searches to the division of the
Soul and Spirit, Joints and Marrow. Give me with this Heavenly Sword, the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, and the Helmet of Salvation; and especially,
give me the Buckler of Faith, that I may be able to quench all the fiery Darts
of the Devil. O my God! cloth me with the Strength and Virtue of thy Holy
Spirit, that I may resist all my spiritual Enemies, and obtain a Glorious
Victory. Give me Grace to overcome Sin, the World, and my Self; all my Passions
and wicked Lusts, that I may see Hell confounded, and Satan crushed under my
feet. Lastly, Give me strength to fight with courage against Death; and to
overcome it. O great and living God! it is not necessary that any should
remember me, that I am Mortal, because Death is to be seen every day before me;
I walk continually upon its Footsteps, if it gives me an assault in the midst
of my Prosperities, and in the first increase of my Glory; I shall then go to
obtain, a more happy and magnificent Victory, than these earthly ones; for it
is far more Honorable to conquer Death, and triumph over Hell; than to be a
Conqueror of thousands of Mortal Men. And if this cruel death carries me away
in a time that my Life and Services are so useful to my Prince and Country;
Let me learn to rest upon thy wonderful Providence, that cannot want Captains
and Soldiers: Thou will raise up after me, more happy and victorious
Commanders, but I shall enter into thy Heavenly Rest and Peace, that reigns in
thy Kingdom. Lord Jesus! I shall gather the fruits of a blessed immortality,
which have been purchased by thy wonderful Victories, and by thy glorious
sufferings, and I shall share in the joy of thine Eternal Triumphs. Let this
death therefore come when it pleases, I shall be ready to say to it as St.
Paul. I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith; henceforth, there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which, the
Lord, the Righteous Judge shall give me at that day, Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation for a Judge or Magistrate.
O Glorious Judge of Mankind, who first honored me with this noble employment,
and put into my hands the sword of Justice. Let me always remember that I am
not called to this noble Office by Man alone, but by thee who lifts up and
pul^s down, who raises the poor out of the Dust, to make him sit with the
Mighty. Enlighten my understanding with thy Divine Knowledge, and strengthen me
with that Spirit, which thou gave to Moses, and to his Judges in Israel. Give
me grace to do the duties of my Office faithfully, and to be an uncorruptible
Judge Let my Ears be always open to hear the cries of the afflicted, but shut
to all unjust suggestions, so that the wind of unlawful favor may never be
admitted. Let me, without any respect of persons, render unto every one what is
his right, and that nothing may hinder me from condemning the guilty, and
justifying the innocent. Let it never happen to me to follow my passions, or
the Lust of others, but let me be a faithful interpreter of thy Holy Laws and
Commands. At every time that I sit to judge thy people, let me remember that
thou art amongst the Judges, and see their most secret thoughts. Let me
always consider, that when I have done judging others, I shall be judged my
self, and nothing shall be able to oppose the Decrees of thine infinite wisdom.
If at any time the considerations of Flesh and Blood, tempt me to evil, let me
recall to mind my approaching Death, that I may be bridled with an Holy Dread;
let me consider that it warns me already to appear in person before thy
Tribunal, where I must give up an account, not only of my Words, and of my
Actions, but of my most secret Thoughts, and of the most plausible Acts of
Judicature. O Lord, thou have Eyes to see into the very depths, an Ear to
listen to the whisperings of the Heart, and a powerful Hand to find out the
Guilty. When I think upon that Glorious Throne, upon which, whole Legions of
Executioners of thy Justice, do continually attend, I should tremble for fear,
were it not that the Judge is my Advocate and Redeemer, and that he is ascended
up into Heaven, there to intercede and prepare for me a place. O let me
therefore willingly quit these vain Honors of the World, that pass away on a
sudden; Seeing that thou preparest for me, above, a Dignity, far more
Excellent, Eternal, and Unchangeable. Let me cast off, without murmuring, this
Robe where Worms do breed, and so many cares that consume my Heart. Let my Soul
put on, with transports of joy, the Heavenly Garments of Light and Glory, that
will render it Eternally happy. Let me go down from this Seat of Judicature,
without grief; seeing that the Lord Jesus promises to every one that
overcomes, that he will make them to sit with him upon his Throne. When I am
gone from hence, thou will raise up wise and uncorruptible Judges, that shall
judge thy People according to Justice and Equity; In the mean while I shall
enjoy the sweet and comfortable effects of thine Eternal Mercy, which thou have
discovered in thine only Son, who has been made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation for a Minister of the Gospel who beholds Death with
Joy and Comfort.
OVniversal Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls, I cannot sufficiently
acknowledge and admire the Graces and Mercies which thou have bestowed upon me;
thou have called me to an Office, in which the Angels of Heaven esteem it an
Honor for themselves to be employed, and in which thou thy self have been
diligent during the days of thy Flesh, Thou have been pleased to make me one of
the Ministers of thy People, and to commit to my trust, that which thou do
cherish, as the dearest and most precious thing of the World, namely, thy
Church, for which thou have expressed so much love, as to give thy self for it,
and to redeem it with thy precious Blood. But alas, my Lord, and my God, who is
sufficient for these things? The employment is heavy and painful, and I am weak
and feeble. The World hates and persecutes us most vehemently, and the Devil,
like a roaring Lion, walks continually about us, to seek to devour the
Shepherd with his Flock. In thine own Inheritance I am forced to swallow many
bitter Fruits, and drink Waters of affliction. I find more Briers and Thorns,
than Flowers and Roses; They that should encourage me in the midst of so many
Labors, do often weaken my Hands, and afflict my Heart; that which should cause
my great'st joy, and fill my Soul with the sweetest Comforts, is the occasion
of my deepest sorrows, and of my most violent grief. Merciful Lord, whilst thou
art pleased to leave me in this mortal Life, and in my Ministry, accomplish thy
Virtue in my weakness, and do thou the work which thou have enjoined to me thy
poor Servant. Open the door wide to the Gospel of thy Grace, that all people of
the Earth may learn to serve and worship thee in Spirit and in Truth. Defeat
all the Counsels, and all the strength that rises up against thee, and bring
all thoughts to thine obedience. Let the World be confounded in all its
purposes, and let it never have the power to scare me by its threatenings, or
to corrupt me by its fair promises. Let Satan once more fall from Heaven as a
Lightning, and let him be for ever shut up in the bottomless pit. Shut up the
mouths of all false Prophets, and let thy Truth be victorious over Error, that
we may see the Congregations of thy true Catholic Church increase in number of
persons, that may worship thee with more Affection and Zeal, or rather increase
in them thy Grace and Heavenly Blessings. O let me always consider, that the
Sheep that I am to feed, belong not to me, nor to any mortal Man, but to thee
Lord Jesus, who have created them by thine infinite power, and redeemed them by
thy wonderful Goodness. Thou have willingly offered thy self to the sufferings
of a painful death, that thou might deliver them from the Wolfs Paw, and
Claws of the infernal Lion. Let me remember that I am shortly to appear before
thy Glorious presence, and to give thee an account of my Stewardship. O Lord,
who know all things, unto whom nothing is hid, thou see the very bottom of
my Heart, and spiest my most secret thoughts. Thou know how faithfully and
affectionately, I have been employed in thy service; I have led thy Sheep to
the wholesome feeding of thy Heavenly Pastures. I have led them to the Waters
that burst forth unto Eternal Life; my Conscience bears me witness before thee
and thy Holy Angels, that I have declared nothing, neither by Word nor Writing,
but that which I firmly believe to be agreeable to the Oracles of the Prophets,
Apostles, and Evangelists. I have drawn out of the Sacred Treasuries of thy
word, things new and old, for the beautifying of thy House, and for the
instruction of such as dwell there. I have labored day and night in the hings
that thou have put into my heart for thy Glory, for the advance of thy Kingdom,
and the comfort of thy Children. In the important passages of my life, I have
not taken counsel from Flesh and Blood, but I have preferred the Honor of thy
great Name, and the Glory of thy Divine Truth, to all Earthly advantages, and
to my particular interest. I have despised all the Riches of this World, and
the Honors of the Age, for the sake of the spiritual Treasuries, and of that
Heavenly Light which thou have put into me, as into an Earthly Vessel, that all
Glory may be ascribed to thee, who art the Author of all good, and of all
perfect Gifts. My most delicious Meat, and my most pleasant Drink, was to do
thy Holy Will, and to perfect thy Work. I have taken a singular delight in
declaring the wonderful Councils of thy Wisdom, and discovering the Mysteries
of thy Kingdom, I have shared in the evils and sufferings of thy Members, I
have not been sparing of the comforts which thou have furnished me in all my
afflictions, and temptations. Thy Holy Law is in my Heart, and thy Gospel is
there engraven with the finger of thy Blessed Spirit. Thou have kindled in me
an earnest desire of saving Souls, and bringing them to Righteousness. O Lord,
who searchest into the bottom of the most secret Hearts, Thou know that I
may say with the Holy Prophet, The zeal of thine House has caten me up. Or
with the Apostle, The care of thy Church comes upon me daily: But for all
this, I pretend not to be justified in thy presence, I am so far from resting
upon mine own Righteousness, and of being puffed up with the opinion of my
deservings, that I confess my self a poor and a miserable sinner; therefore
with my whole Heart, I desire the forgiveness of my great imperfections and
miscarriages, which I have been guilty of in thy service; I have not been
enflamed with a Charity pure enough, nor with a disinteressed Zeal; I have been
sometimes too indulgent, and sometimes too severe in the reprehension of Vice,
and I have not been as I ought, the Director of my Flo^k, in all manner of good
Works: the love of my self has crept in with that affection that I owe to thee
alone, and I have have not served thee only for thy sake, and for thy Divine
perfections; but also for the expectation of the Rewards which thou have
promised to thy faithful Servants, when thou shall render unto every one
according to his Works. I have been too sensible of the wrongs done to mine own
Person, and especially, when I have seen my best deeds misinterpreted, and my
most charitable cares requited with ingratitude; I have not always poss^ssed my
Soul with patience, and I have not had that Meekness, Love, and Humility, which
thou Divine Jesus have recommended to me, by thine example on Earth. O Lord, if
thou should, est treat me according to the exac^ness of thy justice, and
require at my hands the Souls that are perished by my negligence, or evil
example, I should be covered with shame and confusion, and I should soon be
cast, with the unprofitable Servant, into the Eternal Torments of Hell, where
are weeping and gnashing of Teeth. But O Merciful Lord, thou art goodness it
self, Love, and the very being of Charity; Thou acceptest the Will for the
Deed, and the Undertaking for the Performance, and thou have thy Arms always
wide open to receive thy poor Servants that weep for their mistakes, and that
humbly prostrate themselves before thee, to implore thy Mercy and Forgiveness.
O Divine Savior, Thou art rich in Goodness, and ready to cause thy Glorious
Countenance to shine upon such as call upon thee, to their unspeakable joy and
comfort, and upon such as draw near to thee, by a true and serious Repentance.
Therefore I pour forth my Soul before thee, and acknowledge that thou have
heard me, and accepted the contrition of my heart, and heard the voice of my
Tears. Thou strengthenest my Faith, raisest my Hopes, and fillest my Soul with
refreshing and excellent considerations of thy Love: Thou causest me to taste
the Salvation which thou often preachest to others. I feel thy Gracious Hand
drawing me to thyself. I see that thou openest to me the Gate of Paradise, unto
which I have had so many good and Holy Souls, that rest now in the enjoyment of
thy Glory. Thou causest me to have the confidence of saying with the Holy
Apostle, I know that God will show Mercy unto me, and receive me into his
Heavenly Kingdom. O Good and Merciful Lord, I feel my Body consuming away, and
my strength decaying, but thou art the Rock of my Heart, and my portion for
ever. I see death coming apace to me, but instead of afflicting and frighting
me; it comforts and rejoices my Heart, for it comes to put an end to this
miserable life, that is no better than a languishing kind of death; it comes to
take me from my continued labors and loose me from my grievous and painful
Fetters, Rejoice O my Soul! look up to that Rest that God prepares for thee
above. The blessed time is come that I shall no longer endure the heat of the
day and the watchings of the Night, but I shall rest eternally under the
shadows of the Tree of Life; and there satisfy my self with its delicious
Fruits, I shall no longer withstand the contradiction of Sinners, nor hear the
mocks of the sensual and factious minds. I shall no longer encounter with the
enemies of thy Sacred Truth, nor endure the stings of my Lusts, but I shall
live for ever in the blessed company of the Holy Angels, and rejoice with the
Glorified Saints; I shall preach no more against the obstinacy of Men. nor weep
for the sins that disgrace thy Church and Profession, nor complain of the
injustice and affronts done to my Person, nor grieve for my own imperfections,
but I shall sing for ever thy Divine Praises with the Seraphins, and the
Congregation of the firstborn, whose Names are recorded in Heaven. O Lord, who
have an infinite Power in thy Hands, and bottomless Treasuries of Mercy, be
pleased to drive away from thy Flock all ravenous Wolves, and mercenary Souls,
and raise up to this thy Church,
a Faithful, Sober, Wise, and a Learned Clergy; bring in our dissenting
Brethren, reconcile the differences that are amongst us, and give to us all a
friendly compliance, that we may no longer be a hissing, and a byword to our
Enemies. Thou art able yet to clap an effeciual Plaster to our bleeding wound,
and to cure the distempered minds. Be pleased therefore, O great Physician, of
both Soul and Body, mercifully to look down from Heaven upon these Nations.
Check that bold spirit of division, that causes so much disorder amongst us,
and make us all sensible of our chief interests, which consists in a Blessed
Union. Pour upon our Clergy, abundance of thy Grace, and give an happy success
to their painful Ministry; but now I am going to serve thee above in Heaven, in
a more glorious and excellent Ministry, where I shall meet with no trouble nor
resistance, no weariness, grief, pain, sorrow, nor displeasure; I shall enter
into the joy of my Lord, and receive, from his merciful Hand, the uncorruptible
Crown of Immortality and Glory; I shall follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes,
and he shall be my Shepherd for ever; he will lead me to the Fountains of
living water, and wipe away all Tears from mine Eyes, Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation for a Father of a Family.
FAther of Eternity, I yield unto thee my unfeigned thanks, because thou have
made me an happy instrument, to put into the World, Children out of whose
mouths thou may accomplish thine own praise, and who may serve thee here
below, and worship thee for ever in Heaven, amongst the thousands of Angels.
Whilst I have been in the World, I have brought them up in thy Love and Fear, I
have caused them to suck from the Breast the Milk of Piety, and when they were
come to an age of understanding, I have taught them to walk in thine holy Fear,
and obey thy Commandments; I have labored to show them a good example, and to
guide them in thy Truth, And now that I am ready to return unto thee, who art
the Author of my life and being, the only source of my Happiness; I leave them
in thy merciful hands, beseeching thee to look down upon them with the eyes of
thy compassion; they are thine, Lord acknowledge thine own Image and Handywork.
Thy Finger has fashioned these Bodies, where so many wonders are to be seen.
And these souls that animate and move them, are the breath and beams of thy
Divinity. Thou have engaged to be our God, and the God of our Posterity after
us. Thy great and precious promises have been made to us, and to our Children.
O Heavenly Father, I desire not that thou should take them out of the World,
but that thou should keep them from evil. Cover them under the shadow of thy
wings, and preserve them from those Miseries and Calamities, which thou have
threatened to send upon the Inbabitants of the Earth, for their sins; If thou
do chastise them, let it be with the Rod of Men, and with the scourges of the
Sons of Men, but withdraw not from them thy Grace, and thy fatherly
compassions. Let the flames of affliction render their Faith more Pure, their
Lives more Holy, and their Zeal more Sincere and Earnest, and let it prepare
them for thee and thine Eternal Bliss. O Holy Father, thou see that the age
in which we live, is wonderfully corrupt; that the Earth is inclined to Vice,
and that Sin raigns every where. Thou know also, how weak, the Nature of
Children is, and how inclinable to evil; therefore strengthen them, I beseech
thee, with such Antidotes as may preserve them from the infection of the times.
Suffer not the wickedness of the World to win upon their affections, nor Satan
to prevail upon them by his suggestions, nor evil company to spoil their pious
Education. Give them an understanding to know thee, an Heart to love thee, and
Affections to embrace thee and thy Glory. Let thy Holy Angels guard them by
night and by day. Let thy Providence defend them, thy Word instruct them, thy
Promises comfort them, and thy Holy Spirit Regenerate them, and imprint in
their Souls thy blessed Image. Give them neither Poverty nor Riches, but
nourish them with Food convenient; but especially, give them that Bread which
is come down from Heaven, which has brought Life into the World; make them to
raste of the Heavenly Gift, and of the Powers of the World to come; inflame
them with thy Love and Charity, and adorn them with all Christian Virtues; but
chiefly, Sanctify them with thy Holy Spirit, and make them to become new
Creatures: seeing that without Sanctification, none shall see thy Face in
Glory. Confirm them for ever in thy Holy Covenant, and give them grace to
transmit it to their posterity after them, as a blessed Inheritance, that thou
may be Glorified by them from Generation to Generation, to all Eternity.
Suffer not the World, nor Hell, to pluck them out of thine Hand, that nothing
may separate them from the love which thou have showed to them in Jesus Christ
thine only Son. Let not Death terrify them, but let it rather rejoice and
comfort them, because, that it is the entrance that leads to the Glorious
Dwelling of their Heavenly Father, and to the Celestial Paradise; whatsoever
change or alteration shall happen here below, let them always lift up their
Eyes to thee, who art the same yesterday and to day, and shall be the same for
ever. Let them never forget their Duty to thee, from whom they have received
their Being and Life, that they may prefer the Glory of thy Great Name, the
Purity of thy Worship, and the hopes of thy Heavenly Kingdom, to all worldly
Glory, Magnificence, Riches, advantages, and Pleasures of the Flesh. O God, who
art the Creator and Father of their Spirits; cause them to endure a thousand
Deaths, and reduce them to nothing, from whence thou have fetched them, rather
than to suffer them to be enslaved to Vice, Error, or to Superstition that robs
thee, O Great God, of thine Honor, to ascribe it to the Creature. Merciful, and
Almighty Lord, I shall not say to thee as Esau did to Isaac, when he had
blessed Jacob; My Father, have thou but one Blessing? for I am certain that
thou have an infinite number, and many inexhausible Fountains, of all manner of
Blessings; but I beseech thee, with all the Zeal and Earnestness that I can, to
Bless my dear Children with thy Heavenly and especial Favors; take them into
thy protection, bear them in thy Hands, embrace them with thy tender
compassion, and let them be as dear to thee as the Apple of thine Eyes. Let thy
fear be always before them. Let them love thee with all their Heart, and serve
thee with all their Powers that they may Glorify thee in prosperity, and
adversity, in Life and Death, that Christ may be their gain, whether they live,
or whether they dye; but I am now leaving the World and my Children without
Grief, or mistrusting thy care of them, I am ascending with joy up to thee, who
art my God, my Father, and their Father, and I trust in thy great and Eternal
Mercies, that one day we shall see one another in thine Heavenly Kingdom, when
we shall be admitted to behold thy Face, which shall fill us with unspeakable
Gladness and Pleasure, Amen.

CHAP. 13.
The First Consolation against the fears of Death; God will not forsake us in
our most grievous pangs.

MAn is naturally afraid of pain, and abhors all sufferings and grief; now the
most of us are persuaded that it is impossible to dye without enduring great
pains; therefore they abhor Death, not so much for its own sake, as for the
evils that it causes to suffer.

That we may be able to drive away this ill-grounded Fear, and strengthen our
minds against all apprehensions; we must first consider, that death is not so
dreadful and painful, as commonly imagined; the Holy Ghost calls it a Sleep,
and the Heathens themselves have said, that Sleep is Death's Cousen-german, and
the Image of frozen Death: Now Sleep creeps upon us insensibly, it charms our
Senses softly, and with invisible Fetters it ties and stops all our most active
faculties; although we sleep every night, we are not able to discover how this
happens to us. It is said of Socrates, one of the most famous Men of the first
Ages, when he had, in obedience to the Decree of the Judges of Athens, drunk
poison, when he felt the venom benumming his Senses, and Death creeping into
his Veins, he declared with a pleasant countenance, That he had never swallowed
anything more sweet and comfortable. Nothing can be imagined more pleasant,
than the death of the old Patriarchs. The Holy Scripture tells us, That when
Jacob had made an end of commanding his Sons, he gathered up his Feet into the
Bed, and yielded up the Ghost, Genesis 49. The same is related of King David, That
when he had persuaded Solomon to fear God, and to do justice, he slept with his
Fathers, 1 King 1. God is as merciful to many in these latter days, to cause
them to dye in speaking and calling upon his Holy name; their Souls are not
plucked from them by violence, but of their own accord they separate from the
Body, and fly into Heaven with an Holy cheerfulness. The separation of such
Souls from the Body, happens without pain, grief, or suffering. Such are like
to a Taper, that extinguisheth without any blast of Wind, of its own accord,
when the Wax that kept it alive, and nourishes its flame is totally spent. If
you perceive some tossed and tortured with grievous pangs in their deathbed,
they are not properly the pangs of death, but the last struglings and motions
of life; for I cannot imagine, that at the moment of the separation of our
Souls from our Bodies, we suffer any pain, because at that instant, all the
Senses are then lulled asleep, and our Bodies have no more strength, nor life
to hinder the Souls departing.

Death is so far from being so dreadful and painful, as we commonly imagine,
that on the contrary, it is that very thing that puts an end to all our pains
and miseries. And I am persuaded that the diseases that bring us to our graves,
are not so grievous as the other distempers, that we endure whilst we live here
on Earth; such as are a cruel Gout, a Stone in the Kidneys, or a Canker in the
Breast, for they are tortures that rack us continually, and a Fire that
consumes us without ceasing. But when our pains should be far more sensible,
and that we should have reason to impute them to death, we have no reason
therefore to fly from it, or to abhor its approaches, for otherwise we have as
good cause to curse the hour of our Birth, and weep for our Victories, for
there is no Birth without pain, nor Victory without struggling; the most
Glorious and flourishing Laurels are watered with Blood and Sweat.

The most excellent things are the most painful, and to speak according to the
common saying, that One nail drives another, so one evil is a Remedy to many
other evils; we commonly seek with an earnest longing, as a good thing, that
evil that frees us from the violent pains, that we can scarce endure. To be
healed o^^ our distempers, we swallow most bitter Pills and Potions, that gripe
and torment our Bowels. To be freed from the Stone, we suffer a most painful
cutting. And that the Gangreen that has seized upon one of our Members, might
not get to our Heart, we endure it with patience, to be cut off, whether it be
Arm or Leg; therefore, when Death should be much more grievous, bitter, and
more cruel than it is commonly represented; yet we ought to embrace it
willingly, because that it delivers us not only from some disease or some
particular pain, but generally from all pains, aches, and distempers. The
Physic works not always out the humor that disquiets us. When we have drawn
out a Stone from the Bladder, many times others grow in the place that are
worse. The Surgeons hand, let it be never so perfect, answers not always his
Patients expectation; instead of removing his pain, it increases it; But the
working and cure of Death, is always certain, and never fails, the success is
always happy to a Christian Soul.

That I may supply thee with some comfort in the midst of thy great pains and
sufferings, My Brother, or My Sister, remember that these things happen not to
thee by chance, but it is God who sends them to thee, according to the decree
of his Wisdom. Ascribe not thy Disease to the influences of the Stars, to blind
Fortune, but lift up thine Eyes to his appointment, who has stretched out the
Heavens, and Commanded the succession of the Seasons, and who is the Author and
Lord of thy Life. We need not tempt God, as the Philistines did of old, and
require from him a miracle, to know if it be his hand, for God assures us, that
he himself inflicts the Wound, and binds it up, that his hand strikes and heals
again, 1 Samuel 5. Affliction comes not forth of the Dust, neither does trouble
spring out of the ground, Job 5. Who is able to say, that these things are come
to pass, and the Lord has not commanded them, does not evil and good proceed
from the appointment of the most High? There is no evil in the City, but God
has done it; that is to say, that there is no distemper, nor affliction, but
he overrules and governs it by his wonderful Providence.

This persuasion will stop our murmuring in the midst of our greatest troubles
and violent pains, it will cause us to say with David, I have held my peace
Lord, and have not opened my Lips, because it was thy doing. Or if we offer to
speak, it shall be in the language of a blessed Servant of God, Lord, thou
troublest me, but it is sufficient for me to know, that it is thy hand, Job 2.
As if he should have said, this Physic is very bitter. O great Physician of my
Soul and Body, but I will freely drink it up, because thou have prescribed it:
It is not just to receive good, at the hand of God, and refuse evil, to
complain of a disease that he has sent us, for a few days, instead of blessing
him for the health which he has continued unto us many years. In short, when
our Souls should be troubled with the anguish of death, when drops of blood
should come out of our veins, we must in such a case lift up our Eyes to
Heaven, and say with our Lord and Savior, Father, if it please thee that this
Cup should not pass away from me except I drink it: Nevertheless, O Father, not
my Will, but thy Will be done, Luk 21.

This same consideration will keep us from falling into despair, and from
fancying, that the evils will swallow us up. For seeing God sends both evil and
good, and that he is faithful and just, that he is true and merciful, he will
not suffer us to be tempted, that is, that we should be afflicted above that we
are able, but with the temptation he will make away to escape, that we may be
able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10. He kindles not all his wrath at once, and employs
not all his fury, he discovers not all the strength of his Arm, Psalm. 78. but
when his anger is hottest, he remembers to have pity and compassion on the
afflicted, for he knows of what we are made, that we are but Dust and Ashes,
Hab. 3. He remembers that we are but Flesh, that is to say, weakness it self, a
wind that passes away, and returns not again, Psalm. 103. He regulates his
chastisements, not according to the horridness of our sins, but according to
our great weaknesses, Genesis 18. Psalm. 78. Therefore when God speaks of David's
Son, the true and lively Image of the Holy Seed, with which he has concluded
an Eternal Covenant, he speaks in this manner, If he commits sin, I will
chastise him with the Rod of Men, and with the stripes of the Children of men,
but my mercy shall not depart away from him, 2 Samuel 7. And St. Paul speaking in
general, of the afflictions, with which God visits his Children, 1 Cor. 10. he
styles them Humane temptations, to assure us that they shall never exceed the
strength and power of our weak Nature.

The wise and experienced Physician appoints neither Physic nor Bleeding to
the Patient, until he has well examined his Pulse, and understood thereby the
disposition of his Body; and shall not God's Eternal Wisdom, that never acts
without good reason, and that perfectly knows the Pulse and Temper of our
Souls, that searches our Reins, and that sees our very Heart, proportion his
Physic and Remedies to our weaknesses? for his design is to heal, and not to
destroy us; He once inflicted punishments upon Babylon by measure, and numbered
the Viols of his Wrath, which he poured upon the seat of the Beast, and shall
not this good God measure the Rods, and weigh the Afflictions with which he
reproves his Children? shall not he number their Sighs and Tears? This
consideration comforts King David, Thou, says he, O God, tellest my wanderings,
put thou my tears into thy bottle, are they not in thy Book? Ps. 56. Although
Flesh and Blood may think otherwise, I am persuaded that Diseases may be looked
upon as the sweetest and most favorable afflictions. It was David's
persuasion, for when he was to choose one of these three Plagues, either War,
Famine, or Plague, which is the most grievous, most hated, and dreadful of all
distempers, he chose the Plague; We should never forget the reason of his
choice; Let us fall now, said he, to the Prophet Gad, into the hands of the
Lord, for his Mercies are great; and let me not fall into the hand of Man.

The evils which God sends to us, are expressions of his Love, and of his
Fatherly Care of us, for God begins his Judgments, that is, his Chastisements,
at his own House, and shows most severity to the Servants whom he loves best, 1
Pet. 4. Therefore he tells the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, As many as I
love, I rebuke and chasten, Revel. 3. The greatest affliction that can happen
to us in the World, is never to be afflicted, and the most grievous temptation,
is never to be tempted; St Paul to the Hebrews speaks most excellently upon
this subject, Forget not, says he, the exhortation which speaks unto you as
unto Children, my Son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint
when thou art rebuked of him, for whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and
scourges every Son whom he receives; If ye endure chastening, God deals
with you as with Sons, for what Son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? but
if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards
and not Sons, Heb. 12.

All things work together for good to them that love God, Romans 8. The Diseases
of the Body are the Physic of the Soul. The Aches which thou seelest in thy
Body, are Instructions of thy Mind. God intends to make thee sigh for thy sins,
water thy Couch with thy Tears, and abhor the remembrance of thy former
miscarriages, Psalm. 6. The causes of thy present pain and grief. He intends to
make thee partaker of his Holiness, Heb. 12. If it please God to sanctify his
afflictions to thee, thou will be able to say with David, It was good for me
that I was afflicted, that I might learn thy Commandments. Before that I was
afflicted I went astray, but now I keep thy Word, Psalm. 119.

Although our Lord and Savior was the only Son, and the beloved of the Father,
Heb. 5. yet he learned obedience by the things that he suffered; God has
predestined thee to render thee conformable to the image of his Son, that he
might be the firstborn amongst many Brethren; God intends to strengthen thee
with an Holy constancy, and to teach thee to possess thy Soul with patience,
Luk 21. He causes thee therefore to learn by experience, that all Flesh is as
Grass, and all the Glory of Man as the flower of Grass. He intends to teach
thee how to humble thy self under his mighty hand, that he may lift thee up in
due time, 1 Pet. 5. When God purposed to bring the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, Ex. 21.5. He caused the yoke of their grievous bondage to be more heavy,
and loded them with more unsufferable burdens. For the same reason God sends
afflictions, and gluts us with bitterness, because he would bring us to a
loathing of the World, and of its Vanities, and to think upon Heaven and its
Eternal Happiness, 1 Cor. 11. He chastises thee that thou may not perish
with the World; He punishes thy Body, that thy Soul might be saved.

As the Gold is tried in the Fire, thus the Lord casts us into the flames of
affliction, that our Faith might be tried, and appear more precious than fine
Gold, 1 Cor. 5. We Glory in God, in the midst of Tribulations, knowing that
Tribulation produces Patience, Patience Experience, and Experience, Hope, 1
Pet. 1. Now Faith does not make us ashamed, because the love of God is spread
in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, which has been given to us. God will kindle
again thy languishing Zeal, and enliven thy Prayers, that they may be more
acceptable to him. Tell me not that thy distemper is an heavy burden, that
hinders thy Soul from lifting it self toward Heaven; and that thy grievous
Aches, dry up the Humidity of thy Tongue, and cause thy Lips to stick together;
for, I mean not the Prayers composed by Art, but the Holy Affections, and
earnest Sighs of the Soul, sent up to God. A groan of an oppressed Soul, and a
Sigh forced from us by necessity, and a Tear dropped from a penitent Heart, are
far more acceptable to him, than Prayers of Forty hours, that come forth of an
hypocritical Mouth.

When the Prophet Moses saw himself enclosed between Pharaoh's Army, and the
Red Sea, he was so grievously perplexed, that he could not open his mouth; but
God heard the voice of his Heart, and answered to his silent Request. King
Hezekiah muttered as the Crane, or as the Swallow, and groaned as the Pidgeon;
and God had a respect to his groaning, and tears, and heard him from his Holy
Sanctuary. The sighs of Jonas in the Whales Belly, mounted up through the waves
of the Sea, and ascended to the sacred Habitation of God's Glory. The Cries of
Jesus dying upon the Cross, have pierced through to the bosom of our Heavenly
Father, and have moved the Bowels of his Eternal Mercies. In short, God speaks
thus of all his Children, Before they cry, I will grant them their request, and
as they shall yet speak, I shall have heard them. Therefore the Royal Prophet
says not only, That God has heard the Prayers, but has heard the desire of
the humble; thou will prepare their Heart, thou will cause thine Ear to hear.
For that reason, when the Apostle St. Paul make; mention of that Spirit that
supports our weaknesses, and that teaches us to pray, says, That he cries in
our hearts Abba Father, and that he makes request for us with sighs and
groans, that cannot be uttered, Romans 8.

Take good courage, my Brother, or my Sister, and be not frighted at the sight
of Death. Thou see a narrow passage, a way all beset with Thorns and Briars,
but it is Heavens Gate, and the way that leads to thine Heavenly Paradise. For
we must of necessity march through a Valley of Tears, before we can enter into
the City of the living God, Psalm. 84. We must pass through many tribulations to
come to the Kingdom of Heaven, Acts 14. Blessed are they whom God afflicts, for
they shall be comforted, Matthew. 5. Blessed is the man that suffers
temptation, for when he shall be sufficiently proved, he shall receive the
Crown of Life, which God has promised to them that love him., Jam. 1. The Lord
sends thee this affliction, and this grievous temptation, not only for thine
own good, and Salvation, but also for the benefit of others: by his wonderful
Wisdom he preserves the communion of Saints, and so disposes of every one,
that we all contribute to the building of his Tabernacle. Upon one he bestows
Riches, that he should be bountiful in Alms-deeds; to another he gives
Learning, that he might instruct the ignorant, and comfort the afflicted; he
raises others to great Honors and Dignities, that they might be able to
protect the innocent, and deliver the oppressed; others are afflicted with
desperate evils, and grievous, and long diseases; others are deprived of their
most needful senses, as of their Eyesight, or of their Hearing, that they
might edify their neighbors by an Holy Constancy, and Christian Patience. The
Ashes of poor Joh, have more luster than all the Gold and the precious Stones
of the World. It is many Ages since he endured grievous and dreadful
calamities; Nevertheless, his patience is yet proposed to us for our example,
and to the end of the world, it will always instruct the Church of God; God
teaches thee by the evils which thou endurest, to be moved with mercy and
compassion toward others in the same condition; for as he required, that the
Children of Israel should be gracious to strangers, because they had been
strangers in the Land of Egypt, Likewise, he sends to thee afflictions, that
thou might pity the afflicted, and suffer with them as Members of the same
Mystical Body. This appears in Jesus Christ our Head, for although the chief
end of his sufferings was to redeem us, and reconcile us unto God his Father;
nevertheless, the Holy Ghost informs us, That he was like unto us in all
things, Sin excepted, that he might be a merciful High Priest, and have
compassion of our infirmities.

Finally, the affliction that grieves thee, is not only sent to thee for thy
Salvation, and for the instruction of thy neighbors, but also for the Glory of
the Great and living God, who has made and formed thee: for we may say of
every disease that happens to good Men, as Christ said of Lazarus's distemper,
This sickness is not to death, but for the Glory of God, that the Son of God
might be glorified by it. Thou may be severe to thy self, but thou must be
charitable to others, and judge discreetly of thy Brethren's affliction; when
thou art in pain or trouble, think seriously upon thy miscarriages, and turn
unto God with all thy heart. But when thou see others cast upon a bed of
sickness, don't argue from thence, as David's Enemies, that it is, because they
have committed some grievous crime; Rather consider, that it may be a means
which God has a design to employ to declare his Power, and his Servants
Patience, Faith, Piety, and Virtues. Therefore our Lord and Savior tells the
Apostles, when at the Sight of a Man, blind from his Birth, they enquired from
him, whether the Man had sinned, or his Father or Mother, because he was born
blind; That neither the Man nor his Father, nor Mother, had sinned, but that
the Works of God might be manifested in him, John 5. By these words we are not
to imagine, that these persons were without sin, for there is none just, no not
one; but we must understand that they were not guilty of any grievous sin, and
they had not committed any such crime, as had drawn upon them God's vengeance
from above. It was God's Will that this poor man should come into the World
with that natural imperfection, that he might make him an instance of his
Grace, and declare in him his Almighty Power: and that our Savior, in giving
him his sight, might make it appear that he was the true God, who fashions the
wonderful Eye, and that he was the true Light that enlightens every man coming
into the World, Psalm 94. John 1. Likewise, when some came to inform this Great
and Wise Savior, what had happened to the Galileans, whose Blood Pilate had
mingled with their Sacrifice, he replied in this manner, Suppose ye that these
Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such
things? I tell you, nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: Or
those eighteen, upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell, and slew them; think ye
that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you nay,
but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, Luk 13.

God is glorified diverse ways by the afflictions and calamities which he sends
to his Children; for first, he justifies them before all the world, from the
calumnies which are cast upon them, and he discovers thereby, to all, the
sincerity of their Love, and their unfeigned Obedience. Satan accuses us for
serving God for the advantages which we receive in this life, Job 1. and
because he is pleased to protect and favor us by his overruling Providence;
Therefore God removes many times from us, that which is pleasing and delightful
to the Flesh; he gives us the Bread of Affliction for our Food, and the Waters
of Sorrow for our drink; He presents us with cups full of bitterness, and
causes his Rod to return upon us often. By these grievous temptations, he
stops the mouth of the accuser of our Brethren, who accuses them day and night
before God, Isai. 30. He declares by that means to all the Enemies of our
Salvation, and of his Glory, that we put our full confidence in God alone, and
in his unchangeable promises, and not in the outward tokens of his Mercy and
Favor, Revel. 11. He shows to all the World, that the Anchor of our Hope is not
fixed here below, but that it is cast into Heaven, where Christ is entered as
our forerunner, Heb. 6.

As God is glorified in our Afflictions, he is also honored by our
deliverance; If the Land of Judea had not been peopled with deaf, dumb, lame,
blind, decrepid, and possessed with Devils, Acts 9. If Aeneas had not been sick
eight years; If a poor Woman had not been grieved with a Bloody Flux twelve
years; If another had not been vexed with a disease that had bended his Body;
If the sick of the Palsy had not been lying in his bed thirty eight years; If
the Daughter of Jairus had not been dead; If the Widows Son of the City of Nain
had not been carried to his Grave; In short, If Lazarus had not been buried
four days, the Glory and Divine Miracles of our Lord and Savior had not been
admired all over the World, Matthew. 9. Luk 13. John 5. Matthew. 9. Likewise our
desperate diseases, and our unexpected recoveries, when humane skill can do
nothing, declare to the most stupisied Souls, that it is God alone that can
give the wound, and bind it up, and that leads to the Sepulcher, and brings
back again, Luk 7. John 11. Job 5. 1 Samuel 2. God's deliverances of his People
from their afflictions, are of two sorts, for either he takes away the burden
from us, or else he stretches out to us his merciful hand, and helps us to
bear it; either he removes our affliction, and pacifies our grief; or he
strengthens us with Power and Courage, and arms us with Patience, and a
generous resolution, needful in such a case. This appears in a notable manner
in the Apostle St. Paul, for fear that he should be lifted up in pride, because
of the excellency of his Divine Revelations, God had given him a Thorn in the
Flesh, and had sent the Angel of Satan to buffet him, and to increase the
bitterness and sharpness of his disease. This Holy man prayed often to remove
it from him, but God took not this Thorn away from his Flesh, nor did not check
that messenger of Satan that afflicted him; but he delivered him from the
inconveniences, in a more illustrious manner; for he strengthened him with his
Divine Spirit, and enriched him with his Graces; he made him feel the Virtue
and Power of Christ within him, and accomplished his Virtue in Paul's infirmity:
Insomuch, that this great Apostle cries out in the deepest of his afflictions,
with transports of joy. I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, for when I am
weak, then am I strong, I can do all things in Christ that strengthens me, 2
Cor. 12. This may be also seen in the Martyr St. Stephen, for he was condemned
to dye by a death, the most painful and grievous that we can imagine; but God
gave him such powerful Comforts, and filled his mind with such Joys, that his
face shined as that of an Angel. You must understand the words of St. Paul in
that manner, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, Acts 6. Heb. 5. Jesus Christ having
offered up Prayers and Supplications with strong Crying and Tears, unto him
that was able to save him from death, and was heard, in that he feared; for he
was not altogether freed from the sufferings and torments of the Cross, but he
underwent it courageously, and was more than Conqueror in all things; he drunk
up the very dregs of the Cup of God's wrath, but by his Divine Power, he
overcame the strength of the poison; His Heavenly Father took him not down from
the Cross, nor out of the hands of his Murderers, but he has upon this Cross
raised up his Glorious Trophies: the Cross has been as his Triumphing Chariot.
Likewise, when you see a Christian bear up in the midst of a grievous
affliction, and overcome his grief by his constancy and patience, who instead
of murmuring, rejoices, and comforts himself in his distresses; you may then
conclude, that such an one is strengthened by God's Divine Spirit, who upholds
him, and accomplisheth his Heavenly Virtue, in his Servants infirmity. This is
the most wonderful and excellent of all Deliverances.

I confess, some approve this discourse very well, and admit these Consolations
in their ordinary diseases, but as soon as any extraordinary and violent griefs
seize upon them, they are apt to murmr against God, and to complain that
their punishment is too grievous. Some proceed further, to curse, as Job, the
day of their birth, and being hurried into despair, are ready to cry out with
Cain, My punishment is greater than I am able to bear, Unhappy Man! Will thou
imitate the barbarous Heathens, who curse the Sun when it burns them, and let
fly their Arrows against Heaven when it Thunders, wretched Man! What will it
avail thee to affront thy Creator? what advantage will thou reap from the
Blasphemies which thou do belch forth against the Son of Righteousness?
miserable Worm of the Earth, less than Dust, and nothing, will thou undertake
to contend against God, to pluck him from his Throne, and to break the
invincible Arm of his strength? Do thou imagine to stop the hand of his
Vengeance, by offending and sinning against him? Will thou quench the fury of
his wrath, by spitting in his Face? Believe thou, that he will stretch forth
his hand to deliver thee, and to increase thy Blessings, whilst thy mouth is
open to blaspheme him, who is thy Sovereign Lord. Listen well, I beseech thee,
friend, to my advice, and I will draw thee out of the Abyss, where thou art
unhappily fallen, and with God's help I will cause thee to understand, that
thou complainest wrongfully against him, who does all things advisedly, and
with Justice and Reason.

First, run over the whole course of thy life, and consider how many wicked
deeds thou have committed, some by indiscretion, others wilfully; how many
words have gone out of thy mouth, how many thoughts have been entertained in
thy mind, against the Commands of Almighty God. Consider seriously the number,
and grievousness of thy sins and miscarriages; and thou shall find, that God's
punishments are far less than thy deservings; and that for one sensible word
and bitter pain that thou feel, thou have deserved many thousands; so that
thou shall have cause to confess with the Prophet Daniel, O Lord, Righteousness
belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of Faces, Dan. 9. And thou will say
with David, Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have
taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up, they are more than the
hairs of my Head, therefore my heart fails me, there is no whole part in my
Flesh, because of thine indignation, nor rest in my bones, because of my sin,
Ps. 40.

2. Consider how many there are in the world, more righteous than thou, who
suffer more grievous and longer evils than thou have hitherto endured, and yet
have not had so much comfort and assistance. If thou comparest thy condition
with theirs, thou shall find that God spares and favors thee very much.

3. Cast thine Eyes upon the death and passion of our Lord and Savior, who
being righteous and innocent, has suffered for us, wicked and abominable
sinners. Thine affliction is painful, I confess, but that which this merciful
Redeemer has suffered for thee, was far more unsufferable. Let his
Exclamations, his Tears, and drops of Blood which came out of his veins, be
witnesses, and that earnest Prayer which he repeated three times upon his
bended knees, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, that I may
not drink it. Let that doleful voice upon the Cross be also witness; My God, my
God, why have thou sorsaken me?

4. Weigh in just and equal Scales of the Sanctuary, all the sufferings of this
life, with the torments of Hell, which thou have justly deserved, and compare
them together, thou will quickly conclude, that all thy pains are nothing, if
compared, with the grievous tortures of that lake of Fire and Brimstone, where
there are weeping and gnashing of Teeth. If thou art so sensible of these
vanishing pains; consider well, how much thou art obliged to the goodness of
God, who has freely pardoned all thine offenses, and redeemed thee from that
eternal and unspeakable Misery of the the other life,

5. Thou must imitate those men, who having their Sight dimmed with the
extraordinary splendour of bright Colors, or of a Body of Light, turn off their
Eyes to look upon less offensive objects; instead of handling always thy Wounds
and Sores, instead of thinking of the afflictions that lie heavy upon thee,
meditate upon the goodness and favors of God, vouchsafed to thee since thy
Conception until now; I give thee leave to put in one side of the Scales, all
thy crosses, losses, diseases, pains, and grief, upon condition, that in the
the other Balance, thou will put all the Mercies, Favors, Blessings, and
Deliverances which thou have received from God's liberal Hand. It is true, thou
groanest under thy Misery, and complainest of thy condition; thou verily
believe that there is none so miserable as thou art, so that willingly thou
would say with the Prophet Jeremiah, Does not this move ye, O ye that pass
by; behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done
unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.
But when there should be nothing else but this alone, that God has called thee
to the knowledge of his Holy Will; enriched thee with the Graces of his Divine
Spirit, and sown in thy Heart the seeds of Eternal Life, and the blessed hopes
of seeing his Face in Glory; thou ought to look upon thy self, as one of the
happiest Creatures under Heaven.

6. Finally, thou must meditate with a Religious attention, upon the joys of
Heaven, and the Eternal Blessedness of Paradise, for I reckon with the Apostle,
that the sufferings of this present life, art not worthy to be eompared with
the Glory which shall be revealed in us, Lam. 1. When we cast our Eyes upon the
Earth alone, we judge it to be very spacious and large, our sight is lost in
the contemplation of so many Provinces, Cities and Kingdoms, but when we
compare it with Heaven, we find it to be but a point. Likewise when we look
upon, and reckon up the hours, days, weeks, months, and years of our
sufferings, the time appears very tedious and long; but when we compare all
these parcels of time with Eternity, they seem to us but a moment, when we
should have been overwhelmed with evils and miseries, from the first instant of
our entrance, into the World, until the last of our going out. Yet we have
reason enough to say with St. Paul, Our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, while
we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen,, for the things which are seen are Temporal, but the things which are not
seen, are Eternal. 2 Cor. 4.

The chief Spring of all our Comforts is God's Gracious promise of seasonable
help in time of need; Imprint therefore in your minds these Divine passages,
When he that loves me shall call upon me, I will answer him, I will be with
him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him, Psalm. 91. The Lord delivers
from all temptations, them that honor him, he is rich unto all that pray unto
him. 2 Pet. 2. He is near to all them that call upon him, yea, to all them that
call upon him faithfully, Romans 10. He accomplisheth the desire of the humble,
he hears their cry, Psalm. 145. The Righteous is encompassed with many evils,
but the Lord will deliver him from them all, Psalm, 34. Call upon me in the day
of thy distress, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50.
When a poor Subject is courted and visited by his Prince, in the time of his
sickness, he looks upon it as a great favor, and an happiness indeed; And when
we enjoy the presence of a dear friend, whom we desired to see in the midst of
our most grievous pains, we are wont to say, Methinks I feel no more pain, now
that I have the satisfaction of your good company. Now the Glory of God's
Majesty, does accompany the tenderness of his Love; He is the Father of
Mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comforts us in all our afflictions. He
is like that faithful friend who never forsakes us, for in our greatest
calamities, he succors us, Prove. 18. He is the King of Kings, and yet our most
cordial and sincere friend, who frequently visits the Houses of sorrow, and is
near to every broken and bruised Heart, Psalm. 34. The more we are oppressed
with evil, the more he remembers us, Psalm. 136.

Notwithstanding our Childrens imperfections and miscarriages; we cannot suffer
to see them in distress, but we are moved with compassion, and persuaded to
help them, according to our ability, and shall thy God, who loves thee more
sincerely, and more cordially, than the best Fathers, and the most
tenderhearted Mothers do their Children, forsake thee in the day of thy
distress? This Merciful and loving Father, who has taken thee into his
protection, when thou did enter into the World, and who since has furnished
plentifully all thy necessities; shall he deny his Gracious assistance now in
the time of thy calamity? He who has fulfilled his praise by thy mouth, when
thou did yet suck at thy Mothers Breasts, who has crowned thy youthful days
with his Divine Blessings, will not forsake thee now in thine old age, he will
not cast thee off in the last moments of thy life, when thy strength is
decayed; and thou art scarce able to help thy self,

When we offer any assistance to our sick or wounded friends, we labor to
lessen their pain; we employ all our skill, and discover our most excellent
Secrets; at least, we endeavor to make them sensible of our displeasure and
grief for their distemper by our Sighs and Tears, and by all good Offices;
their complaints and outcries, are Darts that strike to our very hearts;
Likewise our merciful God is sensible of our calamities, when he sees us
oppressed with grievous pains, his Bowels earn, his Heart is as it were moved,
and his tender Love for us is concerned; In all our afflictions he is
afflicted, and whosoever touches us, touches the very Apple of his Eye, Hosea
1. Isai. 63. He is said to weep and grieve at the torments that we feel, and to
be sensible of our infirmities, Luk 2. He binds up our wounds, and poures into
them his Divine balm; he cures the diseased Heart, and causes the bruised
Bones to rejoice, Job 5. He casts into our beds of Sickness, his most
excellent Perfumes, and drives from thence all grief and displeasure; when a
pestilentious Feavor has seized upon you, this Heavenly Physician can give you
some Carduus Waters, powerful Antidotes to keep the poison from the Heart, Jer.
30. Psalm. 147. Psalm. 51. Psalm. 34. Cant. 1. His Gracious Hand can drive from
thy Soul the venom with which the old Serpent labors to infect it; He will in
thy need, clap upon thy Head, thy Stomach, or rather to thine Heart, not a
bleeding Pidgeon, but the living and cherishing Virtue of his Holy Spirit; only
discover to him the afflicted, and diseased part, or member of thy Soul or
Body; and he shall anoint it with the Oil of Joy and Gladness, that shall run
down into thy Joints and Marrow. If thou feel thy self weak or fainting, say
to him as the Spouse in the Canticles, Comfort my Heart with wine, Chap. 2. and
he will not fail to present unto thee of the new Wine of his Kingdom. If thou
art thirsty ask him some drink, and he will give thee of that Water, which if a
man drink, he shall never be athirst.

My Brother, or My Sister, cast thy self upon God, for his Power is as great as
his Love to thee; he understands better than thou or we can, what is expedient
and good for thee; in his due time he will make thy pains to cease, and will
pull out of thy Flesh its incomodious Thorn; either he will drive from thee the
Spirit that afflicts thee, or accomplish his Virtue in thine Infirmity; He will
strengthen thee in such a manner, and with such Patience, Constancy, and Faith,
and fill thee with so much extraordinary joy and comfort, that every one shall
visibly perceive, that God himself is thy help, and that his Virtue sustains
thee. O how sweet and pleasant is God's assistance to a Christian Soul; it
brings along with it so much pleasure, and admirable delight; it causes such
undeniable testimonies of our Predestination to appear; it gives us so many
rare fore-tasts of our Celestial Inheritance, that St. Paul does not only
prefer it to all the Pleasures and Honors of the World, but he prefers it also
to his being ravished into the third Heaven, and to his seeing unspeakable
things which cannot be uttered, 1 Cor. 12.

If Afflictions are increased with Christ, Joy and Comfort increase also with
him; for as God commands Wine to be given to a Man whose Heart is oppressed
with sorrow, to drive away his sadness, and bury his troubled thoughts in
oblivion. Thus in the greatest evils, God supplieth us with the strongest and
most cordial Consolations. It is in this occasion that he declares his greatest
Power, and pours out most plentifully his Divine Graces, Is. 4. When thou
should walk through the Flames, the Fire shall not burn, nor touch thee; for
as the Son of God was in the Furnace with Daniels three Companions in Babylon;
Thus in thy most violent fits of the Fever, in the midst of thy most grievous
aches, he will satiate thy Soul, and thou shall be like a watered Garden, Dan.
5. Or as a living Spring of Comfort, that can never be stopped, nor dried up. Let
the Storms and Floods beat against thee; Let the defluxions endeavor to check
thee, Is. 58. thou may say with King David, I have set the Lord always
before me, because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved, Psalm. 16. When
I should walk in the valley of the shadow of Death, when I should have no other
help nor assistance in the World, when there should be no more strength remain
in my Body, I would not fear; for, O God, thy staff, and thy Rod will comfort
me, Is. 26. God will not only draw near to thy bed of Sickness, but he will
embrace and receive thee into his protection, he will kiss thee with the kisses
of his mouth, and make thee taste of the sweetness of his Divine Comforts,
Cant. 1. He will cherish thee as a Mother does her Child, to pacify it, and
make thee so sensible of his Love, that thou may say with the Spouse, his
left hand is under my head, and his right does embrace me. With his Gracious
Hand he will wipe off thy cold sweat, and into his bosom he will receive thy
sighs; thy groans, and thy tears, he will gather up into his most precious
bottles. And as it happened when our Lord and Savior was in his Agony, when
drops of Blood fell from him, the Holy Angels appeared to comfort him, Luk 22.
Likewise, in our greatest and most difficult encounters, when thou shall be at
handy-blows with death it self, his faithful Ministers, h^s Messengers, the
Angels of his right hand shall visit thee, to supply thee with spiritual
Comforts, 2 Cor. 5. Revel. 5. And when these earthly Comforters shall fail, he
will send to thee some of those powerful Spirits, that wait before his Glorious
Throne, Dan. 7. O good God, if we could but perceive the things that are of
themselves invisible, and if thou did but give us eyes, like unto those of
the Holy Prophet, we should behold Legions of immortal Spirits, flying about in
the houses of Sorrow, with an intent to comfort the Christian Souls, Is. 6. 2
King. 6. Finally, as the Sun with its Light, and the strength of its Beams,
drives away the thickest Clouds, and comforts, with its delightful countenance,
the face of the whole Earth; Thus Jesus Christ the Sun of Righteousness, that
carries healing under his wings, banisheth all sadness with the light of his
Divine Graces, Mal. 3. and with the presence of his Holy Spirit, he drives away
the most sensible griefs, and fills us with unspeakable joy, and with the Peace
of God which passes all understanding.

A Prayer and Meditation for a sick Person, who desires to prepare for Death.
O Almighty and Gracious God! who have created both light and darkness, and who
do, by the wisdom of thy Providence, bestow good and evil things upon us, I
acknowledge that thine Hand has cast me upon this bed of sickness, and that
this disease proceeds not so much from the disorder of my Body, (...) from the
corruption, and extravagancy of my Soul; far be it from me to complain of thy
justice; I adore thy Goodness and Wisdom. O Lord, how favorable are thy
punishments, if compared with my deservings; I have miserably abused thy former
Mercies, misspent that time of health that I received from thee, in whom we
live, move, and have our Being. I confess, that I have loved the vanities of
the World, and the satisfaction of this wretched Flesh, more than the Glory of
thy great Name, (...) the Salvation of my Soul; therefore I could willingly
water this Couch with my Tears. O God, who understandest all things, thou
know that my weeping proceeds not from any fretful humor, but out of a
sincere displeasure of having offended so good a Father, and merciful Lord; In
th^^ thy chastisement, I feel the workings of thy tender compassion, and I
perceive thy most wonderful Love. I see the thou do not rebuke me in thy
wrath, nor do not corre^ me in thy fury; Thou do not punish me as a Judge,
b^ do chastise me as a Father; so that this disease is a tes^^mony of thy
Love, and of thy Fatherly care of me, (...) thou do correct all them whom
thou love, and causest t^^^^ to feel the smart of thy Rod, whom thou ownest
for (...) Children; therefore if we were without reproof, wh^ (...) all are
partakers, we should be no longer Children, but bastards: If this chastisement
is at present grievous and painful, one day it will produce the Peaceable
Fruits of Righteousness; and as at the end of Jonathan 's Rod, he tasted Honey
that comforted him, and opened his Eyes; Likewise when I shall have felt the
Rods of thy displeasure, I shall taste the sweet comforts, and unspeakable joys
of thine Holy Spirit, and my understanding shall be more enlightened. O
Almighty and ever wise God, who drawest Light out of Darkness, and causest,
that all things work together for good, to them that love thee; it matters not
how thou orderest this disease, so that it may advance thy Glory, and further
my Salvation. Thou beholdest mine affliction and poverty, and thou know,
better than I can, what is good and expedient for me. O great God, I know that
thou can do all things, and that thou give the wound, and bindest it up,
thou strikest, and thy hands must heal, thou castest into the Grave, and
bring up again. The most desperate and irrecoverable diseases thou can
cure; the dead thou can bring to life again, and call the things that are
not, as if they were. O Almighty Physician, thou can not only vouchsafe thy
Blessing to these Remedies prescribed and administered to me, but if thou
speak the word, I shall be perfectly whole, and well again; But if thou
judge expedient to continue this disease upon me; continue, O merciful Lord
unto me, and increase thy Fatherly assistances, and the comforts of thine Holy
Spirit. Strengthen me with a Christian patience, and with a resolution worthy
of my h^nourable Profession; seeing that thou art the Sovereign Physician both
of Soul and Body. I beseech thee, my God, if thou do not remove the distemper
of my Body, at least, pluck out of my Heart and mind, all the grief and
displeasure, that torments me; Fill my Soul with thy Peace, Joy, Love, and
Heavenly Comforts, while my Body languisheth upon this Earth, and while I am
kept from my former societies of Men. Let my mind be lifted up to Heaven. Let
my Soul delight it self in a familiarity with thee; I have lost too much time
already about the affairs of the World, that is nothing but vanity and vexation
of Spirit. Give me Grace to employ now these few moments of leisure, which thou
do grant to me, to think seriously upon my sins, to beg thy pardon with an
earnest Repentance. Give me Grace to meditate upon thine unspeakable and
eternal Mercy, to embrace it with a true and lively Faith, upon thy Glory, and
the Happiness of thy Kingdom, that I may labor to attain unto it with
transports of joy; so that I may say with the Prophet David, My Soul shall be
satisfied, as with Marrow and Fatness, and my Mouth shall praise thee with
joyful Lips; when I remember thee upon my Bed, and meditate on thee in the
night Watches. My Sickness seems very tedious; but alas, Lord, my Sins have
continued longer, and all this pain that afflicts me, and forces from me so
many sighs, is nothing in comparison of the advantages and happiness, that
waits for me in Heaven. When the whole course of my life should be a continual
languishing, it is but a moment in respect of Eternity; And this moment of
affliction produces in us a weight of Eternal Glory, that excels all things
else. O Lord, Let the distempers and pains of my Body, turn to the health of my
Soul, and a powerful obligation, to the Practice of Piety, and of all Christian
Virtues. Let me learn thereby to renounce the World, and deny my self, and to
cast my self wholly into thy Divine Hands, and submit my self to thy Holy Will.
As Jesus Christ is gain to me, whether I live, or whether I dye, give me Grace
to be ready to praise and glorify thy Mercy, both in Life or Death. If it be
thy pleasure to spare me my life; O that I may live more circumspectly than
ever I have done in the fear and obedience of thy Sacred Commandments; and as
St. Peter's Wives Mother rose up from her Bed of Sickness, to serve our Lord
Jesus; if thou freest me from my plague, let me rise out of thy Couch, to
glorify and serve thee, until the last moment of my life. But if thou art
pleased to call me out of the world, here I am, O God, ready to do thy Will,
and obey thee, without the least resistance; for my Soul is already separated
from this languishing Carcass, and resolved to follow thee; It is not grieved
to see this wretched Body weakened, and crazy, as an Habit worn out, because
thou have prepared for it a Garment of immortal Colors. It is not vexed,
because this earthly Tabernacle decays, for it has a more lasting Dwelling in
Heaven, whereof thou have been the Builder. I have long looked upon this Couch,
as a representation of my Grave, where I shall shortly lie down to take my last
repose; I have long expected Death, that will break in pieces the last link of
this chain of Misery, to put a period to all my pains and grievance, to take me
out of this woeful and rotten Lodge, that falls to pieces, to introduce me into
a Glorious Palace of immortality, where thy Divine Majesty dwells, and where I
shall for ever Glorify thee, with the thousands of Angels, and with all the
sanctified Souls, Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation for a sick Person tormented with grievous pains.
O Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort, have pity upon me, thou know
that I am vexed with fearful pains, that disturb my Mind, and torment my Body;
thine Arrows run through me on every side, and my Soul has its fill of
bitterness. Thy wrath has torn me to pieces, and thou seem to have set thy
self against me. One depth calls for another. At thy Command, the Waves and
Floods have passed over my head; Thou have given me many days of affliction,
and nights of torment; I am like a person breaking upon a wheel, or burning in
hot flames; I feel a fire that consumes me as a Worm that gnaws, and darts that
pierce through my Heart. Sure my sins must be abominable and grievous, seeing
thou infflictest this great punishment upon me, for thou art Mercy it self, and
it is not willingly that thou afflictest the Sons of Men. O good God, consider
what thou art, and what I am; will thou stretch forth thine invincible Arm
against the Leaf that the wind tosseth up and down? will thou declare the
fierceness of thine Eternal displeasure, against Chaff and Stubble? will thou
let fly all thine Arrows against a wretched Worm of the Earth? and will thou
cast out all thy Thunderbolts against a little Dust? O Great God, I am not a
worthy Object of thy wrath, against which thou should kindle all thy
displeasure Remember that I am but flesh, a Wind that passes away and
returns not again; but rather remember Lord, that I am thy Child, and that
thou have redeemed me with the Blood of thine only Son. O my God, it is not
possible for me to withold my complaints, suppress my groans, and to dry up
this torrent of Tears; my Soul is wearied out with this languishing life, or
rather with this unmerciful Death: for is there any sorrow like unto my sorrow?
Is there any torture or pain like unto my torment? When the Prophet Jonas saw a
little Goard withered, that afforded him before a favorable shelter and shadow
from the Sunbeams, when he felt them beating hot upon his Head, he cried out,
Death is better to me than life. How much more cause have I to speak in this
manner; I, of whom the strengh is withered as the parched Ground in the midst
of Summer; I, who feel a Fire in my Bones, and an Heat in my Bowels, that burns
and consumes me by day and by night; Shall not thine Almighty and Merciful
Hand, that has freed me from Hell, take me out also of this deep Abyss of
Misery? Thou, who deliverest thy Children from the burning Furnace, will thou
not quench the fury of this Flame that devours me? O Lord, shut up my Lips, and
let there come out nothing repugnant to that respect that I owe to thy Divine
Majesty. To thee, Great God, belongs Justice, but to me, shame and confusion of
face; when thou should cause me to endure a thousand Plagues and Torments
more, if this poor Body were able to suffer them; and when thou should cast
me irrecoverably into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, I should
have no cause to complain of thy severity. It is true, my pains are great, but
they are nothing in comparison of my sins and offenses; my torments are
violent, but they are not to be compared with my Saviors bitter sufferings,
with that cold sweat, and those drops of Blood that fell from his precious
Body: My affliction is unmerciful, but it is not to be compared with the Glory,
that shall be revealed in them that worship thee, and persevere to the end, in
an obedience to thy Holy Will. When thou should kill me, Lord, yet would I
hope in thee, for thou afflictest me, that I might not perish for ever, with
the rest of the World; Thou causest my Body to be destroyed, that my Soul might
be saved. Bruise me, Lord, and crush me to pieces, so that I may become some of
thy precious Wheat; Cut and burn me in this momentary Life, so that thou will
be favorable to me in the life to come. Cause this bitter cup to pass from me,
that I may not drink up all its dregs. Nevertheless, O Heavenly Father, not my
Will, but thy Will be done. Pluck this Thorn out of my Flesh, or vouchsafe unto
me sufficient strength to endure its deadly wounds with patience. O good God,
thou know that my Spirit is willing, but my Flesh is weak, and that my
misery is heavier than the Sand of the Seashore; but thou that quickenest the
dead, wilt accomplish thy Virtue in mine Infirmities; Therefore, instead of
speaking in Cain's Language, My punishment is greater than I can bear. I will
say with St. Paul, I can do all things in Christ that strengthens me. O Lord,
punish me not in thy wrath, nor correct me in thy heavy displeasure, but
chastise me in reason, that I may not be reduced to nothing. When thou did
wrestle with Jacob, thou tookest upon thee an Humane Body, and did strengthen
thy Servant by the virtue of thy Divine Spirit. O Merciful and Graciouus God,
let thy punishments be proportionable to my great weaknesses; suffer not any
temptation to seize upon me, but only Humane, and give me, with the temptation,
an happy issue, that I may support it, that neither Death nor Life, nor Pain
nor Torment, may ever separate me from thy Love, or pluck me out of thine Hand.
Good Lord, forsake me not, that I may never forsake thee, but, enable me with
Strength, Patience, and Constancy, to bear my burden, and make me more than
Conqueror, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Merciful God, pity thy servant; or rather
thine adopted Child. Awaken thy jealousy, and let thy Bowels that are hardened
against me, move thee to compassion, Strengthen me in this encounter with the
assistance of the good Angels that comforted thine only Son, in the night of
his most bitter affliction cause this black night of my Sorrows to pass
speedily away, or rather in the midst of these dark shadows, cause me to see
the ravishing beams of thy Mercy. Heal my grievous wounds, or else pour into
them the refreshing Balm of thy most tender and Divine Consolations; my Heart
and my Flesh fail, and faint away, but look upon me with a Gracious Eye, and
receive me into the embraces of thine Eternal Mercy. Declare, I beseech thee,
how sensible thou art of my affliction, by a present relief, receive my Sweat
and Tears, and put them into thy Bottles. O good God, thou see that I am
fainting, and that my Soul is weary within me, comfort me therefore with thy
Cordials, and with thy most Divine refreshments; Give me to drink of the Wine
of thy most effectual Consolations, that may restore unto me my spirits, apply
the right hand of thy Mercy, that it may strengthen my Soul, and drive from
thence all poison and infection. Let thine Holy Spirit, the Spiritual Dove
light upon me, to bring joy unto me. O living God, thou see that I dye, but
give me some of that living Water, whereof if a man drink, he shall live
Eternally; my Friends are grieved with me, and weep for my bitter affliction,
but can give me no assistance, but thine only look would be able to deliver me.
O my God, either pull me out of this Sea of Trouble, into which thou have cast
me, or cause me to pass through these waves, to the Inheritance prepared for me
from the foundation of the World. Quench these violent Flames that burn and
consume me, or let them serve as fiery Chariots, to carry me in triumph to
Heaven. O how mad and senseless should I be, if I did fear Death, seeing that
it will put an end to my torments, it will break in pieces my grievous Chains;
it will wipe away all Tears from mine Eyes, and banish all grief from my Heart.
O my God, when shall all my Cries, my Sighs, and Groans, be changed into Songs
of Praise, and Thanksgiving? when shall I see my self in the Glorious company
of the Blessed, who are come out of the great tribulation, and who have washed
and cleansed their Garments in the Blood of the Lamb. Draw me, and I shall run
after thee, and Glorify thee for ever in thine Heavenly Temple, Amen.

CHAP. 14.
The second Consolation against the fears of Death, is to look upon God as a
merciful Father, and to trust upon his infinite Goodness.

THere is no Child well descended, but desires earnestly to see his Fathers
Face, and especially, the Face of a Good and Gracious Father. A great Princes
Son, who has been brought up in a Foreign Country, rejoices at his own
Happiness, when his Father sends for him, to make him partaker of the Glory and
Dignity of his Empire, he is not then grieved nor troubled, he seeks not to
delay his going, but rather he embraces, with transports of joy, the Messenger
of such good news; he thinks of nothing but of hasting his departure; if he
could borrow wings, he would fly with an unspeakable swiftness to his Fathers
Palace, Now we are the Children of the Great God, whose Throne is Heaven, and
whose Footstool is the Earth; for our Faith that looks upon Jesus Christ as our
Savior and Redeemer, considers God as our God and Father, for to them who have
received this only Son of the Father, has been granted the privilege of being
the Sons of God, to them who believe in his name, 1 Job. 1. So that we have
just cause to be transported in an Holy Excess of Joy, with the Apostle St.
John, Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the Sons of God, 1 John 3.

We were by nature Children of Wrath, as others, but God, who is rich in Mercy,
has predestined us unto the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his Will, Ephesians. 2. He gives us the Gracious
assurances of this free adoption, in this life; for as we are Children, he has
sent the Spirit of his Son in our Hearts, to cry Abba, Father, Ephesians. 1. This
Holy Spirit bears witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God, If
we be Children, then Heirs of God, and Coheirs with Christ, Gal. 4. Yea, if we
suffer with him, that we may be also Glorified with him, Romans 8. That we might
be the Children of God; he has not only adopted us by Jesus Christ, but also
regenerated us by uncorruptible Seed. We are not born of Flesh and of Blood,
but we are born of God. His infinite Goodness persuaded him first, to grant us
a Being, and his incomprehensible love, has moved him to reform our Beings,
and reprint his Divine Image in our Hearts, John 1. 1 Pet. 1. He has begotten
us by his pure Grace, by the word of his Truth. that we might be the First
Fruits of his Creatures, Jam. 1. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy, has begotten us again
unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an
inheritance uncorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1.

Now although we be the Children of God, and the supposed Heirs of his Crown,
our Glory and Dignity is not to be discerned during the years of our Earthly
Pilgrimage. Our Heavenly Father suffers us here in an Estate contemptible in
the eye of the World, that we might learn Humility, and desire more earnestly
his celestial Inheritance. As it happens in a dark and obscure midnight, Men
tread under feet the Pearls, the Diamonds, the Scepters, and the Crowns; Thus
it is now, that a gross ignorance has overspread and covers the face of the
World, the Children of God, who are the most precious Jewels of his Crown, are
esteemed no better than the scum, or the filth of the^ Earth. This
consideration causes St. John to tell us, Beloved, we are now Children of God,
it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. As David
sent for Absalom out of the Philistines Country, and gave him leave to dwell in
the City of Jerusalem, but for the space of two years, he would not suffer him
to enter his Royal Palace, or see his Face; Likewise, God has freed us from
the Devils Tyranny, and Hells Power, he has admitted us into his Holy Church,
which is as his Jerusalem, where he gives a fore-tast of our Heavenly Peace and
Reconciliation, but he delays for a time our reception into the magnificent
Palace of his Glory, and to the enjoyment of his Divine Presence, the highest
satisfaction, and the greatest happiness. While we remain in the Body, we are
estranged from God, so that we are saved, but by Hope, 2 Cor. 5. But when we
shall depart out of this Body, we shall be with the Lord, and shall enter into
a real fruition of his Celestial Inheritance, Romans 8. Finally, while we dwell
here below, we may see the Image of our Heavenly Father, and behold his Face as
in a Glass, but when he shall have caused us to draw near his Throne, we shall
see him face to face, we shall be transformed into his likeness, and be fully
satisfied with his resemblance, Romans 1. 1 Cor. 3. 1 Cor. 13. Psalm. 17.

Let Death be never so hideous and ugly, it is the Messenger of our Heavenly
Father, and if we can have but the confidence to open its iron hands, and look
into them, we shall find Gracious Letters, full of Love, by which this Father
of Mercy calls us, to the full enjoyment of our Eternal Happiness. Death does
not only invite us to go to God, but it serves as a Vessel to convey us through
this tempestuous Sea of the World, to go to our good God, who expects our
coming at the Haven of everlasting Rest; it is like to Eliah's Chariot of Fire,
that carried him up to Heaven, 2 King. 2. If Death covers our eyes with one
hand, and deprives us of the Light of the Sun with the other it rents in pieces
that Vail which hinders us from the sight of the varieties of God's immortal
Sanctuary, and discovers to us the Glorious Face of the Father of Lights; with
the one it digs for our Bodies a Grave to cast them in, but with the other hand
it flings open, for our Souls, the Gates of the Heavenly Jerusalem, to usher
them into the Banqueting-Hall.

Therefore Death should be so far from frighting us, that its arrival should
rather comfort us, and cause us to resolve to follow it with an Holy
cheerfulness, for we should not only be willing to go to God with transports of
joy, when he is pleased to call us to himself, to behold his Face, and to eat
of the Bread of Eternal life, in his Heavenly Kingdom, but, of our own accord,
we should be impatient to enjoy his Glorious Presence, and in a continual
longing, to see that happy day that shall bring us into him, and satisfy us
with his unspeakable Delights. A true Christian should be moved in this
occasion, with David's Spirit. As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so
pants my Soul after thee, O God. My Soul thirsts for God, for the living
God, when shall I come and appear before God?

I confess that this Great God, before whom we are to appear, is clothed with
Glory and Majesty, and dwells in the Light, which no man can approach unto; 1 Timothy 6. I know that he sits upon a dreadful Throne of Fire, whereof the Wheels
are like a burning Flame, Dan. 7. that a thousand thousand wait upon him, and
ten thousand Millions stand before him, Isai. 6. I am not ignorant, that at his
Presence the Earth is moved, the Sea and the Rivers dry up, the Mountains
tremble, and the little Hills shake, the Rocks decay, the Pillars of Heaven
fail, and the Seraphims cover themselves with their wings, Revel. 4. But let
not this dreadful Majesty and Heavenly Pomp, terrify thee, O believing, Soul,
for this Great God is full of a Fatherly affection for thee. Round about this
Throne of God there is a beautiful Rainbow of a Green color, like unto an
Emerald, to signify unto us, that God is reconciled, and that the Covenant of
our Peace is to continue for ever. As out of this magnificent Throne, proceed
the Thunders and Thunderbolts, that fright the Worldlings, and cast the proud
Souls down to the ground; so from thence proceed also Lightnings, and such
refreshing Flames, as are able to comfort the Believer, and to guide him to his
Celestial Inheritance. We are related to God more than the Angels and
Seraphims, for we are not only his Creatures and Servants, but also his
Children, and the Members of his Son; nay, we are but one with him, Joh. 17.
Let us therefore return our hearty thanks to our Heavenly Father, which has
made us mete to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Colos.
1.

Let us go up with confidence to Mount Sion, for there are no signs of God's
wrath to be seen, nor of his just vengeance; we shall find no bounds to
separate us from God's Gracious Presence but we shall find Cords of Love to
draw us, and unite us unto him; we shall see no fire to devour and scare us,
but we shall perceive the comfortable Flames which burn without consuming, and
which bring Comfort rather than Fear; we shall not meet there a terrible
Lawgiver to derive us from him, to scare us with his Thunderbolts; but we
shall meet a loving Father to embrace us, and open to us the bosom of his
tender compassions. In short, we shall not hear there the terrible sound of the
Trumpet, that causes the Rocks to split asunder, that casts to the ground the
proud Cedars, and that makes the Deer cast their young; but we shall hear the
sweet and melodious voice, that will settle our trembling Souls, refresh our
languishing Hopes, and fill us with Peace, and Eternal Comfort, Heb. 12.

I acknowledge that God is just, but he is also merciful, and his Mercy
rejoices against Judgment; his Justice is like an exceeding high Mountain,
but his Mercy may be compared to the bottomless deep, Psalm. 39. Therefore Moses
who had seen God more than any living Man, cannot be satisfied, to extol and
magnify his infinite Mercy, and the overflowing Riches of his love, Psalm. 36.
He names him but once, Just, but many times he calls him Merciful, Gracious,
Long suffering, abundant in Goodness, and Truth, Exodus 4. It is not unworthy of
our observation, that the word Righteous or Just, attributed to God, does often
signify also Merciful, Gracious, and Loving, in the Holy Tongue. It is true,
God holds in his hand the sword of his Justice, but he is girded, and clothed
with his Mercy, as with a Garment. In short, God is not only Good and Merciful,
but he is also Goodness and Mercy it self, 1 John 4. His compassion and
tenderness is far greater than that of the best Fathers or Mothers, as he
himself declares by the Prophet, Can a Woman forget her Sucking-Child, that she
should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb; yea, they may forget, yet
will not I forget thee: Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my Hands,
yea, in the bottom of my Heart, Is. 49. These fatherly Compassions force him to
let fall the sword of his justice, as he tells us in Hosea, How shall I make
thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me,
my repentings are kindled together, I will not execute the fierceness of mine
anger, Chap. 11. Therefore David had good cause to be persuaded, That when his
Father and Mother should forsake him, the Lord would receive him. When all
Love, Kindness, and Mercy were totally banished from the Earth; when all
natural affections should be extinct, my God will not forsake me, while I live,
and at the hour of my death, he will receive me into his bosom, and cover me
with his wings. Christian Souls, Let not the sad remembrance of your former
sins and miscarriages, discourage you; for when we appear before the Throne of
Gods Majesty; we must not trust upon our own Righteousness, nor be pust up with
the fancy of our merits; but we must place all our assurance and hope, in the
Mercy of God alone; we must imitate Daniel, who speaks thus of himself, and of
his proceedings, We do not present our supplications before thee for our
Righteousnesses, but for thy great Mercies, Dan 9. The compassions of God are
our Mercies, while God has store of compassions, we shall not want merits, St.
Bern. Now God's Mercies and Compassions can never fail; they renew every
morning, his faithfulness is very excellent, Lam. 3. As I live, says the Lord
God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn
from his way and live, Ezekiel. 33. I am he, I am he that blots out all thy sins
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy transgressions, Isai. 45. Although
our sins and iniquities appear to us with all the deformity and ugliness of
Hell; Be not overcome with grief, nor cast your selves into despair; Let us
rather say with the Prophet Jeremiah, Wherefore does a living man complain, a
man for the punishment of his sins; Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again to the Lord. Let us lift up our Heart with our Hands unto God in the
Heavens. Or let us speak in the language of Micah, Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgressions of the remnant of
his Heritage? he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
Mercy. He will come again, he will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast out their sins into the depths of the Sea, Micah
7. Let us comfort our selves with the words of the Prophet Daniel, To the Lord
our God belongs Mercies and Forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him,
Dan. 7.

Tell me not again, I know that God is Good and Merciful, but I have offended
him too much, to believe that he will vouchsafe me a Pardon, and have Mercy
upon me. After many repented Vows, after many Groans, Sighs, and Tears of
Repentance. I have returned as the Dog to his Vomit, and as the Swine to wallow
in the Mire, 2 Pet. 2. But wretched sinner, learn for thy comfort, that when
thy sins should be as many as the Sand of the Seashore, or as the Stars of the
Sky, Is. 44. If thou do now sincerely repent of them, with a contrite Soul,
God will blot them out as the Cloud, and will cast them into the Sea; for God's
Mercy has no bounds, and his Compassions are infinite, Micah 7. When thy
Brother has offended thee, if he ask forgiveness, the Lord Commands that thou
should pardon him, not only seven times, but seventy and seven times, Matthew.
17. How much more reason have thou to believe, that God, of his infinite
Goodness and Mercy, will pardon thee more sins, and oftener; therefore instead
of murmuring over thy miscarriages, accept of the precious Balm of his Divine
Consolations, and say with the Royal Prophet, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
all that is within me, bless his Holy Name; Bless the Lord O my Soul, and
forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals
all thy diseases, who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowns thee
with loving kindnesses and tender mercies, who satisfies thy mouth with good
things, so that thy youth is renewed, like the Eagles. The Lord executes
Righteousness and Judgment, for all that are oppressed; the Lord is merciful
and gracious, slow to anger and plenteous in mercy. He will not always chide,
neither will he keep his anger for ever; he has not dealt with us after our
sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities; for a the Heaven is high
above the Earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him, as far as
the East is from the West, so far has he removed our transgressions from us.
Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him,
Psalm. 103.

Don't answer me, that your sins are so grievous and abominable, that you
cannot expect a Pardon, for when they should be as high as the proudest
Mountains, if thou art really sensible of their weight, if they make thee to
sigh and groan, God's infinite Mercy, like a Deluge, shall cover and wash them
away, Lam. 5. or like a Torrent, it shall transport them out of his sight* for
when sin abounds, God's Grace will super-abound, in case there be true
Repentance, Is. 1 When your sins should be as Scarlet, they shall be as white
as Snow, when they should be as red as Vermilion, they shall become as white as
Wool. All the offenses that you are guilty of since you are in the World, are
finite, and limited, but God's Mercy is infinite. O Lord, if thou should
mark iniquities who shall stand, but there is forgiveness with thee, that thou
may be feared, Psalm. 130.

He that hides his transgressions shall not prosper, but he that confesses and
forsakes them, shall obtain Mercy, Prove. 1.8. It is certain that there is no
sinner never so guilty, that shall seek unto God's Mercy, by a true Repentance,
but shall obtain his Request, Psalm. 113. David had defiled himself with an
horrible Adultery, and imbrued his Hands in the Blood of one of his most
faithful Servants; but as soon as he made his Suit unto God, with a broken
Heart, and a contrite Spirit, this good and merciful Creator cleansed this foul
Sinner from all his guilt, at the fountain of his infinite Mercy; he made him
whiter than Snow, and comforted his bruised Bones. This consideration caused
him to cry out, I said I will confess unto God my transgressions, and thou O
God, have taken away the punishment of my sin, Ps. 52, King Manasseh had been
addicted to devilish Arts, and to the most abominablee and grievous Idolatries,
2 Chronicles. 33. Nevertheless, as soon as he sighs in his Chains, his Prayers and
his Groans found a Gracious reception at the Throne of Grace. The poor Publican
in the Gospel being ashamed to lift up his Eyes to Heaven, struck upon his
Breast with this expression of his penitent Soul, O God be merciful to me a
sinner, Luk 18. And God looked upon him with an Eye of Mercy, and stretched out
unto him his Gracious Hand, so that h^ departed to his home justified. The
penitent Magdalen was inwardly grieved at her former filthy and debauched
behavior, so that she came and cast her self at our Saviors Feet, watering
them with her Tears, and wiping them with the Hair of her Head, Luk 9. but
Christ soon lifted her up with these comfortable words, Thy sins are pardoned,
thy faith has saved thee, go in peace. St. Peter by an unconstancy, that
should cause the best Christians to tremble for fear of falling into the same
Apostasy, denied his Lord and Master three times, with cursing and swearing,
Matthew. 26. but this merciful God looked upon him with an eye of compassion, and
gave him grace to repent most bitterly, of such a foul crime. I doubt not, but
at the same time, that this wretched sinner poured forth his Tears in God's
presence; doubtless, he poured into his Heart the Oil of Joy and Gladness, and
comforted him most effectually, by his Divine Spirit. Likewise, although your
sins be grievous and abominable, if your Souls be struck with grief and
displeasure, if your Hearts be truly penitent, so that you shed sincere Tears
of Repentance; and in case you are heartily sorry for the want of a sufficient
displeasure for your sins, in case you prostrate your self before your Heavenly
Father, he will raise you up again by his infinite Goodness, he will cast all
your sins and transgressions behind him; he will cry unto you in your Hearts,
by the voice of his Holy Spirit, My Son, or, My Daughter, thy sins are forgiven
thee, John 5. He will fill your Souls with an unspeakable Joy, Luk 9. and will
cause you to sing with the Psalmist, Blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes
not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. Psalm. 32. Finally, think
not that it is ever too late to repent, and that when Death is upon your Lips,
it is no time to seek to the Mercy of God. As the business of Repentance cannot
be too soon, because we know not when God will call us to himself; It is most
certain, that it can never be too late; for at what time or season soever the
poor sinner melts into Tears of Repentance, in case his Repentance be real, and
his Tears proceed from a penitent heart; God will always have the Arms of his
Mercy wide open to receive him. The Thief crucified at our Saviors side, was
at the last gasp, when he was converted, and when he uttered this excellent
expression; Remember me Lord, when thou come into thy Kingdom, Luk 23. Our
good and merciful Savior, granted his Request, and encouraged him with the
most excellent and comfortable promise that we can imagine; Verily I say unto
thee, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. In like manner, when thou art
at the point of death, if God speaks unto thee, and awakens thy Conscience; it
is an infallible sign, that he has compassion upon thee, and that he will not
destroy thee. It is a sign that he opens for thee his Heaven, full of Light
and Glory, and offers unto thee his Paradise, with all its Divine Excellencies.
Doubt not, penitent sinner, that this is the acceptable day, the day of
Salvation, and the time of Gods good pleasure; seeing that this good God draws
so near thee, thou may with freedom draw near him. And seeing that he beats
and knocks at the door of thine Heart; it is an infallible token, that thou
may also beat at the door of his Eternal Mercies, and that he intends to
open, to satisfy thee. In short, at what hour soever we go unto God, and appear
before his Throne; he stretches out unto us the Golden Scepter of his
Goodness, that we should obtain Mercy, and find Grace, to be helped in time of
need.

It is not needful that we should prepare long and elaborated Speeches or
Prayers, to persuade God to vouchsafe his Grace and needful help, in such an
urgent necessity. It is not necessary that we should compose them, with the Art
and Industry of humane Wisdom. We need but pray unto God, as unto our Father,
and weep in his bosom; we need but open unto him our Hearts, and call our
selves his Children; that alone, is sufficient to move him to compassion, and
to stir up his Fatherly affections, to appease his anger, and to draw upon us
his most excellent Blessings. The Prophet Isaiah, the most Eloquent of the Men
of his time, seeks no other argument to persuade God to have Mercy and
compassion but this, Look down from Heaven, and behold from the Habitation of
thy Holiness, and of thy Glory; where is thy Zeal and thy Strength, the
sounding of thy Bowels, and of thy Mercies toward me? are they restrained?
doubtless, thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledges us not. Thou O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is
from everlasting, Isai. 63. Likewise, after that he had made this confession,
We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy Rags,
and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us
away, and there is none that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to
take hold of thee, for thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us,
because of our iniquities, Chap. 64. He adds, But now O Lord, thou art our
Father, we are thy Clay, and thou art our Potter, and we all are the work of
thine Hand; Be not wrath very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever;
behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy People.

By this gracious and loving Title of Father, the prodigal Son is persuaded to
be able to oblige his Father to have compassion of him; I will rise and go to
my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and
against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy
hired Servants. Thus, although we have forsaken our Heavenly Father, misspent
the Riches of his Grace, and lived a filthy and a profane Life; Nevertheless,
if we can be but moved with a serious and a true repentance, and say to him
from our hearts, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and against thee, I am no
more worthy to be called thy Son. He will forget all the miscarriages of our
youth, and will pass by all the offenses that we have committed, out of
ignorance or mistake; nay, he will blot out all our wilful and deliberate sins;
he will not only embrace us when we shall cast our selves at his feet, and in
the arms of his Mercy; but he will meet and receive us as his dearest Children:
he will kiss us with the blessed kisses of his Fatherly love; he will give unto
us his Holy Spirit, that shall seal us for the day of Redemption, and shall
assure us, that we are admitted to the liberty and all the privileges of his
Children; he will shoe our Feet with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace,
and will give us all the assurances of our entire and perfect reconciliation.
He will cloth us here upon Earth with the Robes of Righteousness and Holiness,
and in Heaven, he will bestow upon us uncorruptible Robes of immortality and
Glory. In this life he will give us the foretasts of Eternal Happiness, and in
the life to come he will lead us by the hand into the Banqueting Chamber, and
will cause us to sit there at Table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and with
all the Firstborn whose names are written in Heaven. Out of this celestial
abode, all murmurings and complaints, shall be banished, but here shall be
rejoicing and gladness, for the conversion of poor sinners, and for their
admittance into the Kingdom of Heaven. God himself shall invite the Holy Angels
and blessed Spirits, to share in these public rejoycings; saying to them, We
must rejoice, for these my Children were dead, but now they are alive, they
were lost, but now they are found again.

Let the miserable slaves of the Devil, and of their filthy Lusts, tremble at
the approaches of death, and let them look upon God as a dreadful Judge, Romans
2. For our parts, we have not the spirit of Bondage to be again in fear, but we
have the spirit of Adoption, whereby we may cry Abba, Father. Let the Sons and
Daughters of Adam, who have no other Being nor Life, but that which they have
received with their corrupted Nature, fly from God's Presence; for our parts,
we that are Regenerated by the Spirit of the second Adam, we will draw near to
him with boldness. We will not say as that wretched Soul, disturbed and
frighted at the consideration of its crimes. I heard thy voice, I was afraid
and hid myself, Genesis 3. But rather having been brought up in the Schools of the
Prophets and Apostles, and having learned, that we must prefer our Obedience to
God's Will, to all other things whatsoever; we shall say unto him with Samuel,
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 8. Or rather, we will speak unto
him in plainer terms; O my God and Heavenly Father, speak when thou will, for
thy servant is ready, and resolved to obey thy Commands; we will stay till God
shall call the fourth time, as that Holy Man, Numb. 31. Who because of his
tender and unexperienced years, could not distinguish between God's voice, and
that of a Man; but we will have our Ears always open to his Divine Orders, and
at the first motion and summons of his Will, we shall be ready to follow him,
as the Children of Israel were in the Wilderness, when they raised their Camp,
and marched according to God's directions, Numb. 3.

And as when the Levites stopped, and put down the Ark in its own place, 2 Chronicles.
3. Moses did commonly pray, O Lord give rest to the thousands of Israel.
Likewise, you believing Souls, whom God has chosen for his Ark and Temple,
as soon as you shall perceive that this wise Governor of Mankind, intends to put
a period to your painful Journey, and laborious Race; that is to say, as soon as
you shall perceive the least sign of death, speak with an Holy confidence and
joy; Rejoice, O my Soul, the time of thy freedom, and of thine Eternal Rest
approaches; Here is the Messenger of good news; here is Death that will usher
me in to the Glorious Palace of my Heavenly Father. Father, the hour is come,
Glorify thy Son, that thy Son may Glorify thee, John 17.

When the hour was come that our Lord Jesus Christ was to go out of this World
to the Father; he said unto his Disciples who were grieved for his going from
them, If ye loved me ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father,
for my Father is greater than I, John 13. John 14. Christian Souls, speak in
this manner at the hour of your departing. If such as are about you happen to
weep and lament, if they endeavor to move and stop you, by the considerations
of Flesh and Blood, tell them, why are you grieved at my deliverance, and at
the end of my misery? why would you hinder and retard my Glory and Happiness? O
how cruel is your Love, how blind and unconsiderate is your Affection?
Certainly, if ye did love me as ye ought, ye would prefer my satisfaction, and
the accomplishment of my happiness, to the small advantages that ye might
gather from my abode with you; ye should consider, that the least part of the
joy that I shall feel in my Heavenly Fathers House, is a thousand times more
worth, than all the Pleasures of the Earth, than the Honors of the Age, and the
Pomp and Glory of the World. My friends, or rather my enemies, let me go, for I
go to my Father, I go to behold his Face, which is the most Divine
satisfaction; I go to take possession of that Inheritance, prepared for me,
from the foundations of the World, John 20. Matthew. 21.

A Prayer and Meditation for a believing Soul, that strengthens it self against
the fears of Death, by an Assurance, and Trust upon God's Fatherly Goodness,
and Infinite Mercy.
MY God and Creator, I perceive that the time of my departure draws near, and
that Death presses sore upon me. It summons me to appear before thy dreadful
Tribual; it frights me, when it brings to my remembrance all my former sins,
and represents unto me, the hainousness of my crimes. O Great God, when I
seriously think upon what I am, and consider what thou art, I am astonished,
and the sight of thy Divine Majesty frights me, for I am but Dust and Ashes,
and my Being is less than nothing; but thou art infinite in thy Being and
Glory; the Heaven is thy Throne, and the Earth is thy Footstool: I am clothed
with darkness, but thou dwell in a light, that no man can approach unto. How
dare I, that am all covered with sin, draw near unto thee, who art the Holy of
Holies, and Holiness it self. How can I that am but dry Straw and Stubble,
stand before an everlasting burning. O God of Gods, if I did see thee sitting
upon the Throne of thy Glory, as Judge of thousand thousands of immortal
Spirits wait upon thee, and ten thousand Millions worship thee; if I did see
thee armed with Thunderbolts, encompassed with Flames of Fire, like to those of
Mount Sinai: I should not be only afraid, but I should fall into despair.
Instead of drawing near to thee I should fly from thee, as Adam, and endeavor
to hide my self from thine Eyes, that cannot suffer the sight of evil; I should
cry out as Moses, I am afraid, and I tremble all over. Or, as the Prophet
Isaiah, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean Lips, and I
dwell in the midst of a People of unclean Lips, Isai. 6. Or, it may be I may
say with the Holy Apostle, Depart from me, for I am a sinful Creature. But good
God, I see that thy Throne, so full of Glory, is encompassed about with a
Rainbow of an immortal and a refreshing Color. I see in it the undoubted
assurances of my Peace, and Eternal Reconciliation with thee; therefore I dare
go to it with confidence, as to the Throne of Grace, to obtain Mercy, and find
Grace, to be helped in time of need. Although thou art Clothed with Majesty,
and Crowned with Glory, thou do stretch out unto me the Golden Scepter of
thine infinite Mercies. I see that thou have put off the Arms of thy Justice
and Vengeance, to put on the Bowels of Love and Compassion. I hear no more over
my Head, the dreadful Thunder of thy Curses, but I hear the still voice of thy
Mercy, that comforts my trembling Soul, that raises up my drooping Spirit, and
that causes me to conceive the assured hopes of Happiness and Glory, in thine
Heavenly Paradise. I see no more about thee the grievous flames and burnings,
to devour sinful Men; but I perceive the pleasant and refreshing flames of thy
Love, that rejoice and comfort me, and that do not destroy me as they did the
two Captains and Soldiers of Ahaziah, but they carry me up to Heaven as the
Prophet Elijah was. The spirit which thou have given me, is not the Spirit of
Bondage, to incline me to fear, but the spirit of Adoption, whereby I cry Abba,
Father. It is this spirit that witnesses with my spirit, that I am thy Child,
thy Heir, and Coheir with thy Holy Son Jesus. Seeing thou have reconciled me
to thy self by the Blood of thy Beloved Son, when I was a Slave of Satan, and
thy sworn Enemy; now that I am so nearly related to thee, would thou refuse
me mine Inheritance? O my God, my Heavenly Father, I know that I have
grievously offended thee, and that if thou did treat me exactly according to
thy Justice, of a thousand Articles, I could not answer one; therefore I should
have cause to expect to be cast into the Eternal Fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels; but Lord thou do not desire the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should turn to thee and live. Moreover, thou have confirmed this with
an oath, and thou will never break it. I confess that my sins are many, and
that their hainousness appears unto me day and night; but Lord, where sin
abounds, thy Grace, or thy Mercy superabounds: and when mine iniquities should
be as red as Vermilion, thou have promised to render them as white as Snow;
Thou shall be moved for me with the same compassion as a Father is moved for
his Child, and thou will put away from thee all mine offenses as far as the
East is from the West. O my Soul, why art thou afflicted? why do thou fret
within me? return to thy Rest, my Soul, for the Lord has done thee good; he
prepares for thee an Eternal Felicity. It is not Death's voice that I hear, but
the Call of mine Heavenly Father, who invites and commands me to come away to
him: Therefore, though I am a most miserable sinner, I am going to cast my self
at thy feet, and to say to thee as the prodigal Child, Father, I have sinned
against Heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. O
my God, and Father, thou have bestowed upon me, thy most Divine Favors, thy
greatest Riches and Blessings; nevertheless, I have been estranged from thee,
and have unhappily abused all thy Mercies. I have too much given my self over
to the debaucheries of the Flesh, and of the World; evil company has corrupted
my behavior; so that from the sole of the Foot, to the crown of the Head,
there is nothing whole in me. In this miserable Estate, I fly to thee my Judge
for Mercy, or rather, I implore and entreat with all my Heart thy Fatherly
Love, to have compassion of me. O Divine Flames, O Abyss of Charity, O God,
whose tenderness for me is far greater than that of the best Fathers, and of
the most tender hearted Mothers for their Babes; I see thy Bowels move for me,
thy compassions kindle, and thy Arms wide open to receive me; thou art not only
ready to embrace me, but thou meetest me in the way; not only as the Father of
the prodigal Son, thou do not only receive me, but thou have sought me out in
my former abode of corruption, and drawn me out of those depths of Misery. O
unparalleled Love! what may not I expect from thy Fatherly kindness; thou shall
embrace me with the Arms of thy Mercy, and kiss me with the kisses of thy Love;
thou shall confirm my assurance, of being admitted into the liberty of thy
Children, and give unto me a white Stone, where thou shall write the new Name
of Elect, or Believer, that none knows but him that has it. Thou will shoe my
Feet with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace; or rather, thou shall give
unto my Soul, that peace of God that passes all understanding. Thou shall put
upon me the Robes of fine and white Linen, which are the Righteousness of the
Saints, and thou shall cloth me with the Rays of the Sun of Justice. Thou
shall lead me into thy Dwelling, I mean, thy Glorious Palace, where, instead of
killing the fatted Calfe, we shall solemnize the Nuptials of the Lamb, offered
from the foundation of the World, there we shall meet with the Angels, the
immortal Spirits, and all the Firstborn, whose names are written in Heaven,
who shall not murmr nor complain, but shall be transported with joy, and
adore that infinite Goodness which thou have declared to us poor and miserable
sinners, who out of thine incomprehensible Love, have made us thy Children and
Heirs of thy Kingdom. O Goodness, worthy of the admiration of Heaven and Earth,
we were all lost, but we shall be all found in God, we were dead, but by death,
we shall return to life; we were overwhelmed in a grievous misery, but by this
means we shall attain to the greatest happiness. O my God, I recommend unto
thee my Soul, as to a faithful Creator, Heavenly Father, my Spirit I leave in
thy Hands, Amen.

CHAP. 15.
The third Consolation against the fears of Death, is to represent continually
unto our selves, the Death and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to
trust upon the merits of his Cross.

IF we will dye with a peacable and quiet mind, we must always represent to our
selves the death and sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, and rely upon the
merits of his Cross; for the death of this Prince of Life should be the Model
of ours, and the bottomless Fountain of Comforts to a believing Soul.

1. By looking upon this perfect example, the wonder of Men and Angels, we
learn to endure with an Holy resolution and patience, all the evils and pangs
that accompany Death, Luk 22. For although our Saviors Torments were most
bitter, so that his Soul was sorrowful unto death, although there issued out of
his innocent Body, a bloody Sweat for the violence of his pain; nevertheless,
none ever heard the least murmuring, or expression of impatience, Isai. 53. He
was led to the slaughter as a Lamb, and as a Sheep before the Shearer, is dumb.

2, From hence we learn, that the last hours of our life, must be employed in
fervent and continual Prayers unto God, seeing, that this Beloved of the
Father, offers unto him at such a time his Prayers and Supplications, with
great Cries, and a flood of Tears, as to him who was able to deliver him from
Death; Heb. 5. In the bosoms of this Heavenly Father, he pours out all his
Griefs, and three times he presents this request, Father, if it be possible
that this cup should pass away from me, except I drink it, Matthew. 26.

3. We learn to present our selves before God's Divine Majesty with Humility,
and to resign our selves wholly to his wonderful Providence; seeing that he
who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, he whom the millions of Angels
and Seraphims worship continually, thought it no disgrace to himself to fall
upon his knees three times to the ground, and submit his Will to that of his
Heavenly Father, for after that he had said, Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass away from me, except I drink it. He adds these words,
Nevertheless, O Father, not as I will, but as thou will, Matthew. 26.

4. If at the time of our death, an excessive sorrow, or a malignant humor
seize upon our minds, so that in that disposition we are not able to see the
Heavens open, nor God who stretches out his Arm to receive us into his Rest;
Let us remember that this merciful Lord speaks to us as he did to his three
Apostles, who fell asleep, when he was in his Agony, Cannot you watch one hour
with me? Mat. 29. My dear Children, it is no time to fall asleep with the
foolish and inconsiderate Virgins, trim your Lamps, put on the Garments of
Light, to meet your Celestial Bridegroom, and to enter with him into the
Marriage Chamber, Matthew. 25.

5. God requires that we should do as much good at all times to our friends as
we are able, and to express the sincerity of our affections, to those with whom
Nature and our Duty have caused us to be related, but especially at the hour of
death, we are more bound to this Religious Duty; therefore Jesus Christ has
shown us an excellent example, for when he was nailed to the Cross, and ready
to breathe forth his Soul into the hands of his Heavenly Father, he had an
especial care of his Holy and Blessed Mother, saying to his beloved Disciple,
My Son, behold thy Mother, and to her, Woman, behold thy Son.

6. We must not only do good, and show kindness to our friends, but we must
forgive our greatest enemies, such also as employ their greatest fury against
us; for by this means we shall follow the Blessed footsteps of our Gracious
Savior, for he had compassion upon them that crucified him, and mocked him;
Father, said he, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

7. By the Cross of Jesus Christ, we learn to put our trust in the goodness of
God, in our greatest pangs, and to embrace him as our most loving Father and
Redeemer, when he seems to discover to us a severe countenance, full of wrath
and displeasure for this Eternal Son of God, in his most violent tortures, when
his Heavenly Father did suspend his aid and assistance, and withheld the
effects of his Grace, the expressions of his Love, and the comforts of his
Divine Spirit; nevertheless, he looks upon him as his God, and reposes himself
upon him; he prays unto him with an Holy assurance, and repeats these
passionate words, My God, my God!

8. If we will dye willingly, and leave these crazy Bodies with a joyful mind,
when the time is come, that we must go to the Father of Spirits; we must
remember with what resolution our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ prepared
himself for death, and how willingly he commended his innocent Soul into the
hands of God his Father, when he required it; No man takes my life away from
me, but I lay it down of my self, I have power to lay it down, and I have power
to take it again; this Commandment have I received of my Father, John 10. Heb.
10. This caused him to speak in this manner, Here am I, O God, to do thy will,
Luk 23. Therefore when he gave up the Ghost, he cried with a loud voice, to
show that his precious Soul was not taken from him by violence, but that he did
willingly offer it up as a Sacrifice to God.

9. In this rich description of Christ crucified, we may further learn what
should be our last words, and last thoughts; for if God vouchsafes to us the
use of our Tongues, until the last gasp we cannot end our life more
comfortably, than by such expressions as our Savior made use of upon the
Cross; Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit. But if we cannot move our
Lips, and that we cannot pronounce these words, we must inwardly meditate upon
them in our minds, and express them with motions of the Heart.

10. When we look more narrowly into the death and passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we may easily find how much we are bound to give up our souls unto God,
when he is pleased to call for them, for this Blessed death is the price and
ransom that he has paid for them; now, if there be any reason to render unto
every one that which has been dearly bought, and purchased with a great price;
and seeing that it would be a great sin to refuse unto any man, that which he
has paid for, with the Blood of his only and beloved Son, how can we refuse
our Souls unto God, seeing that they belong to him? because he has not only
created them and stamped in them his Image, but he has also purchased them
with the Blood of his only Son, in whom, from all Eternity he is well pleased.
We must not therefore imitate the example of naughty paymasters, or unjust
possessors of other Men's Goods, we must not expect until our Souls be plucked
from us by violence, but rather like the good and righteous Debtors, we must
return them willingly, and yield them up into his hands who has paid for them
an infinite, and an unvaluable Ransom. David was of this mind when he said,
Into thine hand I commit my spirit, thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth,
Psalm, 31.

11. In this Death and Passion of our Glorious Redeemer, we learn not only our
Duty, but also sufficient grounds of comfort and hope; and if I may so say, it
is in the Bowels of this dead Lion, that we find the sweetest and most
ravishing Consolations; this Chief Priest, that bears us upon his Breast, in
his Heavenly Sanctuary, or rather upon his Heart, will not forsake us in the
day of our distress, and will not give us over to the fears and pangs of death,
for seeing that he has encountered with this cruel Death, seeing that it has
felt its sting, its shiverings and pains, and that he has bin tempted as we
have bin in all things, except in sin; he is merciful and faithful, to have
compassion of our infirmities; he is no less able to assist us in our
temptations, and to make us in all things more than Conquerors.

12. Believing Souls, consider with me the noble expressions of St. Paul,
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
Mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation,
that we may be able to comfort them, which are in any trouble, by the comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1. These excellent Truths
may be very well applied to our Lord Jesus Christ, whom the Holy Ghost names,
The Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, Heb. 3. For the comfortable
assistances which he has received from God, in the time of his greatest
anguish, are precious tokens, and infallibie assurances of God's future help in
our need; for as, when he was in his bitter Agony, when his Soul was cast down
with deadly sorrow, an Angel from Heaven comes to comfort him. Likewise when we
shall be engaged in an encounter with death, when it shall endeavor to fill
our Souls with sadness and apprehensions, he will, doubtless, send unto us some
of his good Angels, that be at his right hand, I mean the faithful Teachers of
his Holy Word, or else he will send from Heaven some of his blessed Spirits
that stand about his Throne, and that are commonly employed in the preservation
of the Godly. The Holy Ghost himself, the Comforter of afflicted Souls, and the
true Oil of Gladness, will then drive from our hearts all grief, and refresh us
with his Heavenly Comforts. He will not forsake us, until he has brought us to
the Head Spring of Eternal Joy and Comfort.

13. Our Lord and Saviors deliverance from death, is an Image, and an
assurance of our future deliverance which we are to expect from God's Mercy,
and Almighty Power; for as, when St. Paul says, that this High Priest in the
days of his Flesh, offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong crying,
and tears unto him, that was able to save him from Death, And was heard, in
that he feared. We are not to understand, that he was freed altogether from
death, but rather, that he had the favor granted to him of swallowing Death up
into Victory, and of triumphing over the Powers of Hell; and that through the
shame and bitterness of death, he is gone into his Glory, and into the Joys of
his Heavenly Paradise. Likewise when we pray unto God in our greatest
distresses, and deepest sorrows, when we pour into his bosom the Tears of a
sincere Repentance; he hears us from his Sanctuary, and delivers us from Death,
not by hindering us from dying, but by raising our Souls to pass through Death
into an immortal Life; from this valley of Tears, into Happiness and endless
Bliss.

14. If we will be sully persuaded that God will not withold from us the Joys
and Comforts of his Holy Spirit, and that he will make us more than Conquerors
of death, by admitting us into an Eternal Felicity; we need but cast our eyes
upon our Lord Jesus Christ; for as he who bestows much will not refuse a
little; so God who has not spared his only Son, but has delivered him, for us
all, to an ignominious and cruel Death; how shall not he with him freely give
us all things? St. Paul has taught to argue in this manner, and to gather this
consequence, necessary from God's proceedings, Romans 8.

15. When Christ our Lord gave up the Ghost upon the Cross, the vail of the
Temple was rent from the top to the bottom; Heaven was opened, and a repenting
Thief was admitted. All this happened, to teach us, that we may enter into the
Holy of Holies, by the Blood of Jesus, by the new and living way, which he has
consecrated, by the Vail, which is by his Flesh; and that this merciful Lord
has always his Arms wide open to receive us, and that he will never refuse the
Glory of Heaven, and the delights of his Paradise, to the greatest sinners that
repent, and that seek to his Eternal Mercy, by his infinite Merits.

16. The Death of this great God and Savior, is the payment of all our debts,
and the expiation of all our crimes, it is the healing of all our diseases; the
freedom from all our miseries; for it has overcome Satan, and the powers of
Hell: It is the death of an Eternal Death, it is this meritorious death that
has purchased for us Heaven, and all its Excellencies, and procured to us a
Right to God's Paradise, and to its Delights and Pleasures. In short, it is
this Death that conveys Pardise into our Souls, before we enter into Paradise,
and fills our minds with an Heavenly and Divine Peace, and an unspeakable and
glorious Joy.

17. This Cross of our Savior may be compared to the Wood which Moses cast
into the Waters of Marah; for it takes away from the natural Death of God's
Children, whatsoever is incommodious and bitter, and causes us to relish
Sweetness and Comforts that cannot be expressed; It is like the Salt which the
Prophet Elisha cast into the Waters of Jerico, to make them wholesome and
fruitful; for it causes that death it self proves our Salvation, and brings
unto us unspeakable comforts. I may also liken it to the Meal which the same
Prophet cast into the Pot, of which the Sons of the Prophets had made this
complaint, O thou man of God, there is death in the pot. It is the death of
Death, because it removes from it all deadly poison, and causes us to relish
Angelical satisfactions. I may therefore justly say of this Glorious Cross,
that it is The Tree of Knowledge, of good and evil; Because it makes known, and
understood the dreadful evils from which we are delivered, and the infinite
advantages which are procured to us (...) Christ's death. I may call it also
the Tree of Life, for every one that takes of the Fruit of this Tree with the
hand of Faith, and he that eats of it shall live for ^ver, John 6. Believing
Souls, it is that Mystical Ladder which Jacob saw in a vision, for it unites
Heaven and Earth, sinful Man with his God, Genesis 28. It pleased the Father to
make peace by the Blood of the Cross of his Son, and to reconcile all things
unto himself, whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven, Coloss. 1.
It is by the means of this Blessed Cross, that the good Angels are sent to our
assistance, and that all the Graces and Blessings of God, are procured unto us;
by this Cross we shall ascend up to God, and to his Eternal Happiness, under
the shadow of this Divine Cross, our Souls do rest, and enjoy the Peace of God
which passes all Understanding. It is like the Golden Scepter which King
Ahasuerus stretched out unto Esther, for if we touch this precious Cross with
the hand of Faith, if we embrace it with a contrite Soul, we shall obtain from
the King of Kings, not only the half part, but all his Kingdom, with all its
Delights, Honors, and Advantages.

18. Moses's Rod was changed into a Serpent, as well as the Rods of Pharaoh's
Magicians, but this Serpent devoured all the rest. Thus the death of our Lord
and Savior is accompanied with Sorrow, Fear and Anguish, but these fears
swallow up all other fears, and cause us to draw near with confidence to the
Throne of Grace; his Sorrows drive away all our Griefs, and fill us with Joy
and Eternal Comfort: his Anguish gives ease and satisfaction to our Souls; his
troubled Mind is the cause of the settlement of our Consciences; his drops of
Blood do wash down our Tears; his Groans hinder us from Sighing; and his
grievous cryings do cause us to sing with Joy, The Fetters of this Glorious
Redeemer have purchased our Freedom, and his Condemnation, our Absolution; he
has been content to drink Vinegar mingled with Gall, and to swallow the very
dregs of the Cup of God's Wrath and Justice, that he might cause us to drink of
the Rivers of his Divine Pleasures. He cried out in the violence of his Grief,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew, 27. That God might never
forsake us, and that in our greatest troubles, we might have always his
fatherly assistance, ready at hand; he has stooped his Head to raise our
hopes. In short, he is dead, that he might deliver them, who through fear of
death, were all their life time subject to a cruel and unsufferable Bondage,
Heb. 2. So that all such as tremble and are afraid at the approaches of Death,
have not yet felt the power and efficacy of the Cross of our Lord Jesus. They
trample under feet the Blood of the Son of God, and as much as in them lies,
they render the fruits and efficacy of this blessed death of no effect.

19. Consider well, Christian Souls, and imprint into your minds this Lesson;
Remember that death is never to be feared, but when it proceeds from God's
wrath, and the curse of his Law; and when our sins and offenses have supplied
it with offensive weapons, when the Devil, who seeks to devour us as a roaring
Lion, follows death at the heels; and when, at the same time, Hell opens its
infernal jaws to swallow us up: But those who have placed their Faith and Hope
in the Death and Passion of the Savior of the World, and who embrace his
Cross, are exempted from all its fears, and out of the reach of all its
poisonous Darts.

20. My beloved Souls, be not therefore frighted to see the face of the great
Judge of the World, 1 Timothy 2. Seeing that there is such an excellent Mediator
between God and Man, namely the Man, Christ Jesus, who has given himself a
Ransom for all, Romans 3. He has disarmed God's Eternal Justice, and stopped the
proceedings of his Vengeance, for God has appointed him for all Eternity, to
be a Propitiation by Faith in his Blood, John 5. The Father judges no man, but
has given all Judgment to the Son, as he is the Son of Man. There is now no
condemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ; whosoever believes in him, shall
never come into condemnation, but is passed from Death to Life, Romans 8. John 5.

21. Fear no more the Thunderbolts, and the flashes of Fire of Mount Sinai;
neither do you tremble, when you hear its horrible Thunder, Cursed is every
one, who continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law, to do
them, Deuteronomy. 28. For although Christ's Hands be nailed and fastened to the Wood,
they pluck, nevertheless, out of the Hands of God's Justice, his terrible
Thunderbolts, and the Sword of his Vengeance. The precious Blood that runs down
from the wounds of this Divine Redeemer, do quench the scorching heat of his
Eternal burning. As at the morning of our Saviors Passion, he had a care of
his Disciples, and therefore he desired those that came to take him, If you
seek me, let these go. John 18. Likewise he has now a care of all such as
believe in his name, to secure them under the shadow of his Cross. He takes
their place, and for them he stands before God's justice, saying, Seeing that
you have taken me to be their pledge, and that you have pursued me without
Mercy; seeing that I have sufficiently satisfied for all their crimes, and have
tasted for them, the most bitter and cruel death; suffer them to enjoy the
freedom that has been purchased at such a dear rate. Suffer them to pass
through death, into the enjoyment of a blessed Life, which is the price of my
Blood, and the fruit of my Victories. This merciful Redeemer has put himself,
of his own accord, in our stead, and has endured, in his own Person, all the
pains which were due to our sins; he has been struck with Moses's Rod, and
pierced through with the Darts of the Law; he has been made a Curse for us,
for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs upon a Tree, Gal. 5. But we
are not only by his means redeemed from the Curse of the Law, but we are also
blessed in him, with all manner of Heavenly Blessings; when we were without
Christ, we were Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, having no Hope, and
without God in the World; But we, who were far off, are made nigh by the Blood
of Christ; we have access with confidence by Faith in his precious Blood, so
that we may go with boldness to the Throne of Grace, to find mercy and help in
time of need, Heb. 4. Rejoice therefore Christian Souls, for you are not come
to the Mount that might be touched with hands, nor to a burning Fire, nor unto
Blackness and Darkness and Tempest, and the sound of a Trumpet, and the voice
of words, which voice, they that heard, entreated that the word should not be
spoken to them any more, but ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the City of
the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of
Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn which are written
in Heaven, and to God, the judge of all, and to the spirits of just Men made
perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel. For Abels Blood
called for vengeance against his own Brother, Heb. 12. Col. 1. but the Blood of
Christ pleads for Mercy, Pardon, and Forgiveness for them, who were his enemies
in their understandings, and wicked deeds. And if when we were enemies, we have
been reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. How much more now,
that we are reconciled, shall we be saved by his life and intercession?

22. Never fear, neither the Devil nor all the powers of Hell, for according to
God's ancient promise, The seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head,
Genesis 3. The Lord of Glory has spoiled the Principalities and Powers, he has
made a show of them, openly triumphing over them in his Cross, Colos. 2. By his
death, he has destroyed him who had the Empire of death, that is the Devil, so
that he has crushed to pieces this red Dragon that did devour whole Nations and
People, Heb. 2. Rev. 12. As it happened when the Children of Israel did look to
the brazen Serpent, which Moses set up in the wilderness, they were perfectly
cured of the bitings of the fiery Serpents; Likewise, you wretched sinners who
feel the venomous and deadly wounds of the old Serpent, cast the eyes of your
faith upon Jesus Christ crucified, and you shall be saved from death, John 3.
As when the Angel destroyed the Firstborn of Egypt, he had not the power to
meddle with the Children of Israel, who had sprinkled their doors with the
blood of the Paschal Lamb; so the Devil, who destroys the Children of this
world, has no power to touch those, whose Hearts and Consciences are washed in
the Blood of the spotless Lamb. And as Pharaoh, and all the Egyptians that
followed him, were overwhelmed and drowned in the waters of the Red Sea, Heb.
10. which served as a passage to the Children of Israel, to their promised
Land: Thus Satan and all his wicked Spirits are, as it were swallowed up in
this precious Sea of Christ's Blood, which opens unto us a way to the celestial
Canaan. Rejoice you Heavens, and you that dwell in them, for the accuser of our
Brethren is cast out, who accused them day and night before God, but they have
overcome him by the Blood of the Lamb, 1 Pet. 1. Jam. 5. Christian Souls,
resist the Devil, and he will fly from you; If he goes about as a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour, be not troubled at his fury, nor at his infernal
power, for he is tied to a Chain, that he cannot stretch nor break; He has
been overcome by the Lion of the Tribe of Juda. Take therefore the shield of
Faith, that you may be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the Devil, Rev. 6.
and speak to him with an undaunted Soul; Get thee behind me Satan, for thou
have no part in me, I belong to the Lord Jesus, who has paid my ransom, who
has redeemed me with his Blood, and sealed me with his Spirit. The Gates of
Hell have no power upon those that are built upon the Rock of Eternity, Matthew.
16.

23. Let not your sins cast you into the Abyss of despair, nor drive you from
the Anchor of your Hope; for God has so loved the World, that he has given
his only Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life; they that are whole have no need of the Physician, but they
that are sick, John 3. Our Savior is not come to call the Just to Repentance;
such as are puffed up with a vain conceit of their own Righteousness, but sinners
who acknowledge their faults and are sorry for them. The sacred Arms of your
Redeemer that were stretched wide open upon the Cross, are yet stretched wide
open to receive us; and from the highest Heavens where he dwells, he causes
these comfortable words to be heard, Come unto me all ye that travel and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Matthew. 11. This merciful Lord is come
to seek for the lost Sheep, to save such as were perished, and to redeem his
people from their sins. As by one Man Sin came into the World, and by Sin
Death; thus death is come upon all Men, for they have all sinned; likewise by
the obedience of one, we are become conquerors over death, Romans 5. And we have
obtained the gift of Righteousness and Immortality; it is the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the World, and that has made an atonement for all our
iniquitites, John 1. For as the Ram that was caught by the Horns in a Thicket
was offered up unto God, as a burnt-offering, instead of Isaac, Ephesians. 5. Thus
the true Lamb of God has been offered up unto God upon the Cross for us as a
Burnt-Sacrifice, well-pleasing unto him, he has born our iniquities in his
Body upon the Tree, and by his stripes we are healed, Isai. 53. He has born
our griefs, and carried our sorrows, the chastisements of our peace was upon
him. As Aaron did put upon the live Goat Hazazel, all the sins of the People
Lev. 16. God has made him who knows no sin, to be made sin for us, that we
might become the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. Acts 10. Whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins in his Name. Therefore rather
than to play the desperate, as Cain, Achitophel, and Judas, let us cry out with
King David, O blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin
is covered. O blessed is he unto whom the Lord imputes no sin, Psalm. 31. Or
let us burst out into St. Paul's language, Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of God's Elect? it is God that justifies. Who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that dyed, Romans 8. Let us therefore embrace this crucified Jesus, and
say with the Blessed Virgin, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit has
rejoiced in God my Savior. Or with the Glorified Spirits of Heaven, To him
that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, be Glory and
Strength for ever and ever, Amen.

24. Christian Souls, if the vast number of your sins come into your
remembrance, consider that it is not said, that the Blood of Christ cleanses
us only from a certain number of sins, but, That if we confess our sins, he is
Faithful and Just, that is, True and Merciful, to forgive us our sins; and that
the Blood of Jesus Christ, cleanses us from all sins. Let them be never so
numerous, drown them all as so many hellish Monsters, in the blood of thy
Savior, take hold of this Divine Jesus, with the Arms of Faith and Repentance;
wrap your selves up in his Winding sheet, repose your selves upon his Cross,
and rest secure in the shadow of his Almighty intercession.

25. But if the grievousness of your crimes fright you, take hold at the same
time of the Horns of this mystical Altar, and all the powers of Hell, will not
be able to pluck you thence. Comfort thy self, sinful Soul, for there cannot be
a spot so black, nor so deep, but the Blood of Christ is able to wash it clean
away: There is no crime so grievous and horrid, but the Sacrifice of this Lamb
without spot, that takes away the fins of the world, can make an atonement for
it. Let thy sins be never so great, they have their limits, but thy Redeemers
Merits are without limits, and the efficacy of his sufferings continues for
ever. To assure thee of this truth, and to encourage thee, he was pleased, upon
the Cross, to discover the Riches of his Mercy upon a wretched Robber, who
suffered then the hands of Justice for his crimes: as soon as he saw him moved
with Repentance, he changed his infamous and painful Cross into a Paradise of
Glory and Happiness, and filled his Soul with the sweetest Comforts of his Holy
Spirit. This merciful Redeemer is the same yesterday, and to day, and shall be
the same for ever. Therefore be never so foul and abominable a sinner, if thou
do groan under the burden of thy sins, and art moved with contrition, Heb.
13. thou ought not to cast off thy hopes, and to be discouraged; draw near
with humility to thy Saviors Cross, and wash thy self in the Blood that comes
out of his veins. All the diseased persons that entered into the pool of
Bethesda, were healed of all manner of distempers, Joh. 5. Likewise all
spiritual diseases are cured in this Divine Pool, of all their griefs; it is
not necessary to stay till a good Angel from Heaven come to move the Waters,
for Christ's Blood is always fresh, living, and of the same Virtue and
Efficacy; we need not fear that others should step down before us, or that the
throng should hinder us, for a thousand worlds may be all healed at the same
instant; neither do ye pretend that there is no body to cast you into this
mystical Pool, for our Lord will never refuse to admit you when you shall have
been Bedrid eight and thirty years, as the poor man that was troubled with the
Palsy: and when you shall be nailed to a Cross, as the good Thief, you may
nevertheless dip your selves into this Divine Pool, and feel its saving and
healing Virtue. It does not only wash away the filth, and heal all thy
diseases, but it gives also life to the Dead, and renders the living immortal:
Whosoever thou art that dippest thy self in this precious Blood, thou may
say with the Apostle St. Paul, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, of whom I
am the chief, 1 Timothy 1. Howbeit I have obtained Mercy, the Lord will deliver me
from all wicked work, and will preserve me to his Heavenly Kingdom, to him be
Glory for ever and ever, Amen. 1 Timothy 7.

26. You understand therefore very well, believing Souls, that you have no
cause to fear Death, seeing that all its Darts have been broken to pieces, all
its Armor has been torn, and that its spoils appear so visibly upon Christ's
Cross. You may see the Claws of this old Lion, the paw of this devouring Bear,
the Teeth and Poison of this infernal Serpent, and the Head of this prodigious
Dragon; you may see death swallowed up into victory, and the Prince of Life
leading it in triumph: follow then the Glorious Chariot of this noble
Conqueror, singing with the Apostle. O death! where is thy Victory? O Grave!
where is thy Sting? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
Law, but blessed be God who has given us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.

27. Therefore when God shall draw near to you, covered with the vail of Death,
be not terrified; seek not to run from him, and to hide your selves from his
all-seeing Eyes, unto whom darkness is as the noonday, Genesis 3. Although you are
by nature poor, wretched, blind and naked, you have more substantial Garments
than Fig leaves, for you have the leaves of the Tree of Life, that are designed
for the salvation of the Gentiles, Revel. 22. The Leaves that shall never fade,
shall cover all your nakedness, and adorn your immortal Souls; for it is the
Eternal Righteousness, the most accomplished Righteousness of our Lord Jesus,
who has been made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption, Dan. 19. It is Jesus Christ himself who is named The Lord our
Righteousness. It is the precious Garment of Salvation, the Glorious Cloak of
Righteousness mentioned by the Prophet, Is. 61. It is the Wedding Garment
whitened in the Blood of the Lamb, without spot, and the fine and bright Linen
which are the Righteousness of the Saints, Ezekiel. 16. In short, it is a Garment
which will not only cover and adorn you, but it will also heal all your
infirmities, and make you become immortal. Rev. 7.

28. If you come before your Heavenly Father with this perfumed clothing of
your Elder Brother Jesus Christ, Genesis 27. or rather, if you be clothed with
him as with a Garment, Romans 1. You shall not only obtain the best and most
advantageous Blessing, but you shall enter into the possession of the
uncorruptible Inheritance, prepared for you from the beginning of the World.
For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is Eternal life, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 6.

A Prayer and Meditation for a Christian, who strengthens himself against the
fears of Death, by meditating upon the Death and Passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ.
O Merciful Savior! who have clothed thy self with our mortal Flesh, that
thou might offer it up as a Sacriffce to God; succor me in my weakness, and
increase the Faith and Hope which thou have begun in my Soul. I see Death
threatening to destroy me, and ready with its jaws open to devour me. But Lord,
I come to cast my self before thy Blessed Cross, I take hold of the Horns of
this Altar, I dip my self in thy Blood, I put on the Robes of thy
Righteousness, and wrap my self up in thy Death. O Holy Redeemer! I know that
thou have been distressed, and grievously perplexed at the approaches of Death;
and that thine Agony has been so bitter, that thou have sweated drops of
Blood, and the Holy Angels have come down to comfort thee; whereas thy Servants
the Martyrs have gone to death, and their sufferings, with expressions of Joy,
as to a most splendid Banquet, or to a Triumph. Thou have prayed with strong
Crying and Tears to be delivered from death, and that this Cup might pass away,
so that thou might never taste of its bitterness; But Lord! thy death was not
as mine, and as that of thy blessed Martyrs. Thy death was an atonement for the
sins of the whole World; whereas our death is not intended as a satisfaction to
God's justice, but rather to render us capable of receiving the blessed Fruits
of his Eternal Compassions. Thou did bear the strokes of God's Justice, and
endure the fierceness of his wrath, enflamed against the sins which thou have
loaded on thy self: But we, instead of this consuming Fire, which thou have
quenched with thy precious Blood: we perceive the flames of Love, instead of
the Hand of thy justice; we see thy Arms wide open to receive us into Eternal
Happiness. Death, good Lord! was armed with our sins and iniquities, and with
all that is dreadful in Hell; but I see that all the Armor of Death are hung
upon thy Cross; they are the Trophies, and everlasting marks of thy Glorious
Victory. Thou have felt, not only the most sensible Darts of Death, but also
the most terrible Thunderbolts, and fearful Curses of the Law. Thou have
secured us from all that violence; thou have redeemed us from the dreadful
Curses. When thou wast made a Curse for us, thou had not only to encounter
with death, but also to destroy him, who had the Empire of Death, and to break
in pieces the Gates of Hell. Thou did spoil Principalities and Powers,
showing them openly, and triumphing of them in thy Cross. O wonderful Savior!
How mavelous are thy Works, and worthy of the continual admiration of Men and
Angels? Thou have drunk up the very dregs of the Cup of God's fury, that we
might never taste of it, and thou have taken upon thee all the punishment that
our sins and offenses had deserved, that we might never feel them. Thy grievous
pangs alleviate my torments; thy bruises and wounds are my health and cure; thy
fears do comfort and settle my mind, and thy distressed Soul does fill mine
full of joy and comfort; thy crying does appease the troubles of my Conscience,
and thy drops of Blood do wash down my Tears; thine affliction comforts me, thy
sorrow is my joy, and thy bitterness is my sweetness; thy death is my victory,
and thy Cross is my Triumph; I shall no longer apprehend to dye, seeing thou
did procure unto me Life and Immortality. O Glorious and Merciful Lord, the
Kingdom of Heaven belongs unto thee by a twofold Right; it belongs to thee,
because thou art the only Son of God, and the Heir of all things; it belongs to
thee also, because thou have purchased it with the infinite Merits of thy
Sufferings; the first is sufficient for thee, the second thou have resigned
unto me, that I might one day enjoy this Heavenly Kingdom, as the fruits of thy
Death, and the price of thy Blood. I have hoped in thee Lord, I shall never be
confounded; I know that nothing impure or defiled shall enter into thine Holy
Jerusalem, but thy Blood shall wash me from all my sins, and make me as white
as Snow. O Glorious Lord! O thou that art wonderful! how precious is thy death
unto me? It is the payment of all my debts, the atonement of all my crimes, and
the ransom of the whole World; It is our peace with God, our reunion with
Heaven, and our reconciliation with the Blessed Angels of Light; It is the
death of Death it self, and the ruin of Hell. In short, it has not only drawn
me out of an Abyss of Misery, freed me from Eternal Damnation, and the
infinite torments of the bottomless Pit, but it has purchased for me Heaven,
with all its Glory and Paradise, with its unspeakable Delights. David was much
admired for making use of Goliath 's Sword, to cut off his Head; but who will
admire and wonder at thee, O victorious Son of David, seeing thou have
swallowed up Death into Victory by thine own death? Sampson was wondered at
because he killed a few Enemies by his death; but who will not wonder at thee,
O Son of Righteousness, who by thy death have destroyed all the enemies of our
Salvation, and given to death itself, its death's wound? Jacob slept peaceably
at the bottom of the mysterious Ladder, which reached from the Earth up to
Heaven; But, O my Lord God, I shall lay my self down, and find more peace and
quiet at the bottom of thy blessed Cross; seeing that by its means I have
access to the Father, unto whom thou have reconciled me, seeing that I may with
boldness go to the Throne of Grace, to obtain Mercy and Help in time of need.
Lord Jesus, I discover in thy Cross, not only the source of my sweetest
Comforts, of my greatest Joys, and of my noblest expectations; but I learn also
there, how to dye well, and I perceive all the Virtues in their greatest
perfection, that should accompany my Soul at its Egress out of this Body. O
Lord! Who art Perfection it self, and who have left me such a notable Example,
that I might imitate it, give me Grace to express to all my Relations, that
cordial and holy affection, and that tenderness which I see in thee; give me
Grace to forgive with all mine Heart mine Enemies, that I may pray God for them
who have persecuted me with fury. Give me Grace in my greatest pains, to follow
the example of thy sweet Nature, of thy Goodness, of thy Patience and noble
Resolution. Inflame my Soul with an earnest Zeal for thy Glory, and with such a
love, as caused thee to offer thy self up in Sacrifice to God. Here I am O God,
ready to perform thy Will; my Soul is none of mine, but thine, who art its
faithful Creator, and its merciful Savior. Seeing that thou have paid its
Ransom, that thou have washed and cleansed it in thy Blood, clothed it with
thy Righteousness, and put it in a capacity of entering into thine Heavenly
Sanctuary, and of appearing before the Father of Lights, do with it as it shall
seem good unto thee. O sweet Jesus, who have been pleased to Dye and be
Crucified for me wretched Sinner, give me that Grace that I may for ever live
and reign with thee, and that I may at every instant be ready to say with all
my heart, I commend into thine hands my Spirit, for thou have redeemed it, thou
who art the strong and faithful God. Amen.

CHAP. 16.
The Fourth Consolation against the Fears of Death, is to Meditate often upon
our Lord Jesus Christ, as he did lie in his Tomb.

MAn does naturally abhor and hate the sight of Graves, some there are, that
cannot pass by a Church yard, without expressing a distaste and secret
displeasure; not only such as make their abode in glorious Palaces and stately
Dwellings, but also such as reside in poor Huts, or in pitiful Cabins, such as
are shut up in black Dungeons, or exposed to the injury of the weather, who
have no other covering then the Sky, can ever think upon Death without fear,
when they are to think, that this Body must go into the Bowels of the Earth,
and lie down in a stinking and noisome Grave.

If ye will banish from your Minds this dangerous apprehension, and these
needless fears, we must consider seriously, with a religious application of our
minds, That we must never abhor the Earth, because our Bodies have been made of
Earth, it has been as it were the Mother that brings us forth.

We must also consider, that it is the order of nature, that all composed
Bodies should return at their dissolution, every part to its first principle;
therefore as the Soul mounts up to its first source, and returns to God that
gave it; likewise it is no wonder, if the Body returns to Dust, because it
proceeds from Dust, and God has pronounced a just Sentence in the earthly
Paradise, which shall never be revoked, dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return, Genesis 3.

Nicodemus inquired of our Lord Jesus Christ, How can a Man be born when he is
old? can he enter the second time into his Mothers Womb and be born, John 3.
This ridiculous and unprobable conceit, is proved in a manner to be true in
this occasion, for we must enter again into the Womb of the Earth our common
Mother, that we might be Born again, and pass into another Life.

It is not amiss to consider often, the notable instances, and excellent
representations of our Death, which St. Paul mentions in the 15 Chap. of the
first Epistle to the Corinth. for our Bodies are as the Seed which is cast into
the Earth, that it might bring forth. O fool, that which thou sowest is not
quickened except it dye. It cannot flourish until it rots. The Students of
Nature inform us, that the generation of one thing is the corruption of
another. In this occasion we may say, that the corruption and dissolution of
this wretched Body, is the means and way that leads to a more glorious
Generation. You that weep for the decease of your Friends and Kindred, when you
see them laid in their Graves, remember what David says, They that sow in
tears, shall reap with songs of Joy, Psalm 126.

Consider that Death is the way of all flesh, and the Grave is the last retreat
which God has appointed for all living; so that if we be loath to enter into
the Tomb, we must desire Almighty God to grant us a Lodging by our selves, to
change the common course of nature, or to create for us another World.

Now the Grave is not only the general Rendezvous of all Mankind, but it is a
Couch where they rest after this laborious and painful race; therefore when the
Prophet Isaiah speaks of the Death of good Men, he says, They enter into
peace, they rest in their Beds, Is. 57. For when he looks to the blessed estate
of their Souls, he tells us, that they are entered into that great and eternal
Peace that raigns in Heaven, but when he casts an eye upon their Bodies, he
says, that they rest in their Beds. For this cause the places appointed to
bury the Dead, are named sleeping places, by the Greeks, to teach us that there
they are fallen asleep, in expectation of the great Morn, when God shall send
to awaken them, with the sound of the Archangels Trumpet.

Therefore when Jacob was ready to give up the Ghost, he commanded his Son
Joseph not to bury him in Egypt, that he might sleep with his Fathers, Genesis 47.
Likewise Job speaks in the same manner, I shall sleep in the Dust of the Earth,
Job. 7. And God held this Language unto Moses, Thou art going to sleep with thy
Fathers, Deuteronomy. 31. and to David, when thy days be fulfilled, thou shall sleep
with thy Fathers, 2 Samuel 7. And when the Prophet Daniel speaks of such as were
deceased since the Creation of the World, he says, They sleep in the dust of
the Earth, Dan. 12.

Especially take notice, Christian Souls, that when God spoke to Moset from the
midst of the burning bush, he told him, I am the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Exodus 4. they had been dead many Ages before,
nevertheless, God names himself their God, Now God is not the God of the Dead
but of the Living, Mat. 22. Those holy Men were not Dead, in regard of their
Souls, because they were Immortal, and God had admitted them into Eternal
Bliss. Their Bodies also, to speak properly, were not Dead, but slept in their
Graves, as our S^viour said of Jairus's Daughter, The Damsel is not Dead but
Sleeps, Mat. 9. and of Lazarus, Lazarus our friend Sleeps, John 11.
Moreover, we may justly ^^y, that the Estate of our Bodies in the Grave, is
better and more pleasant then our daily sleep; for when we rest in our Beds, we
be often disturbed in our fancy; we labor and sweat, and the richest and most
magnificent Couches, are not free from this evil; whereas in our Graves, our
Bodies are at rest, and secure from all sense of pain, so that they enjoy a
perfect Sleep, and a rest without disturbance.

The greatest Princes, and the proudest Monarchs, are constrained to take up
their Lodging, one after another; here in this House, which God has prepared
for all living, and to repose themselves in that Couch, which is to receive all
the Sons of Adam. When the Sacred History gives an Account of the Kings of
Judea, and of Israel, it adds, at the end of their Life, He slept with his
Fathers. Let us be never so wretched, poor, and miserable, we shall all be
entertained in this dwelling of Kings, and lay our selves down upon their Beds;
therefore when Job, through the grieveousness of his pain complained, because
he had not Dyed immediately after his Birth, he says, for now should I have
lain still and been quiet, I should have slept then, had I been at rest with
Kings and Counselors of the Earth, which built desolate places for themselves,
or with Princes that had Gold, who filled their Houses with Silver.

It is in this House, and upon this Couch, that the Patriarcks, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, and generally all the Faithful do rest, who
have lived in all the Ages of the World as it is Recorded of St. Stephen, that
when he had commended his Soul into the hands of the Lord Jesus, that he fell
asleep, Acts 7. Therefore when St. Paul reproves the Cori^thians, and acquaints
them that God had punished them with diverse Diseases and Death, because they
had profaned the Lords Supper, he tells them, For this cause many are feeble
and sick amongst you, and many sleep. And when he speaks of all those that were
dead in the profession of Christ's Religion, he says, they sleep in Jesus, and
he names them, they that sleep. Now we are not better and nobler then the
Saints of Paradise, to expect that our Bodies should receive a better and more
favorable entertainment then they.

In short, there is nothing more able to remove from our fancy, that horror of
our Graves, then the consideration of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who is
entered into the Earth as well as other Men, and has laid himself down there.
He has Sanctified and perfumed that place with his Divine Presence; he has
made it the object of our desires, and the cause of our glory; for there is no
Subject but judges it an honor to lodge in his Princes Chamber, and to lay
down and sleep upon the Bed, where he has taken his rest, although he has
remained there but a moment, or an hour. O glorious Tomb, where Death and Life,
Disgrace and Glory are lodged together, and where the Prince of Life, the
Author of all Honor and Happiness did rest himself.

Christians, who desire to banish from your Souls all fears of Death, and
apprehensions of your Graves, look upon your Sepulchers in the same manner, as
if you should see there Jesus Christ the King of Glory, the Prince of your
Salvation yet remaining asleep. When old Jacob heard the mistaken news, of the
Death of his Son Joseph, he was overcome with a violent grief, so that he cried
out, I shall go down with Sorrow to my Son into the Grave. But the certain news
of the Death and Burial of our true Joseph, will fill us full of unspeakable
comforts; and will cause us to speak in another manner, I shall go down to my
Father into the Sepulcher with Joy. The Prophet Elias raised to Life a Child,
which laid in his Chamber upon his Bed; when he stretched himself upon it, the
Soul that was departed came again; And Elisha raised another in the same
manner, by applying his Mouth to the Child's, his Hands and Eyes to the little
Infants. But believing Soul, God works for thee in this occasion, a far more
wonderful Miracle, for our Resurrection and Life, proceed from the Death and
Burial of our great Prophet. If we go into this holy Tomb, if we lay our selves
down upon this precious Body, if we embrace it with a true and living Faith,
and a serious Repentance, he will quicken us again, and cause us to become
Immortal, for he has been pleased to enter into the estate of the dead, with
an intent to procure unto us, a blessed and a glorious Immortality.

A Prayer and Meditation for a Christian, who strengthens himself against the
horrible aspect of the Grave, by looking upon our Lord Jesus Christ stretched
out in his Tomb.
O Wonderful Mediator, between God and Man! Thou art God Immortal, and yet have
vouchsafed to take upon thee our Mortal Nature, and to Dye for me miserable
Sinner, and to remain for a time in the estate of the Dead, that thou might
procure unto me a blessed Immortality. Give me Grace to Meditate as I ought,
upon thy Sacred Body, wrapped up in a winding sheet, and laid in the Earth, for
by this means, O sweet Jesus, I shall be brought not to abhor the Grave, I
shall look with a steadfast and settled countenance on the Grave digging, into
which I must enter, when thou shall appoint it, for the Servant is not greater
then his Master. It belongs not to the Creature, to lift it self up above the
Creator; seeing that I expect to share in thy Glory and Exaltation; it is but
just and reasonable, that I take some part in thy Disgraces and Abasement. My
reason assisted by thine holy Spirit, teaches me that I must be content to be
wrapped up in thy Darkness, and remain with thee in the valey of the Shadow of
Death; seeing that I hope to be clothed one day with Light, and Crowned with
an eternal Life. I must not only look upon the Grave without Fear. but I shall
consider it with Joy, seeing that thou have honored it with thine holy
presence, and perfumed it with thy Divine and celestial perfumes. I shall
behold it in the same manner, as if thou did yet lie down in it, as if I were
to keep thee company there my Lord and my God. A dead, returned to Life again,
when he did but touch the Bones of thy Prophet; but I do not only touch the
Prince of Prophets, but embrase thee with Faith, as thou art dead for my Sins,
and as resting in thy Grave for my Salvation. Thou shall therefore make me
sensible of thy Divine Virtue, put in me the Seeds of Immortality, and raise my
hopes up to Heaven. Already my Soul has a share in the first Resurrection, and
one day this crazy Body shall return to newness of life. If my Resurrection be
not so quick and speedy, as that of the Dead raised to Life by the Prophet; It
shall be far more glorious and lasting, that I may bless thee with all thy
Saints, and praise thee for ever, with thine Inheritance in Heaven. Amen.

CHAP. 17.
The Fifth Consolation against the Fears of Death, is to Meditate upon the
Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ.

AS there is nothing more grieveous and unsufferable, than to behold a proud
and insulting Enemy, who is always victorious, and whom none can overcome in
his insolent and braving humor; likewise, there is nothing more pleasant and
comfortable, then to see such a pride cast down, and to overcome such an Enemy.
Therefore the Children of Israel, who had long groaned under the cruel tyranny
of Pharaoh, sung with Joy a Song of Triumph and Thanksgiving, when God
destroyed that wretched Tyrant, and Buried him and his Army in the waves of the
Red Sea. For this cause, when the Red Dragon, the ancient Serpent, called the
Devil and Satan, Exodus 15. who seduceth whole Nations, was overcome, and cast
down from Heaven to the Earth; There were Songs of Joy and Gladness heard in
Heaven, Revel, 12. Now is come Salvation and Strength, and the Kingdom of our
God, and the Power of his Christ, for the Accuser of our Brethren is cast down,
which accused them before our God day and night, therefore rejoice ye Heavens,
and ye that dwell in them.

From hence let us conclude, Christian Souls, as it was a grievous Affliction,
and a sensible Grief, to behold Death tyrannising over all the World, and
shutting up in its Dungeons, Kings and Monarchs, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, and generally all the Children of Adam, of what condition or
degree soever; likewise it is a great comfort, and unspeakable joy to us, to
behold this cruel and proud Enemy brought down, overcome, and disarmed, to see
our Lord Jesus Christ marching out of Deaths fortifications, laden with its
Spoils; rejoice therefore ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them, for the
Murderer of our Brethren, is swallowed up into Victory.

We who are the Members of this great Conqueror, have a share in his Honor and
Glory, in his Person, we are Conquerors of Death, so that we may say with the
Apostle, That God has quickened us together, and raised us up with him.

This Prince of Life, has not only loosened all the bands of Death, and broken
to pieces all its chains, but he has led away Death in Triumph, and made it
subject to his Celestial Empire. He has an absolute power over Death, as he
himself declares in these words, I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I
am alive for evermore, Amen, and have the Keys of Hell and of Death.

For it stands with reason, that if this invincible Lord, when he was in the
Prison of Death, commanded over Death itself; if he broke in pieces its Iron
bars, and its Brazen gates; if he caused the Dead to go out, and led them into
the Holy City, now that he is out of the Grave a victorious Conqueror, he must
needs command with an uncontrolable power, this dreadful Enemy which he has
already overcome, and brought under by his Almighty Hand.

O Death! fret and fume out thy rage and fury, I see that thou art tied as a
Prisoner, to the Triumphing Chariot of Jesus Christ my Savior, and I am
certain, that thou can do nothing without leave, and that thou can not go a
step, unless he lengthens thy Chain.

As Joshua, when he had overcome the Kings of Canaan, called for his Captains,
and spoke to them in this manner, Come near and put your feet upon the necks of
these Kings, fear not, nor be dismayed; be strong and of good courage; Likewise
we may imagine, believing Souls, that our Divine Joshua, now that he has
conquered Death, calls to us from Heaven, tread upon this wretched Death with
boldness, fear not, nor be dismayed.

The Children of Israel that trembled at the threatenings of Goliath, were freed
from all apprehensions, when they saw him fall with a Stone from David's sling,
so that the most timorous, could have freely put their feet upon his Neck. And
shall not you Christians, banish from your Hearts all fears and dread of Death,
now that you see that it is cast down at the feet of our true David, the great
Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, for although it opens its Jaws, and that it
fomes out flames of Fire, it has nevertheless received the Stroke of Death,
and is ready to give up the last gasp.

And as the servant of Jonathan the Son of Saul, dispatched and killed those
whom his Master had cast down; Thus we need but pursue the glorious Victories
of the Son of the King of Kings; or rather, we need but gather up the pleasant
Fruits of his Conquests, for this Prince of Life that has overcome Death for
us, offers to overcome it also in us, with the Weapons with which he arms us.
In short, to speak properly, there can be no Death for such as are Incorporated
in Jesus Christ, by a true and lively Faith, for he that lives and believes in
him, shall never Dye, and he that believes in him, though he were dead, yet
shall he live, Joh. 11.

A Prayer and Meditation for the believing Soul, that strengthens it self
against the Fears of Death, by a Meditation upon the Resurrection of our Lord
Jesus Christ.
LOrd Jesus who have been fully declared to be the Son of God, with power by
thy Resurrection from the Dead, and who live for ever and ever, strengthen me
in my weakness, comfort me in my Sorrows, and drive from my Soul all Fears and
apprehensions of Death. O wonderful Savior! I need no longer fear this cruel
and proud enemy, for thou have broken all its fetters and chains, and have
overcome Death, and the Grave. O glorious and triumphing Monarch, what cause
have I to dread a discomfited and disarmed Enemy, whom I see lying under thy
feet, and chained to thy Triumphing Chariot; I need but follow the sacred
Footsteps of thy Victories, and gather its excellent Fruits. If thou have been
able to deal with Death, when thou wast shut up in a Dungeon; if thou did
then, bring down its pride, and carry away its prisoners; what may not I
expect, from thy Victorious and Almighty Arm, now that thou have in hand, the
Keys of Hell and of Death. O most mighty and merciful Lord! Thou have not only
overcome Death for me, but thou will also overcome it by me, who am thy Child,
and the Sheep of thy pasture, whereof thou have paid the Ransom. Thou art not
only raised from the Dead, but thou art also the Resurrection and the Life.
Thou the Prince of Life, and the Lord of Glory and Immortality, so that he that
lives and believes in thee, shall never Dye, and whosoever believes in thee,
though he were Dead, yet shall he live. Sampson was worthily admired when he
slept until midnight, rose up and carried away the Gates of Gaza upon his
Shoulders, up to an high Mountain, but who would not admire thee O invincible
Nazarite! who having slept until the third day in the bowels of the Earth,
did rise again by thy Divine Virtue, carry away the Gates of Hell, and made
them to become the Gates of Heaven, and the entrance into thy celestial
Paradise. Let me Dye, seeing that my Redeemer lives, and seeing that he
intends to introduce me into an happy Life, purchased for me with his most
precious Blood, and secured unto me by his glorious resurrection. Amen.

CHAP. 18.
The Sixth Consolation against the Fears of Death, is the Ascension of Jesus
Christ into Heaven, and his sitting at the Right Hand of God.

IT is a great joy and comfort indeed, to behold a cruel and a proud Enemy
overcome and disarmed, and our selves freed, by that means, from the heavy yoke
of his unsufferable Tyranny; but our joy would be turned into grief, and our
comfort into sadness, if we did but perceive at the same time the Author of our
Freedom, choked with his own Blood, and breathing out the last gasp, at the
moment of his Victory, that our Sanctification might be entire, and our joy
perfect; such a Friend to our welfare, should continue afterward alive, and
receive the Honors and Rewards due to him, for such an expression of his Valor
and Kindness to us. There is no Enemy more cruel and more terrible, then Death,
we have beheld it disarmed upon the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
perfectly vanquished and subdued by his glorious Resurrection. But if with the
eye of our Faith, we look a little higher, to behold the glorious Ascension of
our Divine Savior, we shall see this same Death bound to his Triumphing
Chariot, and we shall see this glorious Redeemer exalted above the highest
Heavens, and sitting gloriously at the Right hand of God; we shall see him
invested in an almighty Power, worshipped by all the Creatures; we shall see
him commanding, not only the Angels of Light, and the celestial Spirits that
are about his Magnificent Throne, but commanding also over this World, over
Death, the Devils, and Hell. Because he has been obedient unto Death, yea, to
the ignominious Death of the Cross, God has highly exalted him, and given him
a Name, which is above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus, every knee should
bow, of things in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth, Phil. 4. and that
every Tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God
the Father.

Every Soldier does not always bear a part in the Triumph of their General,
and all the Subjects do not taste of their Princes happiness, but as we are the
Brethren of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Members of his Mistical Body, we
have a share in his Triumph, and in the glory of his Empire, therefore the
Apostle St. Paul informs us, that our Life, that is to say, our glory and
eternal Felicity is hid with Christ in God: in another place, he tells us, in
express words, That God who is rich in Mercy, has made us sit in Heavenly
places with Jesus Christ.

This glorious Savior is gone to take possession of the Kingdom of Heaven, not
only for himself, but also in our names, and for us, therefore he informs the
Holy Apostles, and all true believers, That in his Fathers House there are many
Mansions, I am going to prepare a place there for you. In the same manner he
speaks in that admirable Prayer, in the which he consecrates himself to God,
for the great Work of our Redemption, Father I will that they also whom thou
have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou
have given me. For the same reason, St. Paul tells us, in his Epistle to the
Hebrews, for our comfort, Heb. 6. that Christ is gone into Heaven as our
forerunner.

The High Priest of the Jews did enter into the earthly Sanctuary, to present
himself before God for the people, Heb. 9. Thus our Lord Jesus Christ is gone
into the Heavenly Sanctuary, to appear for us in the presence of God. The High
Priest of the Jews, did bear upon his Breast and Shoulders, the Names of the 12
Tribes of Israel, but Jesus Christ has graven us upon his Heart, according to
the Prayer of the Spouse in the Canticles, Can. 8. Set me as a Seal upon thine
Heart, as a Seal upon thine Arm, for Love is strong as Death. The High Priest
of the Jews, did cast off the Names of the Twelve Tribes with his Robes; But
neither Death nor Life, nor things present, nor things to come, shall ever
separate us from the love of God in Jesus Christ, Romans 8.

The Roy^^ Diadem that was put upon Esthers Head, never c^^sed her to forget
her People and Parentage, she was m^g^^^ly grieved for her Hamans Conspiray,
and the Decree which he had caused King Ahasuerus to Sign and (...) with his
Signet. I may likewise say, that the Glory unto which our Lord Jesus Christ is
now raised, can never make him forget the People that he has redeemed with his
Blood. He is not unmindful of Satan's plots, nor of the Sentence of Doom
pronounced against us, by the great Monarch of the World, and confirmed with
his great Seal. His glorious Head may be Crowned with the R^inbow, but his
merciful Heart is inflamed with Love for us. He thinks it no disgrace, to
acknowledge us for his Brethren, and to pray God for us upon his glorious
Throne, where thousand millions wait upon him, and ten thousand thousands
Worship him. He is able to Save, to the full, all such as draw near to God
through him, for he lives always to intercede for us. If the Father has always
granted him his Request; when he was in his greatest abasement, can we imagine,
that his Intercession will be fruitless now, that he is ascended up to the
highest Glory?

From the Chariot of his Triumph he beholds all our Encounters, and our
struglings with Death, he sees all the Enemies that Assault us, and all the
Dangers unto which we are exposed. He is acquainted with the deep Malice and
the crafty Designs of the Enemies of our Salvation. He perceives all the Darts
that they let fly against us; therefore he covers us with his Shield, and will
not suffer us to yield to Temptation. He fulfills his Virtue in our
Infirmities, and makes us more then Conquerors; he has an eye always upon his
Flock, he holds his Sheep all in his hand, and none is able to pluck them from
thence.

When he was upon Earth in his Agony, at this word that dropped out of his Mouth,
I am he, John 10. his Enemie^ fell backward, and when he was in Deaths Prison,
he constrained it to obey him, and shall he not now that he is exalted up to
the highest Heavens, in the glory of his Triumph, have the same power and
command over Death, the World, and Hell? When he walked upon the Waters, he
cried to his Apostles, It is I, be not afraid, John 6. how much rather may he
speak unto us in this manner, now that he sits upon the Throne that can never
be moved. Christian Soul, who trembles at the approaches of Death, imagine that
the Lord Jesus Crowned with Glory, calls to thee from Heaven, fear not, for I
call thee, and hold out unto thee my Arms, I that am thy Savior and Redeemer,
who have satisfied for all thy sins with my Blood, and who have redeemed thee
from the Curse of the Law and eternal Damnation. I have disarmed Gods Justice,
vanquished Hell, broken the Serpents Head, and swallowed up Death into Victory.
I have purchased for thee the Glories of Heaven, and the Delights of Paradise.
I have trampled upon the World, and all its powers. I am Worshipped by all the
Church triumphing in Heaven, and by Legions of holy Angels that fly about my
Throne. I will therefore send some of them to guard thee, and when thou shall
leave the Body where thou live as a Sttranger, they shall bring up thy Soul
into this glorious abode of Immortality, whether I am come to prepare a place
for thee.

Without doubt, if the Author of our hope is fixed in the veil that is in
Heaven, where Jesus Christ is gone in as our forerunner, we shall not apprehend
the most contrary and boisterous storms raised against us, by the Prince of the
powers of the Air, who works with efficacy in the Children of Rebellion; we
shall tred under foot all the billows of this troublesome Sea, and through
these swelling waves, we shall march safe to our Divine Jesus. If at any time
we begin to sink, and that our Soul is frighted, this almighty Lord, who has
not only delivered himself, but is the Savior and Deliverer of his Church,
will speak unto us, as to his Apostle, O Man of little Faith why did thou
doubt, know thou not that I command the Winds, that I can still the Waves,
and drive from thee the Tempest? know thou not that I have in my hands, the
Keys of Hell and of Death? When a person is to go to a place of rest and
happiness, and that he cannot pass to it, but through a painful and thorny
passage, he marches with resolution and courage, when a friend of his is gone
before, and stretches out unto him his hand to help him. Now it is not
possible to attain to the glories of Heaven, and the joys of Paradise, but
through the passage of Death, a passage very uneasy and grievous to our
present seeming; But Jesus Christ who loves us with an eternal Love, has gone
through this passage before us, he is past from this World to the Father, he is
gone to his God, and to our God: And that we might go to him, he has sent the
Light of his holy Word to direct us, John 2. he vouchsafes unto us his Staff
and his Rod, to comfort us, Ps. 23. and stretches out the right hand of his
Almighty power, to cause us to pass from Death to Life, where I am, says he,
there shall also my Servant be, Joh. 12.

When the Apostles went up to Jerusalem, and Jesus went before them, Mark 9.
they were terrified and frighted, but we that go up to the Heavenly Jerusalem,
and tred upon the footsteps of this mighty Savior; ought to be full of
boldness and Christian confidence.

This great God and Savior Reigns in Heaven, he Commands in the Earth, the Sea
and the Deep, therefore we may Dye without Fear, and with an holy Joy. For who
would not rejoice to enter into the Glorious Palace of Immortality, where we
should see, not only the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, the holy and
blessed Virgin, with all the Saints of Paradise, but we shall see face to face
our great God and Savior Jesus Christ, whom so many Kings and Prophets have
desired to see and hear? While we remain in these Bodies, we are absent from
the Lord, therefore we rather desire to be absent from the Body, and to be with
Christ; this Consideration causes the holy Apostle to confess. That his desire
was to depart and to be with Christ which was far better for him, Phil. 11.

The Queen of Sheba left her Kingdom, and came from a corner of the Earth to
see King Solomon, who was but a Type of Christ, and who had but a little of his
wisdom and glory; and is there any Treasure on Earth, any Honor in this Age,
or pleasure in this Life, that might hinder us from going to see our Savior
Jesus Christ? When he was in his Infancy, the Shepherds left their Flocks and
made have toward Bethlehem to look upon him, the wise Men came from the East
to adore him* and if he were yet on Earth, we should undertake a tedious
Pilgrimage to the ends of the World, and part with our dearest enjoyments to
see him. But the little Village of Bethlehem, is nothing in comparison of the
celestial Jerusalem, and what is the sight of the Lord Jesus in swaddling
Clothes, lying in a Manger, and in the Arms of his Blessed Mother, in
comparison of the sight of a Christ clothed with Light, Crowned with Glory,
and sitting at the right hand of God the Father, upon a Magnificent Throne,
Worshipped by all the Angels and the glorified Spirits. The Father of the
Faithful was transported with Joy, when he saw in Spirit the day of the Lord;
and the Spouse in the Canticles was exceeding glad, when she heard him knocking
at her door; and old Simon was ravished above measure, when he held Christ in
his Arms, how much more shall we be transported and ravished into admiration
and Joy, when we shall look upon him as he is now in the highest Glory, and
raised to the most magificent Estate, when we shall enjoy him never to leave
him again. When St. Stephen beheld the Heavens open, and Jesus Christ sitting
at the right hand of God the Father, his face became radiant as that of an
Angel. Therefore how luminous and shining shall our Countenances be, when we
shall be entered into these places of Light, and when we shall behold with open
face this ^iessed Redeemer for ever.

When old Jacob heard that Joseph was alive and Reigning (...) Egypt, whom he
had so tenderly loved, and for whom he had shed so many tears, he was most
passionately ^esirous to see again this dear Son, and to behold his glor^, It
is enough says he, Joseph is yet alive, I will go and see him before I dye,
Genesis 45. And what think you believing Souls, when you understand that your true
Jos^ph, whom you heartily love, Lives and Raigns above in ^^e^ven, and that he
is there Worshipped, by all the glorified Spirits; do not you earnestly desire
to see his Face, and ^o behold his Divin Glory and Happiness? This old Father
was weak and feeble through Age, and oppressed with Grief, but his Spirit did
revive when he saw the Wagons that Joseph h^d sent to fetch him; and you my
Christian Brethren, when old Age and Sickness have weakened your bodies, and
grief and displeasure have undermined your Hearts, do not you feel your selves
revive, when Death draws near, and you perceive with the eye of Faith, the
Horses and Charriots which Christ has sent ot carry you away to the Paradise
of his Glory?

Seeing that Joseph received his Father and Brethren with Tears of Joy, and all
the House of Pharaoh rung with outward expressions of gladness, with what Joy,
with what kindness and love will Christ embrace us, and what Joy will there be
in Heaven at our arrival? it is not to be expressed but with the Tongues of
Angels. Joseph fed his Father and his Brethren, but he never yielded up unto
them any part of his Glory: Whereas our Lord Jesus Christ, who excells Joseph
as much in Power and Glory, as in Love and Mercy, shall not only feed us with
the Bread of his Kingdom, and give us to Drink of the Rivers of his Pleasures,
but he will also impart unto us, some of his Glory and Magnificence, as he
promised to his Apostles, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has
appointed unto me, Luke 22. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me
in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
Throne, be thou faithful until Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life,
Rev. 3. Joseph's Brethren notwithstanding his Glory and Power, became afterward
Slaves, but Jesus Christ will place upon our Head a Crown of pure Gold. Joseph
could never defend his Brethren from Death, they all Died one after another,
and he also in his time yielded up the Ghost; But Jesus Christ who is Risen
from the Dead, Dies no more, Death has no more Dominion over him, so that he
lives for ever and ever, and will cause us all to become Immortal. Therefore
instead of desiring as Jacob, to Live to go down into Egypt, to see his Son
Joseph, we should earnestly desire to Dye, that we might ascend up into Heaven,
there to behold our Lord Jesus Christ, our Father and Redeemer. When Jacob
embraced again his wonderful and beloved Child, in the exceeding transport of
his Joy and Love, he burst forth into this kind of Language, Let me now Dye,
now that I have seen again thy Face, and that thou art alive. On the contrary,
when we shall embrace Christ in his Glory, when we should behold his Divine
Countenance, we shall speak in another manner, my Lord and my God, seeing that
I now look upon thee alive, and Reigning in Heaven, I shall live also and Reign
with thee for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer and Meditation for a believing Soul, who strengthens it self against
the Fears of Death, by considering the glorious Ascension of Jesus Christ into
Heaven, and his sitting at the right hand of God.
O Holy and Divine Savior, I have often looked upon thy generous Behavior and
glorious Victories, to strengthen my self against all apprehensions of Death,
but if thou will render my joy, most perfect and accomplished, give me Grace to
Meditate upon thy Divine Triumph. As thou have engaged in many Encounters for
my sake, and have vouchsafed unto me a share in thy Victory, grant me also a
share in thy glorious Ascension and Triumph. As thou have suffered for my Sins,
and art risen again for my Justification; thou art also ascended up into
Heaven, to prepare a place for me; thou art willing that I should be admitted
into thy Noble and Divine Palace, that I should be where thou art, that I may
behold thy Glory which thou have enjoyed with God the Father, before the
Creation of the World. O sweet and Merciful Lord, what cause have I to fear to
go to Heaven, seeing that thou art there seated in the highest Glory and
Felicity, and that thou stretchest out thy merciful hand to receive and admit
me. Have not I good reason to expect to be glorified in thy Kingdom, seeing
that thou thy self do bestow upon those that serve thee, the Immortal Crowns
and Scepters. O great God and Savior, thy Throne is surrounded with Glory and
Splendour, nevertheless, I will draw near unto it with boldness, for it is a
Throne of Love, and a Throne of Mercy, unto which every penitent Sinner may
come. Round about this glorious Throne, I see a Rainbow of an Emerald color,
that certifies me, that thy Covenant is everlasting. When thy Glory and Majesty
did increase, thy Love for me did not lessen, and thy compassion and goodness
were always the same. Thou art the same yesterday and to day, and thou shall
always be the same for ever. Thou have been pleased for my Salvation to lie in
a Manger, and to be nailed to a Cross. Thou have given thy Soul for my Ransom,
and have spilt thy precious Blood, to wash and cleanse me from my Sins, and to
make me a way, that I might enter into thine holy Sanctuary. In the midst of
all that Glory and Light, with which thou art now clothed, thou have not
thought it a scorn to acknowledge me for thy Brether, and for a Member of thy
Mystical Body. It is for my sake, that thou appearest before thine Heavenly
Father, it is for me that thou offerest up unto him Prayers and Supplications.
O wonderful Lord, it is in thy power to give unto me the things which thou have
merited by thy Sufferings, and which thou desire for me by thy Prayers and
Intercession, for all power is given unto thee in Heaven and in Earth. O
Sovereign Monarch of the whole World, have not thou given unto us this great
and gracious promise, When I shall be lifted up from the Earth, I shall draw
all Men after me; And is it not for us, that thou have prayed in this excellent
manner, Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where
I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me. Seeing therefore
that thou have left this wretched Earth, to go and Reign above in Heaven, take
unto thee my Soul, O wonderful Redeemer, and deliver it from this valley of
Tears and Misery, cause it to understand at the time of its departure, those
words of joy and eternal comfort, Verily I say unto thee, this day thou shall
be with me in Paradise. Lord Jesus draw me with the cords of thy Mercy and
Grace, and I shad run after thee. And seeing that I must of necessity pass
through Death to come to thee the Prince of Life and Immortality, give me Grace
to consider it in the same manner as the Prophet Elias did the Fiery Charriots
that carried him up to Heaven, or as Jacob did the Wagon that carried him into
Egypt, to his Son that did Reign there; this holy Father in a transport of joy,
cried out, let me see my Son Joseph again, and then let me Dye. But when I
shall be ravished with an unspeakable and glorious joy, I shall speak in
another manner. Let me Dye that I may behold my true Joseph, the Soul of my
Soul, the light of Life, the Author of my Glory and Happiness. O sweet Jesus, I
shall freely and willingly leave this wretched and crasie dwelling, to enter
into thy heavenly Palace, to behold thy Glory and Magnificence, O King of Kings
and Lord of Lords, when shall I hear that Divine Wisdom that drops from thy
Lips, and when shall I see thee sitting upon the Throne of thy Glorious
Majesty, where a thousand thousands wait upon thee, and ten millions Worship
thee. When shall I enter into the Glorious Company of the Saints and Blessed
Spirits, that Sing forth thy Praises, and cast at thy feet their most precious
Crowns. O glorious Monarch, that art now in thy Kingdom, enjoying a perfect
happiness, forget not thy poor Servant, be not unmindful of thy S^n or
Daughter, who am now overwhelmed with the sorrows of this miserable life, and
the anguish of Death. Let not the Songs of the holy Angels, and applauses of
all the glorified Spirits, hinder thee from listening to my Sighs and Groans. O
Almighty and merciful Lord, look upon me with the eyes of thy Love, and reach
unto me thine helping hand. Send unto me thine Angels of Light, to receive my
Soul, and pr^tect me from the Angels of Darkness that endeav^r to destroy me,
and to drag me headlong into Hell. Let Some of th^se glorious Spirits that wait
for thine orders, and fly at thy command, deliver me from Death, and carry me
upon their wings into thy Bosom. I see the Heavens open, and Jesus Christ
sitting at the right hand of God the Father, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Amen.

CHAP. 19.
The Seventh Consolation against the Fears of Death, is our strict and
unseparable union with Jesus Christ, by the means of his holy Spirit and the
first Fruits of our Blessed Immortality.

OUr Lord Jesus Christ does not only live and triumph in Heaven, but it is
from thence our life, our glory, and our blessed Immortality proceed. For as
the Father has life in himself, he has also given to the Son to have Life in
himself, and as the Father raises and quickneth the Dead, likewise the Son
quickneth whomsoever he will. So that we may not only say to him as St. Peter,
Thou have the words of eternal life, John 6. but we may justly speak to him in
David's Language, with thee is the fountain of Life, in thy light shall we see
light, Ps. 36. Therefore all those that are united and incorporated into Jesus
Christ, do participate of the fullness of his holy Spirit, and by that means
they became Immortal. Now by the virtue of Christ's Death and Pastion, we are
not only made partakers of the Fruits of his Sufferings, but we are united to,
and Incorporated in him, so that by that means, we have obtained not only the
gr^^t and precious promises of Glory and Immortality, which he has purchased
for us, by the infinite merits of his Sufferings, but we receive the
First Fruits and foretasts of our future blessedness.

He that is lifted up and dwells on high, quickens the Spirits of the humble,
Is. 57. he dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 31. he pours into our Souls his
holy and quickening Spirit, for because we are the Children of God, he has sent
the Spirit of his Son into our hearts to cry Abba Father, Gal. 4. Whosoever
has not this Spirit of the Lord Jesus, he is none of his. By the means of this
Spirit he dwells in us and we in him, we become the Members of his Body, and we
may boast that we are his Flesh and his Bones.

All things that are most strictly united by Nature or Art, are employed to
represent this admirable union, John 6. which we enjoy with Jesus Christ, by
the means of his Spirit that quickens us, Romans 13. From hence are derived these
expressions of the holy Apostles, We have put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.
And that when we draw near to him who is the living stone, rejected of Men, but
lifted up and of great price with God, 1 Pet. 2. we like so many living stones,
are built up together to make a Spiritual House. For the same reason our
Savior informs us, John 15. That he is the true Vine, and that we are the
branches. And St. Paul assures us, that if we are become one Plant with him, by
the conformity of his Death, we shall also be one by the resemblance of his
Resurrection. Romans 6.

To show unto us, that this Sacred Union contains many ties of Love, our Lord
Jesus Christ is represented as our Brother, our Father, and our Bridegroom,
therefore the Apostle tells us, that he thinks it no Disgrace to own us for his
Brethren, in saying, Heb. 1. I will declare thy name unto my Brethren; and also
where he informs us, Romans 8. that God had predestined us to be conformed to
the Image of his Son, that he might be the first born among many Brethren. And
after his Resurrection, he speaks in this manner to Mary Magdalen, John 20.
Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father, but go to my Brethren and
say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your
God, Heb. 2. Therefore this glorious Redeemer showing himself unto God with all
the Elect, says, Here I am, and the Children which thou have given me, Hosea
2, And by the Mouth of Hosea he speaks to his Church, and makes this promise
unto her, I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea I will betroth thee unto me
in Righteousness and in Judgment, and in loving kindness and in Mercies. From
hence it is, that this Church is called, The Spouse of the Lamb in the
Revelations; and in the Cantic^es, the Spiritual Union betwixt Christ and his
Church, is expressed by a continual Allusion, to a Marriage between Man and
Woman.

And because our Meat and Drink are turned into our Body and Substance, Jesus
Christ assures us, That his Flesh is truly Meat, and his Blood is truly Drink.
That he is the true Bread come down from Heaven, that gives Life to the World,
and that whosoever shall eat him, shall live for ever.

But amongst all the Similitudes borrowed to represent our Union with Jesus
Christ by his holy Spirit, there is none employed more frequently in holy
Scripture, than that of the Humane Body, for there is not any more proper for
us; all the Spirits that give life and motion, proceed from the Head, and
as soon as the Members are separated from it they Dye. In the like manner the
Spirit that quickens us, and makes us become new Creatures, proceeds from Jesus
Christ, so that whosoever is separated from this Head, he falls into Death and
Eternal Destruction. And as there are many Members, nevertheless they make up
but one Body, because they are all animated with the same Spirit, and they are
kept alive by the same Head; l kewise there be many Members belonging to
Christ's Mystical Body, some engaged yet upon Earth, and others glorified in
Heaven, nevertheless they make up but one only Mystical and Spiritual Body, for
they are all quickened by the same Spirit, and receive all the celestial
influences from the same Head. St. Paul teaches us this Doctrine in express
terms, 1 Cor 12. For as the Body is one and has many Members, and all the
Members of that one Body being many are one Body, so also is Christ, for by one
Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles,
whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.
Finally, because the same spirit that is in our Lord, as in the Head and
Fountain, and in the Church in general, as in the Body which is quickened and
moved, is also in every particular Member. The holy Apostle is not satisfied to
call this Spiritual Body of Christ and his Church Christ; but he tells us
moreover, that whosoever is united unto him, is made but one Spirit with him.

These and such like Representations, let them be never so lively and noble,
are but dark shadows and unperfect Images of our Union with Jesus Christ by
his holy Spirit; for the richest and most Magnificent Garment, can never keep
off from the Body Diseases, nor hinder the approaches of corruption that creeps
upon it. There is no foundation never so firm and well settled that can free the
house built upon it, from the ruins and breach s of time and the weather.
Although the Sap mounts up from the root of the vine, and runs into the twigs
and branches, they wither at last, and are cast into the fire. The rarest Meats
and the most delicious Drinks, can never make our Bodies become Immortal, Death
snatcheth away the Brother from the Brother, the Father from the Child, and the
Wife from her Husband. The stroke of a Sword can separate a Body from the
healthiest and strongest Head, nay without any such violence, the Head dies as
well as the Body, and the Spirits that run in our Ve ns, are far from hindering
the corruption of our Bodies, for they corrupt of themselves and vanish away.
In short, the strictest Unions of Nature and Art are dissolved by time, so that
all things under the Sun, are subject to vanity and unconstancy. But the Spirit
of the Lord Jesus, is the principle of an eternal Life, and the Seed of an
uncorruptible gl^ry, whosoever is united to him by this Spirit, nothing can
separate him from Christ, neither Life nor Death, neither Hell nor the World,
nor things present nor things to come. Therefore because our Blessed Savior
could find nothing here upon Earth, nor amongst all the Creatures, worthy and
able to represent this perfect and unseparable Union, he seeks an Image of it
beyond all natural beings, in the holy Trinity, in that unchangeable Union,
which was, which is, and which shall ever be, between him and God the Father.
As we may see in his excellent Prayer, John 17. Father I pray for them all
which shall believe on me, that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that they may be one ever as we
are one. Banish therefore from your Souls all apprehensions and fears, O
believing Souls, for all the Three persons of the most holy, most glorious and
most wonderful Trinity, are engaged for your Salvation, and to bring you to
your eternal happiness. The Father by his infinite wisdom, has found out a
means to reconcile us unto himself, to satisfy his offended Justice, and to
declare the riches of his unparalleld Mercies. The Son has purchased for us
this great Salvation, by suffering the shameful Death of the Cross, and by
spilling his most precious Blood, for the forgiveness of our Sins; and the holy
Spirit by incorperating us into Jesus Christ, makes us partakers of the
infinite Merits of his Sufferings, Revel. 2. That is the true Hysop, that
sprinkles the Divine Blood of the Lamb, without spot or blemish, to cleanse our
Souls. It is he that gives to our Souls the white Stone, where the new name of
Elect and Believers is written, Heb. 12. which none knows but he that has it.
He gives us to eat of the hidden Manna, and of the food of Angels, John 4.
which the World knows not. It is instead of a precious Ring or Jewel, by
which our spiritual Bridegroom promises and confirms unto us his conjugal
Faith. It is the Seal of the Living God, that Seals unto us the Covenant of
Grace, and the promises of Glory and Happiness made unto us in the Gospel, as
the Apostle himself tells us, Ephesians. 2. that now having believed the Gospel of
our Salvation, we have been Sealed by the holy Spirit of promise, Therefore he
exhorts us Ephesians. 4. not to grieve the holy Spirit of God, by whom we have been
Sealed for the day of Redemption. Finally, this is the Spirit that witnesses
with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God, If we be children we are
Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 8.

Think not, Christian Souls, that I labor to persuade you, that this holy
Spirit of the Lord Jesus, shall come and whisper in your ears, or cry unto you
from within, that you are the Children of God, as the extravagant Quakers
amongst us imagine, the Testimony that he gives to our Spirits, is a real and
an effectual testimony, if I may so speak, for he regenerates us, and makes us
become new Creatures, he gives us a more certain assurance of our adoption,
then if he did declare from Heaven, Thou art my Child, and thy name is written
in the Book of Life. As the Seal imprints its Image in the wax, thus the Spirit
of the Lord Jesus imprints in our Souls the Image of Holiness and all Divine
Virtues; now as the Figure that remains upon the Wax, makes us judge without
dispute, what manner of Seal did print it; likewise when you find Gods Image
imprinted in your Hearts, acknowledge the finger of God, and the Virtue of his
holy Spirit to have been there; for none can have that blessed Image, but he
must needs be the Child of God. The holy Spirit that gives it to our Souls,
kindles in us the blessed flames of holy Love, and produces in us Tongue; of
fire; he makes us speak to God with boldness as to our Father, and lift up our
eyes to Heaven with joy and gladness, as to the place of our Inheritance. All
the goods of this present life, may be, nay will be, lost at last, Pro. 23.
Riches take wings and fly away like an Eagle, Honor vanishes away, as a smoke
carried away with the wind. Earthly Delights and Pleasures have away as a
Torrent or the waters of a River that slide along the Banks, and they end at
last in a Sea of bitterness and sorrow. If by chance these vanities continue
with the Worldlings, while they remain on Earth, Ps 49. they can continue no
longer, for they cannot carry beyond and the Grave, their Riches, their Honors
are not Buried with them, and all their unsettled delights fly away with their
Breath, but Death has no power upon this Spirit of Life, which is our true
Treasure, our glory and everlasting delight.

Moreover, the true and living Faith, that embraces Jesus Christ our Savior
shall cease, and hope that considers the advantages to come, shall one day be
abolished. Whilst we are in this earthly Pilgrimage we walk by Faith, and not
by sight, and while we are tossed up and down upon this dangerous Sea of the
World, Heb. 6. we have need of the Anchor of our Hope, and to expect with
patience the fulfilling of that we hope for, Romans 8. but when we shall come to
our heavenly Country, we shall neither need a staff to walk with, nor a shield
to defend us, and to quench the fiery darts of the Devil, when we shall be
secure in the Haven of Eternity; we shall have no occasion to make use of this
Anchor, for our hope shall be changed into a perfect Fruition. When we shall be
in Paradise, we shall need no Wings to carry us up to God, but only to fly
about his Throne, as the Seraphims. In short, we need no looking glass to see
the glory of God, for we shall behold face to face. All that we believe at
present without seeing, we shall then see and believe no more. But the Spirit
of the Lord Jesus whom the World knows not and cannot receive; he is not
given us for a time, but to dwell in us for ever. As that Flesh which our Lord
took from us was never cast off, nor never shall; Thus the Spirit which he
given us, shall never be taken from us. The flesh which our Savior united in
the same person with the Divine word, has been glorified by this eternal
Union, but the Spirit which he has united to our Spirits, by this gracious
Union, is the foundation of Glory, and of our eternal happiness.

This Spirit of Life is not only the Seal of the promises of God, but also the
earnest of our uncorruptible inheritance, reserved for us in Heaven. This is
St. Paul's Doctrine, Ephesians. 1. for when he had said, you have been Sealed by the
holy Spirit of promise, he adds, which, is the earnest of our inheritance,
until the Redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his
^glory. Because this Divine Spirit is the Seal of the living God, he is the
earnest of his Inheritance; for this heavenly Image that it imprints in our
Souls, shall be part of that glory with which he will Crown us in his holy
Paradise. Therefore the Wisdom that is various in every manner, does not call
this Spirit a Gage but an earnest; for although both be given as a confirmation
of promises, and an assurance of their accomplishment, there is this
difference, that Men commonly take back again the thing engaged, when that
which is promised is done, but the earnest remains always, and is part of the
sum to be paid. As therefore the earnest which is given is never taken away,
but Men commonly add to it the remaining sum promised; likewise our Savior
never takes away from his Elect the Spirit of Adoption, which has been once
bestowed upon them, but he increases its Graces and Advantages, until he has
raised them to the highest glory, and most Divine happiness, which he has
promised.

It is in this occasion as with the Sun, which as soon as it appears upon our
Horizon, increases the Light more and more, until he is mounted up to our
Meridian, or as the Rivolets and Rivers, which the farther they run, the more
they increase, until they discharge into the Sea; Therefore when our Lord and
Savior speaks of this Spirit of Grace, which such as believe in him receive,
he tells the Jews, John 8. He that believes in me, Rivers of living Water
shall flow from his Belly, John 4. and to the Samaritan Woman he speak in this
Language. He that shall Drink of the Water that I shall give him, shall never
thirst, but the Water that I shall give him, shall become in him a fountain of
water springing to eternal life, This was sometimes shown in a Vision to the
Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 47. by the waters that ran down from the Sanctuary, for
at the first they did reach no higher then the Prophets Ankle bone, afterward
they rise up to his knee, and then to his middle; at last they increased in
such a manner, that they became a great Torrent, and a deep River which was not
to be forded over, and which discharged it self into the Sea.

As David in the beginning of his Reign, commanded but one Tribe, but
afterward he enlarged the limits of his Kingdom over all the Tribes of Israel
that small portion of the Kingdom was not then taken from him, but only
increased and became greater; thus it is with us, during this Life, we have
small part of the Kingdom of Heaven entrusted in our hands, or if I may so say,
we have now some Jewels of the uncorruptible Crown which is promised hereafter:
This part shall not be taken from us, this bright beam of our future glory
shall never be put out but in the Life to come, we shall possess as much of
this Kingdom as we are able, and shall be clothed with all that light and
splendour of the Heavenly Glory.

But as there is no comparison never so just, but is faulty in some respects,
there is no small difference in this, for the Tribe of Juda was the noblest and
the richest part of the Kingdom of Israel, but that part which our Souls enjoy
at present of the happiness and glory of the Kingdom of Heaven, is but as a
drop of Water in comparison of the Ocean, or as a weak raye of light, in
comparison, of the Sun 2 Cor. 12. Therefore the Apostle St. Paul, who had been
ravished into the Third Heaven, and who knew better than any Man in the World,
what were the Joys and glories of Heaven, when he mentions this Spirit of
Adoption that God sends into our hearts, he calls it, Romans 8. The First Fruits
of the Spirit. To teach us, that there is as vast a difference between the
measure of the gifts and graces which we receive here below, and the
overflowing abundance which we shall enjoy in Heaven, as between some few ears
of Corn, and the whole Harvest of a Field. It is like the small quantity of
Fruits which were brough^ to the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, compared
to the great abundance of all the Land of Canaan. It is like some small crumbs
of the Heavenly Bread, of which we shall have our fill in the Kingdom of God,
as some small drops of that New Wine which we shall drink for ever in the
heavenly Jerusalem.

Therefore believing Souls, you may from hence conclude, that the approaches of
Death ought not to scare or fright you, because that you have within you the
principles of a life everlasting, and the seeds of a glorious Immortality,
which cannot be taken from you. Jesus Christ does not only wait for you, and
stretch out unto you his Arms, to receive you into his Rest, but he himself is
also with you, and will render the passage easy and pleasant to this new
World, where Justice and Righteousness dwell, John 11. He will make Miracles
for your sake, and if you believe, you shall see the glory of God, Joshua 3. We
do not only follow the footsteps of this Divine and real Joshua, but we pass
with him, and he passes with us, Exodus 19. We are not like the Children of
Israel, that went through the River of Jordan, whilst the Priests held the Ark
in the middle of the River, but we may be compared to the Priests themselves, 1
Pet. 2. that did bear the Ark of the Covenant, and caused the Waters to return
up to their Fountain again, for we are a Generation of Priests, and we bear in
our Souls the Lord Jesus, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, and
in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. In short, our Souls
return to God the Fountain from whence they came; Let therefore that heavenly
voice which was heard in the holy Land, sound in our ears, Is. 43. Fear not for
I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy Name, thou art mine, when thou
passest through the Waters I will be with thee, and through the Rivers, they
shall not overflow thee, when thou walk through the Fire, thou shall not be
burnt, neither shall the Flame kindle upon thee, and say with David, When I
should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I shall fear no evil,
for thou art with me, thy Staff and thy Rod shall comfort me, Psalm. 23.

It seems the Primitive Christians had adesigne to show us this Truth by the
Picture of a Giant-like man, wading through the Sea with a Staff in his hand,
and a Child upon his Shoulder; for this Giant is the Emblem of a Christian, who
lifts up his mind as high as Heaven; The Sea signifies the dangers of this
World, and the fears of Death; The Staff represents Faith that keeps us up in
our passage through Life and Death, upon which, when we lean, we worship the
living God of Heaven and Earth, and the Child is an Image of Christ; therefore
he that bears him, is called Christophorus, that is, He that bears Christ.
Caesar could not endure to see his Pilot tremble in a furious Storm at Sea,
because he was in his Boat; we have far less reason to be afraid, seeing that
we carry in our Hearts the great Emperor and Monarch of the World, the Hope and
Comfort of Israel; Caesar was as much in danger as his Pilot to make Shipwreck,
but our Lord Jesus Christ has all the Winds at his Command. He can still the
most disturbed Sea, and through the most grievous death, he can cause us to
pass and arrive to the safe Haven of an Eternal Rest, and of a most happy and
glorious life.

When David showed himself with a purpose to fight with Goliath, he spoke to
this prodigious Philistines in this manner, I come unto thee in the name of the
Lord of Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel. But you Christian Souls, when
you are to encounter with Death, you may say to it, not only I come to thee in
the name of him, who Commands legions of Angels, and all the Armies of immortal
Spirits, but I come to thee clothed with his Armor, strengthened by his Holy
Spirit, and assisted by him in person, for Jesus Christ who has overcome death
for us, intends to overcome it by us. We are the living Stones which he has
chosen of his disinteressed Mercy, to bring down that proud insulting Enemy,
that causes all Worldlings to tremble, and cover their faces with Shame and
Confusion, Judge. 6.

We have already seen a Sampson breaking in pieces, with a wonderful strength,
the Cords with which he had been bound by the Philistians, and tearing also the
Body of a young Lion, in which he found some few days after, Honey, most
pleasant to his taste. It will be much easier for us, when we shall be
strengthened with the Divine Virtue of the Lord Jesus, of whom Sampson was but
a Type, to tear in pieces all the Cords and Chains of Death. We shall rent in
pieces the Body of this old Lion, and when we shall search into his Bowels,
with a serious and repeated meditation, we shall find the sweetest and most
ravishing Comforts.

As when the Prophet Elias was carried up to Heaven in a fiery Chariot, he let
fall his Cloak, with which Elisha separated the Waters of Jordan, so that he
passed through the River on foot. Likewise our Savior Jesus Christ being
ascended up above the Clouds, to the Throne of his Glory, he has left us the
precious Cloak of his Righteousness, he has granted us his Holy Spirit, that
we might pass through the turbulent Waves of this tempestuous Sea of the World,
by its Divine Virtue, and that through death we might enter into immortal Life.

And as the death of our Lord Jesus Christ separated his Soul from his Body,
although both his innocent Soul and Holy Body remained always united personally
to his Divinity. In the same manner the Believers death disunites, for a time,
his Soul from his Body, but it can never separate it from the Spirit of the
Lord Jesus, that is the Soul of our Souls, and such an Holy Flame, that it can
never be extinguished.

When the High Priest of the Jews put off his Priestly Garments, he cast off at
the same time his Breastplate, where the names of the twelve Tribes were
engraven, Exodus 20. Not only our names are written in the Lamb's Book of Life,
not only our Pictures are printed upon the Palms of his hands, with the Blood
of the Covenant, but we be as a Signet upon his Heart Cant. 8. so that we
cannot be separated from him no more than his heart can be taken from him; his
Love is stronger than Death, and his embraces are embraces of Love.

Ruth promised to Naomi, that Death alone should be able to separate them,
Ruth, 1. But on the contrary, we may tell our Lord and Savior, who is as our
Father, Brother, and Husband, not only death shall never be able to separate
us, but it shall rather bring us nearer unto thee, and cause us to rest in thy
bosom, where we shall be for ever satisfied with thine Heavenly delights.
Christians, you need not fear Death, for you are not to be wounded by all its
Darts, for you have been dipped in the River that springs to Eternal Life. The
Spirit of the Lord Jesus that is in you, is the Spirit of Life; the beginning
of immortality, and the only Spring of Eternal Glory and Happiness. Seeing that
the breath of the Prophet Elias, raised a dead Body to life, the Spirit and the
Breath of the Father, and of the Son will be able to keep your Spiritual life
from decaying; unless it be in Death's power to stop the breath of the
Almighty, unless it be able to limit the beams of Light and Glory that came
from his Divine countenance; unless it can cause the Rivers of living Water
that spring out of his Throne to cease and dry up; It is not possible that it
should cause us to perish, and render us miserable. Therefore you are certain
of your Eternal Happiness, while Jesus Christ shall be the Author and
Wellspring of Light, Life, Glory, and Immortality; and that his Holy Spirit
shall be victorious over Death and Hell; and you may sing with David, I shall
not die but live and declare the Works of the Lord, Ps. 118.

You be not only sure of this Glory and Eternal Happiness; and you be not only
entered into possession of it, by your Faith and Hope, but you begin already to
enjoy it, and its First Fruits, for he that believes in Jesus Christ, is past
from Death to Life; and whosoever has the Son of God, has Eternal Life. As
the Prophet Moses, when he was in the Wilderness, did not only see afar off the
Land of Promise, but he tasted of its delicious Fruits; Thus we don't only
behold afar off with the Eye of Faith, our Celestial Inheritance, but we taste
at present, and relish some of its blessed Delights. And as the Fruits brought
by the Spies, were the same and like unto them that the Children of Israel did
eat in the Promised Land; In like manner, the Fruits that we relish in the
Wilderness of this World, are Fruits of the Tree of Life, with which we shall
be fully satisfied in Heaven; for the Grace that God bestows upon us here below
by his Divine Spirit, is the beginning of the Glory, with which he shall Crown
us above. The same Light that shines upon our Souls on Earth, shall shine much
more for ever in Heaven. But whereas we look upon it at present as it were,
through a black mist with much imperfection, then we shall see it clearly
without Vail or Darkness. The same Holiness that adorns, at present, our Souls
shall be their Ornament and Glory, then it shall appear without spot or
blemish. That same peace of Conscience that preserves our Hearts and Senses,
shall Crown us above, it shall be without the least disturbance. In short, the
same Jesus that is conceived in our Hearts, and that is formed, and grows in us
by degrees, shall then appear in a perfect Stature, that shall want no more
increase.

As it is with the Sea, it enters into the Rivers before the Rivers can run to
the Sea; in like manner God comes to us before we go to him, and Heaven enters
into our Souls before we can enter into Heaven.

Aged Sim^on waited patiently for Death, but as soon as he had seen the Savior
of the World, and embraced him, he ran to meet Death, he thought upon nothing
but his latter end, therefore he prayed most earnestly, to receive him into his
Glorious Rest. O Christian Soul, how should thou dispose and prepare thy
self to die, seeing thou beholdest, with the Eyes of Faith, this Blessed
Redeemer, not wrapped up in Swathling Clothes, but Crowned with an infinite
Glory and Light; He is not in thine Arms, but he lodges in thine Heart; thou
have not received him, to return or part with him again, but to be united unto
him for ever, and to be incorporated into his mystical Body. Seeing therefore
that Death brings thee nearer to thy Redeemer, perfects this Blessed Union, and
casts thee into the very Fountain of Life, instead of being frighted at her,
and grieved when it comes to thee, thou should then rejoice and be
transported above measure with gladness; we should meet this Death with a
cheerful countenance; I mean, that we should meet the Lord Jesus, this merciful
Prince of Life, who having vouchsafed unto thee the sight of his Salvation,
intends to receive thee into his Rest, and Eternal, and Glorious Peace, that
Reigns above in Heaven.

A Prayer and Meditation of a Christian Soul, that strengthens it self against
the fears of Death, by considering our strict and unseparable Union with Jesus
Christ, by his Holy Spirit, and the First Fruits in us, of our Blessed
Immortality.
O Mighty and Merciful Lord, who art the Son of Righteousness, and the Fountain
of Living Water, drive away from me the dark shadows of death, and quench all
the Fires that it kindles in my Soul; thou art not only dead for me, but thou
art pleased to live in me, that I might one day live for ever with thee. Thou
have of thy pure Mercy chosen me for thy Child, and have made me a Member of
thy Mystical Body, Flesh of thy Flesh, Bone of thy Bone, and caused me to be
partaker of thine Holy Spirit. God has not given thee the Spirit by measure,
that out of thy fullness we might receive Grace for Grace. By the means of this
Blessed and Infinite Spirit that rests in my Soul, I am united unto thee in a
more perfect manner, than the Tree is to the root that bears it, or the Child
to its Mother that nourishes it in her Womb, or the Members of the Humane
Body, to the Head that gives them Life. The Ties that unite me unto thee; O
Glorious Savior, are more unchangeable than the Heavens and the Earth. As
nothing can pluck me out of thine Hands, there is nothing can separate me from
thine Heart. Whether I live or dye, I am thine, my Lord and my God, and nothing
can alter thine affection for me. Death can take me out of the World, and carry
me out of the embraces of my dearest friends; but it can never separate me from
thine Holy Spirit, the Soul of my Soul, and the Light of my Life, which cannot
be put out by all the envious Blasts and Storms of the Prince of Darkness; this
Holy Spirit will bring me to behold thy Face, to rest in thy bosom, and unite
me unto thee for ever. To whom Lord shall I go? thou have the words of Eternal
life, and thou art the inexhausible Fountain; Thou art my Hope and my Treasure,
my Glory, and mine only Happiness. O faithful and unquestionable Witness, I
should be worse than an Infidel, if I did call in question my future Salvation
and Glory, seeing the Father has not spared thee for me, although thou art his
only and beloved Son, the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his
Person. Seeing that thou, O merciful Lord, have willingly suffered the most
shameful death of the Cross, and spilt thy precious Blood to wash away all my
sins, and satisfy for my crimes; and seeing that thine Holy Spirit is come into
my Heart, to make me a partaker of that precious Blood, and Seal me for the day
of Redemption. O Glorious Spirit of my Savior, that rests upon me; when I
should be able to speak the Language of Angels, I could not sufficiently
express the wonderful operations that thou do produce in my Soul: thou
kindlest in me such Heavenly Flames as never go out, but are always alive, as
the fire of thine Altar; Thou formest in me a white Stone, where a new Name is
written, which no man knows, but he that receives it; Thou give me to eat of
that hidden Manna, of that food of Angels that the World knows not: Thou
witnessest with my Spirit, that I am a Child of God, an Heir of God, and a
Joint Heir with Jesus Christ, the King of Kings. Thou do not only Seal unto
me the pardon of all my Sins, but thou do also purify my Conscience from all
dead Works to serve the living God; Thou causest me to cry out Abba Father, and
imprintest in my Heart, the Glorious Image of my Heavenly Father; Thou art the
Seal of my Adoption, the earnest of mine uncorruptible Inheritance prepared for
me in Heaven; Thou have given me the infallible assurances of a Glorious and
Eternal Life, and begun it already in my Soul, granting to me its First Fruits;
Thou causest me to behold the Sunshine of thy Grace, and make it to give
Light in mine Understanding; Thou do not only vouchsafe unto me, the favor
of beholding from this Valley of Tears thine Heavenly Canaan, but thou causest
me to taste of its Fruits; I am not yet come to the Fountain of Waters that
spring forth to Eternal Life, but I feel the Streams and the Rivers that run in
my Soul, I am not yet come to thine Holy Paradise, but thou have caused
Paradise to be in me; Thou have given unto me an unspeakable and glorious Joy,
and have bestowed upon me that Peace of God that passes all understanding. O
living and quickening Spirit unknown to the World; thou strengthenest me in
such a manner that death will never be able to fright me; Thou have united me
to thy self by an unseparable Union, O Prince of Life, and have put in me a
Seed of Immortality, an infallible Principle of Glory, and a source of
unspeakable Happiness; Thou art in me to dwell with me for ever, therefore thou
shall fill up the measure of thy most signal Favors. My Faith, by thy Divine
assistance, has spied out the Kingdom prepared for us from the beginning of
the World; and shortly I shall see, with mine Eyes, the unexpressable Beauties
of that Celestial Country, that flows with the Milk of the purest and
sincerest Joys, and with the Honey of the sweetest and most ravishing Comforts;
Thou have sent a fore-taste of the Fruits of the Tree of Life, but I shall come
into thine Heavenly Paradise; I shall ever have my fill of these delicious
Fruits: Now thou have caused some drops of the dew of Heaven to fall upon mine
Heart, but then thou will make me drink of the Rivers of thy Divine Pleasures.
At present, in my painful passage through this Valley of Tears, in the midst of
my Groans and Tears, I may gather some Herbs, but when I shall come to my
Heavenly Country, I shall reap my Hands full with Songs of Joy. Here upon
Earth I see God as in a Glass obscurely, but in Heaven I shall behold him face
to face, and I shall be satisfied with his likeness. My Lord and my God, who by
the infinite Merits of thy sufferings, have purchased for us this Spirit of
Life, and who have given to my Soul such an Authentic Seal of my Salvation,
and such a precious earnest of thine Eternal Bliss. I feel in me the motions
and endeavors of of this New Man that Essays to leave this Body of Darkness
and Death, to enter into the Light of the Living. Lord Jesus, seeing thou have
made me partaker of the Spirit of thy Grace, enlightened my Soul with thy Divine
Knowledge, and caused me to know the way of Life; Seeing that thou have given
me to taste of the Heavenly Gift of the Powers of the life to come; Seeing that
thou have vouchsafed to me the First Fruits of thy Glory, and that I already
feel Heaven in my Soul; Seeing that I behold thee with the Eyes of my Faith,
that I embrace thee with all my affections, and that thou dwell in my Heart,
perfect in me, the work of thy Grace, and bring me at last to thine Eternal
Glory. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine Eyes have
seen thy Salvation, Amen.

CHAP. 20.
The eighth Consolation is to consider, that Death frees and delivers us from
all the Evils that are in the World, and that we daily suffer.

THere are certain Pictures with two Faces, the one represents most ugly
Features, and the other, beautiful and pleasant things; This is the true Emblem
of Death, for it may be painted with a fearful Face, a lean Body, and iron
Hands, that ravish from us our Goods and our Honors, and that divide our
Persons, dragging our bodies into a loathsome Sepulcher; If we look upon Death
in this manner, we can do nothing less, but tremble and fear; We may also look
upon it as a powerful Deliverer, that unlooseth all our Fetters, breaks our
Chains to pieces, lifts up our Souls to the highest Glory and Happiness; If we
consider thus, there is nothing more lovely than death, and nothing more to be
desired.

I have hitherto endeavored to show how a Believer shall strengthen and
comfort himself against the fears of Death, but now I shall say something more;
with Heavens assistance, I shall labor to prove, not only, that Death is to be
expected without apprehension, but to be received with an Holy Joy; That it is
not at all dreadful, but rather it is to be earnestly desired; I shall no
longer give, to speak right, any Consolations against the fears of Death, for I
hope to make it plain, that Death it self is to be looked upon as the greatest
Consolation and Comforter,

That I may attain unto mine end, I shall show as in a Picture, a short view of
all the dreadful miseries, of which Death delivers us, and then I shall
endeavor to paint out in the brightest Colors; or rather I shall chaulk out
unto you, the Blessedness and Glories, into which it ushers us.

Man's Life and Misery, are Twin-Sisters, that are born at the same time, and
owned Adam for their First Father; they dye together at the same instant in
true Believers, We all know that Man begins his Life weeping and crying, and
ends it with sighs and Groans; We come into the World all covered with Blood,
and we go out wet all over with a cold Sweat. If the Child cries not, as soon as
it is born, we judge that it is dead, and when the sick Body cease to groan
and sigh, we say that he is past hopes, so that as our crying is a token of
Life, likewise is and the end of thy sighs, an infallible sign of thy Death;
Wretched Man! how miserable is thy condition? thy best friends rejoice at thy
crying, and they weep and lament, when thou ceasest to sigh and groan.

All the rest of thy time between thy Cradle and thy Grave is no happier; it is
but a continued Chain of Misery, a mixture of pains, a succession of evils, and
a Sea of bitterness, As one Wave falls upon the back of another, one evil is no
sooner gone, but another meets and threatens us, one depth calls another, and
all manner of Floods and Storms pass over our Heads, Job 5. As the Sparks rife
out of the Fire to fly up and down, Man is born for Misery and Pain; and as the
wisest of Kings speaks, His days are nothing but pain, and his employment but
trouble, in the night his Heart rests not, Eccles. 3, There are scarce any
dwellings, but Messengers of ill news do sometimes come to them, as they did to
that of Job, Job. 1.

By God's unchangeable order and appointment, the days succeed the nights, and
divide the year into two equal parts; for if the nights are longer in one
season, so much the shorter are they in another; but the nights of our
afflictions are so long, that they seem to last several Ages; whereas the days
of our prosperity are so short, that they are gone in a moment, so that we may
justly say with the Prophet Moses, The best of our days are but labor and
sorrow, so soon does our life pass away, and we are gone, Psalm. 90. It is as
easy a task to number the Stars of the Firmament, and to reckon up the grains
of Sand upon the Sea shore, as to make an exact enumeration of all the evils,
that happen to us as Men belonging to a civil Society, or as Members of God's
and Church, his adopted Children; therefore old Jacob had cause to complain
that the years of his life had been short, and evil, but ours are so evil, that
they cannot be too short.

I should compose many Volumes, if I should undertake to describe perfectly all
the infirmities and diseases that undermine the Body, all the cutting pains,
and cruel tortures that torment and rack us.

The most languishing sicknesses, and the most violent pains that afflict and
disturb this poor Body, are nothing, in comparison of the excessive sadness and
mortal anguish that seize upon our Souls, and fill them full of Gall and
Bitterness. I think that there is no man upon Earth, that can boast of having
passed but one day without some displeasure, either inward or outward; for we
either feel present evils that strike through our Hearts, as so many Darts, or
the remembeance of former Griefs, that trouble us, or else the fear of future
mischances vex and fret us; I may justly say, that the Devil is not so cruel to
himself, as we are to our own persons, for this evil Spirit cares not to be
tormented before the time, whereas we anticipate the evils, by unquiet
apprehensions, and wilful vexations entertained in our mind. The fear of Misery
makes us far more miserable, and the apprehension of an imaginary evil, causes
us to resent a real affliction, and an unfeigned torment.

When we consider any Man's Life, we only look upon that which appears most
delightful and pleasant; we consider the Nobility of his Blood, the variety of
his Pleasures, the greatness of his Riches, the glory of his Offices and
Victories, and the pomp of his Triumphs; but scarce is there any man that takes
notice of his miseries and afflictions; or if some be noted, they are but such
as are too obvious to every man's Eye; as the public affronts and disgraces,
the loss of a Battle, the degradation from an Office, Banishments,
Imprisonments, and such like unhappy afflictions; but besides these calamities
which are visible to all the World, and the common motives of the condoling
lamentations of our friends; there are many secret evils that be far more
painful; our dearest Relations discover not always our most sensible wounds, to
pour into them an healing Balm; they seek not into our deepest sorrows, nor do
they dream of applying, to our souls, the most proper Comforts.

When ye behold Stage Players capring upon a Theater, speaking as big as Kings
and Princes, you seldom think, that under their Magnificent and Glorious
Attire, they hide many filthy Rags, and perhaps some incommodious Vermin that
stings them to the quick. Likewise, when you cast your Eyes upon the Riches,
Glory, Pomp, and Magnificence of Worldly Men, you don't discover and see the
Canker-worm that gnaws their Hearts, and the secret Fire that devours their
Souls. Some there be that laugh in public before company, and appear with a
merry countenance, who are full of despair, and in private, tear off their
Hair, sigh, and pour forth abundance of Tears. Some feed themselves before the
World with the most delicious Meats and Drink the rarest Wines, but inwardly
they are glutted with poison and gaul. This was the consideration of the wisest
of Kings, when he writ this Sentence, I have said of laughter, it is mad, and
of gladness, what profits it? Eccles. 2.

As Poverty and a mean Estate are always accompanied with a grievous Train of
fretful sorrows and cares, Likewise; Riches and Honors are never without Fears
and Disturbances; and as there is no Flame never so pure, but sends up a Smoke;
nor a Rose so beautiful, but has its prickles; so there is no condition in the
World, so beautiful and glorious, nor any prosperity so well flourishing, but
has its troubles and sharp Thorns. Every Man upon Earth (without exception)
bears his Cross, or has a grievous Thorn in his side. The Moth sticks to the
richest Stuffs, and the Worm, ^e^s unto the heart of the richest Flowers and
Fruits; and the Thunderbolt strikes down the loftiest Oaks the highest
Steeples, and the most glorious Palaces. Likewise, Care and Grief commonly eat
up the flower of the great Prosperities, and the noblest Dignities are often
subject to the strangest alterations, and to the most terrible downfals. The
richest Crowns cast all their splendour and glory outwardly, but inwardly they
are felt to be weighty upon the Heads of such as bear them. A great Prince
found his Diadem so burdensome, and unsufferable, that he cried out, O Crown! if
thy weight were well known, none would lift thee up from the ground, It is not
without good cause, that such as are passionate for the World, and inclinable
to the delights of the Flesh, are in a continual fear and dread, for they be
exposed to most imminent dangers; if their Eyes were but open, they should see
a naked Sword always hanging by a small thread over their Heads. As in that
glorious Statue which Nebuchadnezar saw in his dream, the Head that was of pure
Gold, was as easily broken, as the Earthen feet, and became as light as Chaff,
which the Wind carries away. Likewise, the most Honorable, the Richest, and
the most Glorious Estate, is as well subject to the same mischances, as the
Lowest, the Poorest, and the most Wretched; where are any Riches and Treasuries
that are not succeeded by Poverty? Where rides that Pride and Pomp that has
not shame to attend it? Is there any grandeur in the Age, not subject to the
furious blasts of Envy? Where is that lighted Taper, that a Whirlwind, and a
storm of Rain cannot put out? Christian Souls, take good notice of the Fruits
which the World gives to its Servants and Children, and you shall find that
they are well like to certain Apples of America, of an excellent beauty, and of
a sweet Smell; and nevertheless they are full of the rankest poison, that
kills, infallibly, such as unadvisedly eat them. There is no sweetness so great
upon Earth, but has a mixture of bitter; nor joy so pure and lasting, but is
often interrupted with Sighs and Tears. The rarest Pleasures have a sad
countenance, and a groaning Accent; our Hearts, in the midst of laughter, feel
an oppression, and our joy is accompanied with sorrow; Therefore when the most
experienced of all former Princes, had taken an exact notice of all things
under the Sun, and tasted of all the delights of Life, he concludes with this
confession, That all things under the Sun are nothing but vanity and vexation
of Spirit.

It is not needful that I should make here an exact, and a particular
description of all the sad and troublesome accidents of this life, that are
able to turn the most flourishing Estate upside-down. Remember, ingenious
Reader, to run over carefully the whole course of thy life, and examine in the
just Seals of the Sanctuary, all the good and evil things which thou have
found by experience. In one put all the satisfactions of thy Flesh, and
whatsoever brings thee any advantage or content; and put in the other all thy
fretful Cares, Griefs, Displeasures, and Disgraces. If thy Evils and Miseries
do not weigh down the Balance, thou may esteem it a wonder and a miracle.
Thou have no cause to boast of thine Earthly Happiness. Mind well the speech of
Solon, one of the seven Wise Men of Greece, to Cresus, a Prince who prided in
his Riches and Prosperity, That none could be esteemed happy, before his latter
end, and the hour of his death. Consider, that some who have attained to a
greater degree of Happiness, then thou have, have fallen into a most wretched
Estate on a sudden. He that did lately swim in Wealth and Plenty, is reduced
oft-times to the lowest Poverty. He that had whole Armies at his Command, is
sometimes forsaken of all the World. He that had Princes for his Subjects, is
often forced to obeya Slave. Some that fed daintily, are glad to eat at present
the Bread of Affliction, and to quench their thirst with tears. Some that
lately flourished in gorgeous Apparel, in Palaces bedecked with Gold and
Silver, are now rotting in a loathsome Dungeon. Some are dragged from their
most glorious Dwellings, to the most infamous Deaths. The richest and noblest
Crowns have not protected the wisest Heads.

When it should be possible to go through this life without feeling any
alteration in thine health, nor suffering any loss of Goods, nor change of thy
happy condition, which is as rare a thing to be found, as the strange Bird
called a Phoenix. Have thou no Children, Parents, nor Friends whom thou love,
or ought to love tenderly? are those Persons without any affliction? and is
it not possible that it should seize upon them? certainly, unless thou have an
Heart as unsensible, as the Marble and the Steel; unless thou have renounced
all natural affections, thou must needs be moved with these evils and disgraces
that happen to them in their life; and when death snatcheth them away, it must
needs tear thy very Heart, and rent thy Bowels.

But if it should happen, which is not to be believed, that nothing has ever
afflicted thee in thine own Person, or in that of thy Friends; and if all such
as are related to thee, live in a perfect and flourishing prosperity, like unto
those Countries of the other World, that are always covered with Flowers and
Fruits; cast thine Eyes upon the Earth, and thou shall there behold so many
evils and calamities, that if thou have any common sense of Humanity, thou
shall have cause to weep. God commanded the Prophet Jeremiah, to deliver the
Cup of his Wrath to several People, one after another, but now, it seems, that
he delivers this Cup to them all at once; for where is that People or Nation
that may boast of never having drunk of it, and of not being in danger of
drinking; some have drunk it up to the very dregs, others drink it by degrees;
others have this bitter Cup brought to their Lips.

Our Savior caused his beloved Disciple to see two Angels, that had each of
them in his hand a sharp Sickle to reap the Corn, and gather the Grapes. Revel.
14. Afterward he discovered to him seven more, that had in their Hands Golden
Viols, full of the wrath of God, which they poured upon the Inhabitants of the
World, to plague and punish them, Revel. 15. But at present, the Holy Angels
appear in Troops and Legions, to cut off Mankind, and to transport them to the
Winepress of God's Eternal Vengeance. The wrath of God seems no more to be
measured out by Viols, nor by Cups, but it appears as a great River, and a
bottomless Sea, that swells, and runs over the Shore and the Banks. In short,
the deluge of Evils that covers the face of the Earth, is so universal, that
the Doves, I mean the innocent and meek Souls that love Peace and Rest, can
find no place to fix and settle their Feet.

If thou have any Christian Zeal and Charity to assist thy Sense of Humanity;
thou can not possibly behold with unconcerned Affections, the despicable and
dangerous Estate of Christ's Church on Earth; for it is like Noah's Ark in the
midst of the roaring Waves; Like the burning Bush of Mount Oreb, surrounded
with Flames; Like the Prophet Daniel in the Lion's Den, and like his companions
in the fiery Furnace, so that it may justly speak in the same manner as the
ancient Jerusalem, Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold and see,
if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me, wherewith the
Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger, Lam. 1. O Blessed Church
of God, thou have felt persecution from thine Infancy, until now, Psalm. 119.
Prepare therefore thy self to suffer much more in this decay, and old age of
the World, for the Devil will persecute thee with so much the more fury and
violence, because he knows that he has but a short time, and that he must be
soon shut up in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone.

In this case, Grief is not only lawful, but commanded, for God requires us to
put on Sackcloth and Ashes, Is. 12. He desires that we should be sick for the
troubles of Joseph, Amos 6. That we should weep with them that weep, Romans 12.
That we should remember the prisoners, as if we were prisoners with them, and
that we should suffer with them that are tormented, as being members of one
Body, Heb. 12. We have good reason to apply to the World, and to the
Worldlings, David's saying, Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in
the Tents of Kedar, my Soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace, Psalm.
120. Jeremiah had never so much cause as we to lament, and to wish that his
Head were dissolved into Water, his Eyes were a fountain of Tears to weep day
and night, Jer. 9. And the Prophet Isaiah had never so much reason to cry out
in the displeasure of his Soul, Look away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor
not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the Daughter of my People, Is. 22.

It is not therefore without good cause, that the Preacher acquaints us, That
the day of Death is far better than the day of our birth; for our Birth causes
us to weep, and Death wipes off all Tears from our Eyes; our Birth discovers
that large Theater upon which, all Worldly Tragedies are acted; Death draws the
Curtain, puts a period to all such bloody Spectacles; Our Birth casts us into
the Fire and Water of diverse afflictions; and Death draws us out of the Flames
and Bitterness. Finally, seeing that our Life is but a Chain of Misery, and
that Death breaks in pieces the last link; seeing that our Life is but a
continual Fighting, and that death alone is the Victory; It is most certain,
that this death is not to be feared as an evil and an enemy, but it is rather
to be desired as a good Friend, and a Blessing. It is reported of the
Thracians, that they buried their dead with expressions of joy; and the
Inhabitants of the fortunate Islands did Sing and Dance at the Funerals of
their dearest Friends. I don't recommend these foolish examples of these
extravagant and barbarous People, who were without Hope, and without God in the
World; such cannot fear death too much, for if it frees them from some present
and light evils, it casts them into an Abyss of excessive torments; Death is
an Happiness, it brings with it solid Comfort and Joy, but it is when we dye in
God's Favor, and in the Faith of our Lord Jesus; God has sufficiently
declared the Happiness and Pleasure of his Childrens death, for he does often
abridge the days of those whom he favors and esteems. Because he had seen some
good things in the person of Abijah, the eldest Son of Jeroboam, King of
Israel, he took him away in the flower of his Age, 1 Kings 14. He granted the
same favor to Josias, King of Judea, one of the most Religious Princes of the
World, for he had declared to him by Hulda the Prophetess, Behold, I will
gather thee unto thy Fathers, and thou shall be gathered into thy Grave in
peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this
place, 2 Kings 22. It is not to be doubted, but that such are most happy, as
die in the Lord, and rest from their Labors; but I judge such happy in a
twofold manner, as Dye, or rather cease from Dying in such miserable times, so
full of confusion and disorder.

Would not you laugh at a Workman that should grieve when his Task is ended,
and his Labor finished; or at a Wayfaring Man, that should lament to see the
end of his painful journey through Prickles and Thorns, and the scorching heat
of the Sun, or the unsufferable cold of the Winter. Or would you not wonder at
one that should vex himself, when he is safely arrived in the Haven, escaped
the Waves of a tempestuous Sea, and in a shelter from the Storms. Wretched Man!
thou art far more foolish and extravagant, than those of whom we speak; for the
most painful Labors of a Workman, the most grievous weariness of a tedious
journey, and the swelling Waves of a troubled Sea, are nothing in comparison of
the Labors, Misery, and Troubles of this languishing Life. You would,
doubtless, esteem it a very great folly and madness in a prisoner, to be sorry
of being delivered out of his noisome Dungeon; or in a Gally-Slave, to be angry
when he is to be loosed from his Chains; or in an offender, to vex when he is
freed from his Torments. What think ye? is there less madness and extravagancy
in you, when ye are grieved to see death, freeing your Souls from this
miserable Body, where it is imprisoned, withdrawing it from the painful
employments of this unhappy Age, more grievous and intolerable than that of the
Gally-slaves, and discharging you from the troubles of the Soul, far more
painful, than the most unsufferable tortures of the Body; no, no, death that
thou dreadest so much, is not the death of the faithful, but the end of his
miseries, and the last period of all his torments, Genesis 8. Noah when he went
out of the Ark that stopped upon Mount Ararat, had never so much cause to praise
God, and to offer unto him the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving; as we have, when he
is pleased to cause us to see the end of the Inundation of so many evils and
calamities, and to make this floating Life, or this living Death, to stop upon
Mount Sion.

The Children of Israel sung Songs of Thanksgiving, when they came out of
Egypt, and saw themselves delivered out of a bitter and painful Bondage; where
they had been employed in gathering up Stubble, and burning Brick; but we have
much more cause to rejoice and to sing Songs of Praise, when Death takes us out
of the World, where we suffer a kind of bondage, laboring in vain employments,
and enduring the scorching heat of many afflictions that consume us. Thou
find fault with some of the unconstant people that murmured to return again
into Egypt, when they were upon the borders of the promised Land, but rather
find fault with thine own filthy flesh; if it offers to murmr and revolt,
when thou art at the entrance of thy Celestial Canaan; Joseph rejoiced when the
King of Egypt sent for him out of prison, Genesis 41. and have we not cause to be
joyful, when God sends for our Souls out of the World, and causes them to go
out of their Bodies, which to them is a kind of a Dungeon?

If therefore we can speak without impatient murmuring; I conceive we have as
good reason as Jonas, to say, O Lord, take, I beseech thee, my life from me,
for it is better for me to dye than to live, Jonas 4. Or, as the Prophet Elias,
It is enough, Lord, take away my life. 1 Kings 19. Such a Soul, may in an Holy
transport, safely speak in the language of David, the Man after God's own
Heart, Bring my Soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name, the righteous
shall compass me about, for thou shall deal bountifully with me, Psalm. 141.

A Prayer and Meditation for a Christian, who comforts himself with the
Consideration that Death delivers us from all evils, which are so numerous in
the World, and which so often assault us.
O Glorious Prince of my Salvation! thou have hitherto strengthened me against
all fears of Death, but now I beseech thee with all mine Heart, to give me
Grace, that death may not terrify and afflict me; but also fill me full of Joy
and Comfort. Suffer me not to be like thy People Israel, when they had
forgotten their hard and cruel Bondage; when they thought upon the Pleasures
and Plenty of Egypt, they did mutiny to return thither again, when they were
upon the borders of Canaan. Give me Grace, O my God, to blot out of my Soul the
fancy for the vain delights of the World, and for the deceitsul Pleasures of
this wretched Flesh. Let me have always in my mind the Labors, the Pains and
Troubles of this miserable Life, that I may continually look upon Death in the
same manner as the Workman looks upon the end of his days work; As the
Wayfaring man looks upon the end of his Journey; and as the Traveller looks
upon the Haven of his last Rest. Let me often meditate upon these horrible
confusions that are this day in the World, the Deluge of all manner of Evils
that cover the face of the Earth, the Rivers and Streams of Blood that is shed,
the Fires and the Swords that devour so many. Let me never forget the sad and
lamentable state of thy poor Church, that is like a small Boat upon the Waves
of the Sea, always in danger of sinking; if thou did not still the Winds, and
Command the roaring Storms; it is in the World, as it were in a flanting
Furnace, ready to be consumed, if thou did not withdraw from thence the
furious heat, Or in the midst of Lions that would soon devour it, if thou did
not close their jaws. O my God, when wilt, thou shut mine Eyes, that I may not
see so many Tragical appearances. When will thou stretch out unto me from above
thine Hand, to draw me out of this Abyss of Wickedness? When will thou send
down unto me thine Holy Angels, to carry me out of this grievous burning? When
is it that I shall see no more the Nations drunk with the Wine of thy Fury; and
thy Holy Church stooping under the heavy weight of its Cross? When shall I hear
no more the bitter complaints of thy Spouse; the lamentations of thy Children,
the groans of thy Servants, the sighs of the Prisoners, and the mournings of
thine Inheritance. O Heavenly Father, my only Hope, and my All! When will thou
loose me from this Chain of Misery? When will thou carry me above the reach of
the Storms and Tempests of this troublesome Sea? When shall the cares and griefs
cease to devour my Soul, and when shall my Body no more be subject to Sickness
and Pain, and Torments. O Lord, thou knownst all things; thou see that I am
in the World as in a Prison, and that my Soul is in this wretched Body, as in a
woeful Dungeon. Cause therefore thine Heavenly Light to shine upon me thy
Servant; strike me with thy merciful Hand, and awake me out of my dumpish and
sottish Humor; cause all my Chains to fall off, and open unto me the Gates of
this black Prison, that I may go out and follow willingly the steps of that
good Angel, that intends to take me out of this miserable Captivity, and secure
me for ever from the malicious designs of Satan and the World, that endeavor
to destroy me, and triumph over my Misery. When I shall be in the streets of
thine Heavenly Jerusalem, I shall then know for certain, that thou have
delivered me; I shall then praise thy wonderful Works in the Company and Church
of the Firstborn, that rejoice in Heaven, where the former miseries shall no
more be remembered, where there shall be neither Crying nor Pain; where we shall
not be tormented with Hunger and Thirst, and where no Affliction shall disturb
us, for the Lamb that is in the midst of the Throne shall feed, and lead us to
the Fountains of living Water, where be shall wipe away all Tears from our
Eyes, Amen.

CHAP. 21.
The ninth Consolation, Death shall deliver us from Sin, which we may see
Reigning in the World, and from the Relics of our Corruption.

WHen God sent Angels from Heaven to lead Lot out of Sodom, and to draw him out
of the Flames with which he intended to destroy that abominable City; this good
Man's Wife could not but look back; but she was in that very moment
sufficiently punished, for she was turned into a Pillar of Salt. The Emblem of
that Holy Prudence that this example recommends to posterity; The cause of this
unhappy Woman's breaking the Angels express Command, was her consideration of
the Riches, Plenty, and Pleasures of that Country which she had left, not
thinking upon the baseness, filth, and abominable Vices that brought God's
Wrath and Vengeance upon the unworthy Inhabitants: Likewise, when God intends
to take us out of the World, and to secure us from the sense of his dreadful
judgments; that which causes us to look back, and hinders us from following
the Angels that God sends unto us, to lead us up to the Mountain of our
Salvation; are our thoughts and affections for the Riches, Honors, and
Pleasures of this wretched World, whereas we should then fix our minds upon the
sins that govern here below, wherewith we are defiled, whilst we remain in this
corrupted Flesh.

Christian Souls, will you prepare your selves to go to God? and do you wish
that Death would comfort and rejoice your Hearts, instead of afflicting them.
Cast your Eyes upon those dreadful Vices that are so usual, under which, the
whole Creation groans, as under an heavy burden. O good God, in what age are we
born? an age like that of Noah, for all the Earth has corrupted its ways, Genesis
6. nothing but a deluge of Fire is able to purge it. There was never more
Injustice, more Perfidiousness, Treachery, Debauchery, Insolency, and Envy;
never more Vanity, Luxury, Pride, Cruelty, Blasphemies, Impiety, and Atheism;
we may justly apply to our days, that which the Prophet. Hosea said of the
corruption of his time, There is no Truth, no Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in
the Land; there is nothing but Swearing, Lying, Killing, Stealing, and
committing Adultery; they break out, and blood touches blood, Hos. 4.
Therefore we have good cause to make David's Prayer, Help Lord, for the Godly
man cease, for the faithful fail from among the Children of Men. They speak
vanity, every one with his neighbor, with flattering Lips, and with a double
Heart do they speak, Psalm. 12. O wicked World, a World overflowing with
Iniquity, a sink of Impurity, a burning Furnace, heated with the impure flames
of the bottomless Pit, and choakt with the smoke of Hell. But sin reigns not
only in this wretched World, but it defaces also the Church of God, and causes
most fearful disorders amongst those that bear the Glorious name of Christians;
they were anciently to be discerned from the rest of the World, by their
Speech, Conversation, and Behavior; but the Devil has wonderfully debauched
them, he has blotted out God's Image in their Souls, he has taken from them
that noble distinction, and removed far away all difference between them and
the World; we cannot with justice say to most Christians of our age, as was
said to the Apostle St. Peter, Thy speech bewrays thee. Nor to appropriate to
them, what Isaac said of one of his Sons, Thy voice is the voice of Jacob, but
thou have the hands of Esau; for they have both the Voice and Hands of profane
Esau, they speak and live as he did, they publish their crimes with a brazen
face, and endeavor to glory in their shame; the Air is infected with their
profane and dirty Language, with their impudent Lying, with their fearful
Oaths, and grievous Blasphemies, and the Earth is defiled with their horrid
Sins, and abominable Crimes. Covetousness, Ambition, Lust, and all manner of
Vices, have mounted upon the Throne; they Act and Command in a furious manner
in every place; They that have in their mouths the Holy Name of the Lord Jesus,
and that make profession of following his Sacred Footsteps, give us good cause
to take up again St. Paul's lamentation and complaint, Many walk, of whom I
have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies
of the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and
whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3.

If we should seek in these days, for the Christian Virtues, where shall we
find Faith, Hope, and Charity? where shall we meet with Righteousness,
Fidelity, Holiness, Innocence, Goodness, Meekness, Humility, Patience, Piety,
and Devotion. You Daughters of Heaven, what is become of you? we cannot see any
more your Angelical countenance, we are so far from beholding the delightful
Beams of your Divine Presence, that we cannot spy out any of your Footsteps
upon Earth. You may therefore understand, Christians, thereby, that the Son of
God is at hand, for iniquity abounds, Charity grows cold, and there is no more
faith upon Earth.

In the midst of such a woeful Corruption, who of us does afflict his Soul, as
Righteous Lot? who weeps day and night, as David, a Man after God's own Heart?
where can we spy out the Fountains of Tears of the Prophet Jeremiah? Or the
confusion of Face of Daniel? Or the Zeal of Moses, of Phineas, and of St. Paul?
If the Angel of God that went through the midst of Jerusalem, did review in our
days, the Inhabitants of this Land, I am afraid, that he would not find many
marked with the Letter Thau; not many weeping and sighing for the abominations
that are amongst us; for evil and wickedness are become familiar to us; by the
means of our too usual inspection, our continual conversation, with the
vicious, accustomes us to the grievousness of their crimes, and to the impiety
of their discourses, as we are accustomed by degrees, to breathe in an
unwholsom Air, without aversion, and to hear the fearful downfall of the
Cartaracts of the River Nilus, without repugnancy.

But we are so far from grieving at the universal inundation of Vice in the
World, that we our selves are carried away with the impetuous torrent of
corruption. Sin gets upon us insensibly, and overcomes us; so that the World is
not unlike to the House mentioned by God himself in the 14 of Leviticus, for it
is not only infected with an incommodious Leprosy, but it infects all such as
dwell therein. The Men of the World have an easier task to teach us their
Vices, than we have to teach and persuade them to Virtue. As a pestiferous Body
may spread the infection, and give it to a thousand such as are whole; whereas,
a thousand in perfect health cannot heal one infected with the Plague. So that
what happened under the Ceremonial Law, happens now unto us; the clean Vessel
did not sanctify the defiled, but the defiled did corrupt, by its approaches,
such as were clean. Evil companies corrupt good manners, and the flames of the
most burning Zeal, are extinguished by the coldness of the Age. As Lambs cannot
feed amongst Briars and Thorns, without leaving behind them some of their
Wool; Likewise the harmless and meek Souls, cannot live amongst so much
cousenage and malice without loosing something of their Innocence and Christian
Simplicity.

Who is it amongst us, that can say, with a safe Conscience, that the World is
crucrified to him, and that he is crucified to the World? Gal. 6. Or who is it
that lives in the World without being guilty of its sins, as the Fish drinks of
the Sea water and receives nothing of its bitterness? Psalm. 26. Who can
converse in the Courts of Princes, as Joseph in Egypt, as Daniel in Babylon,
or as Queen Esther in the Court of Ahasuerus? Is there any that can justly say,
that he has washed his Hands in Innocence, and purified his Conscience from
all dead Works, to serve the living God? Heb. 9. Who can speak in this manner,
I have purified my Heart, I am clean from my sin? Prove. 20. In truth, if we say
that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. 1 John
1. We have good reason to break out into the Prophet Isaiah's exclamation, when
he saw God sitting upon his Throne, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a
man of unclean Lips, and I dwell in the midst of a People of unclean Lips,
Isai. 6. Or we may say with the same Prophet From the sole of the foot, unto
the crown of the head, there is no whole part. Not only the Souls that are
fixed to the Earth, but also such as mount up to Heaven by fervent Prayers, and
devout Meditations, have good cause to acknowledge their imperfections, and to
ask forgiveness. If any fancies himself to be perfectly whole and free from all
infection, let him enter into his Soul, and seriously examine his own
Conscience, and the same thing will happen to him as to Moses, when he put his
hand into his bosom, he drawed it out again as white as Snow, all covered with
Leprosy, Exodus 4. Where is there a Christian that feels no Law commanding in
his Members, and struggling against the Law of his Understanding? Who is it that
finds not by experience, the truth of St. Paul's saying? The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary
the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would, Romans 7.
Gal. 5. Without doubt, such as know not, nor never have felt the bitter and
vehement struglings of their carnal Lusts that War against the Soul, 2 Pet. 1.
cannot conceive what it is to deny themselves, to put off the old man with his
Deeds, to crucify the Flesh with its Affections and filthy Lusts, Ephesians. 4. such
know not what it is to mortify our Members, to cut off our right Feet, and
right Hands, and to pluck out our right Eyes, Matthew. 10. that is to say, to
destroy, and by an Holy violence, to give a deadly wound to all our brutish
Passions, and vicious Affections, when they should seem to us as dear and
useful as our Hands, Feet, and as tender as our right Eyes, Coloss. 3. Matthew. 5.

If these cursed affections could but declare their names, they would say as
the evil Spirits of the Gospel, Our name is Legion, for we are many. As that
Devil that possessed the Lunatic, mentioned by St. Matthew, he cast him
sometimes into the Fire, at other times into the Water. Likewise these carnal
Lusts labor to cast us sometimes into the Flames of Ambition, or into the
burning heat of Covetousness, or to hurry us headlong into the gulf of unlawful
Delights, or into the mud of filthy and carnal Pleasures. Furthermore, they
break the Chains and Ties with which we imagine to stop their fury; they war
and fight against us by day and by night; and at every moment they return to
charge us home, and renew the combat. Every where they assault us, and have no
more regard for Temples and Houses of Prayer, than for common and public
places. As Satan had once the boldness to encounter with Jehosoua the
High Priest, before the Angel of God; Likewise these cursed Lusts are so
impudent to tempt us in the most Religious Assemblies, and the devoutest
Congregations, as well as where we are engaged in the most hellish and
debauched companies of the World.

But these Lusts that War against the Soul, are as subtle and malicious, as
they are cruel and obstinate. When they perceive us upon our guards, and see
that there is nothing to be got, they conceal their weapons, and their fire,
but it is with a design to surprise and burn us when we are least aware. As
there are certain Creatures that counterfeit the Dead, that Men might not spend
their labor to kill them; Likewise, this treacherous Flesh appears of its own
accord, as dead, that we might spare it, and not totally deprive it of Life. If
then we leave it in peace and quiet, it recovers its strength and vigor, and
assaults us afresh with its poisoned Darts. When we imagine that we have cut up
this wretched Plant by the root, it grows and breaks forth into bitterness.
When we think that we have put out this Fire, with the Tears of our Repentance,
it kindles again, and bursts forth into fiercer Flames. As Soon as we have cut
this cunning Serpent to pieces, with the sharp knife of true Repentance, it
gets together, and when it seems to have lost all strength and heat, it
recovers again in our Breasts, and wounds us to the very Heart. In short, as
that evil Spirit, mentioned by our Savior, in the Gospel, when he was driven
out of one House, waited for a good opportunity to return; which as soon as he
perceived, he took unto himself seven other Spirits, worse than himself, so
that the last condition of that Man was worse than the first, Mar. 12. Likewise
after an afflicting Fast, and fervent Prayers; after a torrent of contrite
Tears; when we imagine that we have cast out of our Hearts, the most dangerous
Lusts; if we begin to relent and open to them the door, they burst in again
upon us with more fury, and render the sequel of our Life, far more bitter and
unpleasant.

But if you had not so many sins, and that your Lusts were not so violent, when
the old Man should not have so much strength in our Members, and that the
temptations should not overcome us so often; tell me, I pray, Christian Souls,
in what Virtues do you excel? Have they all the Beauty, the Glory, and
Perfection that God requires? Is your Holiness without the least spot or
blemish? Is your Innocence as white as Snow, and as bright as the Light? Is
your Zeal as hot and burning as that of the Seraphims? Is your Charity sincere,
without Paint or Disguise, as that of Christ, who gave his Life for you? Do you
love God for his Name sake, or because of his excellent Perfection? Do you love
him with all your Heart, with all your Strength, and with all your Thoughts? Do
you love him more than you love your Selves, or any thing in the World? Do you
hate all things that he hates? and do you carefully abstain from every thing
that displeases him? Do you love your neighbor in God, and for the sake of
that good God, whose Image he bears? Do you love him as you love your Selves,
without Hypocrisy or Disguise? Do you never deal otherwise with others, than
you would have them deal with you? And do you perform to them the same good
Offices, that you would have them perform to you, if they were in the same
Estate as you be at present? Do you shine in the midst of the dark night of
this Age, as so many Tapers lighted with the beams of the Sun of Righteousness?
Phil. 2. Do you live as Citizens of Heaven, and as fellow-Citizens of the
Saints, and as the Children of God? Phil. 5. Or as such as expect the Blessed
Hope, and appearing of the Glory of the Great God and Savior Jesus Christ? Is
your Heart in Heaven, where your Treasure should be, and your Glory and
Happiness. And do you walk as Persons that ascend up by the steps and degrees
of Piety to the Heavenly Jerusalem? Tit. 2. Do you go from Faith to Faith, from
Hope to Hope? and do you make every day some new progress in Holiness? Do you
never grieve the Holy Spirit, by whom you have been sealed for the day of
Redemption? Are you immutable, abounding always in the Work of the Lord? Ephesians.
4. And do you endeavor to be found in him, without spot or blame, in Peace? 1
Cor. 15. 2 Pet. 2.

Tell me devout Souls, whether you be not as the Fire and the light. For as
there is no Flame so pure, but has its Smoke, nor Star so bright, but becomes
dark and invisible at the first approach of the Sun; Likewise, there is no Life
so Holy and Harmless, but has its imperfections, and cannot abide the sight of
an impartial God, and the exact inquisition of his Justice. When we have well
Prayed and Wept, and begged Forgiveness; and when God has bestowed upon us a
new Heart, and a new Spirit; After all, we have need that God should enlighten
us afresh with the Gracious Beams of his Divine Countenance, that he should
lead us by the Hand, direct us by his Wisdom, and accomplish his Virtue in our
Infirmities.

Examine seriously, My dear Friends, unto what exercises of Devotion you are
most addicted, and what secret motions you feel in your Souls. Who is it that
has the greatest share in your Heart and Affections? What Thoughts do lull you
asleep, and what are those that awake you? What do you think upon, for the most
part, upon God and his Glory, or upon the World and its Vanities? upon Heaven
and its Excellencies, or upon the Earth and its Riches? upon Paradise, and its
mortal Delights? or upon the Flesh and its base satisfactions? And when you
meditate upon Divine things, are you certain that you do it with a Religious
attention, with an inward delight that ravisheth and comforts your Souls. And
when you offer any Prayers unto God, do you perform this Duty with Humility and
an Holy Zeal? Are your Hearts and Affections carried up to Heaven, before you
lift up thitherward your Eyes and Hands? Are your Oraizons like the perfume of
the Saints, that came out of Golden Viols? Are they like the Incense of the
ancient Israelites that did smoke upon an Altar, burning with a Celestial Fire?
Do they thus proceed from a Soul purified with Faith, which is more precious
than fine Gold? Do they come from an Heart that is enflamed with a Zeal that
never dies, and that ascends continually on high? Do you bestow your Alms with
that earnest and fervent Charity that God requires from you? Do you open your
Bowels to your Brethren, before you open to them your Purse? And do you bestow
your Hearts upon the Poor, before you bestow your Money?

And for the public Devotions that you owe to God; Pray tell me with what
Humility and Respect they are performed? Do you call your Delight the Days
dedicated to his Glory, and to the Celebration of his Holy Mysteries, Isai. 58.
or do you look upon them as troublesome? Don't they cause you to complain in
your selves, as those profane Jews spoken of by Malachi, Behold what a
weariness is it, Mal. 1. Do you go up to the House of God with the voice of
Melody, and transports of Joy? Psalm. 41. or do you go thither out of custom,
in a careless manner? When Jacob went up to Bethel to offer Sacrifices, he
buried under ground, all the Gods of Gold and Silver, that were in his Family,
Genesis 35. Likewise, you Religious Souls, when you intend to go up to Offer your
Spiritual Sacrifices in the true Bethel, where God bestows in such plenty his
Bread from Heaven, that gives life to the World; Do you not forget to bury all
your Earthly Cares, your Carnal Lusts? Or else do you nourish in your Hearts,
all these false Gods, of whom the World is so fond? Do you look upon the Holy
Assemblies with an unconcerned Eye? Or do you behold them with Reverence and
Respect, as the living Images of that Glorious Church, gathered together before
God's Majestique Throne, which worships him day and night in his Holy Temple?
Are those Divine Psalms that are there, sung only upon your Tongues, or do you
sing them with your Hearts to the Lord? Do you think upon the Angels Songs, and
the Holy Spirits Hallelujahs, with Holy transports of Joy? Is the Word of God
only an Airy Sound that strikes your Ears, or does it reach your Consciences?
Coloss. 3. Does not your Heart burn within you, while God speaks by the
Ministry of his Servants, and opens to you his Holy Scriptures? Revel. 19. Does
this Heart of yours burn with an Heavenly Fire, or with restless impatience, to
see the end of your Devotions, that you might return to your Domestic affairs,
to your worldly Delights, or to your carnal pastimes? Luk 14. Does your Soul
thirst for God, for the strong and living God? Psalm. 42. And is the performing
of the Holy Will of your Heavenly Father, become your Meat, and your only
Delight, John 4. Psalm. 103. In short, Do you fly as swift as the blessed
Angels, when your great God and Savior offers to you an occasion of advancing
his Kingdom, of comforting his Chosen, and edifying the Souls for whom he is
dead? When Abraham offered unto God many Beasts in Sacrifice, a flight of Birds
came and lighted upon his dead Offerings, Genesis 15; Likewise, when we present
unto God the Sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving, and intend to multiply the
acts of our Devotion, a great number of vain and idle thoughts come to
interrupt us. Abraham frighted away those troublesome Birds, but it is not
always in our power to drive away from our minds these intruding thoughts that
disturb us in our Devotions. When we will lift up our selves unto God, and draw
near to his Sacred Throne, our Hearts are far more dull and heavy, than ever
Moses's Hands were, so that they fall down again to the Earth, and to mind
Earthly things; we need therefore that our Chief Priest should hold them up;
and furthermore, it is necessary that they should be perfumed with the sweet
smells of his most Holy Sacrifice, Exodus, 17.

If David, a Man after God's own Heart, entreats that God would be pleased to
sanctify the Words of his Mouth, and the Meditations of his Heart, Psalm. 15. If
the Prophet Daniel, whom the Holy Spirit styles, A man greatly beloved, Dan. 9.
who spent the days and the nights in Devotion, seeks how to make his Prayers
acceptable to God, If the Prophet Isaiah has need that his Lips should be
purified with a burning Coal taken from the Altar, Isa. 6. Who will wonder if
the Meditations of the devoutest Souls be so often interrupted? if their
Prayers be so cold and lukewarm? who can think it strange that we are not able
to pray as we ought? Romans 8. And that we have need to desire God's Holy Spirit
of Prayer and Supplication, who prays and intercedes for us, with Sighs and
Groans which cannot be expressed, Zach. 13. Romans 8.

That which afflicts most the true Believers is, that when they imagine that
they have attained to some kind of Perfection in the exercises of Piety; they
find many times, to their unspeakble sorrow, that they are but beginners, and
that they have made no progress at all. For as the Stone cast up into the Air,
falls down of its own accord, by reason of its natural weight; and as the Water
often heated, becomes as often cold and frozen, because cold is a property
belonging to it; Likewise our Souls that mount up to God in Holy Meditations
and Zealous Prayers, fall down again to these Earthly Vanities, they become
cold and heavy, for these are their natural Properties. God refused the
Sacrifices of such Beasts as were lame and sickly; if therefore he should treat
us, according to our Deservings, how will he accept of us or our Devotions; we
that are weak and infirm in his service, and that cannot walk in his ways
without stumbling at every moment. For these Considerations I may apply to the
spiritual Joy what was said of the Earthly and worldly mirth, Joy is cut off by
Sadness, Isai. 65. For when we have felt in our Breasts this unspeakable Joy of
the Holy Ghost, and that it begins afterward to abate, it seems to us, as if
it had taken its flight to Heaven, as the smoke of Manoah's Sacrifice; Then as
great a Sorrow seiseth upon our Souls, therefore we may complain and cry out as
David, Will the Lord cast me off for ever? and will he be favorable no more?
is his Mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? has God
forgotten to be Gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender Mercies? Psalm.
77. And pray in the Language of Isaiah, Lord awaken thy jealousy, and the
stirring of thy Bowels, that are shut up to me. Finally, if after all the
exercises of Devotion, if after a serious and settled Meditation upon God's Holy
Word: if after Fasting and Mortification, Prayers and Tears, and a constant
attendance in the Duties of Religion; we find any good Progress in Piety; we
may then also perceive Vice to proceed out of our most Glorious Virtues, and
Perfectest Graces. For as the Moth enters soonest into the richest Stuffs and
Cloth; thus Pride creeps into the noblest Souls, and breeds in the most
enlightened understandings. As a Primitive Doctor of the Christian Church has
very well observed; all Vices are begot by corruption, and by other Vices, only
Pride and Presumption proceed from Virtue. O how hard a task is it for a Man
enabled with Gifts and Perfections, that raise him above the Vulgar, not to be
puffed up with Pride, nor deceived with the love of himself. As the beautiful
Bird looks and admires the dainty and various Colors of its Wings, we do thus
behold and admire our selves, we are in love with our own Beauty, and idolize
our Virtues. Therefore as the Nurse leaves sometime the Child to his Legs, and
suffers it to fall, that it might know its own strength, and learn to hold
faster by the Hand; Thus God withdraws from us the assistance of his Grace, to
humble us, and to cause us to implore more earnestly the help and favorable
succors of his Holy Spirit. When St. Peter felt the Sacred Flames of that Holy
Zeal that was kindled in his Heart, and that sincere love that he had for
Christ; he rejoiced and imagined himself to be strong enough to resist all the
powers of Hell, and to frustrate all the fiery Darts of the Devil. This good
opinion that he had of himself, and of his own ability, transports him to that
confidence, as to contradict our Savior Christ, and to protest; Although all
should be offended in thee, yet will not I be offended; and when I should dye
with thee, yet will not I deny thee. This was he who trembled at the voice of a
Damsel, so that his Fall and Apostasy, was as notable as his Confidence was
great; therefore it warns such as stand, that they should take heed of falling
into misfortune, Rom, 11.

There is no good natured Child but is vexed to live amongst such as Curse and
Reproach its Parents; and if we should happen to be concerned unawares in the
offense, or to occasion the death of him from whom it had its being, it will
feel an Eternal displeasure. Now it is certain, that whilst we live in this
world, we must spend our time amongst those that blaspheme the Holy Name of
God, and abuse the Glory of his Eternal Godhead. Moreover, Vice and Corruption
are so universal, that we our selves offend this Father of Mercies and
Compassions, we add sin to sin, and heap up our iniquities together.

Let us therefore conclude from hence, Believing Souls, that Death is not to be
feared as an Evil, or a Misery, but that it is rather to be desired, as an
Advantage and a Blessing. For seeing that it is to be wished for, because it
frees us from all the calamities and sufferings of the World; It is far more
desirable, because it closes our Eyes, and conveys out of our sight, all the
sins and abominations that abound in the World; and because it stops our Ears,
and hinders us from hearing the Impieties and the filthy Discourses that infect
the Air. Seeing that Death is to be embraced with joy, because it delivers our
Bodies from the diseases that torment them and our minds from the cares and
displeasures that vex and afflict them; It deserves to be welcomed with greater
expressions of Gladness, because it delivers us from all remains of sin, and
puts a period to our natural corruption; so that it is to be esteemed, and
looked upon as the Death and Destruction of the Old Man, rather than the Death
of a true Believer.

Sampson rejoiced in his Death, because he knew, that in dying, his mortal
Enemies should dye also, and be destroyed with him; we have more cause to
rejoice at our Death, and to give God thanks at that time; seeing that in
dying, or rather in passing from Death to Life, we may see the Destruction of
all the dangerous Enemies of our Salvation, Who are more dreadful to us than
the Philistines were to Sampson. All the most cruel and barbarous Men of the
World are not so much to be feared, as the Lusts of our filthy Flesh, that put
out the Eyes of our understanding, that cause us to be the Devil's sport, and
to worship many false Gods.

We commonly run out with haste from a place infected with the Plague, and
should not we make as much speed by our Vows and Prayers, to get out of the
World? seeing that Vice is so Infectious and Universal all over it, that so
many thousand Souls are therewith miserably spoiled. Seeing the World is as a
Babylon, where all manner of Debauchery, Vice and Virtue are mixed together,
where Unjustice and impiety Reigns; have we not greater cause to be transported
with Joy, when God delivers us from our woeful Captivity, than the Children of
Israel had when it pleased him to call them out of Babylon? should we not sing
unto him when the Lord returned back, and restored them of Sion, that came back
from their Captivity; we were as those that dream, though our Mouths were full
of Laughter, and our Tongues with Songs of Triumph?

In short, as the Lord Jesus, when he had restored Lazarus to life, and taken
him out of his Grave, he had compassion of him, and could not see him any
longer wrapped up in his Winding Sheet, and tied with a Napkin; therefore he
commanded, Loose him and let him go. Likewise this Merciful Lord, who has made
us to be partakers of the first Resurrection, and called our Souls out of the
noisome Grave of our Lusts, is moved with compassion for us, when he sees these
wretched Souls drag about them the relics of Sin, and some Remains of that
Corruption, in which they were wrapped. Therefore he will cause them to hear
this sweet and comfortable voice, Loose them and let them go. Let them go to
the Eternal Mansions, to the City of the living God, to the Heavenly Jerusalem,
to the Glorious Companies of Angels, and to the Church and Congregation of the
Firstborn, whose Names are Written in Heaven.

A Prayer and Meditation for a true Christian, who comforts himself with this
Consideration, That Death shall deliver him from Sin that Reigns so much in the
World, and from all Remains of his wretched Corruption.
O Most Gracious High Priest, Holy, Innocent, separated from sinners, exalted
above all the Heave^^ who art now shining in Light and Glory, look upon m^ from
thy Sanctuary and Compassionate my wretched Estate. Thou understandest well the
cause of my grief, O Lord, who searchest the Hearts, and read my most Secret
Thoughts. Thou know, O my God, that I grieve to see so much Injustice and
Impiety reigning this day in the World, to see Vice, Profaneness Superstition
and Schism, committing so many disorders in thy Holy Church; But that which
chiefly increases my pain, and aggravates my displeasure, is to see my self
guilty and spotted with the general corruption, and to feel my Flesh, warring
and struggling against the Spirit. The Lusts of the Flesh do not only disturb
me, but they get many times the victory, and insult upon my infirmities. Sin
shows not only it self to me in all its Hellish deformity, so that I am thereby
ashamed of my self, but I also acknowledge, to the praise of thy Grace, that
all that is best in me, cannot endure an exact Inquisition of thy Justice. Alas
my God, how imperfect is my Piety? How languishing is my Devotion? I worship
thee too much for custom, and in a very slight manner. I often praise thee with
my Tongue, and Honor thee with my Lips, whilst my Heart is far from thee. The
Love that I bear to thee is not pure and enflamed, and my Charity, instead of
being burning, is quite cold, or lukewarm. I have not a sufficient trust upon
thy promises, and upon thy fatherly care, my Hope is not settled; It does not
sill my Soul with Heavenly Joys and Comforts. Thine eyes, O Lord, that sees all
the secret Clossets of the Heart, and that pierce into the depths, are too Holy
and Pure, to pass over the sight of evil, and to approve of the ill-favored
Features of Satan yet imprinted in my Soul; they don't only discover my sins,
and iniquities, and all my evil Deeds, but they also behold all the spots and
imperfections of my best performances, and of my most Glorious Acts. My Lord,
and my God, I am not only grieved to see so much sin in the World, in the
Church, and in my Self, but I am also grieved and vexed, that I have not grief
enough; That my Soul is not sufficiently vexed, as that of Righteous Lot; That
the Zeal of thine House does not eat me up, as it did the Man after thine own
Heart; That mine Eyes are not become a Wellspring of Tears, as those of the
Prophet; That the cares of the Churches do not besiege me as they did thine
Holy Apostle; And that I do not sigh and cry as the servants whom thou did
mark with the Letter Thau. O wonderful Lord! Seeing that thou do give me
leave, wherefore is it that I do not embrace thee with a lively Faith, and a
serious Repentance? Wherefore do not I wrestle with thee by Prayers and
Supplications, and Tears? and that I continue not in these Devotions, until I
have obtained thy most precious Blessings, until thou have changed my Being,
and my Life; until thou have renewed my Spirit, and my Heart, to love thee,
fear thee, and worship thee, answerable to thine infinite Merits and Glory? O
Lord, I perceive thou have not altogether forsaken me; I perceive the day of my
deliverance breaking in upon me; I see Death coming to carry me out of this
painful Dwelling, out of this life of bitterness and sorrow: I have this
comfort, that it shall put to death my most cruel and unreconcileable Enemies,
and introduce me into the freedom of thy Children; It will cut off all the
remains of that corruption in which I was first conceived, and usher me into
that Eternal Light that shines for ever in Heaven; Therefore, instead of
frighting me, the sight of Death rejoices and comforts my Heart; for this
cause I shall not fly from it, and turn my back, but I shall go and meet it; I
will endeavor to hasten its coming by my Prayers and continual VVishes; I will
embrace it when thou shall be pleased to send it. O Almighty God of an infinite
Goodness, when will thou reach unto me thy Hand from Heaven, to draw me out of
this Egypt? that I may no longer see the cruelties and abominations committed
in it. When will thou deliver me out of this Babylon, where Vice and Virtue
are intermixed, and where the Creature receives the Honor, only due to the
Creator? When will thou have Compassion of my poor Soul that drags yet some of
its Chains? And when shall I hear that sweet and comforting voice, Loose him
and let him go to his God who calls him, and to his Savior who holds out unto
him his Arms wide open? When will thou send unto me thy good Angels, to lead
me up to thine Holy Mountain, to thine Heavenly Jerusalem, where no impure
thing shall ever enter; or that commits Abomination, or a Lie? When shall I
see my self in that blessed Paradise, where there shall be no Serpent to seduce
us, nor Lusts to war against us, nor evil company to corrupt and spoil us?
When shall I behold the new Heavens and the new Earth, where Justice,
Righteousness, and true Holiness, are sitting upon the Throne? How long, Lord,
shall I hear thine Holy Name blasphemed, and the Blood of thy Covenant trampled
under foot? How long yet shall I listen to the impieties and abuses of the
Children of this age? When will thou lift me up to the Dwelling of thy Glory,
where I shall be no longer assaulted with temptations from the World, with
enticements from the Flesh, and with the fiery Darts of the Devil, where I
shall be no more vexed with evil desires, false Fears, and vain hopes; where I
shall never offend my God, nor grieve his Holy Spirit, that has sealed me to
the day of my Redemption. O Holy of Holies! when shall thy Church be so
sanctified, and cleansed, that no spot or wrinkle, nor any such thing shall
appear in it? When shall I see it decked with fine Linen, clothed with the
Sun, and crowned with the Stars? When shall my Heart be as a golden Viol, from
whence sweet Perfumes may ascend? When shall I behold thy Face continually?
When shall I love thee without interruption, and serve thee without any Let
or Hinderance? When will thou put into my Hands a Celestial Harp, and into my
Mouth the Songs of the Blessed? and when shall I worship thee in the company of
all the Holy Spirits, without intermission, and for ever? When shall I sing
forth thy Praises in Heaven? O Lord, when shall I appear with the Holiness of
thy Saints, in the white Robes of thy Martyrs, and be as fiery as the Seraphims
that fly about thy Glorious Throne. O my God! Let this Holy Zeal which thou
have kindled in my Soul, be like a Fiery Chariot, and an Holy Flame, to carry
me up to the Heaven of thy Glory, where I am to shine in thy presence for ever,
Amen.

CHAP. 22.
The Tenth Consolation, is the Glory and Happiness of our Souls, at their
Egress out of the Body.

IF there were neither Punishment nor Torment after this life to be feared; the
Wicked and Unbelievers that prosper in the World, might justly esteem
themselves the happiest of all men. And if there were neither Glory nor Rewards
to be expected after death, the Righteous and the Faithful, who drink, here
below, Cups full of bitterness and sorrow, would be the most miserable of all
Creatures. The condition of the Beasts would appear more happy than theirs, for
they enjoy in quiet and peace, all the pleasures that the animal Nature is able
to relish. They are not tormented by so many diseases that vex our Bodies;
neither do they know the cares and displeasures that consume and fret our
minds; They grieve not for the time past, nor trouble themselves with any
apprehensions of the time to come; They never feel the grievous disputes of
Lusts; They know not most of those Passions that torment and domineer over our
Souls. All their pains and sufferings, end with their breath, so that when they
are dead, they endure nothing. If we make our Eyes the Judges of these things;
we may say, The accident that happens to Men and Beasts, is the same accident,
as is the death of the one so is the death of the other. But if we search and
examine further, we shall find more difference than between Heaven and Earth,
between Light and Darkness; for it is true, that the death of Beasts delivers
them from the sense of all evils, but it does not introduce them into any real
happiness; when it puts an end to their Misery, it puts a period to their
Being, and to all that pleasure and content, which they formerly enjoyed; for
their Souls and Bodies die together without any hopes of living again.

If we look to the wicked and unbelievers, we shall find that death deprives
them, not only of their Honors, Riches, and of all their Pleasures, and carnal
Enjoyments; but it puts out their Taper in their blackest Darkness, and all
their greatest Delights are lost in a vast Sea of bitterness. If Death loses
them from that Chain of Misery, from which all the Children of Adam are
unseparable; if it frees then Bodies from the pain of any temporal evils, it
casts their Souls into Eternal Torments; but for the virtuous and believing
Christians, if Death is so great a friend to them, because it delivers them
from many Evils and Miseries, it is a greater friend, because it opens to them
the Gate that leads to an endless Glory and Happiness.

The Son of God had a desire to persuade us this Truth, in that remarkable
Parable of the 16 of St. Lukes Gospel, for at one hand he shows a rich Miser,
clothed in Purple and fine Linen, feeding upon Dainties, and living in much
Splendour and Magnificence; and at the other hand he discovers to us a poor
Wretch, named Lazarus, all covered with Soars, lying at this rich man's Gate,
entreating that he might share with the Dogs in the Crumbs that fell from the
rich Man's Table: the Dogs had compassion upon him, and licked his Sores; at
last, the poor Man dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. O
wonderful change! He that was lately a companion, scarce good enough for Dogs,
now solaces himself in the Angel's Embraces; He that was lying at the Gate of a
proud and unmerciful Wretch, is admitted into the Glorious Palace of
Immortality, and reposes himself in the bosom of a charitable and rich Abraham,
where he is sanctified with the Bread of the living God, and drinks of the
Rivers of his Pleasures. The rich Man dyed also, but it happened, that while
his Body was laid in the Earth with State and Honor, the Devils dragged his
Soul into Hell, and cast it into a Fire that burns continually, and that
nothing is able to extinguish: Therefore our Savior represents this damned
Soul, crying out of Hell fire, Father Abraham, have pity upon me, and send
Lazarus,, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my Tongue,
for I am tormented in these Flames. In the next Verses, our Savior shows, how
all the complaints of the damned are fruitless, and their tortures remediless;
he makes Abraham return an answer to this wretched Son. My Son, remember, that
thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil
things, but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

The Heathens have looked upon Death, as the end of all their Afflictions and
Sufferings, but they have never tasted of the Powers of the life to come, they
have never had any assurance of future Glory and Happiness. The Spiritual Joys,
and Celestial Comforts, God keeps for them that fear him, and worship him in
Spirit and in Truth. These precious Riches, and Divine Excellencies, are only
discoverable to the faithful, especially, since the time, in which Christ our
Savior has put Life and Immortality to light, through the Gospel. Hitherto I
have given you a short survey of the calamities that attend upon us in this
mortal life; I have essayed to present unto you all the Comforts that we may
gather from thence, to strengthen a believing Soul, and enable it to withstand
and endure all the encounters with which it is assaulted in this Valley of
Tears. At present I intend to describe its future Happiness, when it is
separated from the Body, and introduced into Heaven; I shall, as far as I am
able, discover unto you that Glory, and Bliss which our Souls enjoy, in
expectation of the great Morn of the Resurrection. You must not think to see
here any perfect Image of our Celestial Paradise, or any magnificent draught of
the advantages reserved for us there; it would be as difficult a task as to
paint the Sun in its splendour, or to measure the Waters of the Sea. I cannot
find words to express my thoughts, all my conceptions are far below that
perfect Happiness, and highest Glory; I shall think that I have done enough, if
I can but represent unto you some few beams of so great a Light; If I can but
show some drops of that Ocean of Heavenly pleasures, in which we shall swim for
all Eternity.

I shall not deliver any thing from my own fancy, nor offer to speak of that
which I have never learned from the great Doctor of our Souls; I shall not
engage my self in vain speculations, more fit to please and puff up the curious
Wits, then to comfort and rejoice the devout Souls, and satisfy such as hunger
and thirst after Righteousness: one word from the mouth of the Lord is better,
and far more worth, than all the reasonings of Humane Wisdom, than all the
subtilties of Philosophy, than all the arguings and conclusions of the most
refined and eloquent Ages. In this description I shall not seek mine own Glory,
nor the applauses of the World, but the Glory of my God, and the instruction of
the Souls which he has purchased with his Blood; I desire to be understood of
the weakest capacities, as well as of the strongest; I hope that such as know
the language of Canaan, such as have tasted of the good word of God, and of the
powers of the Life to come, will not mistake me; for such as have not been
accustomed in the discernment of spiritual things, unto whom the language of
God's Holy Spirit is insipid and unsufferable, if they are not moved, nor
benefited by this Treatise, I dare say, it is none of my fault; but theirs.
Therefore as the wise Men when they traveled to Bethlem, where Jesus Christ
was lying in a Manger, took the Star of the East for their guide; Likewise, we
that be marching to our true Bethlem, where our great God and Savior is
sitting upon the Throne of his Glory; we will follow no other guidance, but
that Divine Light which comes down from Heaven. And as it is impossible to
number all the Stars that shine in the Heavens, therefore we are wont to reduce
them to certain Figures and Constellations. Thus we will not undertake to show
you every particular of our private Meditations, upon this Rich and Divine
Subject; but we will discourse unto you of the chief Heads, leaving the rest to
your pious Thoughts, and the information of God's Holy Spirit.

Whosoever thou art that have embraced Christ, dead and crucified, by Faith and
Repentance, and know thy self united to him, and incorporated into his
mystical Body; remember to praise this Merciful Lord, and rejoice in his
Salvation. Learn to admire the superexcellent Riches of the Treasuries of his
Grace, and seriously consider how magnificent and liberal he is to thee; for he
intends not only to deliver thee from all the sufferings and calamities that
afflict thee, but he will also raise thee up to the highest and most
transcendent Felicity: He will not only draw thee out of the deep Abyss of
Death, and eternal Damnation, but he will take thee up to the Enjoyment of the
most blessed Life, and an immortal Glory. He will not only remove thee from
this wretched Wilderness, where thou art tormented with Hunger and Thirst, and
exposed to the scorching heat of a burning Sun, to poisonous bitings of the
fiery Serpents, but he will introduce thee into his Celestial Canaan, where the
Milk and Honey of the purest Joys, and most solid Comforts flow in abundance,
and where thou shall for ever repose thy self, under the refreshing Shadows of
the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. He will not
only deliver thee from the captivity of this miserable World, which is a true
Babylon, full of all manner of abominations, but he will lead thee in to his
Holy Jerusalem, and carry thee thither upon his Arms; not with an intent that
thou should build and repair it with cost and labor, but that thou should
behold the Glorious and Magnificent Structures, reared up by himself alone from
the creation of the World, and that thou may be Eternally satisfied with his
overflowing Plenty. He will not only pluck off from thee the filthy rags of Sin
and Corruption, but he will cloth thee with a Garment of Light, of perfect
Righteousness and Holiness. He will not only wipe away all Tears from thine
Eyes, but he will put into thy Mouth Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving. He will
not only break the Fetters from thy Feet, but he will place upon thy Head a
Crown of pure Gold. He will not only draw thee out of a black and noisome
Dungeon, but he will place thee upon a Throne of Glory and Magnificence. He
will not only extinguish all the carnal Lusts that War against thee, and put an
end to all thy troublesome disputes; but he calls thee to the fruition of an
Eternal Peace, and Celestial Triumphs. In short, God will not only separate
thee from the acquaintance of sinful and debauched Men, but he will cause thee
to enter in amongst the thousands of Angels, and admit thee to the vision of
his Glorious Face.

When a compounded thing comes to be dissolved, every part returns to its,
first Principle; Likewise, when Man dies, his Body returns to Dust, from whence
it is taken, and the Soul returns to God that gave it. As the Bird, when its
Cage is broken, flies away into the Air to seek lits Liberty and Pleasure. Thus
when this Body is broken to pieces by Death, the Soul flies above the Heavens,
where it meets with Rest and Happiness; or as it is when the Net is torn, the
Fish falls into the Water, where it lives and enjoys all its Delights; Thus
when Death comes to break the strings of this wretched Body, the Soul enters
into the River of Living Water, and into an Ocean of Heavenly Delights.
Finally, as the death of our Savior Christ rent in pieces the Vail of the
Earthly Sanctuary, and discovered all its wonderful Mysteries. Thus the death
of a Believer rents the Vail of this crazy and sinful Flesh, and gives us a
sight of the rich Treasuries, and magnificent Excellencies of the Heavenly
Sanctuary. You Christians, whom God calls to his Glorious Rest, who may express
the greatness of your future happiness? It is not possible to imagine it as it
is. When your whole Lives should have been nothing else but a continuation of
Misery, and a Chain of Calamities; you have now just cause to comfort your
selves, and rejoice in God with an unspeakable joy; for when all things are
reckoned up, the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the Glory which shall be revealed in us. You can loose nothing in this
life but God will restore to you an hundred times more in his Kingdom; besides,
there is no comparison between the advantages of the life to come, and of this
mortal Estate and Being. Grieve not, Believing S^uls, to forsake an Earth
overspread with darkness, full of Misery, and all infected with Sin; seeing
that thy God purposes to receive thee into new Heavens, all enlightened with a
Divine Light, and enriched with endless Felicities, where Righteousness and
Holiness sit upon the Throne. Grieve not for the loss of the most Pious and
Regenerated Societies; Seeing that thou art to be admitted into the Companies
of the Glorified Saints, and Blessed Martyrs, who have washed and whitened
their Garments, in the Sacred Blood of the Lamb; Seeing that thou art from
henceforth to be reckoned in the number, and of the society of the Angels of
Light, and of the glorious Cherubims. Fret not to leave behind thee the Holy
Congregations of the Militant Church, for thou art going apace to the Glorious
Congregation of the Church triumphing, and in a few moments thou shall find thy
self amongst the thousands of Angels and Saints, that worship God day and
night, and adore him, who lives for ever and ever. If God has bestowed upon
thee worldly Riches, leave them without Regret or displeasure, for thou art
going to possess inestimable Treasures, which shall never be taken from thee.
If thou art advanced to great Employments and Honors, cast off thy Purple and
Scarlet willingly, and of thine own accord, for God will shortly cloth thee
with an infinite Glory, that shall never change. When thou should be raised
up to the highest, and most splendid Dignities, when thou should enjoy a
great and flourishing Kingdom, come down from thy Throne with joy, and let fall
thy Scepter and thy Crown; for God calls thee to sit upon a Throne that can
never be shaken, to an incorruptible Crown, and to endless Joys.

Can there be any Town so Rich, so Great and Noble a Seat, that thou may
justly grieve to forsake it, at that time when God intends to make thee a
Citizen with the Glorified Saints of the Jerusalem from above; where neither
Crying nor Labor, neither Fear nor Grief, neither Poverty nor Want shall ever
come near thee; where all the Inhabitants are Kings, and possess Riches without
value? Is there any Dwelling so Beautiful and Magnificent, that should cause
thee to depart out of it with sorrow? for God will lead thee into his own
Palace, all built with fine Gold and precious Stones, where God himself is the
Light, and the Lamb is the Sun. Art thou delighted in the enjoyment of some
pleasant Inheritance here on Earth? Then consider, that all the Inheritances of
the Earth, are nothing in comparison of that uncorruptible Inheritance which
God keeps for thee in Heaven, and has prepared since the Creation of the
World. Have thou a pleasant Garden, or a rich Field? But what are all the
Gardens of the World, in respect of the Heavenly Paradise, where the Tree of
Life grows, that brings forth its Fruits every month of the year, and where
the River of living Water, as transparent as Crystal, runs continually.

What reason have thou, Christian Soul, to grieve, when thou forsakest the
pleasures of the World, that thou enjoyest with the Children of the Earth, or
the Delights of the Body, which are common to thee with the bruit Beasts:
Seeing that God will satisfy thee with his most precious Delights; for in the
blessed Vision of his Face, thou shall meet with fullness of joy? Have thou any
friends on Earth? Let it not trouble thee to leave them; for instead of one
friend here below, whom thou fanciest to be real and sincere, thou have
thousands in Heaven, who will receive thee into the Eternal Mansions, and
embrace thee as their companion, and the partaker of the same Glory and
Happiness. Have thou any Parents or Relations? I suppose that they are not
burdensome to thee, and that thou receivest much more Pleasure and Assistance
from them, than Grief and Ingratitude; yet thou have a spiritual Parentage in
Heaven, and Eternal Relations. Thou have in the Mansion House of thy Heavenly
Father, a great number of Brothers and Sisters, with whom thou shall live in a
blessed Unity, as Members of one Body, governed by the same Spirit, and
enflamed with the same Zeal.

Thou Husband, whom Death snatcheth away from thy beloved Wife, seriously
consider, that God will unite thee to himself, by an unscparable Union, and
that he purposes to take up to him, some part of thy self, that thy
expectations, thy hopes, and affections might be now in Heaven. And thou also,
O Woman! whom Death plucks out of the embraces of thy dear and loving Husband,
remember that thou have a Husband also in Heaven, who has espoused thee to
himself for ever in Righteousness, in Mercy, and Compassion; a Husband always
Living and Glorious; a Husband, who loves thee with an Eternal Love, that is
stronger than Death; whose affections are enflamed for thee in such a manner,
that the Water of all the Seas and Rivers, are not able to extinguish; a
Husband, who bears with all thine infirmities, and has redeemed thee from all
thy sins; a Husband who has not spared for thee his precious Blood, that he
might procure for thee the Glory and Happiness of his Kingdom; who invites thee
to his Heavenly Nuptials, having prepared and appointed for thee a Room in the
Banqueting-Chamber, where thousands of glorified Saints shall sit, and where
the meledious Tunes of Angels shall be heard; a Husband who calls to thee,
reaches out unto thee his Hand, and opens his Bosom to receive thee. If thou
have found any satisfaction and pleasure in the company of that Person whom God
had given thee for an Assistant, and Mate; judge from thence, what Angelical
Delights thou shall meet with, in the ravishing embraces of thy Heavenly
Spouse. The most pleasant Marriage days are gone as a shadow, but the day which
shall bring thee to thy Celestial Bridegroom, shall never depart nor darken, so
that the Heavenly Contentments shall abide and continue with thee for ever,
without the least distaste.

You beloved, and loving Children, who are yet in the bosom of a good Father,
or of a tenderhearted Mother, suffer Death patiently to remove you far from
them, and depart with joy to that good God, that will receive you as his
Children; satisfy your Souls with the Milk of his most Blessed Consolations,
and will make you his Heirs, and Coheirs with his Son Jesus Christ, Say to him
as the Holy Prophet, When my Father and my Mother should forsake me, yet the
Lord will receive me, Isai. 66. Romans 8. Psalm. 27. And you Fathers and Mothers,
that have a tender affection for your Children, if Death takes them out of your
sight, and deprives you of the comfort of their company, grieve not as those
who have no hope, for when they should be never so accomplished, when they
should have never given you but pleasure and divertisement. What are all these
pitiful Delights that pass away in a moment, and that change oft-times into
bitterness and sorrow, if compared with the Eternal Pleasures which we shall
enjoy, in the contemplation of God's Glorious Face, and in a familiar
acquaintance with his Divine Wisdom? You shall not return to them, but they
shall in their time go to you, so that you shall shortly see one another, in
the Dwelling of the Father of Spirits, Matthew. 27. Death separates you for a
while. but the Author of your Life will bring you together for ever.

Finally, of what age and condition soever you be, if you perceive the breath
of your Life to stop, never grieve nor murmr at it; for if Death separates
you from your Selves, it brings you nearer to God, your chief Good, and instead
of a wretched and perishing life, it will promote you to the fruition of an
Eternal and ever happy one.

If we had lived in the days when our Savior was on Earth, there is none of us
but would have looked upon it as a singular Happiness and Honor, to have been
admitted with Peter, James, and John, when they went up to Mount Tabor, to be
Eyewitnesses of our Savior's transfiguration; A far greater Honor and
Happiness, Death is endeavoring to procure you; it will usher you up to Mount
Sion, it will transport you above all the Heavens, where you shall behold more
excellent wonders than ever the Apostles beheld upon Mount Tabor; for you shall
not only see this Glorious Savior whiter than the Snow, and brighter than the
Sun, but you your selves shall be transfigured with him, and clothed with an
exceeding great Glory. The Holy Apostles saw but two Prophets, but you shall
see all the Prophets, all the Patriarchs, Apostles, Confessors, Martyrs, the
Holy and Blessed Virgin, and generally all the Saints that Reign and Triumph in
Heaven. The Apostles had a sight of this Glory of our Savior, as of a flash of
Lightning, it continued with them but for a moment, for soon after they came
down from the Holy Mountain, and were again in danger of the same temptations
as before, and besieged by the same Calamities. It will be otherwise with thee,
O Christian Soul, thou art flying up to Heaven, from whence thou shall never
descend, till the great day of the Glorious Resurrection of our Bodies; Thou
shall not be assaulted any more by any temptation^ thou shall have no more
Enemies to overcome, nor Bitterness to digest. Thou art going to reap and enjoy
the Blessed Fruits of thy Saviors Victories, and to be Eternally satisfied
with the Celestial Pleasures that are at the right hand of the God of Mercies.

We esteem St. John highly privileged, because the Lord gave him a sight of
his Glory, of the Riches, and Divine Excellencies of the New Jerusalem; but how
much greater is thy privilege? for that which this Holy Apostle beheld in a
Vision and a Dream, God will discover to thee in Truth and Reality. Let thine
Heart listen, and thou shall hear the voice of thy Savior, calling already to
thee feom Heaven, as unto his Beloved Disciple, Come and see, Come my good and
faithful Servant, come my Son, or my Daughter, and I will show thee my Glorious
and Magnificent City, I will show thee the Palace of my Glory, and all the
Splendour and State of my Kingdom; Come, and I will expose before thine eyes,
all my Riches, Treasuries, and my most precious Crowns; Come, and I will cause
the River of Living Water, which proceeds from my Throne, to run before thee,
and the Eternal Delights that proceed from my Face; I shall show thee all these
Heavenly Treasures and Glory, all the Angelical satisfactions, not in the
visions of the night, in an ecstasy, in an Holy ravishment of the Mind, or in a
Prophetical elevation of the Soul, but I will discover them to thee in Reality
and Truth, by the assistance of a purer and more Glorious Light, than that of
the Sun. I shall not only cause thee to behold this Glory, these Treasures and
Delight, but I will cause thee to be partakar of them for ever; for as thou
have pledged me in the Cup of my bitterness and sorrows, as thou have continued
with me in my afflictions, and have been faithful unto Death; I will give the
Kingdom to thee, as the Father has given it to me, I will give thee the Crown
of Life, and will cause thee to swim in the vast Ocean of the Eternal
Pleasures; Thou shall not only see all my Treasures, all my Pomp and Glory;
thou shall not only behold the Rivers and the Seas of my most wonderful
Delights, and shall be a partaker of them, but thou shall see me as I am in my
Kingdom; I will pull off the Vail that covers me, and scatter the Clouds and
Mists that hide me, so that thou shall look upon me without hindrance, and
behold me face to face; thou shall be transformed into my Likeness, and be
satisfied with my Resemblance. You see therefore Christians, that although
Death appears to us grievous, and ill-favored, we may apply to it what David
said of Ahimaz, that it is the Messenger of good news; Notwithstanding its
hideous Vail and Cloak of Darkness, we have just cause to liken it to the
Chariot of Fire, that carried up the Prophet Elijah into Heaven.

From what we have said, you may easily conclude with the wisest of Kings, That
the day of our death is better than the day of our birth; for our Birth brings
us upon a wretched Earth, but death carries us into a Paradise of Heavenly
Delights. Our Birth exposes us to several Encounters, but Death lifts us up
upon a Chariot of Triumph. Our Birth expresses from us Crying and Tears, but
Death makes us sing for joy; our Birth brings us into the Light, but Death
causes us to shine as the Sun; our Birth makes us to live a sensual and animal
Life, of a short continuance, but Death introduces us into a Spiritual and
Angelical Life, that shall continue for ever. In short, our Birth casts us into
the Arms of Death, but Death leads to the Wellspring of Life.

Therefore the Apostle St. Paul confesses, that Christ is gain to him both in
life and death, Phil. 1. And for the same reason, the Primitive Christians
could not endure to see any person afflicting himself, for the decease of
Believers, because that it was the day of their Deliverance, Rest, Glory, and
Happiness; they did commonly forbid all manner of Mourning, for they judged
that it is not proper that we should cloth our selves with black, and sadness,
for their sakes who are clothed in white and shining Garments of Light and
Immortality. They looked upon this Life as upon a continual Death, and upon
Death, as upon the beginning of a real Life. Therefore they styled the
aniversary day of the Martyrs death, The day of their Nativity. From hence
proceed the usual Songs of Praise, which they did commonly sing, to perpetuate
their Blessed Memories.

I need not cause you to take notice, devout Souls! of the notable difference
between the death of God's Children, and the death of the wicked, It is as
great as between Heaven and Earth, between Paradise and Hell. Balaam had good
cause to desire the one, and fear the consequence of the other; we have as much
reason to cry out as he did, Let me dye the death of the Righteous and let my
last end be like his, Numb. 23.

You have heard how an Heathen Prince made this address to his Soul, My little
Soul, my little Darling, Hostess and Companion of my Body; Adrian.
thou art going to wander up and down in cold, obscure and fearful places; thou
shall never delight thy self in jesting, as thou have been wont; thou shall
never give me any more pastime: but when a Christian Soul goes out of this
mortal Tabernacle, he may talk to it in another manner. O my Soul! pleasant
Hostess, and Heavenly Companion of this crazy Body, thou can not wander out
of thy way, for thou have a faithful and a knowing Guide; Thou art already in
the blessed company of Angels that shall bear thee upon their wings; thou art
going to a Noble place, enriched with Light and Glory, and blessed with the
sincerest and most Heavenly Delights: Thou shall meet with no more Sorrows,
Grief, nor Displeasure, which so often disturb thy quiet here upon Earth; Thou
shall rejoice for ever with all the Glorified Saints, and sing Songs of Praise
and Thanksgiving for ever, with all the Celestial Spirits. O my Soul! how great
is that Glory and Happiness which thou may justly expect from thy God, who
has both an infinite Power, and an infinite Mercy and Goodness, seeing that he
has endeared thee unto himself, by giving his own Life to free thee from
Death, and Eternal Damnation? If your friends or rather your enemies in this
occasion, weep, and are grieved at your departure; if they labor by their
Tears and Sighs, to move your Heart, and to persuade you to remain yet here
below, speak to them, as St. Paul did to those that wept about his neck, What
mean ye to weep and to break my heart? Acts 21. St. Paul was then in his
journey to Jerusalem, where he was to be bound and imprisoned, and to be
carried to the City of Rome, where he was to dye upon a Scaffold by the
separation of his Head from his Body; notwithstanding St. Paul's friends
comforted themselves with this expression, The Will of the Lord be done. And
what mean ye my friends? will ye hinder me from going up to an Heavenly
Jerusalem, at the Gates whereof I must cast off all these Chains and Fetters of
Mortality; I must leave my Sins and all my Sufferings and Grief. I shall enter
into a new Glory, into the ever blessed company of Saints and Angels. If your
love be sincere and real, prefer my Felicity and Rest, to the small
satisfaction that you find in my company here below; Consider, that in the
House of my God and in the vision of his Glorious Face, I shall find every
moment more Joy and Pleasure, than I should have met with upon Earth, in
thousands of Ages. All the Pomp and Splendour of the World, all the Glory and
State, its Riches and Treasures, its Pleasures and Delights, are as
unconsiderable to those that I am going to enjoy in Heaven, as a few drops of
Water to a boundless Sea, or as a flash of Lightening to the Noon-Sun. Must the
blind Passion which you have for to see me continue with you, hinder me from
seeing the face of my God and Heavenly Father? Suppose I were now shut up with
you in some dark Dungeon, and bound with the same Chain; would you rather see
me your companion, to continue in your misery, and sufferings, than to behold
me at a distance at liberty, in the fruition of a perfect satisfaction. Tell me
not, that we shall never see one another any more; for can you be so great an
Unbeliever to doubt of God's Mercy, that intends to bring us together again in
Heaven. Death separates us for a moment, but the Prince of Life will unite us
together for ever in his Fathers House, whither he is gone to prepare a place
for us. O Devout and Religious Soul! by such Language as this thou shall be
able to mollify the hardest Hearts, and prepare them to behold thy Translation
into Heaven, as Elisha was, when he saw his Masters Rapture. If they feel any
displeasure and grief for thy separation from them; they will have more joy and
comfort to consider with the Eyes of Faith, that extraordinary Glory and
Happiness into which God intends to receive thee, of his infinite Goodness and
Mercy.

If it happens otherwise, and that thou art to deal with weak minds, whose Love
is blind, and whose Passions are so unreasonable, as to resist God's
appointment, and to hinder thy promotion to Happiness; thou must overcome, by
the strength of God's Grace, and the assistance of his Holy Spirit, all the
furious reluctances of Nature. Thou must imitate St. Peter when he saw our
Savior Christ in his transfiguration upon Mount Tabor; he forgot his Family,
and all his dearest Enjoyments in the World, therefore in that excess of joy,
he cried out, Lord it is good for us to be here. In the same Language must you
speak, Christian Souls; I dare be bold to affirm, if your mind is raised up by
Faith into Heaven, to behold Jesus Christ shining in Light and Glory, and
surrounded by all the Holy Angels, and Immortal Spirits. As Soon as you shall
have but the least relish of Paradise, you will be so ravished with that
extraordinary Happiness, that you will easily forget the most lovely Enjoyments
of the Earth, unto which you had devoted your affections; so that in that
transport of Joy, you will be ready to burst out in this Language, My Lord, and
my God, I am sick with Love for thee, I wish for nothing but for thy glorious
Presence; My chief Happiness is to be with thee, and to behold thy face, where
I see already so much Light and Love. I confess, we shall not say as St. Peter,
Let us build Tabernacles; For we shall never be concerned as Soldiers, and
Travelers, in Fights and Journeys; We shall not say, let us build an House,
that we may dwell with thee and thy blessed company; for I see, O God, with the
eye of Faith, the Palace which thou have built from the foundation of the
World, where thou have prepared a place for me. Lord open to me the Gates of
this Glorious Palace, that I may enter in, and sing forth thy Divine Praises.

My dear Friend, shall the miserable Pagans, who never tasted of the Heavenly
Gift, who were never made partakers of the Spirit of Grace, nor of the powers
of the Life to come; the Heathens who were without Hope, and without God in the
World; shall they march courageously to meet Death, and will thou that have had
some foretasts of the happiness of Heaven, that have seen some beams of its
Glory; can not thou resolve to depart out of the World? Shall a Seneca, who
had no other means to strengthen himself, but the persuasions of his vain
Philosophy, who had no expectation of advantages of the life to come; shall
such an one look with a steadfast countenance upon his Blood and Life, gushing
apace out of his veins, and thou my Brother, have thou been brought up under
the tuition of an Eternal Wisdom; Do thou embrace by Faith the Glory and
Felicities prepared for thee by God? and art not able to look upon Death, with
resolution and courage? and can not leave the World with expressions of Joy?
Shall Socrates, whose crazy Body was animated by a sinful Soul, and who had no
manner of Antidotes against Death; drink up that poison that was mixed for him
as a pleasant cup of Drink? And thou Christian, that art animated by the Spirit
of the living God, that seals to thee, his great and most precious promises;
Thou Christian, that enjoyest the earnest of that Inheritance, prepared for
thee in Heaven; shall not thou be able to swallow down, with content, the cup,
that death holds out to thee? Thou have a powerful, and an infallible Antidote
against this poison, for after this bitter Cup, thou art going where thou shall
drink at leisure, out of the Rivers of Eternal Pleasures. Shall it be said,
that in the Jews Houses, at the time of death, the sound of Instruments of
Music was heard, together with Crying and Lamentations, and at thy Dwelling,
who have an interest in Christ crucified, and see him Reigning and Triumphing
in Heaven; there shall be nothing heard but weeping and sighing, that praising
God, and giving of Thanks, shall not be seen at such a time?

Finally, seeing so many persons of all Ages, Sexes, and Conditions, have
desired Death, to be freed from all Earthly Evils and Calamities; have not thou
good cause to wish for it heartily, when it shall please God that thou may
enter in the fruition of the advantages and happiness of the Heavenly Life? How
excellent is thy loving kindness, O God, therefore, the Children of Men, or
rather thy Children, the Brothers and Sisters of Jesus Christ, thy Well-beloved
Son, put their trust under the shadow of thy wings; They shall be fully
satisfied with the fatness of thy House, and thou shall cause them to drink out
of the Rivers of thy Pleasures.

If you be passionately desirous to taste of the Angelical delights, and relish
the Divine pleasures that flow from the Throne of God and of the Lamb; if you
be really athirst for God, will not you speak in David's Language? Psalm. 42. As
the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee O God,
my Soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear
before God? Psalm. 63. And elsewhere, O God thou art my God, early will I seek
thee, my Soul thirsts for thee, my Flesh longs for thee, in a dry and
thirsty Land, where no water is, to see thy Power and Glory, so as I have seen
thee in the Sanctuary. It is not possible to taste of the heavenly Joys but we
are constrained to cry out as the man after Gods own heart. How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts? My Soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts
of the Lord, my Heart and my Flesh cries out for the living God. Psalm. 84.

Consider well, believing Soul, what vast difference there was between the
earthly Jerusalem, for which David was so passionate, and the heavenly
Jerusalem where God intends to receive thee. What great disproportion was there
between the little stream of Shilo, and the large River of Paradise; between
the material Tabernacle, the mercy Seat covered over with fine Gold, upon which
the Cherubims did stretch out their Wings, and the immaterial Sanctuary of
Heaven Jesus Christ the true Ark of the Covenant, in whom are hid the richest
Treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells
bodily, and in whose glorious presence the Seraphims cover their Faces with
their Wings, Coloss. 2. How contemptible were the Sacrifices, Oblations and
Burnt-offerings of the Children of Israel, in comparison of the Spiritual
Sacrifices that are presented unto God in Heaven, in comparison of the
Offerings burning there entire in the Flames of an Holy Zeal, and of a perfect
Charity? And what was all the Frankincense of Arabia, and the sweet smells of
the Holy Land which were burnt in God's presence, if compared with the sacred
persumes that mount up out of the Golden Vials that are in the hands of all the
members of the Glorified Church. Seeing David esteems a Doorkeeper of the
House of the Lord, an happy man on Earth, How great shall thy Glory be, and
extraordinary thy happiness, O believing Christian? for thou art going to be
advanced to the most Honorable Room of that Celestial Dwelling, which God has
built with his own Hands, To this purpose, our Lord Jesus has made to thee
this gracious promise; Him that overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Temple
of my God, and he shall go no more out, and I will write upon him the name of
my God, and the name of the City of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which
comes down out of Heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my new name,
Revel. 3. If this great King was so desirous to hear the Levites singing the
praises of God, with their Tongues, and Instruments of Music, How much more
passionate should we be to hear the Harmonies of Heaven, and the Celestial
Hymns of the Holy Angels, Archangels, Cherubims, Seraphims, and of all the
Glorified Saints, who have in their mouths every one a new Song, the Song of
Moses and of the Lamb?

When the Shepherds heard some few expressions of the Angels Songs, who praised
God at the Nativity of the Son of God, they began to rejoice with an exceeding
great joy, they left their Flocks, and ran in haste to look upon the Child
Jesus in the Manger of Bethlem; and, thou devout Soul, thou hear already the
sweet Anthems of Paradise, and the ravishing consorts of thousands of Angels;
thou know that thy Savior sits there upon a Throne clothed with Glory, and
Divine Majesty, and will thou not forsake all the base Employments of this
sensual and animal life, to go and see this wonderful Savior, who expects
thee, and intends that thou shall sit also with him upon his Throne?

Zacheus climed upon a Sicamore-tree with an unspeakable swiftness, and an
earnest desire to behold the Lord Jesus as he passed by, when he was in the
estate of his hum^liation, and abasement. Should not thou be as earnest, O
Christian Soul, to fly up above the Heavens, to see this merciful Savior, in
the estate of his Glory and elevation; and to have him always in thine eye,
for ever and ever. When our Lord was come into the house of this poor Publican,
he told him, That Salvation was that day come to his house; And shall not thou
O blessed Soul, have more reason to say when thou shall enter into the Palace
of this glorified Redeemer, I am this day going into my Salvation and my Glory?

We highly esteem Jacobs happiness, when he was in Bethel* because God appeared
unto him in that surprising Vision, mentioned in the 28 of Genesis; But if thou
art an Israelite without fraud, I esteem thee to be in a more happy, and a more
blessed estate, thou have a greater cause to break out into Jacobs Language;
This is Gods house, and the Gate of Heaven. Jacob it is true saw the Heavens
open, but he was not admitted into them at that time, but now God opens these
Heavens to receive and lodge thee for ever. The holy Angels of God went up and
down the Ladder that reached up from the Earth to Heaven, but they left Jacob
at the bottom of this Ladder; whereas the Angels that are about thee are come
down to cause thee to ascend up with them, or rather to carry thee up in their
hands, and bring thee to Christ typified by this mysterious Ladder. Jacob saw
God at the top of this Ladder, but he was to go afterward to padan Aram, he
was to travel up and down, to suffer many inconveniences, the heat of the day,
the frost of the night, the displeasure of his Father-in-Law, and his
Treachery; he was forced to fly from the cruelty of his Brother Esau, nay more
then that he was forced to struggle and wrestle with God himself. Whereas here
is now the end of thy Pilgrimage, of all thy troubles, and encounters: Thou
shall never feel the burning and scorching heat of thy Afflictions. Thou shall
be no more tortured with the fears and Apprehensions that now congele thy
Blood: Thou shall no more stand upon thy guard for fear of the deceits, and
violent dealings of Men: Thou shall wrestle no more with God by Prayers and
Supplications, and tears, for they shall be no more in use. God shall load thee
with his most extraordinary blessings, and bestow himself upon thee.

The Prophet Moses wished very passionately to see, but for a moment, God's
Face, whereof he had beheld so many glorious expressions, and should not
thou desire as passionately to see that beautiful and ever shining countenance
in its Glory and Splendour. (O Religious Soul) thou art enflamed with this
Divine affection, God will shortly fulfill all thy mind; so that thou may say
to him as one of the Prophets, Thou shall cause me to know the way of Life, Thy
face is the fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

Christian, if thou had but as much Faith, and assurance as there is Glory
and happiness in Heaven, with what excess of Joy shall thou leave the World,
and all its vanities, to ascend up to that magnificent Palace, purchased for
thee with the precious Blood of thy Redeemer.

Jonathans eyes were once enlightened when he tasted some Honey with the end of
his Rod which he had found in a Rock; And (thou believer) if thou have by Faith
tasted the Divine sweetness that proceeds from Christ the Rock of Eternity,
thine understanding will be all enlightened: Thou shall need no other
Consolation against Death, for Death it self shall fill thee full of
Consolation, and real Joy; So that thou shall have cause to speak not only as
Jacob, O God I expect thy Salvation, Genesis 49. but as King David, I was glad
when they said unto me let us go into the House of the Lord, our feet shall
stand within thy Gates, O Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. By this means thou shall not
only expect with patience, and embrace with Joy, the blessed news of this
Glorious Salvation, but thou shall endeavor to hasten its coming by thy
continual and repeated Sighs: O my God, When will thou stretch out unto me,
from above, thy Gracious Arms? When shall I go into thy Celestial Sanctuary?
When shall I see plainly thy Divine and Glorious Face? When will thou cause me
to drink out of the Rivers of thy Pleasures? How blessed is the man whom thou
have chosen and taken to thy self, to dwell for ever in thy Holy Courts? such
shall be satisfied with the good things of thy House and of thy Glorious Palace.

Joseph m^rched out of his Prison in haste to go to the Palace of the Kings of
Egypt; and haste not thou as much reason to make as much have out of the Prison
of this wretched Body, O believing Soul, that thou may go up to the Palace
of the King of Kings, who inten^s to install thee into such a Glorious estate,
in comparison of which all the pomp of Pharaoh, and of all the Kings and
Princes of the Earth, is nothing but as the hore-frost of the night?

Bartimeus forsakes willingly his Mantle to creep to the Lord Jesus, when he
called him, and thou, Christian Soul, wilt not thou leave this body which is as
a troublesome garment to thee, to ascend up to this Divine Savior, who intends
to cure thee of all thy distempers and Diseases, and who purposes to load thee
with his blessings, and unspeak^ble favors? He will not only bring thee to
behold the refreshing light of Heaven, but he will also cause thee to shine as
the Sun, for ever and ever.

Religious Soul, cast off this spotted garment of the flesh, and so much the
more cheerfully, because God holds out in his Hand a Garment of Light and
Glory, which he will bestow upon thee; for it shall happen to thee as to the
Prophet Elias, who having let fall his Mantle, he found himself all encompassed
about with Flames of fire, and an extraordinary light; for as soon as thou shall
put off this miserable body, thou shall be surrounded with Celestial flames, in
which thou shall mount up to Heaven into the dwelling of immortality, where
thou shall be like God, who clothes himself with light as with a Garment. To
this purpose the words of the Prophet Zachariah concerning the High Priest
Iehoschuah are very proper; he was arrayed with filthy Garments, but an Angel
from Heaven calls to them that waited before him; Take away the filthy Garments
from him, and cloth him with change of raiment, let them set a fair Mitre upon
his head: This, O Christian Soul is the true Image of thy condition, at thy
departure, and the lively portraiture of thy future happiness. At present thou
art clothed with a body undermined by sickness and labor, thou bear about
thee the relics of the old man; but behold, God calls to thee from his Holy
Sanctuary, Take away from him this old garment, pluck off all remains of this
old clothing, bespotted with sin, where the Devils Image is yet to be seen;
and give him the Sacred ornaments of a Royal Priesthood; cloth this Soul with
a long garment whitned in the Blood of the Lamb, gird it about with the Ephod
of righteousness, put upon its head, an uncorruptible Crown, and in its hand a
Golden Viol, that it may for ever offer up the Heavenly perfumes in the company
of all the glorified Saints.

If, after all this, O Christian! thou doubtest of the felicity and glory of
such as die in the Lord Jesus, hear what an Apostle says, who was himself
ravished up into the third Heaven, where he beheld in this Glorious Palace
unspeakable things; We know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens; for in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with
our house which is from Heaven: If so be that being clothed we shall not ^e
found naked; for we that are in this Tabernacle do (...) burdned, not for that
we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon that mortality might be swallowed up
of Life. And listen to what the Holy Ghost says, Blessed are the Dead that die
in the Lord, for so says the Spirit, for they rest from their labors and their
works do follow them.

Would to God that we had some other Word besides that of Death, to express the
wonderful and happy change that we make when we go out of this miserable World;
for, to speak properly, we cannot be said to die, when we leave a place full of
misery to enter into another blessed with an endless felicity; when we exchange
a laborious estate for a peaceable and an happy rest; when we come off from a
cruel War, to enjoy the pleasures of everlasting Joy; when we pass through
Death to an endless life; and forsake a Tomb to mount up on a Throne. Christian
Soul, remember thy beginning and thine end, consider what thou art, from whence
thou proceedest, and whither thou go: Thou art a living Image of thy
Creator, and a beam of glory; thou art of a celestial and immortal nature; God
has washed and cleansed thee in the Blood of his Lamb, without spot and
blemish; and sanctified thee by his holy Spirit; he has brought thee to an
estate convenient to enter into his holy City, and he is ready to admit thee to
take the fruition of his glory; Thou have fought the good fight, finished thy
course and kept the faith, it is therefore high time that thou should
receive the Crown of life; Thou have this precious Crown already in thine
hands, Thou art at the Gates of Heaven, and at the entrance of Paradise.

Go therefore, O believing Soul! go with Joy and gladness to this great God
that calls thee, to this merciful Savior that stretches forth his hands unto
thee, and opens his bosom to receive thee; go into the glorious company of
Angels and blessed Spirits; take upon thee these beautiful Robes of light with
which thine Heavenly Father will cloth thy nakedness, and accept this immortal
Crown that he offers to thee; go and satisfy thy self with the Bread of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and remove thy thirst with the Christial Waters of that
River of pleasure, which proceeds from the Throne of God and of the Lamb: Go
and behold the face of the Father of lights; go and be happy with his Divine
resemblance, and be transformed into his glorious Image.

O blessed Soul! See thou not already the Heavens open, and Jesus Christ at
the right hand of God the Father holding out his hand unto thee, offering to
receive thee into his glorious rest? See thou not the Angels of Heaven
(clothed in white raiment) coming to transport thee out of this miserable
estate? See thou not how thou art already encompassed about with light and
Celestial Flames? Do thou not relish the sweetness of Paradise? Is not there
a Heaven already in thine heart? Do thou not hear the Hymns of the glorified
Spirits? Has not the Lord caused thee to hear that sweet and comfortable voice
sound in thine ear; Verily I say unto thee thou shall be this day with me in
Paradise: Come good and faithful Servant enter into the Joy of thy Lord:
seeiest thou not thy self lifted up above all earthly and perishing things?
Do thou not fly upon the wings of faith and repentance to the Throne of Gods
glory? Do thou not cast thy self into Paradise, into the Arms of Almighty
God, into the bosom of the Lord Jesus, to rest there for ever; and to be
Satisfied with the good things which eye has not seen, ear has not heard, and
which are not entered into the heart of Man, but which God has prepared for
them that love him.

A Prayer and Meditation of a Christian Soul that prepares to go out of its
Body, and comforts its self in the Contemplation of the glory and happiness of
Paradise.
O God! the Author of my being, and the Sovereign Lord of my life; thou see
all the motions and dispositions of my Soul, thou know that I have wholly
resigned my self into thy hands, and desire nothing else but to depend upon thy
good pleasure; speak Lord, for thy Servant hears, here I am to do thy Will O
God. Thy People Israel removed their Camp at thy Command, in the same manner I
am ready to remove out of this Earthly Tabernacle at the first motion of thy
Will. The Golden Cherubims were always upon their feet, with their wings
stretched out, and their faces toward the Mercy Seat; O that I likewise might
look up to him who has purchased for me the eternal Mercies of God; him, who
is the Propitiation for my Sins; that I may be always ready to fly up to him:
Lord Jesus! seeing thou call me to thy self, stretch out thy hand unto me
from above, and draw me out of this tempestuous Sea. When a poor blind man
understood that thou calledst him to restore his sight, he left his Garment for
haste and ran to thee with joy, and shall not I quit this wretched body to go
to thee my Lord and my God? seeing thou call me out of the midnight of this
World to thy marvelous and glorious light; seeing that thou have a design, not
only to discover to me this surprising and refreshing light that shines in
Heaven, but thou will cause me to shine in thy Kingdom as the Stars and as the
Sun. When the Prophet Elias let fall his Mantle he was immediately received
into a Chariot of Fire, and carried up into Heaven; also, I hope in thy tender
love and favor that as soon as my Soul shall forsake this wretched Body, it
shall be likewise received into a Celestial Chariot of Fire, that will carry
it up to Heaven, thou will deal as graciously with my Soul as with thine
High Priest Joshua; thou will take away its Garments shattered and broken by
sickness and distempers, bespotted and bedaubed with sin, to adorn it with
Robes of fine and bright linen, and Crown it with glory: Therefore I am so far
from being afflicted to see the earthly house of this Tabernacle demolished,
that I rejoice in a certain assurance that I shall be admitted to my eternal
Tabernacle of Heaven. O good God! thou see upon me a contemptible body of
dust, that desires nothing more then to return to dust again; but, this
Heavenly and immortal Soul of mine, that is come from above, that is thy
breath, and a beam of thy glory; this Soul, I say, will return up to its source
and origin, It sighs for thee, O God! and desires nothing but eternal
happiness. Is it possible that I can be happy too soon, and too speedily
admitted to the Contemplation of thy glorious face? Lord, I should be worse
then an Infidel if I did doubt of my Salvation; if I were not assured to
partake of thy glory; for, thou have promised to save all such as persevere to
the end, and to give the Crown of life to all those that are faithful unto
Death. Seeing therefore, that by the assistance of thine holy Spirit, thou have
enabled me to continue in thine holy and Divine Covenant, to fight the good
fight, to finish my course, and to keep the faith; thou will not refuse me this
great Salvation, this precious Crown: O merciful and bountiful Lord, thou have
promised all such as overcome to cause them to sit upon thy Throne; now, by thy
special grace and wonderful power that appears, and is fulfilled in mine
infirmities, I have overcome the World, sin, the Devil and Hell at present; I
beseech thee give me a new supply of strength to overcome Death also, that I
may have no more Enemies to counter with, but that I may mount upon the
magnificent Throne designed for me; let this Death be a passage that may bring
me to life, immortality, eternal glory; and to the happiness of thy Kingdom.
Thou art my God and Father, that love me with an unchangeable affection,
reach thy hand to me thy child, for I long for thee, and open for me the
bowels of thy most wonderful mercies: O good Lord receive me into thy bosom,
and satisfy me with the most effectual Consolations of thy goodness; thou art
my Spiritual Bridegroom, draw me and I shall run or rather I shall fly after
thee, to magnify thy tender compassions, and to be filled with thine heavenly
delights: Thou art the chief Shepherd of my Soul, help me therefore in this
vale of the shadow of Death, let thy Staff and thy Rod assist and comfort me,
send me thy light and thy truth, that they may lead and conduct me up to thy
holy Mountain, and to thine eternal dwelling; Send thy good Angels that they
may carry me up upon their Wings; I expect O Lord thy Salvation, I do not only
expect and hope for it, but I desire and wish for it, with all mine heart; my
Soul is athirst for God, my flesh and mine heart leap for joy, for the strong
and living God, O Lord when shall I go up to the Heavenly Jerusalem, when shall
thou open for me the Gutes of righteousness? When shall I go into the holy
Sanctuary? When shall I be in the blessed company of the glorified Saints, who
have Palms in their hands, Crowns upon their heads, and Praises in their
mouths? When shall I be with the thousands of Angels that are clothed with
light and glory, and with burning Seraphims that surround thy Heavenly Throne?
O my God and Father, When will thou remove and take away this covering from
mine eyes, that I may behold thy beautiful and glorious Face? When shall I see
my self transformed into thy Divine Image, and sanctified with thy likeness? O
Lord! thy grace has brought me to a most happy estate. Who could express the
joy and satisfaction of my heart? with the eyes of faith I see the Angels
descending from Heaven to encompass me about, I see them ready to take me into
their arms, and to transport me into thy glorious Rest. O my God! I have
nothing to stop me in this World; I shut mine eyes to all things under the Sun;
all my thoughts are employed about the glory of Heaven, and the pleasures of
Paradise. Merciful Father, glorify thy Child, that thy Child may glorify thee;
let me enter into the magnificent Palace of immortality, let me see my God face
to face; let me embrace my Savior and only Redeemer; let me receive from his
hand the incorruptible Crown, let me drink out of the Rivers of of his
pleasures, and let me swim in the Sea of his Heavenly delights. O God whose
goodness is unspeakable; speak to me in a Language suitable to those heavenly
desires which thou have kindled in my Soul. O that I may soon hear these sweet
expressions; Verily I say unto thee this day thou shall be with me in Paradise,
come believing Soul enter into the Joy of thy Lord: And before that I shall go
into thy Heavenly joy, cause this joy to come into my Soul; before thou
receivest me into Paradise, cause a Paradise to be in me; O my God I feel an
unspeakable and surprising gladness in me, I enjoy a peace which passes all
understanding; I see my self already surrounded with light and Glory; If
therefore my expectation be so happy and pleasant, what shall be the fruition?
If the first fruits are so ravishing what shall we say of the harvest? I see
the Heavens open and Jesus Christ stretching out his arms unto me, and opening
his bosom to receive me, my Lord and my God, my Savior and my All; I commend
my Spirit into thy hands, for thou have Redeemed it, thou who art the Almighty,
and true God, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Amen.

CHAP. 23.
The eleventh Consolation. The glorious Resurrection of our bodies.

WHen God Created Angels he gave them a Spiritual nature, that had little or no
relation with the Elements; I confess that some of these Heavenly Spirits have
often appeared in humane bodies to the ancient Patriarchs; but, those bodies
were extraordinary and subitaneous, formed by Almighty Gods Power, for such
occasions; besides, those holy Spirits were not in those bodies as the Soul is
in ours, quickening and animating them in the same manner, but only as the
Pilot is in the Ship that he governs; therefore as soon as they had fulfilled
the work about which they were employed by God; they left those bodies without
prejudice to their beings, as the Pilot leaves and goes out of the Ship, when
he has brought it to the desired Haven. All the happiness of these glorified
Spirits consists in this, that God has confirmed them in his grace and love,
and admitted them for ever to a continual contemplation of his glorious face.
It is not so with our Souls, for although they be also spiritual and of an
Heavenly substance, God has not created them to be alone and to subsist at a
distance from all matter, but to live in the pleasant company of those
Element^l bocies which he has fashioned in a most Artifi^ial manner. When he
creates an humane Soul and pours it into an organized body, it is not that it
should be there as water in a Vessel, or as a King in his Palace: it lives not
thereas an assisting form, or as an outward cause of the Bodies operations, but
it is united to it by a very strict union, and serves as an essential form; It
is the Principle of our life, the internal cause of motion of Sense, and of
understanding: So that if we will speak properly, Man cannot be said to be
altogether of a Spiritual nature, as the holy Angels, nor a single body, as the
Sun, and the Stars; but, he is made up of both: Therefore if our Souls wish to
depart out of this Earthly Tabernacle, it is not out of any displeasure against
it, as it is in it self, for none did ever hate his own body, every one seeks
to nourish and cherish it: But, by accident, because of the vanity and
corruption unto which sin has enthralled it, we desire earnestly to depart out
of it, to a place where righteousness, and true holiness reign, that we might
be with the Lord Jesus, to behold him nearer. It is therefore an undoubted
truth, That, unless the body partakes of the same happiness and glory of the
Soul, Man cannot be said to be perfectly and entirely happy. I confess, it is
no light occasion of joy to us, to know, that when our Soul casts off this
earthly body, it enters into the eternal Dwellings of Heaven, whether it goes
to behold the face of the Father of lights; But, this holy Joy is disturbed
with sad reflections, and this Heavenly sweetness is strangely altered with the
bitter considerations of this poor body cast into the earth, and left to the
mercy of the crawling Worms; for, it is a most hateful thing to behold our
body rotting and turning to ashes; that body that was our pavillion, our
Palace; nay more then so, that was a half part of our selves: Therefore if we
will render our Joy accomplished, and apply an effectual comfort to our Souls,
we must nourish and entertain this pleasant assurance, That the ruin of our
bodies, which causes us to lament so much, shall not be eternal; but, as our
bodies fall down by Death, they shall rise again one day at the general
Resurrection. This is one of the noblest and most excellent Mysteries of our
Christian Religion, and one of its most glorious advantages: The Wisdom of the
World, with all its reasonings, and the heathenish Philosophy, with its rarest
subtleties, could never attain to this wholesome and comfortable Doctrine:
Therefore, when St. Paul Preached to the Council of Athens, he was heard with
admiration, until he had spoken to them of the Resurrection; as soon as he
began to mention that, they laughed at him.

Therefore, while Humane Reason remains in its darkness and Natural ignorance,
it cannot of it self find out the glorious Mystery; but, as soon as it is
enlightened with this light from above, it discovers its most temarkable
circumstances, and acknowledges the Justice and Necessity of the future
Resurrection of our Bodies.

First, Seeing that Rewards and Punishments ought to be proportionable and
answerable to him who is to punish and reward, we must of necessity establish
the Resurrection of our Bodies; otherwise, the pains of the wicked cannot be
most violent, nor the happiness of the Godly can never be absolute and perfect.

Secondly, As when a Traitor is executed, men are wont to fasten to the
Scaffold, or to burn in the fire, the Instruments and Tools with which he had
assaulted or offended his Prince; in the same manner, the bodies of the
profane and impious varlets, of the Traitors against God's Divine Majesty
ought to be treated, they ought to be eternally punished with their Soul in
Hell fire; because they have been the unhappy instruments employed in
affronting our Creator.

Thirdly, The body is not only the instrument employed by the wicked against
God, but, encourages them and hurries them on in sin; for, its humors stir it
up, inflame it, and carry it to evil Acts: For example, its sanguine
constitution makes it luxurious, and inclinable to the filthy lusts of the
flesh; its choler carries it to violent and furious actions; its mellancholy
prompts it to the most horrid and hellish attempts: So, that if such are to be
punished that cause us to perform such grievous actions, it belongs to Gods
justice to inflict upon the body, as well as upon the Soul, eternal punishments.

Fourthly, To every thing there eis a season, and a time, to every purpose under
the Heaven. Eccles. 3. As the body of the wicked and of the reprobate has had
its good things, and its satisfactions during this life, it must needs have
also in another life its punishments, and its torments.

Fifthly, But, not to forget the reasons which have a relation to the faithful,
and which are the Pillars and supporters of our faith and hope; we may say,
That Jesus Christ is no less able to save us then Adam was to damn us: Now Adam
having lost both Soul and body, we must conclude, that it belongs to Christ to
save them also; Therefore the body is to rise again, that it may partake of
that Salvation or Redemption procured unto us by this great Savior.

Sixthly, As we have born the Image of the first man, who was of the dust of
the Earth, we must also bear the Image of the second man, who comes from
Heaven, 1 Cor. 15 Now, we bear not this Image at present, in this life, we must
therefore bear it in another.

Seventhly, God has not made a Covenant with part of man, but with all man,
composed of Soul and body: The body therefore must needs rise again, that it
might gather the eternal fruits of glory and happiness, which are promised unto
us by this Divine Covenant.

Eighthly, God is not only styled, The Father of Spirits, and the God of the
Spirits of all flesh; Heb. 12. But he declares himself to be the God of
Abraham, and of his Posterity, Numb. 16.27. He is not only the God of the
Soul; or, the God of the body alone; but he is the God of believing persons, of
both their Souls and bodies: from hence it follows of necessity, That the
bodies of such as are deceased, are not utterly destroyed, for God will raise
them up again. With this argument Christ stopped the mouths of the Saduces, who
denied the Resurrection; Concerning the Resurrection of the Dead (said he) Have
you not read what God himself speaks to you? I am the God of Abraham, the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; God is not the God of the Dead, but of the
living.

Ninthly, God has adopted us to himself by Jesus Christ, according to the good
pleasure of his Will, to make us the heirs of his Kingdom, and coheirs of his
Son. From this passage we may gather a certain assurance of the Resurrection,
for when this Father of Mercies shall see our bodies lying in the dust, out of
his tenderness and compassion, he will say there are the bodies of my Children,
the members of mine only Son; it is not convenient to leave them always in
that shameful estate, in the bowels of the Earth; that love that I bear to
them cannot suffer it; doubtless it was this consideration that caused the
Apostle to call the redemption of our bodies Adoption, for by that he assures
us that he shall fetch out of their graves the bodies of all them whom he has
Adopted; and that our future Resurrection is an effect, and a necessary
consequence of our Adoption.

Tenthly, If we consider Death in it self, as it is in its own nature, we shall
find it to be the wages of sin, and a punishment of our crimes: Now Jesus
Christ has paid for us these wages and satisfied for all our sins, abolishing
them in his Cross, we may therefore conclude that Death (...) to be destroyed
in respect of believers, and that their bodies must needs rise again.

Eleventhly, St. Paul assures us that Jesus Christ is the Savior of his body:
Now the body of this great God and Redeemer consists not only in that infinite
number of Souls, purchased with his Blood, but also in the Union of all the
bodies that have been the companions of these blessed Souls: Therefore as he
has saved our Souls from Spiritual Death, and eternal damnation, he must also
save our bodies from corporal death, and redeem them from the power of the
grave.

Twelfthly, If death did for ever detain our bodies in the grave, we could not
say, to speak properly, that our Savior has swallowed up death into victory,
and that he has destroyed the Sepulcher, for in such a case, Death and the
Grave would remain victorious, and triumph eternally over these miserable
Bodies.

Thirteenth, Our Savior has suffered in his Soul and in his Body, and by that
means he has purchased to himself both our Souls and Bodies, according to St.
Paul's excellent intimation; You are bought with a price, glorify therefore God,
in your Bodies, and in your Souls, that belong unto God. From hence we must
conclude, that this glorious Savior will be deprived of part of that which he
has purchased by his inestimable sufferings, if our Bodies did always
continue in the power of Death.

Fourteenth, The holy Ghost has Sanctified our Bodies and made them his
Temples, as St. Paul teaches us, Know ye not that you are the Temple of God,
and that the holy Ghost dwells in you? From hence the Resurrection of our
bodies must needs follow as a necessary consequence, for can we imagine that
God will suffer the Temple of his Holiness to continue for ever in its ruins
and Desolation; will he not rear up again the noble Pavillion of his glory cast
down by Death?

Fifteenth, God has predestined us to make us conformable to the Image of
his Son, that he might be the firstborn amongst many Brethren: Now the Soul
and the Body of this only begotten of the Father that were separated by Death,
have been joined again in his glorious Resurrection, and received into Heaven;
therefore our Soul that departs out of the World to enter into Paradise, must
return again to its Body, that we may ascend up to Heaven both in Soul and
Body. All the difference that appears between Christ and us is, that the
precious Body of our noble Chieftain could not be subject to corruption, but
was raised again as soon as it fell, because of that strict and personal Union
between his Humanity and Divinity; whereas the most part of all other bodies
are corrupt, and reduced to Ashes.

Sixteenth, We have the same holy Spirit, and Divine virtue dwelling in us,
which was in our Lord Jesus Christ, the efficient cause of his Resurrection,
although not in the same measure and degree; therefore it will produce in us
the same effect, and raise our bodies also from the dust: St. Paul makes use of
this Reason in the 8 of the Romans, if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus
from the dead, dwells in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall
also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you.

Seventeenth, The dead body that touched the bones of the Prophet Elisha
revived again on a sudden: We have more cause to expect the Resurrection of our
bodies, because our bodies don't only touch Jesus Christ dead and risen again,
but we are become one body with him, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone:
I am (said he) the Resurrection and the life, he that lives and believes in
me shall never die; and he that believes in me, though he were dead yet shall
he live, Ephesians. 5. John 11.

Eighteenth, God has imprinted upon our bodies his own Signet, and the marks
of his love; he has given to them visible and palpable assurances of their
future blessedness. Under the Old Testament believers carried the Seal of the
Covenant of God in their flesh: for Circumcision was the Seal of the
righteousness obtained by Faith and hope of a blessed immortality; they did
also eat the flesh of the Paschal Lamb, which was a type of Jesus Christ the
true Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the World. Likewise, under the
New Covenant, God consecrates to himself our Bodies by the Waters of Baptism,
and by the Bread and Wine of the Lords Supper: So, by this means he assures
them of a Joyful and glorious Resurrection. For, if by eating of this Bread,
and drinking of this Wine, we eat and drink spiritually the flesh and the Blood
of Jesus Christ, it is an infallible assurance that this Divine Savior will
raise us up again at the end of the World; as he himself promises, Whosoever
eats my flesh and drinks my Blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him
up at the last day, St John 6 54.

Nineteenth, The body of believers endures many assaults and evils for Christ's
sake, and for his holy profession, it is often exposed to the most shameful
and most cruel torments; and partakes on the same sufferings as he did on
Earth; therefore it is just that it should partake in his triumphs, glory, and
eternal happiness: It is a faithful saying, for if we be dead with him, we
shall also live with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him. We always
bear about in our bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of
Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh, 2 Timothy 2. 2 Cor 4.

Twenty, There is nothing that God does in vain, he never bestows upon us
useless desires; therefore, to what purpose has he kindled in us such an
earnest desire to see this wretched Body out of the misery and corruption into
which sin has enthralled it, and the fruition of glory and immortality? As St.
Paul tells us in these words. The creature was made subject to vanity, not
willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected the same in hope, because
the creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the glorious liberty of the Children of God: He adds immediately after,
For, we know that the whole creation groaneth and travelleth in pain together
until now, and not only they but our selves also, which have the first fruits
of the Spirit; even we our selves groan within our selves waiting for the
Adoption, to wit the Redemption of our Body. Romans 8.

Finally, Seeing, that whatsoever God has appointed in his eternal Council
must be fulfilled in time, and that all things in the World attain to those
ends, for which he made them, and seeing that he created our Souls not to be
alone, but to live in the company and fellowship with the Body, therefore this
Body which falls down by Death must needs rise again at the Resurrection, that
the immortal Soul might return to and dwell with it for ever.

To say that the Resurrection of our bodies is impospossible, is the greatest
and most abominable Atheism in the World: It Is to deny with impudency the
infinite power of God, and the sacred History of the Worlds Creation: For if
things are in their beings, as they are in workings, and if their operations
are correspondent to their natures, we must of necessity conclude, That if
there be a God of an infinite being, he must needs have a power answerable to
his being; And, by consequence that this Almighty God, may, without difficulty
raise the dead. If thou believe that God calls the things that are not as if
they were; Wherefore do thou not also believe that this same God will also
call the things that have been already to restore them that being which they
have formerly enjoyed from his Almighty Hand? If thou believe that God has
fashioned Eve out of one of her Husbands ribs, that he made Man of the dust,
and created this dust out of nothing, can thou not also believe that God is
able at the day of the Resurrection to make again thy body of that dust into
which it is reduced, by Death? If thou believe that God has breathed into
Adams Nostrils the breath of Life, that he has created thy Soul, and infused
it into thy Body, where it was never before; How can thou question his power,
of returning one day the same Soul into the same Body, where it formerly made
its abode? In short, if thou believe that the holy Ghost by moving upon the
Waters, has caused so many beautiful and noble Creatures to appear, and that
he has made light to shine out of darkness, can thou not be also persuaded,
that this same holy Ghost can show his Power amongst the Graves, and fetch thy
Body out of the dark shadows of Death, to introduce it unto the light of the
living?

Thou see by experience that every day a new House (...) built up of old
materials, and do thou wonder ^ow the great Architect, who has built the
great World, ^y his Word alone, can gather up the old pieces and ma^erials of
this little World, to make up a new building, ^dorned with Divine Graces and
Beauty? Shall the Statue ^aker be able to restore again his bruised Image,
reduced to Ashes, and shall not God be able to restore man created after his
own Image, and likeness, to his primitive estate and being? In a word, let the
difficulties seem never so great, remember (Christian Soul) what the Angel
Gabriel told the blessed Virgin, With God nothing shall be unpossible.

I know very well that it is an old Axiom of Philosophy, From privation to the
habit there is no returning. That is to say, when once we are deprived of, and
have lost, a natural faculty, it is never to be recovered again. But the
profane Atheists do wrongfully abuse this Maxim, against the Article of our
Resurrection, for it is most true, in respect of natural and secondary causes:
It is not to be doubted that when the faculties of nature are once lost, they
are not to be restored by Humane Art or Skill; and when a man is dead, it is not
possible for all the Creatures to bring him to life again: But nothing is able
to limit the power of an infinite Agent. He that has formed the wonderful eye
in whom we live, move and have our being, cannot he open the Eyes of a Man born
Blind and restore Life to a dead Corpse? This same Philosophy whereof the
Maxims are brought against the Resurrection declares openly, That God can do
all things, that imply not contradiction. Now there is no contradiction in
believing that God can render life to him that had lost it; and that what is
fallen down by Death, should rise again by the Resurrection. To the end that
this Resurrection of our Bodies might seem less strange, God has been pleased
to give us in nature many Images, and likenesses. I am persuaded (Believing
Souls) that you will not be displeased if I mention here some of the chief.

As when the Sun goes down, and the Earth is covered with the dark shadows of
the night, Man's declining and the darkness of the Grave is represented;
likewise, when this King of the Stars rises, when he brings with him the day
over our Heads; there is a beautiful and perfect Image of the Resurrection.

Secondly, When the Moon parts with all its light and Splendour, which it
borrowes from the Sun, when it covers it self with a Veil of darkness, it is
the Image of Death, and a representation of that Veil which it draws over our
eyes: but when the Sun begins to look upon it again, and by that means it
recovers its former brightness and Glory, it discovers before our Eyes in a
manner that which shall happen to our Bodies, when the Sun of righteousness
shall rise and cast upon them his favorable aspect.

Thirdly, The Spring, Summer and Autumn, follow one after another, and the
Winter shows us an Image of Death: but when the Sun begins to return again upon
our heads, when it covers the Earth with a beautiful green, and revives the
sleeping virtues of Nature, he expresses to us the Resurrection in lively
colors.

Fourthly, The Trees that are in Winter without Flowers, Fruits or Leaves,
discover to us the hideous aspect of Death, that strips man's body, and deprives
him of all that is beautiful and pleasant to the eye; but, when these same
Trees flourish again, and are laden with fresh leaves and fruits, they put us
in mind of the blessed Resurrection of our Bodies.

Fifthly, The seeds that corrupt and rot in the ground, represent our Bodies
rotten in their Graves; but when these seeds appear above Ground, and flourish*
they express excellently well the blessed estate of our Bodies, rising again to
a new life, and recovering a perfect beauty, and a new glory. This similitude
the Son of God himself recommends to us: If the grain of Wheat which falls to
the Earth, does not die it remains alone; but if it dies, it brings forth much
fruit, John 22. And the Apostle St. Paul insists at large upon this comparison,
thereupon he exclaimes against the stupid Atheists who will not believe that a
dead Body can revive again. O fool! that which thou sowest is not quickened
except it die, 2 Cor. 15.

Sixthly, I find more wonderful what is said of certain herbs which rise again
out of their Ashes; for example, if you burn Gall. Armois and fling its Ashes
upon the Earth, you shall see the same herb grow again: Many have tried and
found this by experience. The same is reported of a kind of Palm Tree, and
because in the Greek (...), a Palm, is called Phaenix; this experiment has
given occasion to the Fable of the Phaenix, a Bird that is said to revive again
out of its own marrow and Ashes. Who is it but will say, that this is an
excellent expression of the Resurrection of our Bodies?

Seventhly, There are also several sorts of Insects which shadow out unto us
Death and the Resurrection: As the silk Worms; for, when these small creatures
have finished their work, and spun out that silk with which the Garments and
stately attire of Kings and Princes are made, they bury themselves in the Tomb
which they build; afterward, they become like to a little Bean which hides
under its thin skin the formation of a white Butter-fly. The same is observed
of the Chenilles, Caterpillars, for when they seem stark dead, they creep out
of their little Sepulchers in the forms of Butter-flies, of so many rare and
various colors, that they ravish the Eye into admiration; so that many curious
persons keep them in their Clossets amongst their rarities.

Eighthly, Amongst the Beasts also, some seem to be dead for several Months of
the year, being without Sense or Motion, but afterward they awake again or
rather they begin a new life to move about as they did before.

Ninthly, But we need go no further then our selves to find the Image of Death,
and of the Resurrection; for, Is there any thing that can express Death more
perfectly then our dead sleep, that Stupifies our Senses, puts a stop to the
Spirits of our Bodies, and binds up our most active faculties? So that we have
then Eyes without feeing, ears without hearing, a nose and cannot smell, and a
living Body but we have no feeling: But as soon as such a person comes to awake
again, to open its eyes, to stir, and to act, he represents a most perfect
Image of the Resurrection.

I might also add amongst the Images of Death and the Resurrection, the several
changes and alterations that happen to the States and Empires of the World; for
oftimes they appear as dead and buried, but afterward they rise again from
their falls, and march out of their obscurity as in a glorious Resurrection:
But, I shall wave these similitudes, and consider only such as the Church of
God in several Ages have recommended to us as Types of the future Resurrection
of our Bodies.

First, Noah and his Family, (in which, all the Church of God of that time was
comprehended) remained in the Ark as in a floating Coffin, during the space of
one hundred and fifty days; But, after the deluge, God caused them to march
out of that Ark: In the same manner, after that our Bodies shall have been in
their Graves so many years or ages (as God has appointed in his wonderful
Wisdom) he will draw them out again by his infinite power, and will say to us
all. Come out and appear to Judgment.

Secondly, The People of Israel went down into Egypt and dwelt there 200 years,
or thereabouts, as in a kind of Sepulcher, but God delivered them and at last
caused them to go up to the Land of Canaan, as by a blessed Resurrection.

Thirdly, The Red Sea, into which this People went down, and in which Pharao
with all his host was drowned, is an Image of our Grave, and the great power
which God discovered to make this people pass through that dreadful Sea, and to
go up out of its depths, as by a miracle, shows to the blindest understandings
that Almighty Power which God will one day declare in drawing his people out of
the depths of Death, that we may be able to sing the Song of Moses and of the
Lamb.

Fourthly, When the Ark of Gods Covenant was taken Captive by the Philistines,
and shut up in the house of Dagon, it was a Type of those Bodies which God has
chosen for his Ark, and which are to remain for a time in Satan's Prisons, under
the Command of Death; but when the Philistines sent back again this Ark, and
that the Children of Israel received it with outward expressions of great Joy,
it is a plain description of that which shall happen, when God shall oblige
Death to open all its Prisons, and release all its prisoners; a description I
say of the wonderful Joy of the inhabitants of the Celestial Canaan.

Fifthly, Babylon also, where the Church of Israel remained Captive threescore
and ten years, is a Symbolical representation of the Grave; where these
miserable Bodies are to continue in Captivity: Therefore, by allusion, the
Prophet styles it a Lake without Water, but the deliverance of Israel from the
Babylonish Captivity is a Type of our glorious Resurrection: For that reason
the holy Men of God declare it in such terms as have respect to the
Resurrection of our Bodies from the Grave.

Sixthly, Solomon's Temple, that was demolished and pulled down by
Nebuchadnezar, and that lay many years in a desolate condition, is another Type
of the Body of believers destroyed by the Devil, and remaining for a time in
the dust: But, when the Jews were returned from Babylon, they reared up the
Walls of this Temple, and building it again: This represents the Resurrection
of our Bodies, the Temples of the living God. Our Savior had an eye to this
allusion, when he told the Jews, Destroy this Temple, and I will build it up
again in three days; for, his beloved Disciple adds immediately after, that he
spoke of the Temple of his Body.

Seventhly, You may find the Types and Images of the same thing in many of the
faithful, in Joseph, Daniel and Jonns; for, as the Prisons of Egypt, the
Lyon's-den and the Whales Belly, represent the Grave; likewise, when Pharaoh
commands Joseph out of Prison, when Darius causes Daniel to be taken out of
the Den, and when God orders the Whale to return Jonas upon the dry ground, the
Resurrection is thereby described.

Eighthly, But, there is no passage, Type nor figure more expressible in the Old
Testament, concerning the Resurrection, then that of the 37 of Ezekiel; for,
that the Children of Israel might understand the greatness of Gods power, able
to free them from the Babylonish Captivity, he caused the Resurrection of the
dead to appear before his Prophet; he carried him away into a large Field,
covered all over with dead and dry Bones; but, at Gods command these Bones drew
near one to another, and began to be joined; afterward the Sinews appeared,
the flesh covered them, and the skin was stretched over them; then a breath
came from the four Winds upon these dead Bodies, entered into them, and they
rose up alive upon their feet, so that they seemed as a great Army.

But, God has not only represented the Resurrection by many illustrious and
excellent Types, but he has also expressly foretold it by the holy Prophets:
Isaiah speaks of this mystery in an excellent manner, Thy dead Men shall live
together, with my dead Body shall they rise; awake and sing ye that dwell in
the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of h^rbs, and the Earth shall cast out the
dead, Is. 26. And there can be nothing plainer than the Prophecy of the Prophet
Daniel, And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake some
to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt, Dan ^.2.

Therefore, in hopes of the Resurrection, the Patriarchs were very careful of
their Tombs. Abraham the Father of the faithful, had no inheritance in the Land
of Canaan, and yet he was very desirous to buy for himself and Family a burying
place: When Jacob lay upon his Death Bed, he commanded his Son Joseph in this
manner; Deal kindly and truly with me, bury me not I pray thee in Egypt, but I
will be with my Fathers, and thou shall carry me out of Egypt and bury me in
their burying place, Genesis 47. And, when Joseph was ready to yield up his Soul
unto God, he told his Brethren, That God would surely visit them, and that they
should carry his Bones from thence, Genesis 50.

All the faithful of the Old Testament have publicly declared their
expectation of this blessed Resurrection from the dead; As may appear by that
notable passage of Job. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand
at the latter day upon the Earth; and though after my skin Worms destroy this
Body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine
eyes shall behold and not another, Job 19. As may also appear by the
magnificent words of David. I will behold thy Face in righteousness, I shall be
satisfied when I wake with thy likeness, Ps. 17.

Martha, the Sister of Lazarus was well acquainted with this Mystery, as is to
be proved by what she told our Savior Christ; I know that my Brether shall
rise again at the Resurrection at the last day: And, the Pharisees maintained
the belief of the Resurrection from the dead against the Saduces, who denied
the Resurrection, and immortality of the Soul: Therefore, when St. Paul was to
answer for himself before the Jews Tribunal, where half were Pharisees, and half
were Saduces, he made this crafty Declaration; I am a Pharise, and the Son of a
Pharise; for the hope of the Resurrection of the dead I am called in question:
And when he made his Apology before Felix the Governor, he spoke in this
manner; This I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call Heresy,
so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in
the Law and the Prophets, and have hope toward God, which they themselves also
allow, that there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the Just and
Unjust.

As the Jews of our time have forsaken God, God has also forsaken and given
them over to a reprobate sense, for, as they set aside the infinite merits of
the Death and Rassion of Jesus Christ, they vainly persuade themselves, that
their sins are sufficiently expiated by their own Deaths: Notwithstanding the
grievous corruptions that are to be found in their Doctrines, they depart out
of this life in hopes of rising again one day; for that reason they are careful
in washing their dead Bodies, in burying them with honor and decency; and, when
they have thus laid them in their Graves, they bow themselves three times
toward the Earth, and cast behind them Grass newly plucked up from the Ground;
by which ceremony, they would have us understand, that the Corpse which they lay
in the Earth shall one day rise again, and push forth, according to the
Prophets expression, Your Bones shall grow as the Grass.

But this Article of the Resurrection of our Bodies, which is found in some few
passages of the Old Testament, is to be seen almost in every Page of the New;
And, the passages concerning this truth are so plain and express, that it is not
possible to reject this wholesome Doctrine; but we must at the same time abjure
Christian Religion, and give the lie to the holy Ghost.

That our faith might be settled the better, God has been pleased, not only to
publish this Resurrection from the dead by his Prophets and Apostles, he has
not only discovered to us many excellent and delightful Types and Figures of
the Truth; but, to give to us a more experimental testimony of his power, he
has raised several from the dead. In the Old Testament God raised up two
Children, one at the Prayers of the Prophet Elisha, the other at the request of
Elisha's Successor, 1 Kings 17. And, when a dead Body had been laid in Elisha's
Grave, and touched his Bones, he returned to life again, 2 Kings 6. And during
our Saviors abode on Earth, he raised to life the Daughter of Jairus that was
dead, the Widows Son of Nain, who was carried out of the Gate to be buried; and
Lazarus who had been four days lying in his Grave, whose body began to stink,
Math. 9. Luke 7. When this merciful Savior gave up the Ghost upon the Cross,
The Graves were opened, and many Bodies of Saints which slept arose, and came
out of the Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the holy City and
appeared unto many, Math. 27. After his Ascension he raised from the dead
Dorcas a charitable Widow, at the Prayers of St. Peter, and to comfort the poor
Widows that wept for her; and a young man named Eutyches, was restored to life
by the means of St. Paul; that the Congregation of believers, who were troubled
at the unexpected fall, and sudden Death of that man, might have cause to
rejoice, and comfort themselves in an assurance upon God.

But chiefly we have the example of our Lord, who has raised himself up by his
Divine Power: This glorious instance is able not only to stir up our
admiration; but also to settle our Faith, and nourish our hopes: For, the
Resurrection of other persons show what God can do, but the Resurrection of
Christ declares unto us what God will do, and is an earnest to assure us of our
future Resurrection. It is not possible to believe as we ought, that Jesus
Christ is risen from the dead; but we must also, by a necessary consequence,
believe that he will raise us likewise: This St. Paul endeavors to teach us,
If we believe that Jesus Christ is dead and risen, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. 1 Thessalonians. 4. As the head is so shall the
members be: As the first fruits are, so shall the rest of the harvest be. The
same Apostle labors to persuade this truth in these excellent words; Christ is
risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept; for since
by man came Death, by man came also the Resurrection of the dead; for as in
Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive: But every man in his own
order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming.

Some are ready to oppose against this holy and Divine Doctrine this objection;
That some Bodies are consumed by fire, and burned to ashes; it is true: But,
What follows from thence? For whether the Bodies be reduced to dust or ashes it
matters not, God is able to restore them and render unto them their primitive
forms: Seeing that certain herbs (consumed to ashes) rise again out of the
ground, by a natural inclination, as we have already observed; and, seeing that
art is so industrious, as to make transparent Bodies (of an extraordinary
beauty) of melted ashes; shall not God, who is so far transcendent above all
abilities of nature, created by him, and of all Arts and Sciences, which
proceed from his direction, be able of ashes, to compose a beautiful and a
perfect body?

Others pretend next, That a great many bodies have been drowned in the Seas,
and swallowed up in the Waters; I acknowledge that to be true: But I affirm,
that God is altogether as able to draw a body out of the depths of the Sea, as
out of the bowels of the Earth. He that has prescribed bounds to this great
Sea, that dries up its vast concavities, and lays open its bottomless bottom;
Has not he a command over this Sea? Cannot he oblige it to a restitution of
those bodies that have been committed to its keeping, as when he commanded the
Whale to bring again to Land the Prophet Jonas, whom it had swallowed up alive?

Some object, That there are bodies devoured by the Beasts, which have been
their Food, and have been turned into their substance: But, this objection is
not to be valued; for, when an humane body shall have passed through the bowels
of the Beasts, and been changed a thousand and a thousand times into their
substance, there is nothing that can hinder God from restoring them again at
the day of the Resurrection; for, those Animals shall never rise again: It is
therefore nothing to the purpose to inquire after them, when the body shall
reassume that which they shall have devoured, and turned into their own
substances. The strongest and most plausible objection concerns the
Anthropophages, the eaters of Men; for it is very well known, that in the
Indies there are some Savages so barbarous as to feed upon humane flesh, and to
esteem it as their greatest dainties: Some answer to this, That such kind of
inhumanities are not ordinary, and that such wretched Indians never practice
such heinous things but in urgent necessity, or when they purpose to revenge
themselves upon their Enemies: But, such as have given an account of the New
found America, relate, That in some Provinces there have been such cruel and
inhumane Savages, as not only to devour the flesh of their Enemies whom they
sacrificed to their Idols, but also of their dearest Friends, whom they do cut
in pieces in their Shambles: These same Historians tell us, That some of the
barbarous people are so impiously mistaken, as to reckon it an act of piety and
duty to their Parents and Friends, to give them a Sepulcher in their own
stomachs. Moreover they say, That yet there are some, who, like so many mad
Dogs feed upon Infants, and hunt after Men as we do after wild Beasts of the
Field. In case all these relations should be true, I must desire my Reader to
take notice that are two kinds of parts that compose the humane body, the one
solid, as the Bones and Nerves, and so essential to it, that without them it
would cease from being any longer an humane body; the other parts are
adventitious, accidental and changeable, they serve to maintain it almost as
the food and nourishment: Now, this I affirm, as an undoubted Truth, that when
it happens that Men feed upon their own Kind, God takes care, by his wonderful
Providence, that the essential and solid parts of the Man devoured never enter
into the substance or composition or the solid parts of the devourer. At the
great day of the Resurrection, the bodies will reassume all their essential and
solid parts, without which they cannot be true bodies; but, they shall not need
the accidental and fluid parts, as are the humors and the Blood, for then, they
shall have no more inward heat to consume them, no more hunger and thirst;
Therefore they shall never have any need of meat or of drink, or of any other
thing whatsoever to serve them instead of Nourishment. Let the metals be never
so much mingled the Goldsmith separates them with ease. Thus let our humane
Bodies be never so much altered and mingled, God will be able enough to
separate and distinguish them from one another: Shen the Goldsmith will
separate the metals he casts them into the melting-pot, and causes them to
pass through the Fire; but God who can do all things without means, has no
need of the Fire or of the melting-pot, for by his word at the twingling of an
eye, he can cause this separation to be made; and render unto every Body that
which necessarily belongs to its composition. In a word, when the difficulty
should be far greater than it is, and when the resolution of this objection
were not so easy to be made as it is; it should not weaken our Faith, or cause
us to doubt of the Resurrection of our Bodies.

When it concerns things that the holy Scripture does not expressly declare and
decide, or that cannot be drawn from it by a necessary consequence, it is
lawful to dispute either for, or against such things; but if it concerns such
as this sacred Writ, inspired of God, plainly sets forth, our Faith must learn
her Duty, to submit to Almighty God, and believe that there is nothing
impossible with him. Now this Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead is so
expressy and plainly found in this Holy Scripture, that it seems as visible as
the beams of the Noon-Sun. Many questions are made upon this subject, some are
of that importance, that a reply will give most satisfaction upon this
excellent subject; first, they inquire by whom and by whose Power shall the
Resurrection be effected? The Scripture gives an occasion to make this inquiry,
for it ascribes it sometimes to the Father as in the 5 of St. John, The Father
raises the dead and quickens them, sometimes to the Son as in the 3 of the
Phil. Jesus Christ shall change our vile Bodies according to his mighty
working, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. And sometimes to
the Holy Ghost, as in 8 Romans If the Spirit of him who has raised Jesus from
the dead, dwells in you, he that has raised up Jesus from the dead shall
quicken your mortal Bodies by his Holy Spirit that dwells in you. This
difficulty may thus be resolved; All the outward works of God, that concern the
Creatures, are common to the three Persons, of the most Holy, most Glorious,
and most Wonderful Trinity.

So that we shall rise again by the the infinite Power of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Nevertheless, the Resurrection is especialy
ascribed to the Son as he is Judge of the quick and of the dead: In order to
the discharge of that glorious employment, all Power has been committed to him
in Heaven, and in Earth, and in the Seas.

2. Some inquire further, When shall this Resurrection be? I answer, that it
shall be in the day which God has appointed, to Judge all the World, by the
Man whom he has ordained, Acts 17. You are not to expect from me, Christians,
that I should point out unto you precisely the day when this shall come to
pass, for it belongs not to us, to know the times, and the Seasons which God
has reserved to himself. It is true, we may see that most part of the
Prophecies are already fulfilled, so that we may say in general terms, The Lord
is at hand, and our Salvation is nearer to us then when we began to believe,
Phil. 4 Romans 13.

Nevertheless, I cannot undertake to make out unto you this Glorious Day, nor
to tell you the year, nor age, when this shall be; There is no Man upon Earth,
nor Angel in Heaven that is able to speak of it with certainty; therefore Jesus
Christ himself informs us, But of that Day and Hour knows no Man, no not the
Angels of Heaven, but my Father only, Mat. 24. If our Savior says more, that
the Son himself knows not the Day, Mark 13. We must understand this as he is
a Man, and during his abode in the World, for as he is God he knows all
things, from all Eternity; and now that he is glorified as he is Man, he
understands all things. But he has hid from Men, the time of his coming, that
we might expect him at every moment; as he tells the Holy Apostles, Watch
therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord does come, but know this, that
if the good man of the House had known in what Watch the thief would come, he
would have watched, and would not have suffered his House to be broken up, Mat.
24. He writes in the same Language to the Angel of the Church of Sardis,
Remember how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, and repent; if
therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee, as the thief, and thou
shall not know what hour I will come upon thee, The first Christians were very
well acquainted with this wholesome Doctrine, as we may judge by this passage
of St. Paul, to the Thessalonians, But of the times, and of the Seasons,
Brethren ye have no need that I write unto you, for your selves know perfectly
that the day of the Lord so comes, as a thief in the night: for when they
shall say Peace and Safety, then sudden Destruction comes upon them, as
travail upon a Woman with Child, and they shall not escape, 1 Thessalonians. 5. As the
days of Noah were, so shall be the coming of the Son of Man; for as they were
before the deluge, Eating and Drinking, Marrying and and giving in Marriage,
and were not sensible of the danger, until it was come, and carried them all
away, so shall it be at the coming of the Son of Man, Mat. 24.

The Wiseman tells us, that hope delayed causes the heart to languish, Prove.
3. But we must except the hope and expectation of the Resurrection, for when
this blessed Resurrection should not come to pass, yet many thousand Ages, it
should not cause such as die in the Lord to languish, for whiles their Bodies
are in their Graves, they suffer nothing, and as they are there without feeling
cannot be impatient, no more then a Man that is in a deep sleep; for the Soul
it enjoyes, in the contemplation of Gods Face, such unspeakable satisfactions,
that it is not capable of grief, sorrow, displeasure, or the least disturbance.
St. Peter tells us, that a thousand years with God are but as a day, 2 Pet. 3.
We may say the same of those who are admitted to Gods glorious presence, to
behold his Face, for a thousand years, in such an happy Estate, appear less
then one day in this miserable condition. The hundreds and thousands of years
pass away far quicker to the blessed Inhabitants of Heaven, then the moments do
to such as live in troubles upon Earth.

3. Others desire to know where this Resurrection shall happen? The Jewish
whimseys and extravagancies have given occasion to this question, for they
think that the dead shall rise in no other place but in the Holy Land; and
therefore they have made another childish Fable, that the Bodies of all their
Nation that die in several parts of the World, shall go through earthly vaults,
and roll through the secret conveyances of this Globe, until they come to the
Land of Canaan; where they are to arise from the dead; and as one error
occasions another, they say further, That they shall feel more or less pain in
their passage, according to their goodness, or sins of their lives. I need not
spend any time in the refutation of this foolish and impertinent opinion; but
it may justly cause us to acknowledge the just Judgment of God, upon this
unhappy people, who have refused with a divellish obstinacy the great Savior
of the World; for because they have not received the love of the truth that
they might be saved, God has sent them strong delusions, that they might
believe a lie, and has given them over to a reprobate sense, 2 Thessalonians. 2. For
us, Christians; we say that without so much ado where the body is, at the last
day, there it shall rise from its Grave.

4. The next question is, What shall rise from the dead? I answer, that the
same body which falls by Death shall rise again at the General Resurrection; if
God did make a new Body to join it to our Souls, it would be no more a
Resurrection, but rather a new Creation: neither shall we only take such a
Body as our own, for things that are only like, are not the same; let them be
never so much a like; but we shall take again the same Body, which our Soul
does animate, during its abode here below; and if I may employ the expressions
and terms of Divines, it shall not only be the same Body, but also the same
Individual; as in the first Resurrection, God creates not a new Soul, but he
regenerates and sanctifies that which was dead, in its trespasses and sins;
thus in the second Resurrectioin God makes not another Body, but he only
bestows another life upon that which was lying in corruption, and amongst the
dead. As when our Savior rose from the dead, he made not for himself a new
Body, but he took again that same which had been formed in the Womb of the
blessed Virgin. Likewise, in the General Resurrection, he will not create for
us a new Body, but he will render unto us that same which we had from our
Mothers Womb; this argument is not to be answered, for the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ is not only the efficient or merritorious cause of ours, but also
the pattern and model, or as the Schoolmen tell us, it is the exemplary cause
of our future Resurrection, but there is no need of arguments, when the Word of
God is so clear and express on this subject. St. Paul informs us, That the Lord
shall change our vile Body, that this corruptible must put on incorruption,
this mortal must put on immortality, Phil. 3, And that the life of Jesus shall
be made manifest in our mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4. And the only Job says, Job 19.
not only that he shall see God, but that he shall see God in his flesh, and
that he shall see him with his Eyes: For the same reason in some ancient Copies
of our Apostles Creed, as in the Creed of Aquilia, I find not only, I believe
the Resurrection of the flesh, but I be ieve the Resurrection of this flesh.

5. Some ask whether the Bodies of the wicked shall rise from the dead, as
well as the Bodies of the righteous? the Jews that delight in whimsycal
inventions, fancy a Resurrection only for the Just, in which unbelievers and
reprobates have no share. To strengthen this dream they abuse the words of the
first Psalm, The wicked shall not stand in judgment, nor sinners in the
Congregation of he righteous.

Finally. They are so much besotted with an high conceit of themselves, that
none are righteous but of their own Nation; That none are pleasing to God, or
that ought to rise again from the dead but the Israelites; but, we Christians,
are brought up and instructed in better Doctrine, we believe, without
difficulty, that all Men that are dead since the beginning of the World, of
every People and Nation under Heaven, shall rise again at the day of Judgment:
for St. Paul assures us, That there shall be a Resurection of the Just, and of
the Unjust. David in the first Psalm speaks nothing against this truth, which
is clear as the Sun, and as well grounded as the Heavens, and the Earth, for he
says not that the wicked shall not rise again, but only that he shall not
stand before God in judgment; that is to say, that he shall not subsist before
the Tribunal of Gods Justice, nor be able to abide the fiery presence of God,
angry and displeased for their impieties: But this we may observe, that
although God will raise up all the Men of the World, without exception from
their Graves, there shall be a notable difference between them; for he will
raise the wicked up and draw them out of their Graves, as a Judge drags an
Offender out of his Dungeon to sentence him to Death; but he will raise again
believers as their Redeemer, that their Bodies as well as their Souls might
enjoy the blessed fruits of their Redemption purchased for us: therefore this
Divine Savior styles them Children of the Resurrection; for none but they
shall inherit his blessings, and partake of his Eternal Glory.

6. Some inquire further, in what manner shall this Resurrection be? I answer,
That our Lord and Savior shall come down from Heaven clothed with light and
glory, and attended upon by the Angels of his Power and millions of his Saints,
He shall be preceded by the cry of an Archangel, and the Trumpet of God: for
the Trumpet shall sound, and as at the sounding of the Silver Trumpet, that did
Proclaim the Jews Jubilee, all the Prisons were opened and the Prisoners set at
liberty; in the same manner, at the sound of the last Trumpet, all the Prisons
of Death shall be broke open, and the Bodies that were imprisoned shall go out;
to speak in the Language of the Holy Ghost; The Sea shall give up the dead, and
Death and Hell shall restore the dead that are in them. And as Lazarus rose up
as soon as Jesus Christ had called to him in his Tomb, Lazarus come out;
likewise, when the Voice of this great God and Savior shall sound in our
Tombs, at that moment we shall rise again, and appear before him; for the hour
comes that such as are in the Graves shall hear the Voice of the Son of God,
and they that shall hear shall live.

7. The next question is, in what stature of Body shall we rise? some are
persuaded that we shall rise in the same stature that we die; this they gather
from St. John's description of the last Judgment, I saw the living and the
dead, the great and small standing before God. Others think that all the elect
shall rise again in perfect stature, and shall be all like to our Savior
Christ; which they endeavor to prove, by St. Paul's words; We shall meet in a
perfect Man, to the measure of the perfect stature of Christ.

When it concerns things that relate to our Salvation, it is respective
ignorance to refuse, to pry into those things which God has concealed, or not
thought fitting to reveal; therefore as the holy Writ is silent concerning
this, we cannot speak of it with too much sobriety; I dare not affirm, that we
shall all rise again in the same stature. I confess, that this opinion, That
all the Saints shall have a stature like to our Savior Christ; and that they
shall bear his Image and likeness, in that respect in their Bodies, contains
nothing contrary to piety, but I dare say, that this cannot be proved by the
words of St. Paul, for the sequel of his discourse shows most evidently that he
intends not the stature of the Body, but that of the Soul, which consists in
knowledge and holiness.

That opinion which appears to be most likely, and most conformable to the
Analogy of Faith, is, that the Elect shall all rise again in a perfect stature;
for the beauty and perfection of the stature contributes much to the Glory and
Majesty of the Body, without which man cannot be said to be most perfectly
happy: besides this perfection is answerable to that Command and Dominion which
God shall give to the Saints, over the Creatures after the Resurrection: if
those that die in their childhood, did rise again in the same stature, if those
that depart in their old and decrepid Age, did come out of their Graves with
their feeble and crasie Bodies, How could either of them be fit for that Glory
and Perfection, where nothing shall be amiss or wanting? As the promised Land
was the Type of the Celestial Canaan, it is not without good cause that the
Scripture takes notice that there was no Body of those that went over Jordain
into the Holy Land that was old and decrepid; unless it were Joshua and Caleb;
none of the rest was threescore years old; I may also apply to the Jerusalem
above, that which the Prophet says of the Jerusalem here below, the Type and
Figure of the Celestial: From thenceforth there shall not be any Child of a few
days old, nor no ancient person who fulfilleth not his days. Finally, As God
created Adam and Eve in a perfect stature, to settle them in the Terrestial
Paradise, it is my opinion, that he will also raise up all the faithful in a
perfect stature, to introduce them into the Celestial Paradise. In this life
the Body of a Child is many years before it can to attain to the stature of a
perfect man: but at the great day of the Resurrection God will grant it to him
in a moment.

That which is spoken of in the 20 of the Revelations does in no wise oppose
this Doctrine, for when the holy Ghost says that the dead small and great
shall stand before God. That relates not to the stature or bigness of Body, but
to the state, and condition of the persons; that is to say, the Kings and
Princes shall appear to Judgment as well as the vilest and most contemptible
Subjects and the most wretched slaves; therefore these former words are
designed to express nothing more than what St. Paul says, That we must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Chirst, that we might receive in our Bodies
according as we have done, whether it be good or evil.

8. Some are ready to ask what manner of Bodies shall the Reprobates have after
the Resurrection? I have no mind to speak any thing of my self, otherwise I
should answer, That in consideration of the fury of Hell Fire, the smoke of the
bottomless pit, and the violence of the excessive Torments which they shall
suffer, they shall appear most deformed, ugly, il-favoured, and dreadful to
look upon; I should say, that there shall appear in their guilty looks, and
frighted countenances, the Devils Image, and that of the Hellish Furies; but it
will be sufficient to reply, That the Bodies of the wicked shall be Immortal,
and that their Immortality shall be most miserable; that it had been far better
for them to have never been, or to have been as the Beasts, that Die without
any hopes of living again; for they shall Live to Die eternally, and they shall
Die but never consume away. It shall not be possible to add any thing to their
most violent Tortures, for they shall be infinite; nor to the continuance of
their sufferings, for they shall be eternal; Therefore as we have already taken
notice, they shall seek Death, that is, they shall desire to be reduced to
nothing, but Death shall fly away from them, and give them over to a Worm that
shall never Dye, and to a Fire that shall never be extinguished. O miserable
Bodies! O wretched Souls! whom God shall cast into the midst of Hells furious
flames, and against whom the Devils shall let fly all their Arrows, discharge
all their Fury, and kindle all their Fires, and whom they will take pleasure to
torment for ever and ever.

9. Some inquire what manner of Bodies the Children of God, and the Members of
Christ shall have after they are risen from the Dead, I answer, that their
substance shall be the same which they had before Death; they shall not be
Phantasms or false appearances, but true humane Bodies, made up of flesh and
bones; for we may say of all the Bodies of the faithful, as of that of our
Savior Christ, that the Resurrection will procure unto them a considerable
Glory, which they never had before, but it shall not destroy their Nature and
Manhood. They shall be able to speak in the Language of our Redeemer, feel and
see, a Spirit has neither Flesh nor Bones, as ye see that I have. All our Soul
shall lose nothing of its Being, only it shall be perfectly cleansed from all
Sin and Corruption, and sanctified in such a manner, that it will not be
poffible for it to entertain any vicious inclination; likewise there shall be
no alteration in the essential part of our Bodies, but there shall be a
wonderful alteration in regard of the qualities, for they shall cast off all
corruption and mortality, and shall never be subject to Sickness, Pain, nor to
the inconveniences that disturb it during this life. And if they have now any
imperfection, they shall be perfectly freed; so that we may justly say of the
Celestial Jerusalem, that in it, no Blind nor Lame shall be admitted to enter,
for all the Bodies of the Saints shall be so perfect and beautiful, that the
least spot or blemish shall not be seen in them, 1 Samuel 6.

I know that Jesus Christ tells us in his Gospel, Matthew. 5. If thy right Eye
offend thee pluck it out, and cast it from thee, for it is better that one of
thy Members perish, than that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell; and if
thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee, for it is
better that thou should enter into life lame or maimed, than to have two feet
and two hands, and to be cast into eternal Fire, Mark 4. But these words are
figurative; by them our Savior would teach us, that for his sake and glory we
must deny our dearest affections, and our most importunate lusts: and when
these words should be taken in their literal sense, we must understand a
Supposition if it were possible to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven with one
eye, lame, maimed, it would be far better to be admitted to that blessed
estate, then to have a perfect and a whole body, and to be cast into the
Torments of Hell. From thence we cannot conclude, that the faithful are to rise
from their Graves, with imperfect and deficient Bodies, for that is repugnant
to an accomplished happiness, seeing that sin shall be utterly abolished and
destroyed, the punishment of Sin shall continue no longer.

There are nevertheless some that believe with several ancient Doctors of the
Primitive Church, that the holy Martyrs shall bear about them the scars and
other marks of their Sufferings, for the Name of Jesus, in the same manner as
this glorious Savior after his Resurrection could show the print of the Nails,
that had fastened his feet and hands to the Cross, and in his side the hole
that the Spear had made. They esteem such Marks, glorious and honorable Stars,
so that according to their judgment, the Martyrs shall be like to the generous
and noble hearted Soldiers, who have received Wounds in the service of their
Prince, which they bear about as undoubted expressions of their Courage. I
shall not altogether contradict this opinion, for it is not contrary to the
Analogy of Faith, but I dare not affirm it as a certain truth, for we cannot
learn from the holy Scriptures, that represent these Blessed Martyrs, clothed
with long Robes, washed and whitened in the Blood of the Lamb, without making
any mention of their former sufferings. Our Savior he was pleased to preserve
the Marks of his Sufferings, that he might convince St. Thomas of his unbelief,
and that he may one day discover and show them to those that have pierced him
through. But from this instance I cannot see how we can gather any consequence;
we may safely say, either that the Martyrs shall have no such scars, or if they
have, they shall bring no deformity to their Bodies, nor shall they deprive us
of any Member or part required in us, to make us perfect. If it should be
otherwise, we could not be entirely and perfectly happy. After the
Resurrection, the Bodies of Gods Children shall have none of these
imperfections, that Sin has brought into the World; they shall not feel any of
the infirmities, unto which the Bodies of Adam and Eve were subject, in the
estate of their innocence, for their life was sensual and animal like,
disturbed with hunger, thirst, and weariness, therefore they had need of
nourishment and drink, and especially of the Fruits of the Tree of Life, to
supply so much of their radical humor, as was decayed and consumed by their
natural heat. I conceive also, that they stood in want of rest and sleep; and
although God would have protected them from all dangerous accidents, if they
had continued in their integrity; if we consider them in themselves, without
any such protection, they might have been injured by fire and sword, and burned
with the heat of the scorching Sun. But it shall be otherwise with the Bodies
of the Righteous, after the Resurrection, they shall not be subject to any
infirmity, they shall be free from pain, weariness, and from the sense of any
displeasure, as the holy Spirit promises, they shall hunger nor thirst no
more; the Sun shall not beat upon them, nor any heat incommode them. It is not
to be doubted, but that a glorified Body shall enjoy all the perfections that a
humane Body is capable of; and that the greatest and rarest Beauties on Earth,
are but difform objects, in comparison of the Celestial, which shall never
change nor fade away, no accident shall ever be able to destroy or diminish
them. The years, ages, and thousand of ages, shall not imprint upon our
glorious faces, the least wrinkle, we shall always be young and lusty, as a
precious Stone that preserves its Luster and Beauty without alteration, and as
the Sun that never decreaseth in light and heat. These glorified Bodies shall
cast off all gross and heavy qualities, that incline them to the Earth, so that
they shall be more nimble then the Eagles, and shall be able to fly up as quick
as the fire. St. Paul intends to teach us this truth, when he tells us, that
this Body is sown an earthly and a sensual Body, but it shall rise again an
heavenly and a spiritual Body; we are not so to understand these words, as to
think that God will change them into Spirits, or into such uncomposed bodies,
as are the Heavens, for they shall yet be made up of flesh and bones, and they
shall have all the essential parts of an humane Body, as we have already taken
notice; but I conceive that they are named spiritual and heavenly, because they
shall have no more the gross and earthy qualities, and they shall live no more
a Sensitive and an animal life. In a word, they shall need no more meat or
drink, than the Stars and Celestial Bodies, no more than the holy Angels of God.

I confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ ascended up into Heaven in a cloud, not
because that a Cloud was necessary to uphold and keep up his glorious Body; for
if in the estate of his infirmity and humiliation, this divine Body was able to
walk upon the waves of the Sea, without sinking, by the assistance of his
divine Nature, how much more since its glorification, shall it be able to
ascend up on high, and to go whither he lists. If the help of any Creature
had been necessary to uphold him, he might have had Legions of Immortal Angels
to carry him up, but Christ needed not to be assisted, neither by a Body, nor a
Spirit, nor by any other Creature. This Cloud therefore that appeared at his
Ascension, was no token of the infirmity of his humane Nature, it did rather
manifest the glory and magnificence of his Divine Majesty, unto which this
precious Body was united personally. God has often revealed himself, attended
by a Cloud, as upon Mount Sina, in the Ark of the Covenant, at the Dedication
of Solomone Temple; therefore that Cloud in which God was pleased to discover
himself, is styled, The Glory of God, that is, the Sign and visible expression
of his Glorious Presence, and Divine Majesty. Let us therefore gather from
hence, that the Cloud which attended upon the glorified Body of Jesus Christ,
was no needful help to carry him up to Heaven, but as it were a Chariot of
Triumph, to cause him to go with more glory and pomp. The Bodies of the Saints,
after the Resuriection, shall shine and be full of glory; they shall not only
have some superficial splendour upon their Countenance or Skin, as Moses when he
had been with God forty days and forty nights in the Holy Mountain, but they
shall shine within and without, as a true Diamond, that casts abroad on all
sides its light and flames. So that it shall happen to them, as it happened to
our Savior upon Mount Tabor, for it is said, that his Garments became White as
the Light. In the same manner, at the time of our Transfiguration, our bodies
that are but the Garments of our Immortal Souls, shall be as clear as the
Light, and as bright as the Celestial Globes. I speak here nothing, but what
the Prophet Daniel says, before me, Daniel 12. They that be wise, shall shine
as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness,
as the Stars for ever and ever. And our Savior assures us, Math. 23. That the
Children of God shall shine in the Kingdom of their Father as the Sun.

These glorified Bodies, shall never corrupt nor putrify, but they shall be for
ever uncorruptible. Therefore St. Paul assures us, that the Corruptible must
put on incorruption; so that I may safely affirm, that their glory shall be
more durable than that of the Sun, or of the Moon, or of the Stars; for
although these Celestial Bodies never corrupt, out of any inward principle;
although there can be no alteration happen to them, neither from their
essential form, nor from the properties that come from it, nor from any other
inherent quality, they shall nevertheless corrupt, out of an external
principle, for the Almighty hand of God which made them, shall change and alter
them, as the royal Prophet tells us, in 102 Psalm, The heavens shall perish,
but thou shall endure, yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment, as a
vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, 1 Pet. 5. Unto this
St. Peter does very well agree, The Heavens, says he, shall pass away with a
great noise. Where as the glorified Bodies shall never corrupt, neither by any
internal principle, nor by their essential form, nor by the properties and
accidents that flow from it, nor by any external cause, nor by any accident
whatsoever, that can be imagined, for the Almighty hand of God, shall make them
never to mar them again. From hence it follows, that they shall Die no more,
but shall continue Immortal, for with incorruption they must put on
Immortality; therefore when our Savior speaks of the estate of the glorified
Saints, Luke 20. he says, not only that they shall not Die, but that they
cannot Die any more, because they shall be like the Angels, being the Children
of the Resurrection. In this consists the difference between them and those
whom God has raised up, already mentioned in the Old and New Testament.

For they were forced to return to their sensual life, to eat and drink, and
therefore they were again subject to corruption and Death; but at the day of
the general Resurrection, whatsoever is Mortal, shall be swallowed up by Life;
therefore St. Paul applies to this glorious day, the accomplishment of this
Prophecy, Death is swallowed up into Victory: and he brings in these who shall
be clothed with this Immortal Glory, braving Death and the Grave, in this
triumphing Language, O Death! where is thy Victory? O Grave I where is thy
Sting?

In short, to make us sensible, that our Bodies shall put on all the richest
and most noble qualities that can be imagined, and to express all in a word,
the Holy Ghost assures us, that they shall bear the Image of the Son of God,
and be made conformable to his glorious Body, St Paul declares this Truth, in
the 15 Chap. of the first of the Corinth. The first Man, says he, was of the
Earth Earthly, the second Man was the Lord from Heaven; as is the Earthy, such
are they that are are Earthy; and as is the Heavenly, such are they also that
are Heavenly; and as we have born the Image of the Earthy, we shall also bear
the Image of the Heavenly. And in Philip. 3. he says, we wait for the Lord
Jesus from Heaven, who shall change our vile Body, that it may be like to his
glorious Body; from hence you may gather Christians, that at the rebuilding of
this little Temple of the Godhead, there shall happen no such thing, as at the
rearing up of the Temple of Jerusalem, for when that was Rebuilding, at the
return from the Babilonish Captivity; they that had seen the former Temple, and
its wonderful glory, wept aloud, so that their weeping interrupted the others
expressions of joy and gladness. At the Restoration of the Temple of our
Bodies, nothing shall be heard but Songs of Triumph and Jubilee. Such as have
seen, with the eyes of Faith, Man's Body, as it was in the estate of its
integrity, in the earthly Paradise, shall not be then sorry, that it has been
defaced by Sin, and destroyed by Death; they shall not be sorry for any thing
that is passed; they shall not be able to wish for any increase of happiness
and glory for the future, for at the very instant of its rising from the Grave,
it shall be raised to its highest Splendour, Happiness, and Magnificence, so
that it shall be truly said, That the glory of this Second House, shall be
greater than that of the First, Hag. 2.

Now that we have treated sufficiently, of such as shall rise from their
Graves, it remains, that we take a view of them, whose Bodies shall never be
laid in the Dust, and who shall be alive at Christ's coming down from Heaven:
for that purpose. St. Paul informs us, 1 Cor. 15. Behold I show you a Mystery,
we shall not all sleep, but we shall be all changed in a moment, at the
twinkling of an eye, at the sound of the last trumpet; and he speaks in this
manner to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 4. For this we say unto you, by the word
of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord,
shall not prevent them which are asleep, for the Lord himself shall descend
from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump
of God, and the Dead in Christ shall rise first, then we which are alive and
remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord
in the Air, and we shall ever be with the Lord, wherefore comfort one another
with these words, I know very well that St. Paul tells the Hebrews, that it is
appointed unto all Men once to Die. Therefore I conceive that this great change
that shall be made in the Bodies of them that shall be then alive, shall be a
kind of Death, for Christ will destroy and abolish altogether in them, all
corruption and inclination to Mortality. And when he shall change the Bodies of
the Reprobates, he will make them like to the other Reprobates, whom he shall
fetch out of their Graves; he will make them Immortal, that they may be
eternally tormented in Hell. But he will cause the Bodies of Believers then
alive, to be like the other Believers, that they may all partake and enjoy the
same glory and eternal Bliss.

Christians, in what condition soever you be in, seriously apply to your
selves, these Divine Consolations, you that are grieved to see your Bodies
maimed and deprived of one of your Members, of your Eyes, Hearing, or of some
other of your senses, whether you be so born, or whether such a privation has
happened unto you by a Disease, by a Mischance, or by any other Means, rejoice
and comfort your selves with this assurance, that you shall see one day, this
wretched Body restored to a perfect estate, to a perfection that shall never be
lost; you that fret and vex your selves, to behold now old Age and Sickness
have disfigured your Bodies, what breaches and ruins they have caused in you;
Comfort your selves in expectation of this glorious Resurrection, which shall
supply this decayed and languishing Body, with new strength and vigor, and
adorn it with a perfect beauty, and an eternal glory.

And you whom Death undermines, and intends shortly to lay in the Dust, grieve
not at it, for you shall loose nothing at present, but you shall find it again,
at the great day of the Resurrection. When Joseph died, he commanded his
Brethren, concerning his Bones, that they should carry them out of Egypt into
the Land of Canaan. Now our Bones are the Bones of Jesus Christ, our true
Joseph: Therefore he will command his Angels to gather them up safe, he himself
will have a care to preserve them, at the great Morn of the Resurrection, he
shall fetch them out of their Graves, as out of an Egypt, out of an House of
Bondage, and will carry them to his Celestial Canaan. When the Tabernacle was
taken in pieces, the High Priest did deliver every piece in charge to the
Levites, so that when they were to set it up again, there was nothing wanting.
Likewise our Savior has given in charge, and delivered by retail, every
Member and part of our Bodies; these Tabernacles which he has Consecrated for
himself to our Graves, therefore they shall all be found again at the
Resurrection, without the least imperfection. These Tabernacles shall not only
be found entire, but they shall be beautified with a far greater Glory and
Splend or than before

There is none but would be glad to lay himself down to sleep in his Bed, and
pull off his garments willingly, if he were certain to be more healthy, and to
find his garments fresher and more beautiful in the Morning, if he were
persuaded, that instead of old rags, he were to cloth and put on a royal
attire, and most m^gnificent garments. Who would not willingly go out of a
pitiful Cabin, and forfake a miserable lodge, which shall be one day changed
into a Golden Palace, adorned with precious Stones? Comfort thy self, believing
Soul, and rejoice in God thy Redeemer; cast off willingly this Garment that is
so incommodious and troublesome to thee; forsake this wretched Body, undermined
by sickness and diseases, and consumed by time. Sleep quietly in the Lord
Jesus, and repose thy self in his Bosom, for when thou shall wake again at the
sound of the Archangels Trumpet, thou shall find this garment whither then
Snow, and as bright as the Light; grieve not to see this crasy dwelling fall to
pieces and rot, for God shall build it up again with his own hands, and convert
it into his Temple, and a pavillion of his glory. Thou may be certain,
shortly to return again, and to find this woeful lodge of Earth, become an
heavenly Palace, purer than fine Gold, and brighter than the Diamonds, the
Rubies, and all the precious Stones. Weep not, for thy beautiful eyes that are
shut, nor for the rest of thy Senses that are lost, nor for the Members of thy
Body that consume away one after another; for with these same eyes that have
lost, or shall shortly loose the sight of the day light, thou shall behold a
Divine Light, that shall shine eternally in Heaven; thou shall behold the face
of the King of Kings, and all the Glory and Magnificence of his Kingdom, with
these ears that are deaf, and that shall shortly be stopped, thou shall hear
with transports of Joy, the ravishing harmonies of the Saints, and the Songs of
the Blessed Angels, with this stammering Tongue, which is to loose the faculty
of Speech; thou shall sing with a loud voice the praises of Almighty God, in
the glorious company of the Church triumphant; with these unsteddy hands that
can scarce hold any thing, thou shall one day receive Immortal Palms, and
Golden Viols, which thou shall never quit with these feet that are dying, and
that can scarce hold thee up, thou shall follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, and thou shall walk about the Streets of the heavenly Jerusalem, and
this same body that is going to rot, and to be turned to dust, shall one day
shine as the Firmament, and as the Sun in its greatest splendour.

What desire thou more Christian Soul for thy comfort, what addition can
there be made to thine happiness? for thou art going to the fruition of eternal
Joys, and of endless pleasures in Heaven. In the mean while, thy Body shall
endure no pain, nor grief; and God will shortly raise it up again from this
deep sleep, that begins to dull thy senses, and close thine eye lids. Shortly
God will publish the year of the great Jubilee, all the Prisons of Death shall
be then opened, and the Prisoners shall be set at liberty. Thou shall shortly
hear the found of the last Trump that shall rouse thee out of the dust, and
cause thee to appear in the presence of thy great Redeemer. Thou leavest a
wretched Body, full of darkness and corruption, assaulted by Death on all
sides, but it shall shortly be made uncorruptible, immortal, and adorned with
Light and Glory.

Let therefore thy Heart rejoice, thy Tongue be glad, and thy flesh rest in
hope, for the Lord will not leave thee always in the Grave, he will not suffer
thee to continue for ever in dust and corruption, he will not only discover to
thee the ways of life, but he will shortly come down himself from Heaven, for
to lead thee thither.

When Death should be already upon thy lips, when she should be ready to lay
thee in thy Grave, let not this disturb the quiet of thy Soul, nor the peace of
thy Conscience, let it not shake thy precious Faith that keeps thee up, nor
drive thee from the Author of thy Blessed hope fixed in Heaven, where Jesus
Christ is entered as thy forerunner; in short, when thy Body should be all
covered with sores and boiles, as that of Job, Job 19 when it should all fall
to pieces before thine eyes, let nothing hinder thee from crying out with this
patient Man, I know that my redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the Earth, and though after my skin, worms destroy this Body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my se f and mine Eyes
shall behold and not another. And with St. Paul, Phil. 3. We look from Heaven
for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the mighty working,
whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

A Prayer and Meditation of a Christian, who being ready to depart out of the
World, comforts himself with an assurance and expectation of the glorious
Resurrection of his Body from the Dust.
O Eternal and Divine Word! by whom all things were Created, and without whom
was not any thing made, that was made; Thou have not only created our Souls,
and fashioned our Bodies with thy skilful hands, but when they were miserably
lost and corrupted with Sin, thou have been pleased to redeem both our Souls
and Bodies with thy most precious Blood, and to restore thy glorious Image in
us. This wretched Body is but an Earthen Vessel; yet thou have enclosed in it,
the richest Treasuries of Life and Light. Thou have appointed it to be the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, and a noble Pavillion of the Godhead, to participate
with the Soul in the eternal happiness of thy Kingdom. I feel my strength
failing me, and this Earthly Tabernacle decaying every day, and every hour, so
that I am certain that it shall shortly fall to dust. But Lord I am
sufficiently comforted with the knowledge, that if the outward Man decays, the
inward is renewed day by day. If this wretched Body falls down by Death, thou
shall raise it up again at the general Resurrection. My Lord, and my God, thou
art sufficiently able, for all power is given to thee in Heaven and in Earth,
and in the depths of the Sea. As the Father raises and quickneth the Dead,
thou do also quicken them whom thou have chosen. Thou have fashioned my Body
of Dust, and created this Dust of nothing; and shall not thou be able of the
same dust, into which this my Body shall be turned by Death, to make and
fashion it again: Thou have by thine Almighty power, created my Soul and
infused it into this Body, and can thou not return it again, when it shall
please thee, to live for ever in a more blessed society than ever it has been
before? O Prince of Life, Death has sufficiently felt thy great and
overflowing power. It intended to swallow thee up, but thou have swallowed it
up in a glorious manner into Victory. Thou have been dead, but thou art
returned to life, and thou live for ever and ever. And now thou hold in
thy hands the Keys of Death. Thou openest and shutest up thy black Dungeon at
thy pleasure; Thou killest and make alive, thou castest into the Grave, and
fetchest up again. Lord Jesus, who art the Resurrection and the Life, as thou
have an ability to cause my Body to come out of the Dust, thou art willing and
resolved to take it out again, for thou have promised to awake with the sound
of the Archangels Trump, and to lead away with thee all them that sleep in
thee, and repose themselves upon thee, when thou shall come from Heaven with
thy powerful Angels, at the great day of thy Triumph, and at the Crowning of
thy Spouse, all the Prisons of Death shall be opened, and the prisoners set at
liberty. It shall not be long O Lord, before thou will cause the last Trumpet
to sound, to publish and proclaim the great Day of Rest and Joy. Thou shall
then put us in possession of all the advantages which we have lost. Thou shall
command the Sea, the Earth, and the Grave, to restore all the Bodies which they
have swallowed up, and they shall readily obey thee. Thy mighty word that
Created the World and sustains it, shall be heard in our very Graves, and at
that instant we shall go out to appear before thy dreadful Tribunal. We shall
not go out in the same manner as Lazarus with our winding sheets about us; we
shall leave in the Grave all tokens of our former infirmities. Thou shall not
only draw our Bodies out of their Tombs, but thou shall make them more
beautiful, more perfect and glorious than ever they were before, so that we are
able to say for a truth, I hat the glory of this second House, shall be greater
than the glory of the former, For thou shall change this vile body, and make it
like to thy glorious body; this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and
whatsoever is mortal in us, shall be overcome and swallowed up by life. With
these same languishing eyes I shall behold thee upon a Cloud of the Heavens,
and a Throne of fire; with these ears that are going to be stopped, I shall hear
the sound of the last Trump, and the Songs of the blessed Angels; with this
Tongue that can scarce speak and move, I shall sing forth thine Eternal and
Divine praises with the Church Triumphing; with these dying hands I shall
embrace and take hold of thee; with these feet that are already in the Grave, I
shall follow thee whither soever thou go, and walk about the streets of the
new Jerusalem; this same Body that is now dropping into the rotten Grave, shall
be carried up into Heaven, to shine as the Stars, or as the Sun for ever and
ever. O Lord, I am ready to depart out of this Tabernacle, there is nothing but
a breath in my nostrils, the shadow of Death appears upon mine eye lids, and my
Soul is upon my lips, but I am fully persuaded, that in this flesh which shall
be cast away to the worms, and left in a rotten Grave, I shall behold thy Glory
and magnificence, I shall see thy face and shall be satisfied with thy likeness
when I shall awake again. Amen.

CHAP. 24.
The Twelfth Consolation, the Destruction of Death, and the Eternal and most
Blessed Life which we shall enjoy both in Soul and Body after our Resurrection.

WE have sufficiently treated of that happiness which is prepared for our Souls
at their departure from the Bodies, and of the glorious Resurrection promised
to these Bodies, when Jesus Christ shall come down from Heaven in his Glory, to
judge the quick and the dead. It seems (...) we have nothing more to say, but
as Moses when he had made the Ark of Shittim wood, and lined it with fine Gold,
he put round about a Crown of Gold upon the Top. In the same manner now that we
have declared unto you the incorruption and future glory of our Bodies, which
are to be looked upon as sacred Arks, (...) Gods Majesty shall dwell for ever.
Now that we (...) how by the Almighty and gracious power of (...) they shall
become more uncorruptible than the (...) wood, and more glorious than fine
Gold. I will n^w with Gods a ^^^ance draw about them a Crown more precious than
the purest Gold, and richer than all the ^ewels in the World, I mean, to Crown
this work, and intend to end it with as perfect a Picture, as I am able to draw
of the Eternal Glory and Happiness which we expect to enjoy both in Soul and
Body after our Resurrection. But first, I must say something of the entire and
perfect destruction of all our Enemies, and represent unto you the overthrow
and the fatal end of Death.

When Jesus Christ shall appear again to Judge the World in Righteousness, he
shall sit upon a glorious and a most splendid Throne. Solomon's magnificent
Throne, was but its shadow and imperfect Type, he shall then send forth his
Angels, who shall gather together the Elect with the sound of a Trumpet from
the four parts of the World, and from one end of the Heavens to the other. The
sight of this glorious Savior, shall then fill us with an unspeakable joy, and
cause us to burst forth into this Language, Is. 25. Lo this is our God, we have
waited for him, and he will save us; This is the Lord, we have waited for him,
we will be glad and rejoice in his Salvation. But when all the kinreds of the
Earth shall behold this glorious King, in the Clouds of Heaven, with power and
great glory, they shall lament and strike their Breasts in despair, they shall
call to the Mountains and Rocks, Revel. 6. Fall upon us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for
the great day of his wrath is come, who shall be able to stand?

It is then, that the Lord shall bring to light the hidden things of darkness,
and shall manifest the thoughts of the heart, with the most secret
contrivances. The Books shall be opened, not only of the guilty Consciences,
where Satan's Image and Deeds shall be engraven, but also the other Books, where
God himself has written with his own finger, all our actions, words, and our
most secret thoughts. All Men shall be judged according to the things written
in the Books. St. John declares this in the 20. of the Revelations. I saw a
great White Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the Earth and the
Heaven fled away, and there was no place for them. And I saw the Dead small and
great stand before God, and the Books were opened, and another Book was opened,
which is the Book of Life, and the Dead were judged out of those things which
were written in the Books, according to their works. Unto this St. Paul agrees,
we must all appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive in his Body according as he has done, whether it be good or evil.

There are three sorts of persons that are to stand before this glorious
Tribunal, such as never had any other teacher but Nature, who were not
acquainted with any other Works of God, but of Creation and Providence; for God
has not left himself without witness in doing good.

The second sort have been assisted with a Divine Revelation from above, under
the Law which has distinctly taught them what Works are pleasing to God. These
may have heard something of a Messiah from the ancient Prophets, they may have
seen his pourtraiture in the Types and Shadows of Moses ordinances.

The other sort have had the Grace of God clearly and plainly revealed unto
them, unto whom our Lord Jesus Christ has brought Life and Immortality to
light, through the Gospel. There are none of these persons if they have lived
in Impiety and debauchery, and are dead in impenitency, that shall be able to
excuse themselves in this dreadful day of Judgment. But some are more guilty
than others, therefore they shall be condemned to more grievous Tortures.

The knowledge that God has bestowed upon Man, has been darkened by the
Prince of darkness, but it has not been totally extinct; and that Law which
God has engraven in the Soul of Man, has not been altogether blotted out, but
there remains yet some relics. So that there is no Man living that can affirm,
that he has done all the good deeds, which his Conscience was persuaded that
he ought to perform, and that he has omitted all the evil acts, of which his
Conscience did convince him. They who have lived and are Dead, without any Law
of God revealed unto them, shall be judged without the Law. Such shall be
condemned, for having taken pleasure in extinguishing the remains of their
natural light, and in smothering the good and rational dictates of their
Consciences. They shall be condemned because they have abused Heavens favors,
and filled themselves with Gods good Creatures, without returning to him due
thanks; and because they have not meditated as they ought, upon so many stately
and noble works of nature, nor learned by that means to know God, who has left
in these works, so many impresses of his eternal Power and Godhead, and because
that knowing God, they have not glorified him as God, this St. Paul teaches in
these words, As many as have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law,
and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law; for when the
Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law
these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the
Law written in their Hearts, their Conscience also bearing Witness, and their
thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another in the day when
God shall judge the secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel,
Romans 2.

They that profess to know the Law, shall be judged by the Law, such as have
already heard the Thunders of Mount Sinai, they shall one day feel the
Thunderbolts. They shall understand by experience, what it is to rebel against
God, and to draw upon themselves and their guilty heads, the dreadful curses of
Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 17. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things,
which are written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. There is no doubt
but that the Jews upon whom Moses and the Prophets have spent so many fruitless
exhortations to live well, shall be punished with more grievous Torments, than
the poor Savages, unto whom God never sent any Message, who never had any
acquaintance with the Commonwealth of Israel, being strangers from the
Covenant, having no hope and being without God in the World, Ephesians. 2. For that
servant who knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with more
stripes then him who knows it not, Luke 12.

But no people upon Earth have cause to expect and dread a more severe
Sentence, then the wicked Christians, that make profession of knowing God, and
believing in Jesus Christ; who nevertheless deny him by their Works, and
trample under feet the riches of his Grace; how can it otherwise be, for such
as have heard the Gospel Preached, who have seen Jesus Christ as it were
Crucified before their eyes, and yet have made no advantage of all this, they
ought to be punished in another manner, than the bare Auditors of Moses, that
never saw the Messiah but afar off, and in the shadows of the Ceremonial Law.
Take notice of these Divine ex pressions of St. Paul to the Hebrews, He that
despised Moses Law, died without Mercy, under two or three witnesses; of how
much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden
under foot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant,
wherewith he was Sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
Spirit of Grace? For we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I
will recompense says the Lord; and again, the Lord shall judge his people. It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Therefore when St.
Paul speaks of such as obey not the Gospel, he says, That they shall be
punished with eternal Punishments from the presence of God, and from the glory
of his power. And our Savior teaches us, that such as reject so great
Salvation, shall be punished more grievously than the most abominable Sinners
unto whom it was never declared. Therefore when he sends forth his Apostles to
Preach, he tells them, whosoever shall not receive you, and hear your words,
when ye depart out of that House or City, shake off the dust of your feet;
verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom and
Gomorrha in the day of Judgment, than for that City. Likewise, when he
upbraids the Cities which had not believed in him, for their unbelief and
impenitency, because they were not converted at the Preaching of his Gospel,
and at the sight of his glorious Miracles, Math. 11. he tells them, Woe unto
thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty works which were done
in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire
and Sidon, at the day of Judgment then for you. And thou Capernaum, which art
exalted unto Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell; for if the mighty works
which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained
unto this day, but I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the
Land of Sodom in the day of Judgment then for thee.

The great Judge of the World, shall place at his left hand, all wicked Souls
which have lived without any fear of God, and without expressing Charity to the
Members of his Mystical Body, and shall pronounce to them this dreadful
Sentence, Depart from me ye Cursed, to Eternal Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, for I was an hungrey, and ye gave me no Meat, I was thirsty, and ye
gave me no Drink, I was a stranger and ye took me not in, Naked and ye clothed
me not, sick and in Prison, and ye visited me not; verily I say unto you, in as
much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. But
the faithful who have declared their Faith, by a good and holy Life, and by
works of Charity and Mercy, he will place at his right hand, and in the
Presence of God, and all his holy Angels, he shall say unto them, Come ye
Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning
of the World, for I was an hungrey, and ye gave me Meat, I was thirsty, and ye
gave me Drink, I was a Stranger, and ye took me in, Naked, and ye clothed me,
I was sick, and ye visited me, I was in Prison, and ye came unto me; verily I
say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
Brethren, ye have done it unto me.

There be some that make this question, what sign shall precede immediately
before, or accompany the coming of Christ in the World? Our Savior has given
occasion to this demand, for when he speaks of the things that are to happen
about the time of his glorious Coming, he says, That the Sun shall be
darkened, that the Moon shall not give light, that the Stars shall fall from
Heaven, and that the powers of the Heavens shall be shaken, and that then shall
appear in Heaven, the Sign of the Son of Man,

Some imagine; that this Sign of the Son of Man, is the Sign of the Cross,
which shall appear in the air. This opinion in it self is harmless, but in
regard that it has no foundation in holy Scripture, I am not to insist upon
it. Others believe, that it shall be the Fire with which Jesus Christ shall
burn the Earth, dissolve the Elements, and punish unbelievers. This conceit is
grounded upon St. Paul's words to the Thessal. 2. These. 1. It is a righteous
thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you
who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Others
conceive, that this Sign of the Son of Man, is nothing else, but the Body of
Jesus Christ, bearing and discovering the print of the nails in his hands and
feet, and the wound of the Spear in his side. This they gather from these words
of the first of the Revel. Behold he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall
see him, and they also which pierced him. There be others yet, that take it in
another sense, and that believe that there shall be no particular Sign, but
that we must understand by this Sign of the Son of Man, all those things which
shall declare the end of the World, and the coming of Jesus Christ to judge the
quick and the dead. If we take the words in this manner, there will be an
excellent allusion to that which is commonly practiced, when Kings and Princes
make their public entrance into great Cities, for their coming in is
proclaimed by the sound of a Trumpet, and by the attendants of Majesty, a Train
and Pomp that usually accompanies it. In the same manner, the glorious coming
of Jesus Christ, shall be known, by the sound of the Archangels Trumpet, and by
all the Signs and wonderful alterations which shall suddenly happen in the
Heavens. This last opinion is very likely, and the former advances nothing
contrary to the analogy of Faith. Therefore in harmless matters, which are
controverted, and not plainly decided by the Word of God, we leave to every
pious Soul, a liberty to choose that which it likes best.

Some inquire further, If it be true, that the Souls of the Damned go down into
Hell immediately, after their egress out of the Body, and if they are tormented
in a Fire that goes not out, whereof the heat never lessens, as the Christian
Religion teaches, and as we may see in the Parable of the rich Glutton; does
it not follow, that these wretches are already judged? How is it therefore that
the Son of God will judge them again at the last day, and send them to an
everlasting burning prepared for the Devil and his Angels; I answer, First,
That it is no absurdity to say, that one Sentence shall be pronounced twice,
for Men are wont to read the Sentence of Doom to the Prisoner, before he is
taken out of Prison, afterward the same Sentence is published before all the
people, at the time of execution: Likewise when the Souls of the Wicked go out
of their wretched Bodies, God pronounces to them the Sentence of his Death; But
when Jesus Christ shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory; he shall publish the
same Sentence, before all the Men of the World, and all the Angels of Heaven.
Besides, that Sentence was never pronounced, but to the Soul, but then it shall
be declared both to the Soul and Body, and both together shall be sent to the
everlasting burning, from whence they shall never be reprieved. From hence
therefore Christians, you may gather, that there are three degrees of
Punishments or Torments to the Wicked; for in this Life they have a Worm that
knaws their Bowels and Heart, and a kind of Hell that Torments their
Consciences. At the going of their Souls out of the World, they are cast
headlong into the Eternal flames of Hell, where they suffer unspeakable
Torments; at that time their Bodies are senseless in their Graves, as the
Bodies of the righteous. But at this last and dreadful day of Judgment, as the
Grave shall restore all the Dead Bodies, Hell, which is the place designed for
the Torment of the Damned shall give up all the Souls that are tormented in its
flames, and these cursed Souls shall be remitted to their miserable Bodies, to
suffer the pangs of an eternal Death, Revel. 20. Thus they shall be cast in
Body and Soul into the bottomless pit, where there is weeping and gnashing of
teeth. At that time the Beast, the false Prophet, and all the Enemies of God
and of his Church, shall be cast alive into the Lake burning with fire and
brimstone, which is the second Death, Revel. 19.10, 11. And when all these
Offenders shall be executed, the Executioners themselves shall be punished for
their Crimes, when the Damned shall be cast into eternal Tortures, the Devils
and infernal furies shall be sent after them, as it is said, The Devil who
seduced the Nations, shall be cast into the lake of fire and Brimstone, where
the Beast and the false Prophet are, and they shall be tormented day and night
for ever and ever, Revel. 20. What a dreadful sight is it to behold all those
Roaring Lions; those furious Dragons in their rage, vomiting forth fire and
flames? What a joyful spectacle shall this be, to the Children of God, to look
upon these infernal Devils, bound fast with those Chains, which they shall
never be able to break, and shut up in this bottomless pit, out of which they
shall never be released.

Our Lord shall cast into this Lake of fire and brimstone, and shut up in this
bottomless pit, not only the Devil and his Angels, the Beast and the false
Prophet, and generally all wicked Souls and unbelievers, but he shall cast
therein also Death and the Grave, or rather, he shall abolish them for ever. As
Josuah when he conquered the Kings of the Amorites, he never killed them, until
such time as he had overcome all his Enemies. Likewise our Lord Jesus Christ,
our true Joshua, has encountered with Death upon the Cross, and overcome it by
his Resurrection, but he will not destroy it altogether, until the last day,
when he shall come to judge the World. Then to perfect all his glorious
victories, he shall destroy this last Enemy, this destroyer of his Brethren,
and of his Members, so that Death shall be no more. It shall be no more for the
wicked, they shall seek it in vain, to be freed from their Torments. It shall
fly away from them as a shadow, that departs and is no more to be found, Death
shall be no more for Gods Children, for it shall never disturb their Rest and
Happiness,

If the old Serpent could enter into Paradise, we should fear his temptations,
and inflamed Darts; and if Death did continue in its Empire and Command, we
should dread its approaches; but then it shall not have the least power, it
shall be totally abolished; All the living shall become immortal: And although
God will not destroy the Being, nor take away the malice of the Devil; yet to
us he shall be as if he were not, for he shall never be able to break his
Chains, nor to escape out of his Prison; and between him and us, there shall be
depths that can never be filled: So that as Moses when he cast his Eyes upon
Pharaoh, and the Egyptians who pursued the frighted Israelites, he told them,
Stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you to
day; for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no
more for ever. Likewise, when we think upon Satan, and all his infernal Armies
that pursue you; We may say with confidence, Settle your minds, Christian
Souls, and with the Eye of Faith, behold the Salvation of the Lord; for these
hellish furies that have persecuted us so long, shall be reduced to that
estate, that they shall not be able to do you the least displeasure, or to give
you any apprehension; God is going to drown them in the Red Sea of his wrath;
and to shut them up for ever, in the bottomless pit of his just revenge. So
that as in the Heavenly Paradise, there shall be neither pain nor sorrow, nor
grief, nor crying, nor sighs heard. Likewise, there shall never be any fear nor
fright, nor the least alarm, but we shall live there in a settled Peace and
quiet for ever.

It is reported of the Macedonians, that they wept for joy when they beheld
their King Alexander the Great, seated in the Throne of Darius, and trampling
under feet, the Pride and Empire of Persia. But how exceeding great shall our
joy be, when we shall behold Jesus Christ our great Monarch, sitting upon the
Throne of God, and trampling under feet the pomp of the World, crushing the Red
Dragon, and all the tyrannical powers of Hell. The Glory of Alexander vanished
away with his breath. Death destroyed all his Trophies; but our Lord shall
triumph over death it self; It shall be the last act of his Eternal Justice, to
destroy the destroyer and murderer, from the beginning.

At that time there shall be no more enemies to encounter with, no evils to be
feared, neither shall there be any Advantages to be desired, nor Honors to be
expected, for God will cast us into the bottomless Ocean of the most Divine
Pleasures, and shall raise us up to the highest Glory, that our Nature shall be
capable of. This Happiness and this Glory shall be infinite in regard of its
durance. It shall not be like to the Pomp and Magnificence of the Kings and
Princes of the World, which vanishes away in an instant; nor like to the
brightness of Moses Face, which departed with his life; nor like the
transfiguration of Christ upon mount Tabor, which soon disappeared; for when it
shall have continued as many hundred ages as there are Stars in the Firmament;
it shall then but begin and appear in its rising, so that there we may have
just cause, and more reason than St. Peter, to say, Lord, it is good for us to
be here. There is no place in the world so pleasant and delightful, but at last
one shall be weary to continue in it, nor company so amiable and sweet, but
becomes tedious in time, nor pleasure so ravishing, but grows into distaste. The
greatest persons on earth sigh under the burden of their greatness; the
brightness of their Glory dazles them: When nothing troubles them, they are
troubled of their own accord, and the most magnificent Triumphs disturb and
weary them. Oft-times their Heart groans in the midst of the greatest
rejoycings, and of the public applauses; they think themselves more unhappy
than those, who envy their apparent happiness, for all that shines is not.
Gold, the most beautiful Roses are not without their prickles, and many times
they hide dangerous Serpents.

As the Glory and Happiness of Paradise is insinite, in regard of its Durance,
so in respect of its Dignity and Excellency; for God will not only satisfy all
our desires, and answer all our expectations, but he will also give unto us,
above all that we can ask or think.

Shall I undertake to paint out unto you this Glory and perfect Happiness? When
St. Paul speaks of these Evangelical Mysteries, he assures us, that they are
things that the Eye of Man has never seen, that his Ear has never heard, and
that never entered into his Heart, 1 Cor. 2. If this is true of the Doctrine,
which declares this Glory and Eternal Happiness; how are we able to comprehend
that Glory and Happiness it self, therefore the same Apostle tells us in
another place, That God works in us abundantly, above that we are able to ask
or think, Ephesians. 3. I cannot boast of having spoken with God face to face, as
Moses, Numb. 11. of having been ravished as St. Paul, into the third Heaven. 1
Cor. 12. God has not transported me up as St. John, into the Celestial
Jerusalem; neither has he delivered to me as to his Holy Angels, a Reed to
measure the holy City. But when I should have enjoyed these Glorious
privileges, this Divine Entertainment, these supernatural Elevations, when I
should have walked about, and taken a full view of the Celestial Jerusalem,
when I should have been in the company of the Seraphims, that fly about God's
Throne, when I should have beheld God face to face, although I were the most
eloquent of all Men, and did speak with the tongues of Angels, and had in my
hand the Pencil of an Archangel, I should not dare to undertake to represent
this exceeding great Glory, nor to paint out unto you the brightness of that
Heavenly Light, whereof the least beam is able to dazzle me. St. Paul had been
near the body of this great Light, he had beheld the Riches and Glory of
Paradise, yet he confesses that they be things unutterable, not to be
expressed by any tongue.

But as those who cannot cast their eyes directly to look upon the Sun, because
that it dazles them with its exceeding great Light, behold its Body with more
ease and leisure in the Water, or in a Looking-Glass. Thus shall we consider
and look upon the Images which God himself has expressed for us in his Holy
Word, of this Divine brightness of Heaven, which we are not able otherwise to
comprehend: for God has dealt with us, as a Father does with his young Babes,
who babbles with them, and represents to them the light of the un, with a black
Coal. Or as the Astrologers, who represent the Heavenly Constellations by the
Figures of Birds, of four-footed Beasts, and of creeping things.

For nothing can enter into our understanding, but by the door of our Senses,
therefore Spiritual and Celestial things, are represented under the Notions of
Corporal and Earthly Enjoyments, which we passionately love; and because there
is not one thing here below that can express unto us the Glory and Happiness of
Paradise; so many perfections are not to be found in one only thing: Therefore
the Holy Ghost gathers together all the Excellencies, Riches, and Beauty,
scattered about in the inferior Creatures, and borrows the Ideas and Notions of
those things that are rarest and most glorious, and that give us the greatest
pleasure and satisfaction, to represent unto us Heaven's Glory.

To begin in the first place with the word Paradise; it signifies a delightful
and a pleasant Garden; it is often made use of to express to us the Joys and
Happiness of the life to come, and to make us sensible, that what we have lost
by Adam, is restored to us by Jesus Christ, Our Lord and Savior, who is
goodness it self, shall bestow upon us another Eden, another Garden of
pleasure, watered with living water; in the midst of it is the Tree of Life,
that brings forth its Fruits every month; instead of an earthly Paradise,
subject to change, we shall find an Heavenly, and an Unchangeable Paradise. The
earthly Paradise is no more to be seen, it is thought that it was swallowed up
and destroyed by the Waters and Deluge; but the Heavenly Paradise can never be
destroyed by the most furious Fire, nor by the most swelling Waves. It is above
all the Winds and Storms, and Tempests; therefore St. Peter assures us, That it
is an incorruptible inheritance that fades not away. It has no need of an
elemental Water, for it is watered every where with the River of living Water,
that proceeds from the Throne of God and the Lamb. And whereas Cherubims, armed
with a flaming Sword, stood at the entrance of the Earthly Paradise, to hinder
Adam from approaching near to the Tree of Life, and from gathering of its
Fruits. Now whole Legions of Cherubims are to carry us up upon their wings, to
the true Tree of Life, which stands in the midst of the Heavenly Paradise; and
Jesus Christ himself, the Prince of all the Angels, of all the Cherubims and
Seraphims, promises to admit us to partake of its delicious Fruits, by these
blessed words, To him that shall overcome, I will give him to eat of the Tree
of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God:

It is the common custom of Men, to have an high esteem of beautiful and great
Cities, whereof the buildings are stately, and the Inhabitants many. Therefore
the Jews were wont to boast of Jerusalem, and to call it The City perfect in
Beauty, the joy of the whole Earth. Therefore the Holy Ghost represents unto
us, the Glory and Happiness of Heaven, by a City which he names Jerusalem. And
St. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews, mentions the same comparison, for when
he had said, That Abraham by faith sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a
strange Country dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the Heirs with
him of the same promise; he adds immediately after, For he looked for a City
which has foundations, whose builder and Maker is God, and a little after, God
is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City,
Heb. 11. And in the 12 Chapter of the same Epistle, he speaks to Believers in
this manner, Ye are come to mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God,
the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels. And elsewhere,
We have no continuing City here below, but we seek one to come, Heb. 13.14.

God is pleased, not only to describe unto us our future Paradise, under the
general notion of a City, and of Jerusalem, but he declares unto us its
Heavenly Beauty, its Glory and Magnificence; you cannot find a richer, and a
more excellent Image, than that of St. John, who himself had been a spectator
of the new Jerusalem; and had beheld all its rarities and wonders; for when the
Angel, who had in his hand a Golden Reed, to measure this Glorious City, had
said unto him, Come, I will show thee the Spouse, the wife of the Lamb. He
carried him in the Spirit to an high Mountain, from whence he had a prospect of
that great and Holy City Jerusalem, which came down from Heaven from God,
decked as a Spouse, prepared for her Husband, having the Glory of God and his
Light. This faithful witness assures us, that its Buildings, and the Streets of
this blessed City, were all of fine Gold, as bright as Crystal; its
Foundations were of precious Stone; its twelve Gates were twelve Pearls; at
each of them stood an Angel of God. This Holy City has no need of the light of
the Sun, or of the light of the Moon, for the Light of God enlightens it, and
the Lamb is the Light thereof; there is no Temple therein, for the Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it.

It is our delight to abide in stately and magnificent Houses, and in rich and
glorious Palaces; Therefore Paradise is expressed unto us by a Dwelling, and by
a Palace, which God himself has built with his own Hands. This is the Picture
that the Royal Prophet represents unto us in the 65 Psalm. when he speaks of
God's House, and of the Holy place of his Palace. And St. Paul does the like in
the 1 Cor. 5 Chap. when he says, We know that if our earthly House of this
Tabernacle, were dissolved, we have a building of God, an House not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens. And our Savior, when he was ready to leave the
World, he comforts his Apostles in this manner, In my Fathers House there are
many Mansions, I go to prepare a place for you. And St. John heard a mighty
voice from Heaven, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God with Men, he shall
dwell with them; and they shall be his people, and God himself shall he their
God with them.

Every one desires to be rich, there be some that esteem it their chief
Happiness, therefore the Holy Ghost represents the Happiness of Heaven, under
the notion of Riches and Treasures; our Savior himself speaks of it in this
manner, in the 6 of St. Matthew, Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon
Earth, where Moth and Rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through and
steal, but lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth nor
Rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal. Therefore
when the Holy Ghost describes Heavens Glory, and mentions Gold, Pearls, and
precious stones, it has a regard to this consideration.

And because Men are for the most part desirous of Honors, Greatness, and
Dignities, and that there is nothing in the world more esteemed, than Scepters
Crowns; therefore the Glory of Heaven is expressed by a Kingdom, by Thrones,
Crowns, and Triumphs. Our Savior speaks in this language to his Apostles, To
you all who have continued with me in my afflictions; I appoint a Kingdom as my
Father has appointed unto me, Luk 22. In another place, he speaks to all his
Church in general, Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to
give you the Kingdom, Luk 20. And at the last day he will say, Come ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
World, Matthew. 25. And to the Angel of his Church in Smyrns, and to all faithful
Souls, this Divine Savior makes this promise, Be thou faithful unto death, and
I will give thee a Crown of Life, Revel. 2. And to the Angel of the Church of
Laodicea, To him that over comes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne,
even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne, Revel.
3. And St. Paul tells us, That we run to obtain an uncorruptible Crown, 1 Cor.
6. And when he saw himself at the end of his Race, he cries out, I have fought
the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth
there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous
Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all them also
that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. And St. James speaks in the same Language,
Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried, he shall
receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him,
Jam. 1. Finally, we read that the glorified Saints have Palms in their Hands,
and Crowns of Gold upon their Heads, and in their Songs of Praise, they speak
thus to our Savior Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and have made us to our God, Kings
and Priests, and we shall reign on the Earth, Revel. 4.4.

The great Men of the World delight in gorgeous Apparel, some in perfumed
Garments, therefore the Holy Ghost condescends to this weakness of Man, and
promises in Heaven Robes, more flagrant than the perfumes of Arabia; he
promises a Garment whiter than Snow, and brighter than the Light it self. And
Solomon when he considers his Spouse, as the Type of the Church, he says, The
Kings daughter is full of glory within, her clothing is of wrought Gold, she
shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle work.

And when God himself speaks of the glory of his Church, which he begins now,
and will consummate hereafter; he says, that he adorned her with Gold, Silver,
and precious Stones, that he has clothed her with fine Linen, with Silk, and
Needle Work; therefore the Church speaks in this manner, I will greatly rejoice
in the Lord, my Soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the
Garments of Salvation, he has covered me with the Robes of Righteousness, as a
Bridegroom decketh himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self
with her Jewels. And if you take notice of such as stand before the Throne of
God, and in the presence of the Lamb that worship him day and night in his
Temple, you shall find them clothed with long Robes, whitened in the Blood of
the Lamb. Look also upon that Glorious Woman of the Revelations, the true Type
and representation of the Church, and you shall see her clothed with the Sun,
and a Crown of twelve Stars upon her Head. In a word, hearken to the Song of
the glorified Saints, and you shall hear them speaking to one another, Let us
be glad and rejoice, and give honor to God, for the Marriage of the Lamb is
come, and his Wife has made her self ready, and to her was granted, that she
should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white, for the fine Linen is the
righteousness of Saints.

Men commonly love good cheer, to partake of sumptuous Feasts, therefore the
Heavenly Delights are represented to us under the notion of rare Meats, and
exquisite Drinks, of Noble Feasts, and Magnificent Banquets. In this manner,
the Royal Prophet speaks of them in the 36 Psalm, How excellent is thy loving
kindness, O God! therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow
of thy wings, they shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy House,
and thou shall make them drink of the River of thy pleasures. And in the 65
Psalm, Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto
thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts, he shall be satisffed with the goodness
of thy house, even of thy holy Temple. And the Prophet Isaiah speaks in the
same language, In this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people, a
Feast of fat things, a Feast of Wine on the Lees, of fat things full of Marrow,
of Wines on the Lees, well refined. This consideration causes a Doctor in the
Gospel to say, Blessed is he that shall eat Bread in the Kingdom of Heaven. And
our Savior himself says, that many shall come from the East and from the
West, and shall sit at Table in the Kingdom of Heaven with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob. Ahasuerus's Feast continued 180 days, but the Feast of which we shall be
partakers in Heaven, and which has been preparing from the foundation of the
World, shall continue for all Eternity.

Of all Feasts, such as are prepared for Nuptial Solemnities, are most
esteemed, when they are for Kings and Princes of the Earth, for in such
occasions there are the greatest, and the most extraordinary rejoycings;
therefore the happiness of Heaven is expressed by a Marriage, our Savior
himself makes use of this comparison in the 22 Chapter of St. Matthew, The
Kingdom of God, says he, is like unto a King which made a Marriage for his
Son. This caused the glorified Church to speak in this manner, Let us rejoice
and be glad, and give glory to the Lord our God for the Marriage of the Lamb is
come. Finally, The Holy Ghost has Commanded to Write and Record these words
for ever, Blessed are those that are called to the Marriage Feast of the Lamb.

Some persons are very much delighted with the sweet and pleasant Consorts of
Music; Therefore the Holy Ghost to signify unto us, That in Heaven there shall
be all manner of pleasures, and nothing wanting, tells us, that about God's
Throne, millions of Angels, and glorified Saints, shall sing forth the Divine
Praise. Besides, it acquaints us with the substance of their Heavenly Songs;
when Isaiah mentions these wonderful Seraphims, that fly round about God's
Glorious Throne, he says, That they cry one to another, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord
God of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of thy glory. And when St. John speaks of
those glorified Saints, he says, that they stand before this magnificent
Throne, playing with their Harps, and singing a new Song, that is to say, a
most rare and excellent Song, and that they have always in their mouths the
song of Moses, and of the Lamb, and that Heaven it self resounds with their
Sacred Halelujah's, which signifies, Praise God, or, Set forth the praises of
God. There is no ingenuous Soul but loves Peace and Rest, for this cause, the
Glory and Happiness of Paradise is represented under this lovely and pleasant
Notion, as in the 4 Chapter of the Hebrews, For we which believed, do enter
into rest, as he said, as I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my
rest; for if Jesus had given them rest, then would he not afterward have spoken
of another day, there remains therefore a Rest to the People of God, for he
that is entered into his Rest, he also has ceased from his own Works, as God
did from his; Let us labor therefore to enter into that Rest. This causes old
Simeon to cry out, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace. Finally,
the Holy City is called Jerusalem, which signifies a Vision of Peace, And God
himself makes this promise, Behold, I will extend Peace to her, like a River,
Is. 66. Phil. 4. Wherefore if the Peace which God grants to believing Souls in
this life, surpasses all understanding, what may we judge shall be the full
enjoyment of an Eternal Peace in the Kingdom of Heaven; the tongues of Men and
Angels is not able to express its Dignity and Excellency.

Lastly, because Men are lovers of Pleasures, Delights, and Pomp, and that the
most part seek for nothing, but how to drive away their sorrows, and to
recreate themselves with pastimes; Therefore the felicities of Paradise are
represented by Rejoycings, Pleasures, and Eternal Solemnities, as in the 36
Psalm, Thou shall cause them to drink of the River of thy pleasure^. And in the
126 Psalm, They that sow in Tears, shall reap in Joy; And God himself speaking
of that most blessed time, says, Behold, I create new Heavens, and a new
Earth, and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind, but be you
glad and rejoice for ever, in that which I create; for behold, I create
Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her People a joy. Therefore when the Holy Ghost
represents the condition of the Glorified Saints; he does only say, that God
will wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and that there shall be no more
sorrow, nor crying, nor labor, nor pain, nor grief, but he adds over and
above,, that in their mouths there shall be Songs of Praise, and upon their
Heads, an Eternal joy and gladness, like to a precious Crown, which shall never
be taken from them; for this cause they call so earnestly upon one another, Let
us be glad and rejoice, and give glory to the Lord our God, Revel. 19.

All our senses shall partake in these Heavenly and Everlasting Pleasures; our
Eyes shall behold with transports of joy, the sacred countenance of our
Redeemer, the Riches and wonderful Beauty of his Palace, the Glory and
Magnificence of his Empire; our Ears shall be delighted with the Music of the
blessed Saints, and with the Tunes of the Angels, and of the Church Triumphant;
our smelling shall receive the sweet perfumes of our Bridegroom, whose Garments
are of Myrrh, and whose Vine, always blossoming, gives a good smell; our Palate
shall taste the Bread of Angels, the hidden Manna, the Fruits of the Tree of
Life, the Waters issuing forth to everlasting Life, and the new Wine of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Our Hands shall embrace the Savior of the World, and with
our Feet we shall walk about the streets of that golden City, the Heavenly
Jerusalem, and we shall follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Revel. 14.

Although I speak to you in this manner, I am persuaded Christian Souls, that
you understand very well that these expressions and such like, are not to be
understood in a litteral Sense, and that they are but dark Shadows, and
imperfect Images of the advantages of the life to come. You have not forgot
what St. Paul says, That they are things which Eye has not seen, Ear has not
heard, and which never entered into the heart of Man, which God has prepared
for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. And that this great God, whose Riches are
inexhaustible, does in us abundantly, above what we are able to ask or think,
Ephesians. 3. so that when you see before you all the most Beautiful, Amiable,
Glorious, and excellent things of the World; you may say in your selves,
without doubt, the Glory and Happiness of Heaven, is something more than all
this, for it is elevated so much above all Earthly enjoyments, and surpasses,
so much all the thoughts and conceits of Man, that it is not possible to
describe it in its own Colors, nor to fancy it really as it is.

Think not therefore, Christian Souls, to meet in Heaven with a Paradise,
something like to your Gardens, nor with Flowers, like to such as adorn your
pleasant Walks and Fields, nor Fruits like to such as hang upon your Trees; you
may be assured, that God will discover things infinitely more pleasant and
delightful, and more lasting. Fancy not such a City, built up as ours is, where
Gold, Silver, Pealrs, and precious Stones are to be seen: you may expect
something more Noble and Magnificent, than all the richest and most stately
Cities of the World; God will cause you to see, not only the beauty of Silver,
the purity of Gold, the whiteness of Pearls, and the brightness of precious
Stones; but you shall discover something more beautiful, purer, whiter,
brighter, and something more surprising than any Earthly thing. Think not to
receive any material Crown, or to ascend up upon Thrones, like to those of
Kings and Princes, You may justly fancy something more Glorious, and more
lasting.

I am also persuaded, Christians, that you expect not in Heaven, to find Tables
covered, as those of the rich Worldlings; nor to glutt your selves with a
Feast, like that of the Nuptials of Earthly Princes, without doubt, your Faith
has an eye to something more Heavenly and Glorious; Your Soul hungers for more
exquisite Dainties, and is athirst for more delicious and sweeter Drinks. You
are too well instructed, to think to live in Heaven an animal, and a sensual
Life; Such a gross conceit, becomes only the Impostor Mahomet, and his fond
Paradise.

In this life that we lead upon Earth, there are two things which chiefly
discover our natural Infirmity; The first is our eating and drinking,
absolutely necessary to make up the breaches that labor, and the natural heat
do make, which spend and feed upon the radical Humor, which serves to our
life, as Oil to a Lamp. The other is Marriage, appointed by God for the
continuance and propagation of the humane Race. But in Heaven our life shall be
altogether Angelical, Spiritual, and Supernatural; our Bodies shall be no more
subject to corruption, nor to any alteration, they shall want no more food than
the Stars do at present, and the rest of the Celestial Bodies; Therefore the
Holy Ghost speaks expressly, That we shall neither hunger nor thirst, that the
Sun shall not burn, nor any other heat trouble us. That is to say, as we shall
never be inclinable to eat or drink, the most burning heat, and the most
furious Flames shall have no power to hurt our Bodies, when they shall have
cast off all sensual and earthly qualities, and instead of them it shall be
clothed with Light and Glory; therefore at that time there shall be no need of
propogating the Species, or of multiplying the Persons by Marriage, for we
shall not be then subject to earthly Passions, and the number of the Elect
shall be complete; the Congregation of Saints shall be full, and the building
of the Church shall be perfectly made up; therefore our Savior Jesus Christ
assures us, That in the Kingdom of Heaven they shall neither take nor give in
Marriage, but that we shall be like the Angels of God, we shall enjoy the light
of their understanding, the Holiness of their Wills, and the Purity of their
affections.

When the Queen of Sheba saw the Glory and State of King Solomon, and heard all
his excellent Discourses, she was extraordinarily surprised and wondered;
therefore she told this great Prince, It was a true report that I heard in mine
own Land, of thy Acts, and of thy Wisdom; howbeit, I believed not the words,
until I came, and mine eyes had seen it; and behold, the half was not told me,
thy Wisdom and prosperity exceeds the same which I heard; happy are thy Men,
happy are these thy servants which stand continually before thee, and that hear
thy Wisdom. I am persuaded, Believing Souls, that something like to this shall
happen to us, when we shall be come to the Heavenly Jerusalem, to behold our
Lord Jesus Christ himself, of whom Solomon was but a Type, and a Figure, for he
had but a spark of his Glory, and but a beam of his Wisdom; when we shall see
this peaceable King Crowned with an Heavenly Rainbow, we shall be ravished into
admiration, and as it were, transported out of our selves; then we shall speak
in this manner to his Divine Majesty: O Glorious Monarch, all that I have ever
heard or imagined of thy Wisdom, of thy Glory, Riches, Beauty, and
extraordinary Pleasure of thy Paradise, is more than true, but it is not the
thousand part of that which I see this day. O blessed are they that dwell in
thy House, and that praise thee without ceasing; happy are they that behold thy
Glorious Face, and hear thy Divine Wisdom. After that, the Queen of Sheba had
been some time in the Court of King Solomon, she returned back to her own home;
but when we shall be once entered into the Glory and Happiness of Paradise, we
shall never depart out again; we shall behold continually this Glorious King of
Kings, and we shall hear, with Divine transports of Joy, the wonderful
expressions of his Wisdom; we shall not only be with him for ever and ever, but
we shall always be in him, and he in us.

To take off your mind from all carnal and worldly Thoughts, the Glory and
Happiness of Paradise, is represented unto us by the Light, as in the 12
Chapter of the Revelations, of the Prophet Daniel, They that be wise shall
shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to
Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever. And in the 13 of St. Matthew. our
Savior says expressly, That the Righteous shall shine as the Sun, in the
Kingdom of his Father.

Finally, it is promised, as the highest Glory and Happiness, that we shall
stand before the Throne of God, that we shall sit with Jesus Christ upon his
Throne, and that we shall see his Face. St. John in the 22 of the Revel. speaks
in this manner, in the description of the Heavenly Jerusalem, he says, that
the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, are in it, that his servants shall serve
him, and see his Face, and that his Name shall be upon their Forehead. When we
look to behold the Sun, our Faces become not more radiant nor Glorious; nay
many times our Eyes thereby dazzle, and our Skin becomes blacker, and more
swarthy; but when we shall look upon God in his Love and Glory, we shall be
perfectly enlightened, and become brighter, and more shining; This appears by
Moses's person, when he came down from the Holy Mountain, his Face was full of
Beams of Light, so that the Children of Israel could not endure to look
steadfast upon him. If therefore this faithful Servant of God had such a bright
countenance, by his continuance with God, upon an Earthly Mountain, during the
space of forty days and forty nights, and by a sight of some light expressions
of his Glory; what will be, think ye, your Light, and the brightness of your
Countenance, when you shall be raised above the Heavens, to continue with God,
and to behold his Face thousands and thousands of Ages; and at the end of all
that time, it shall be but the beginning of that most blessed contemplation,
which shall never end?

When we cast our Eyes upon a beautiful Person, we become neither more
beautiful nor happier; nothing but an unprofitable Idea remains in our fancy,
and many times that also quickly vanishes away; but when we shall look upon
God we shall become like him, and in this likeness, we shall find fullness of
Joy, of Happiness, and Glory; This is promised to us by the Royal Prophet, in
the 16 Psalm, In thy Presence, O God! is fullness of joy, and at thy right Hand
there are Pleasures for evermore, And in the 17 Psalm, As for me, I will behold
thy face in Righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.
And the beloved Disciple, of the beloved of the Father, whose Writings are full
of love, confirms this Truth, Beloved, says he, Now we are the Sons of God,
and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know, that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

You see therefore, Christians, unto what extraordinary Glory and Happiness,
you have right to pretend, for in Heaven, God shall not only make us shine as
the Sun and the Stars; he shall not only cloth us with the brightness of the
glorified Saints and Angels, but he promises a great deal more, to make us
like unto himself; He shall not only satisfy us with the fatness of his House,
and cause us to drink of the Rivers of his Pleasures; he shall not only fill us
with his Treasures, enlighten us with his brightness, cloth us with his
Honors, and crown us with his Glory; but he himself will become our Meat and
our Drink, our Treasure, our Sun, and Glory; and if I may so say, to satisfy
us, and accomplish our Happiness, God shall, as it were, dissolve himself into
Rivers and Seas of Divine and unspeakable Pleasures; but that I may not be
misunderstood in such bold and figurative Language, it shall suffice me to say
with St. Paul, That God will be in us all in all; that is to say, that he will
dwell, and make his abode in us, in respect of his Being, and that he will
cause us to feel in us his Glorious presence as much as a finite and limited
Nature, as ours, is capable of. What the Jews have invented, of the Manna which
their Fathers did feed upon in the Wilderness, may justly be appropriated to
Almighty God, as he intends to reveal himself unto us in Heaven; for there is
no taste but shall be satisfied, no desire but shall be filled. Moreover, God
shall be our Meat and our Drink, our Light, also our Clothing; and all that we
can imagine in him, and his Divine Enjoyment; we shall find beyond all that we
can think or desire. The knowledge of Spiritual and Celestial things, which we
attain to here below, is like the breaking of the day; and that we shall enjoy
hereafter, shall be like that of the Sun, when it shines in our Meridian. But
to speak in the Apostles Language, Now we know in part, and we prophecy in
part, but when that which is perfect, shall come, then that which is in part,
shall be done away, for now we see through a Glass darkly, but then we shall
see him face to face; whilst we continue in this life, God discovers to us only
the borders of his Wisdom, we cannot understand much of it, but in the life to
come, he shall reveal to us the depths of his Glorious Mysteries, into which
the Angels themselves desire to pry. In our understanstings, God shall be as a
Sun to enlighten them for ever and ever, and scatter away all Mists of Errors,
and Mistakes. At present, our Will has its imperfections, and oft-times it
rebels against God, but then it shall be perfectly sanctified and reformed,
according to the Image of God. It shall burn with an Holy Zeal, and with a Love
for him. It shall desire nothing but his Glory, and a conformity to his Holy
Will. It shall not only obey God without resistance, but it shall fly with an
Holy earnestness and speed, to the performance of his Sacred Commands. Whilst
we remain in the Fetters of this crazy and sinful flesh, there is always some
filth and disorder in our affections, but when we shall come to this Estate of
Glory, God will sanctify them in such a manner, by his Presence, that they
shall be purer and cleaner, than the Stars, or the Sunbeams; they shall become
Celestial Fires, and Divine Flames, proceeding from God's love to us. In a
word, that Being of Beings, who is Perfection it self, that Author and Origin
of all Beauty, that Object so exceeding Glorious and Lovely, shall ravish us in
such a manner, that our understandings shall be continually employed in
beholding him, our Wills and Affections in loving and embracing him, and all
the faculties of our Souls, shall labor to be united to him, and to be like
him. It shall be in this manner, that we shall be made partakers of the Divine
Nature; for we must not fancy that we shall be made partakers of God's infinite
Being, for this Divine Essence, is indivisible, and uncommunicable to the
Creatures, so that none but God can enjoy it, but God's Holiness shall imprint
in our Souls its Blessed and Glorious Image; and that of all his wonderful
Virtues, when God shall show himself to us as he is, he will cause us to become
like him, by producing in us an impression of his Divine countenance.

It may be you will inquire of me, whether we shall see God, and how we shall
behold him? This question is too considerable to be passed over lightly. I am
persuaded Christians, that you will not be displeased, not only to hear my
judgment, but that of the Holy Scriptures, from whence we draw all our
instructions, as out of a Fountain. Some imagine, that God cannot be seen,
neither in this life, nor in the life to come. Their reasons are very strong
and weighty? for first, God is of an invisible Nature: This Quality is ascribed
to him by the Sacred writers, as in the 11 of the Heb. The Apostle says, that
Moses by Faith saw him, who is invisible, and in the 1 Epistle to Timothy, in
the 1 Chapter he says, To the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise
God, be Honor and Glory for ever and ever, Amen. Secondly, we read in the 33 of
Exodus when Moses said to God, I pray thee let me see thy Glory; God answered
him, thou can not see my Face, for no man shall ever see my Face, and live.
Thirdly, St. John in the 1 Chapter of his Gospel speaks thus, No Man has
seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him. Lastly, St. Paul seems to remove all doubt, for
he says, not only, that God alone has immortality, that he dwells in a Light
unto which no man can approach, and that no man has ever seen him; but he
says more, that no man can see him, 1 Timothy 6.

Others are of a contrary opinion, That God may be seen in this life, but that
in the life to come, he shall be seen more perfectly; that which encourages
this opinion is, that God has put into the Hearts of all his Children, an
earnest desire of seeing his Face, and that in this contemplation they place
their greatest Happiness and Glory. This was David's desire, A man after God's
own heart, in the fourth Psalm, There be many that say, who will show us any
good. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. And in the 42
Psalm, My Soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and
appear before God. This is the desire also of the Prophet Asaph in the 80
Psalm, O God of Hosts, cause thy Face to shine, and we shall be saved.
Secondly, we have heard David say, I shall see thy face in Righteousness, I
shall be satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness, Psalm. 17. And St. Paul
promises that we shall see God face to face. And St. John assures us, That we
shall see God as he is. Thirdly, in the 3 Chapter of Numbers, God speaks in
this manner to Aaron and Miriam, who had murmured against their Brother Moses,
If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him in
a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream, my servant Moses is not so, who
is faithful in all mine House, with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even
apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the similitude of the Lord shall he
behold. Lastly, we have heard the voice from Heaven, that represents to me the
blessed Estate of the Glorified, saying, That they shall see the face of God.

If it be lawful for me to engage my self in such an high Meditation, which is
above the capacity of Men and Angels; I should declare to you in few words, how
it may be said that we shall see God, and in what manner it is impossible to
behold him. But first we must take notice of two or three distinctions, which
if we understand well, we shall find no more difficulty in this question.

First, God may be considered in three several respects, as he is in Himself,
and in his proper Being. It is in this respect, that our Souls do earnestly
long for h m, and desire to draw near to him, and be united unto him, as to
their Sovereign Good, and the bottomless Fountain of Glory and Happiness.
Secondly, as he does reveal and discover himself on Earth, by certain Images,
and Tokens of his favorable Presence. Thirdly, as he shall manifest himself in
Heaven by the Glorious Images, and Divine marks of his Glorious Presence.

Secondly, we must distinguish the several kinds of sight, for there is the
sight of the Body, which looks only upon the objects, whereof the Images and
Species are within the reach and capacity of our Eyesight, as are Color and
Light. There is the sight of the understanding which sees and beholds the
things that are at a distance from our senses, as the spiritual and invisible
substances, and the Essential forms of the Body. There is also the sight of
Faith which rises, yet something higher than our understanding, as it is
during our abode here below; when it is enlightened with God's Divine Grace; it
sees and beholds things which the eye of the Body never saw, and the sensual
understandings of Men, can never comprehend; as the Mysteries of Christian
Religion and the powers of the World to come.

Lastly, we must distinguish the knowledge of the Understanding, for sometimes
it is obscure and confused; at other times it is plain and distinct: Moreover,
that knowledge which is most certain; and the plainest, is of two sorts, the
one has bounds and limits, suitable to its subject, that is to say, suitable
to the ability and reach of the Understanding; the other is absolute, and of
the same nature, as its object, that is to say, as the thing it self, which the
understanding looks upon and beholds.

God, as he is in himself, and in his own Essence and Being, has never been
seen by the Eye of the Body, and shall never be, neither in this life, nor in
the life to come; for God is a Spirit, and of an invisible Nature, 1 Timothy 6.
In this respect St. Paul affirms, That God dwells in a Light which no man can
approach unto, that no man has ever seen him, nor can see him, John 3. But
this good God, who of himself is invisible, delights to show him self to his
Creatures, in several ways.

First, God shows himself unto all Men, in the works of the Creation of the
great World, for as St. Paul says in the 1 of the Romans, The invisible things
of God from the creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made even his Eternal Power and Godhead; Especially, he
has been pleased to give in the Light, a production of Nature, and the first
of all visible Creatures, a lively Image of himself, for as there is nothing
more ample, purer, and more beautiful than the Light; Likewise, there is no
visible Creature that represents so well, this great God, who is a Being most
pure, most beautiful and perfect, the Father of Lights, and the true Sun of our
Souls.

Secondly, God discovers himself in all the workings of his wonderful
Providence, and chiefly, in his extraordinary and miraculous Operations; for
when men perceive productions, which exceed all the ordinary strength of
Nature, they are forced to acknowledge, that they come immediately from an
infinite Power. As Pharaoh's Magicians, for when they saw, that by their Magic
Art, they were not able to counterfeit Moses's Miracle, they confessed, That it
was the finger of God.

Thirdly, God discovers himself in his Holy and Divine Word, which is to us as
a beautiful and perfect Looking-Glass, where we may see his Image, and the
brightness of his Glory; This was St. Paul's judgment, when he says, That all,
we that behold as in a Glass, the glory of the Lord, with open face, are
changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord. 2 Cor. 3.18.

Fourthly, God revealed himself to the Church of Israel, in the Ark, the Sign
and ordinary Token of his Gracious Presence. He did speak unto this People from
the midst of the two Golden Cherubims, and did publish his Divine Oracles;
there he was pleased to discover himself in diverse representations, chiefly in
the Cloud and Fire which came down from Heaven. Therefore the Sign, bearing
the name of the thing signified, is sometimes styled The Lord; as in that
passage where David says, My Soul is athirst for God, for the mighty and
living God; O when shall I go and appear in the presence of God? Psalm. 42.

Fifthly, God manifested himself to the Patriarchs and Prophets, in Dreams and
Visions, by Divine Raptures, and Prophetical Elevations. In this manner he
appeared to the Patriarch Jacob in Bethel, for when it is said, that God was at
the end of the mystical Ladder, which reached up to Heaven, without doubt, he
gave some Sign and Testimony there of his Presence. And when the Prophet Isaiah
mentions his Glorious Throne, he makes no difficulty to say, I saw the Lord
sitting upon a Throne, high, and lifted up, and his Train filled the Temple;
above it stood the Seraphims, each one had six wings, with two he covered his
Face, and with two he covered his Feet, and with two he did fly; and one cried
to another, and said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is
full of his Glory, and the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that
cried, and the House was filled with smoke, Isai. 6. And the Prophet Micah,
when he speaks of his Vision he says, I have seen the Lord sitting upon his
Throne, and all the Hosts of Heaven standing at his right hand, and at his
left, 1 King 12. And the Prophet Daniel describing one of his visions, speaks
in this manner. I beheld, till the Thrones were cast down, and the ancient of
days did sit, whose Garment was white as Snow, and the hair of his Head like
the pure Wool, his Throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as hurning
fire, a fiery stream issued, and came forth from before him, thousand thousands
ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him.

Sixthly, God showed himself unto Moses, in a particular manner, not only when
he appeared unto him in Horeb, and spoke to him out of the flaming Bush, but
especially when God appeared unto him in the Holy Mountain, and, for the space
of forty days and forty nights, discoursed with him familiarly, as with a
friend; for at that time, he exposed before him, such Glorious and Magnificent
Tokens of his Divine Presence, that it was almost the same thing, as if he had
seen God himself. God gave him more Light and Knowledge of his Glory, than to
any other of his Prophets, and revealed himself unto him in a more familiar
manner, than to any other living Man; Because of these glorious and
extraordinary appearances of God's presence, and of the brightness of his
Light, which shined so clear in the Soul of Moses, because of that Holy
familiarity which he had with God, that he speaks of it in such a manner, in
the 12 Chapter of the Book of Numbers; for we cannot understand that place in a
litteral sense; That Moses did really see God himself, and that with the Eyes
of the Body, he beheld his Being, which is altogether invisible: But we must
understand it in this manner, that never any man beheld such glorious
expressions of the Godhead, with the Eyes of the Body. That never any Man
discoursed so familiarly with God as Moses; never any man^ has ever had so
clear and plain a knowledge of his great Glory, and Divine Majesty.

Seventhly, God has often appeared unto Men in Humane shapes, and has given
them such visible expressions of his Holy Presence, that such as have seen
those Images, tell us that they have seen God. It is in this manner that Jacob
speaks, when he had wrestled with God in his Body; when he was moved, not only
by an assisting Angel, but also by God himself, who discovers there his Divine
Virtue, I have seen, says he, God face to face, and my soul has been saved,
Genesis 32. Manoah, the Father of Sampson, tells as much when he had seen the
Humane shape, in which God was pleased to appear, when he ascended up into
Heaven, in the flame of his sacrifice, For certain we shall dye, for we have
seen God, Judge. 13. In like manner, when God appeared to Abraham, in the shape
of a man, this man is called the Lord, and Abraham bowed himself before him,
and worshipped; and at one time this Holy Patriarch saw no less than three
Humane shapes which appeared to him at once. Some think that God appeared but
in one of these shapes, and that the two others were Angels. That which
confirms this opinion is, that of these three persons, there is but one that
speaks as God, and receives Abraham's Adoration; And when he appears no more,
the two others are styled Angels, in the beginning of the 19 Chapter. But
others believe with some ancient Doctors of the Church, that these, three
Humane shapes were a true Image, and living Representation of the most Holy,
most Glorious, and most Wonderful Trinity. In this opinion, there is nothing
contrary to the Analogy of Faith.

Finally, God has discovered himself by his Son in a particular manner, he is
named therefore; The Image of God, the Image of the invisible God, and God
manifested in flesh. God has not only imprinted in him, some tokens of his
Godhead, and Marks of his Divine Power, he caused him not to walk and move as
the borrowed Bodies of the old Testament. He has not only engraven in him, the
perfect Image of all (...) Divine Virtues; God is not in him in a shadow or
Figure, as he was in the Ark, and in Solomon's Temple; but he has dwelt in him
bodily, and by his Eternal Godhead, as St. Paul informs us, That in him
dwells Bodily, that is to say, Really, and Essentially, all the fullness of
the Godhead; therefore our Savior tells St. Philip, That he that has seen
him, has seen the Father, John 14.

This being thus, let us now consider how we see God, now here below, and how
we shall see him hereafter in Heaven: At present we see him with the eyes of
the Body in his visible Works; And we see his Being also with the Eye of our
Understanding, but in a weak and a languishing manner; we know him with a very
obscure and imperfect Knowledge, for this cause St. Paul says very well and
truly, That we know in part, and we prophecy in part. We see God also with the
Eye of Faith, it is with this Eye that we see him, as Moses did, who is
invisible, and that we behold our Lord Jesus Christ, sitting at the right hand
of God the Father, above all Principalities and Powers, worshipped and adored by
all the glorified Church in Heaven. In Paradise we hope to see with the Eyes of
our glorified Body; the Images and Marks of the Divinity, so Glorious, and
Magnificent, so Beautiful and full of Majesty, that in comparison of that,
whatsoever appeared to the Prophets and Patriarchs in their illustrious
Visions, was nothing but obscurity and darkness. And with the same Eyes of the
Body we shall see God in the Person of our glorified Savior, who is the
brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, so that we may
well say with Job, in a full assurance of Faith, I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day, upon the earth, and though
after my Skin, Worms destroy this Body, I shall see God in my Flesh, whom I
shall see for my self, and my Eyes shall be hold, and not another, Job 19. But
for the Essence and Being of God, and for the Eternal Godhead, we shall not,
nor cannot see it with the Eyes of the Body; Let them become never so Glorious,
Incorruptible, and Immortal. We shall neither see it with the eye of Faith, for
then Faith shall be totally abolished, and we shall not walk any more by Faith,
but by sight, but we shall see God with the Eye of the Understanding,
enlightened with a Divine Glory. Now as we have taken notice there are two
sorts of Contemplations and Knowledges, the one perfect, proportioned to the
object, which we behold and look upon, the other imperfect, suitable to the
being, beholding, and to the abilities of the understanding. Our future
knowledge of God, shall not be of the first, but of the latter sort; that is to
say, That we shall never see into the bottom of the Mysteries of God's Divine
Majesty, and of his Glory. We shall never know perfectly, this highest
Perfection, this infinite Being, this Incomprehensible and Glorious Godhead;
for things are in their Actions, as they are in their Beings and Abilities. Now
in the most glorious State of Heaven, our Beings and Abilities shall be
limited, and circumscribed; therefore it shall be absolutely impossible for us
to comprehend perfectly the Being of God, who is infinite in it self, and in
all its wonderful perfections. The Holy Angels themselves, the Cherubims and
Seraphims; these Beings of Light and Glory, are not able to pry into these
bottomless depths, they are not able to approach this infinite Light. In a
word, it is necessary to be God himself, to comprehend and understand
perfectly, the infinite Glory, and the highest perfections of the Godhead.

Although our sight shall not be able to search into the bottom of these depths
of the Divinity, although we shall never be able to comprehend perfectly the
infinite Being of God; nevertheless we hope to behold openly, this wonderful
object, and to obtain as much knowledge of it, as shall be requisite to render
us perfectly happy; for as when our Eye beholds the Noon-Sun, it cannot
steadfastly look upon it, nor receive all its beams, but it partakes of as much
as is necessary to enlighten it; and when there should be a thousand Suns, our
Eyes would never make use of more Light then they do at present Likewise, in
beholding the Father of Lights, this beautiful Sun of our Souls, it is
altogether impossible to receive the immensity of its Beams; but we shall
partake of as much as shall be necessary to drive away all our darkness, and to
fill us full of a perfect Light, to make us become Light in the Lord, and to
cause us to shine for ever, as so many Stars and little Suns. As an empty
Vessel, when it is cast into the Sea, comprehends not all its Waters, but
receives only enough to fill it up, so that there is no part empty. Likewise
when we shall be cast into the Ocean of the Godhead; we shall not be able to
comprehend and receive God's infinite Glory and Happiness, but we shall receive
and comprehend as much as shall content all our desires, and satisfy all our
craving Appetites, so that there shall be nothing at all wanting in us, which
might be expected in the highest felicity of an humane Creature.

I do not say, in the highest Felicity, absolutely without limitation, for
there are two kinds of Felicities, the one absolutely perfect, beyond which
there can be nothing expected. This Felicity or Happiness is only to be found
in God; the other is perfect, in a certain degree. As the perfect happiness of
the Angels (...) to attain to that degree of Glory, of which the Angelical
Nature is capable. Likewise, the perfect happiness of Man, is to enjoy all that
Blessedness, whereof the Humane Nature alone and single, is able to enjoy; I
must say the single Nature of Man, to distinguish it from that which is united
to the Person of the Eternal Son of God; for by this means, this has attained
to an uncommunicable Glory, of which other Creatures cannot partake in the same
perfection; it has attained to an happiness, far above the Glory of all the
Children of God, and of all the Holy Angels of Heaven, far above what they can
or may expect.

Moreover, I may say, that there is a supreme and perfect Happiness
independent, which subsists of its self, without any foreign assistance; this
kind of happiness is only to be found in God. For as he is of himself an
infinite Being, which borrows nothing from others. Likewise of himself he is
absolutely and perfectly happy. The other happiness is that which proceeds not
of our selves, but is derived to us from another; such is the Glory and
Happiness of the Angels. This Lesson the Holy Ghost teaches us in these words,
God puts Light into his Angels; that is to say, that these Holy Spirits have
nothing of Light or Glory, but it is derived to them from the Father of Lights,
and his gracious Aspect: such also is the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
Mediator; therefore he speaks thus to God his Father, Glorify thy Son, that thy
Son may Glorify thee, John 17. In a word, such shall be our Glory and
Happiness, for as we have our Being from God, it is from him that we derive our
Well-being also; and it is from him that we expect all our Glory and Bliss.

From hence you may easily conclude, that God is the only object, and the only
source of our Eternal Glo^^, and future Happiness. If you enquire from me what
shall be the Essential form? I answer, that it shall be our Likeness and
Resemblance with God, which shall be as perfect as an Humane Creature is
capable of. Now this Resemblance and Similitude shall consist in three things,
in a pure and bright Light, which shall not be mixed with the least Darkness,
in a perfect and a complete Holiness, where there shall not be the least
blemish, and in an infinite and unalterable joy and content, where there shall
never be the least cloud of Grief, but of this we have sufficiently Treated
already.

Some there are that inquire whether in Paradise there shall be an equality, or
an inequality of Glories and Happinesses; to say the truth, this question is
more curious than necessary; for we need not inquire whether there shall be any
more or less happy, than our selves. It should suffice us for our comfort, to
know, that if we be true Believers and truly penitent; if we fear God, as we
ought to do, if we serve him with a Religious mind, until the last gasp, that
in such a case we shall attain to the Glory of the Children of God, and possess
with them, a perfect and Eternal Happiness. Nevertheless, that we may seem to
omit nothing, which might give satisfaction to every believing Soul; I shall
examine this particular, but it shall be without advancing any new thing, which
I have not seen in the Holy Gospel, nor learned from the true Doctor of our
Souls; I shall declare the opinion of the most Learned, upon this rich and
excellent subject; afterward, I shall add mine own, which I shall submit, as
the rest of this Treatise, to the judgment of the Wiser and more Learned
Persons, who are better acquainted than I am, with the Spiritual and Heavenly
Enjoyments.

Some believe, that in Paradise there shall be every where, the same Glory and
Happiness, equal and uniform in every individual Person. This opinion they back
with these reasons; First, that we shall have no Glory nor Happiness, but that
which has been purchased for us by the Death and Passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and that as this Glorious Savior has purchased this Glory and
Happiness, for all the Elect equally, they shall all enjoy it in the highest
degree, and perfection. Secondly, that the Holiness of all the Blessed shall be
perfect, therefore as they shall be all perfectly Holy, they shall be all
likewise perfectly happy in the same degree. Thirdly, that our Savior says
expressly, without any exception, That the Saints shall shine as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father, Matthew. 23. Now the Sun is the King of the Stars, and
the brightest of all the Heavenly Bodies. Fourthly, That the Elect are
represented in Heaven, as so many Kings, having upon their Heads, Crowns of
Gold, Revel. 1.4, 5. Now there is no inequality between Kings, for each of them
is in possession of Sovereignty, and an independent and Supreme Authority.
Fifthly, That Jesus Christ represents to us, the last transactions and passages
of the World, by the parable of a Father of a Family, who at the end of the
day, bestows the same Salary, upon every one that has labored in his
Vineyard, Matthew. 20. Sixthly, That it is said in general terms, That we shall
see God face to face, and that we shall see him as he is, 1 Cor, 13. 1 John 3.
and that in this blessed Vision shall consist the chief Happiness of Man.
Lastly, That after the Resurrection, God shall be in us all in all; which
expression declares the highest, and most complete Happiness and Glory.

Others think the contrary, that in Heaven there shall be an inequality of
Glory, and several degrees of Happiness. This their opinion they strengthen
chiefly with two passages of Holy Scripture, the one is in the 14 of St. John,
where Christ says to his Apostles, In my Fathers house there are many
Mansions. The other is in the 1 Cor. 15. where St. Paul discoursing at large,
of the happiness of the Saints after the Resurrection, says, There is one
Glory of the Sun, another Glory of the Moon, and another Glory of the Stars,
for one Star differs from another in Glory, so is the resurrection of the
dead.

There are some that are not content to believe an inequality of Glory and
Happiness, but they undertake further to discourse of this matter, with as much
boldness, as if God had admitted them to the knowledge of his Eternal Secrets,
as if he had discovered to them all the wonders of the Heavenly Jerusalem, more
plainly than to his beloved disciple. Such tell us, not only, that there shall
be diverse degrees of Glory and Happiness, but they inform, who they are that
shall obtain such and such Degrees; they prescribe in a Dogmatical and
Magisterial manner, which shall be the Glory of Virgins, which shall belong to
Confessors, which shall be that of Martys. In a word, some are so much puffed
up with an high conceit of themselves, and of their own deservings, that they
make an open profession of being of the number of such as shall obtain the
highest degrees of Glory and Happiness.

But my opinion is, that the Truth is to be found between these two extremes; I
shall not impose any Law upon the Consciences of any Man, in this particular,
whereof the decision is not absolutely necessary to Salvation; yet we may say,
that in Heaven there shall be diverse degrees of Glory and Happiness, but we
dare not describe them, nor venture to apply them to any persons, or to tell,
who of us shall possess such and such degrees. This were a bold attempt upon
Heaven, and a taking of the forbidden Fruit; by such an impudency we should
loose our selves, instead of saving others, for such as are so audacious as to
search into the Divine Majesty, shall be swallowed up by his Glory. Prove. 25.

And although we verily believe degrees of Glory, yet we may say, without
offense to any person, that this belief is not to be established upon the
forementioned passages, from whence we cannot gather any such conclusion; for
in the 14 of St. John, our Savior says not, that there are diverse Degrees, or
diverse Mansions, whereof some are Richer and more Glorious than others; but
only, that in his Fathers House there are many Mansions. The meaning of this
Divine Savior is as clear as the day, he had an intent to raise up the
drooping courage of his Holy Apostles, and to comfort them in his absence; for
that purpose he assures them, that he is going to lodge in an House, where
there is not only room for himself, but also for them, and for all that shall
believe in him, by their Teaching. He expounds his words plainly in the 17
Chapter of the same Gospel, where he speaks to God in this manner, Father, I
will that they also whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they
may behold my Glory which thou have given me. For the other passage of the 1 of
the Corinth. I beseech you, devout Souls, read over the Apostles words, and
consider with a Religious observation, what goes before, and what follows
after; you shall find that the Apostle intends not to compare the Saints, the
one with the other, but only to discover the difference which is between our
Bodies as they are in this corruptible and mortal life, and as they shall be
when they shall have put on incorruption and immortality. Therefore, when he
had said, One is the Glory of the Sun, another is the Glory of the Moon,
another the Glory of the Stars, for one Star differs from another Star in
Glory; He does not add likewise, so shall be the Glory of one blessed Person,
differing from another, but he says, So shall be the resurrection from the
dead; The Body is sown in corruption, it shall be raised in incorruption; it is
sown in dishonor, it it raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised
in power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.

From whence is it therefore that we gather these diverse degrees of Glory and
Happiness? I answer, First, from the diverse and different pains and punishments
of the damned. For as in Hell there shall be several degrees of Torments;
Likewise, it is very probable, that in Heaven, there shall be diverse degrees of
Happiness, and several degrees of Glory. Secondly, God to declare his Divine
Wisdom, which is various in all things, bestows at present all his Blessings
and Riches with a wonderful variety, and with an admirable order. Thus you may
see in nature, that God has scattered up and down the World, diverse gifts and
excellencies; for example the smell and beauty of Roses, is different from that
of the Lillies; the brightness of the Diamonds, is not like that of Rubies; the
light of the Sun differs from that of the Moon and Stars. Likewise, it is very
probable, that above all the Heavens, there shall be diverse degrees of Light
and Glory. Amongst the Holy Angels, there are Titles of Honor, and several
Dignities, therefore they are named Archangels, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, and Powers: As therefore amongst the Angels there are diverse
degrees of Glory; it is also likely that the same order shall be observed
amongst the Glorified in Heaven. Besides, as in the Church militant, the Graces
of God differ very much. The Souls of the Faithful, are not the same in all
respects, they have differing qualities and excellencies; there are in them
diverse degrees of Light, of Knowledge, of Faith, of Hope, of Charity, and
Holiness. Likewise, according to the Analogy of Faith, there should be also in
the Church glorified, diverse degrees of Glory and Happiness; and the rather,
because Glory is nothing else, but the completing and perfection of Grace.
This reason is so much the stronger, because in the parable of the Talents,
Jesus Christ gives to his servants a Glory, proportionable to the former Riches
of his Grace. None can conceive, that the words relate to God's Favors,
bestowed upon his Children on Earth, for our Lord speaks of that which he
intends to do to them, when he shall come down from Heaven to judge the World.
The words relate to the time, when he shall say to such as have well employed
the Talents of his Mercy, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into the
joy of the Lord: They relate also to the time when he shall cause the
unprofitable servant to be cast into utter darkness, where there shall be
weeping and gnashing of Teeth. It may also be worthy of our observation, that
the felicities of Heaven are represented to us, by a Feast, where all partake
of the same Meats, but some are seated in a more Honorable Room than others.
This, as I conceive may be gathered from our Saviors words, Many shall come
from the East and from the West, and shall sit at Table in the Kingdom of
Heaven, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It may also be gathered from that other
passage where Lazarus is carried by the Holy Angels into Abraham's bosom.
Lastly, I ground my opinion upon the 12 Chapter of Daniel, where this blessed
Prophet, when he had spoken in general terms, of the future Happiness of the
faithful, who shall rise to Eternal life; he comes down to particularize some,
unto whom God has bestowed more light upon Earth, and whose Ministry he has
made use of, to bring many Souls to Salvation, amongst these, he seems to put
many degrees of Glory, They that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that bring many to righteousness as the Stars, from ever
and ever. From this passage one may apparently, conclude, that as the light of
the Firmament, differs much from that of tha bright Stars; and as amongst the
Stars there is a diversity and variety of Light: in the same manner there shall
be diverse and differing degrees of Glory, amongst the glorified in Heaven.

Now in answer to that reason, that Jesus Christ has purchased for us, the
Glory and Happiness of Heaven; and that therefore this Glory and Happiness
should be equal. I confess this reason is weighty, I intend not to refute it
altogether, but I shall propose several things to the consideration of the
Pious and Devout Souls, that shall peruse this Treatise. First, that although
the blood of Jesus Christ has purchased for us Heaven; and that we are not
able to deserve it by our most regenerate Actions, nor by our most grievous
sufferings and Martyrdom; because that when we have performed all that is
Commanded, our Savior requires us to say, We be unprofitable servants, because
we have done but what we were bound to do, Luk 17. And because his Holy Apostle
assures us, that When all things are reckoned up, the sufferings of this
present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us, Romans 8. Nevertheless, God is so Good, Merciful, and Bountiful,
that he bears with our imperfections, that he rewards as a Father, with a free
Reward, all the good Works of his fervants, especially the works of Charity.
Therefore Jesus Christ tells his Apostles, and generally all the faithful;
Whosoever shall give unto you to drink a cup of water, because you are Christ's,
verily I say unto you, he shall not loose his reward. And because it is the
custom of the Eastern People, to warm their drink; therefore to give a cup of
cold water may be reckoned the smallest assistance. Our Savior says,
Whosoever shall give unto one of these little ones, to drink a cup of ^old
water only, in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall not
loose his reward. Matthew. 10. If such as bestow a cup of cold water for God's
sake, are rewarded in Heaven, what may not those bountiful Souls expect there,
who now spend their Estates in charitable Deeds? He that sows sparingly shall
reap sparingly, he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully, 1 Cor. 9.
These be the words of St. Paul, which in my judgment declare plainly an
inequality amongst the Glories and Happinesses which we are to reap in Heaven.
Besides, we have heard a Prophet tell us, that all such as, by the light of
their Doctrines, and the Holiness of their Lives, lead many Souls to their
Salvation, shall shine for ever in Heaven, as so many bright Stars. It stands
with reason, that if our Savior will, in his infinite Mercy, reward such a
small kindness as the gift of a draught of Water, to one of his Children, they
shall excel in Glory, who pour forth for his sake in his quarrel, every drop
of their Blood, and by their deaths confirm his Holy Gospel, This is a faithful
saying, If we dye with Jesus Christ, we shall also live with him, if we suffer
with him, we shall also reign with him. But that which seems to me yet
stronger, which makes for this purpose, is, That all the spiritual Graces which
are bestowed upon us in this life, proceed from the Holy Ghost, purchased for
us by the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by his precious Blood. Now these
Graces are differing and various; if therefore there are diverse degrees in
Grace, why should not there be also diverse degrees in Glory, seeing that both
have been purchased for us with the same price; by the death and passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ?

The other Argument drawn from the happiness and perfection of the Glorified is
rational, but not invincible, for several Diamonds may be perfect in their
kind, so that the clearest Eye cannot take notice of any imperfection;
nevertheless, they may differ in weight and price. All the Stars have their
perfection and light; Nevertheless, one Star differs from another Star in
Glory; All the Angels of Heaven are perfectly Happy and Holy, and yet there is
a great inequality amongst them in Glory and Dignity. Likewise, although all
the Blessed shall attain to a perfect Holiness, in my judgment, that cannot
hinder the diversity of degrees of Glory and Happiness.

I acknowledge also, that the other objection, drawn out of these words, The
Just shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father, is not to be
despised, but it concludes nothing to the purpose, for if you should cut out
excellently well, some Orbs of Crystal, of differing sizes, some greater, some
less, and should put them all in the Sun, they would be all full of Light in
every part; every one of them would represent the beautiful Image of that Sun
that looks upon them, so that it may very well be said of all of them, that
they shine as the Sun. Nevertheless, according to their bigness and size, they
receive more Light, and the Sun seems greater in the one than in the other. To
the other objection, that all the Glorified in Heaven are named Kings. I
answer, That this is not to be understood in a litteral Sense, no more then
when it is said, that they had on their Heads Crowns of Gold. That I may
continue in the same comparison, I may say, that as all Kings have a Sovereign
Majesty, which acknowledges none above it, but God from whom it proceeds:
Nevertheless, some have a greater Power and Riches than others. Likewise all
the glorified Saints shall enjoy a Sovereign, and perfect Happiness, and
receive it immediately from God. This cannot hinder them from differing from
one another in Glory. I answer, next to the other Argument, taken out of the
Parable of the Father of the Family, who, at the evening of the day, rewarded
equally all his Laborers, that had been employed in his Vineyard, giving to
every one of them a penny, that Parables are as Pictures, in which, besides the
thing intended to be drawn, there are many particulars which serve but as
flourishes to adorn the piece. If we should consider every passage of this
Parable, we might gather from hence, that amongst such as shall be saved, there
shall be there some murmuring against God, who shall envy their companions,
which is a gross absurdity to conceive; the design of our Savior is not to
speak of the equality of the glorified Saints, but his intent is to show, that
those whom God calls first, should not despise the others; because God, who
does with his own what he pleases, is able to make them equal, and to bestow
upon them the same advantages. Lastly, as every one whom the good man of the
House sent into his Vineyard at several times of the day, received for their
Salary a penny; in the same manner, whomsoever God calls into his Church
effectually, at any time, nay, at the hour of death, they shall receive from
his infinite Bounty, eternal Life, but from hence we cannot conclude any thing,
contrary to this Truth, that in Heaven there shall be diverse degrees of Glory.

The greatest difficulty in my judgment is in this Allegation, That we shall
see God face to face, and that he will be all in all 1 Cor. 13. 1 Cor. 15.
Nevertheless, we may say, that as all the damned in Hell shall loose all sight
of God, yet that cannot hinder the diverse degrees of Pain and Torment. Likewise
all the glorified in Heaven shall see God; but this sight which all shall
enjoy, cannot remove the inequality of their Glory and Happiness. As when all
men look upon the same Sun, but several receive the benefit of its beams in a
differing manner; thus we shall all behold the same God, but the Gracious
Aspect of his Countenance shall be cast upon us variously, and produce in us
diverse and various effects. We may also make use of another comparison; As when
we cast many empty Vessels into the same Sea, they are all filled up, so that
it may be said of them, that the Sea is in them all: some nevertheless, may be
more capacious, and receive more Water than others. Likewise all the Saints
shall enter into the same wonderful Ocean of the Godhead, they shall be all
filled up to the brim with his Glorious presence, so that God shall be all in
all. Nevertheless, they shall receive differing measures of these Waters,
issuing forth to Eternal life. In a word, as God shall cast headlong all the
Reprobates into the same Lake of Fire and Brimstone, and yet there shall be
diverse degrees amongst them, of punishments; so God shall cause all the Elect
to drink out of the same River of Pleasure; but there shall be a difference
amongst their degrees of Glory. Moreover, this passage may be thus understood,
God shall be all in all; that is to say, he shall be to us all Riches, Glory,
Light, Meat, Drink, Pleasures, etc. In my judgment we cannot conclude from
hence, that he is to make all equal.

If any have other thoughts, or is of another judgment, I shall not offer to
condemn him, nor to undertake to refute him; for I conceive, that seeing
Almighty God has hid the Glories and Happiness of Heaven, and covered them
over with a thick Cloud, on purpose to limit our too curious inquiry; we cannot
mention them with too much modesty and respect; only I must take notice of
something more, for the comfort of the good and devout Souls, whose thoughts
and mind are in Heaven. That when we affirm, that there shall be differing
degrees of Glory in Paradise, we must not conceive that this shall bring any
diminution to the perfect Happiness of the Glorified; for if I may once again
make use of the comparison of the Sunbeams, and of the Waters of the Sea, I
cannot find any more proper for this purpose, As all Eyes that look upon the
clear Sun, without Cloud or Mist, receive its Rays in a differing manner, yet
they have all enough to see to guide themselves, and to rejoice in this
beautiful Light that enlightens them; if some receive a greater measure of that
Light, this hinders not the rest from enjoying also a sufficiency; so shall it
be with all the glorified Souls, when they shall behold God the Father of
Lights, the true Sun that shall shine for ever and ever. If any of them shall
have more or less of his Light, that shall in no wise impede the perfection of
another Happiness, for every one of them shall enjoy as much, as they shall be
able to receive, or shall be necessary to complete their Joy, and perfect their
Happiness. And as when we cast into the Sea many empty Vessels, some greater
some less, the greater contains more Water, and the lesser not so much: yet
they do all receive enough to be filled up to the brim: if the least of these
Vessels had the knowledge to speak, they would not complain of the greater, for
containing more then they, because they have all as much as they can either
desire or expect. Likewise, when the Saints shall be cast into that bottomless
Sea of Glory and Happiness, they shall be filled all up to the brim, so that
they shall not be able to desire any more; they shall be all according to their
differing capacities, perfectly, and entirely happy. Consider therefore,
Christian Soul, that if thou enjoyest so much satisfaction and delight, as thou
art capable of, although others may have something more, thou art no less happy
for their overplus; there is none but God alone, that according to the
infiniteness of his Being, possesses an unmeasurable and infinite Glory and
Happiness. This bottomless source of Glory and Bliss, shall for ever and ever
run over all the glorified in Heaven, and satisfy their Souls with unspeakable
Delights.

You may ask, Christians, in what part of the great World shall God cause us to
enjoy so many rare pleasures and Heavenly contentments? Where shall he produce
so many Treasures and Riches? Where will he discover so much Glory and
Splendour? In what part does he intend to show so many Divine marks of his
Gracious Presence? I answer, that this place is above the Elemental World,
above all the Heavens that appear before our Eyes, and that roll about us. If
we will understand this, we must remember, that the Holy Scripture makes
mention of three Heavens; The first is, the large extent of the Air,
distinguished by the Learned, into three Regions. In this sense it is to be
taken, when it speaks of the Birds of the Air. The second Heaven comprehends
the Heavenly Spheres, the Globes that are between the Moon and the Firmament,
where are all the fixed Stars; and if beyond this, there be any other Sphere,
whereof the motion is so furious and swift, as to carry with it the inferior
Globes, and to cause them to roll round in the space of four and twenty hours.
Of this Heaven, David speaks in the 19 Psalm, The Heavens declare the Glory of
God, and the Firmament shows his handiwork, be has put in them a Tabernacle
for the Sun. Now, above all these Heavenly Spheres, mentioned by the
Astrologers, some reckon up nine or ten, and others more. There is yet a third
Heaven spoken of by St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. I know, says he, a man in Christ,
which was taken up into the third Heaven; I know that he was taken up into
Paradise, and heard words which cannot be spoken, which are not possible for
Man to utter. The Holy Apostle removes in these words, all doubts concerning
the place intended by this Third Heaven, for he calls it Paradise, where he
heard unspeakable words, which are not possible to be uttered.

The Celestial Globes roll about continually, but this Third Heaven, which for
its excellency is styled Heaven, is fixed, and without motion in Eternal Rest.
And as much as these beautiful Orbs have a greater Light and Glory than the
Air, and the inferior Bodies; so much the more does this Third Heaven excel
them. It is my judgment, that Solomon means this Third Heaven, situate above
all the rest, which exceeds them so much in Beauty and Glory, when he speaks to
God, of the Heavens, and of the Heaven of Heavens, 1 Kings 8. That is to say,
the most Excellent, the highest, and the most Glorious of all the Heavens, are
not able to contain thee, and God himself says, by his Holy Prophet, The
Heavens are my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool, Isai. 66. for in this
high Heaven, God has placed his Throne, where he discovers his Glory, and the
brightness of his surprising Countenance; there the Seraphims fly, and thousand
thousands worship him, and ten thousand Millions stand continually before him.
Isai. 6. Dan. 7. Here it was that the Blessed Soul of our Savior Christ was
admitted, as soon as it had left the Body, according to what he promised to the
crucified Thief. Verily I say unto thee this day thou shall be with me in
Paradise, Luk 23. Hither this Glorious Savior is ascended, both in Soul and
Body, after his Resurrection; and here it was that St. Stephen saw him, when he
cried out, I see the Heavens open, and Jesus Christ fitting at the right hand
of God, Acts 7. And hither it is, that the Souls of all such as dye in his
favor, are carried up. Therefore St. Paul to the Hebrews mentions immediately,
after the thousands of Angels, The Spirits of just Men made perfect, and the
Church and Congregation of the firstborn, whose names are written in Heaven.
In short, it is the Glorious Seat, where we hope that God will receive us, both
in Soul and Body, at that day, when we shall be taken up into the Air, above
the Clouds of Heaven, to be for ever with the Lord Jesus.

Some inquire then what shall become of this Elemental World? whether this
Heaven that appears to our Eyes, and this Earth which sustains us, shall
perish? or whether they shall remain yet after the great day of Doom?

Certain profane Atheists are persuaded, that the World shall remain for ever,
as it does at present, and that there shall be no manner of alteration. The
Apostle St. Peter has Prophesied of these Persons, and described them in their
own Colors, There shall come at the last day mockers, walking after their own
Lusts, saying, where is the promise of his coming, for since the Fathers are
asleep, all things continue in the same manner, since the beginning of the
World. I need not trouble my self in a refutation of such impieties; I speak to
none but to the devout Souls, which reverence the Divinity of the Holy
Scriptures, and are fully persuaded of the Truth of all the Articles of our
Creed.

It oft-times happens, when Men oppose a false Doctrine, and an erroneous
opinion, they run from one extremity to another; therefore some imagine, that
the World shall totally perish: and that as God has called the Heavens and
Earth, and the rest of the Elements out of nothing, he will reduce them all
again into the same Nothing, and that he intends to create others, more
beautiful, more Holy, and far more Glorious. There are two kinds of expressions
that seem to favor this opinion. The first, which speaks of the Heavens and of
the Earth, as of perishing and decaying Creatures. In this manner David
discourses of them in 102 Psalm, and after him, the Apostle to the Hebrews,
Thou Lord, have established the Earth and the Heavens are the Works of thy
hands, they shall perish, but thou shall endure, they shall wax old as does a
Garment, and as a Vesture shall thou fold them up, and theyshall be changed.
And our Savior tells us in the 24 of St. Matt. The Heavens and the Earth shall
pass away, but my Words shall not pass away. Especially, the words of St.
Peter, in the 2 Epistle, and the 3 Chapter, are remarkable, The Heavens shall
pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt with heat, and the Earth
with the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. The other passages mention
new Heavens, and a new Earth, as in the 65 of Isaiah; Behold, I create new
Heavens, and a new Earth, and the former things shall be remembered no more.
Likewise in the forementioned Chapter, the 3 of the 2 Epistle of St. Peter, We
look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, according to his promise, wherein
dwells Righteousness. And in the 21 Revel. I saw a new Heaven and a new
Earth, for the first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away, and there was
no more Sea. Moreover, St. Paul to the Hebrews speaks of the World to come;
from hence some conclude that the old World ought to be abolished, and that God
shall create a new World.

There is no man that is a Christian, can doubt of that wonderful change, which
shall happen to the world, at the last day, if he considers the forementioned
passage of Holy Scripture, especially that of St. Peter, The Heavens shall pass
away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt with heat, and the Earth with
the Works that are therein. So that as the Walls of Jerico fell at the sound of
the Priests Trumpets; Likewise this great world shall be turned upside down, at
the blowing of the Archangels Trumpet. Our Reason alone being enlightened by
Divine Revelation, seems to confirm this Truth; for seeing that the House
infected with a spreading Leprosy, was to be demolished, how much the rather
should the world be destroyed because in it is to be seen apparently, the spots
and blemishes of sin, the Spiritual Leprosy.

But although this great Fabric of the World, ought to be ruined, and turned
upside down; we do not believe, that it shall be reduced to nothing, its
qualities shall be changed, and it may be its form shall be altered, but its
substance and matter shall continue always the same: for First, As God has
created the World for his own Glory, he cannot be disappointed of the intent of
his Creation. And because this world has not glorified him as it ought, he
will put it into a condition proper to glorify him, according to that purpose,
for which he drew it out of nothing. Secondly, Seeing that this World was
created to serve Man, as a Looking-Glass, to behold the Eternal Power of God,
and that this beautiful Looking-Glass has been spotted and sullied by sin, It
is yet possible to cleanse it, and make it brighter, that it might represent
its Creator better, and show forth a more perfect Image of his Divine Majesty.
Thirdly, Seeing that God does nothing in vain, there is no likelihood that he
should destroy the World totally, and reduce the primitive Matter, to nothing,
from whence it is drawn, to create new Matter, because he is able of this old
Matter, to make a new Earth, and new Heaven, as pure and undefiled, as if the
Matter had been newly created. Fourthly, Sin has spoiled and disfigured the
Works of the Creation, but it has not touched, neither the first Matter nor
its Being, so that God can take away this defilement, and remove the deformity,
without touching the Matter, which of it self is innocent and harmless. In Man,
the little World and the compendium of the great, I find a beautiful and
perfect Image of that which God shall do with the whole World. God intends not
to destroy the substance of our Souls, but only to purge them from all vicious
qualities, and beautify them with Righteousness and true Holiness; so that they
shall be as the Angels of Heaven. Likewise, he intends not to destroy the
substance of our Bodies, but he will free them from corruption, from death, and
cloth them with Glory and Immortality; so that this vile Body shall be rendered
conformable to the glorious Body of the Son of God, and shall shine as the Sun.
Likewise, God will not altogether destroy the World, and abolish its substance,
but he will rectify all its imperfections, and add to it a greater Glory. If it
be lawful for me to discover here all my thoughts; I must say, that I put a
great difference between Heaven and Earth, for the Earth is altogether corrupt
and spoiled with sin; it is the Earth, especially, that groans under the burden
of so many iniquities, which reign in it; but if Heaven is guilty of any crime,
it is, because it has given Light to such as have been Rebels against the
Divine Majesty, and assisted the cursed Earth by its Gracious and continual
influences. Because of this great difference, it is my opinion, that the Earth
shall be destroyed by Fire, and that all its beautiful Buildings, and proud
Palaces shall be turned into Ashes; but the change which shall happen in
Heaven, shall only be to make it more beautiful and brighter, that Children of
God might have there a more Glorious Palace. This seems to have been typified
in the ceremonial Law; for as we have already observed speaking of that which
shall happen to the Soul and Body, that when an Earthen Vessel was defiled, it
was to be broken to pieces, but such Vessels as were of a more precious Metal,
as of Brass, of Silver, or of Gold, were to be purified with Fire. Likewise the
Earth, with all its works, shall pass through the Flames, so that it shall
loose its present shape and qualities. But Heaven, that is as Brass, or rather
as fine Silver, shall only he purified by the Fire of the last Judgment. If
you remove the cause, you take away also the effect; if you remove away sin,
you also remove its punishment. Now it is, because of Man's sin, that the World
has, and shall see so great a change. Therefore, as God by his infinite Mercy,
has forgiven Man's sin; it is also to be expected from the same Mercy, that he
will not totally destroy the World, but that he will rather free it from
corruption, unto which our sins had enthralled it.

Unless God deals in this manner, our Joy and Comfort cannot be accomplished,
and God will not appear perfectly satisfied. While a Subject continues in
rebellion, and in the displeasure of his Prince; not only his person is pursued
and punished, but all that belongs to him, bears the marks of the wrath and
indignation of the Prince, whom he has offended; his dwelling House is
commonly pulled down, his Woods are cut and mangled, and his Inheritance is
destroyed; but when his Peace is concluded, and his pardon granted, his houses
are built up again, al signs of the King's displeasure are taken away, and
every thing appears with a more pleasant countenance; likewise, because of our
Rebellion and our Treason against God, he has punished the World for our
sakes, and has made it sensible of his wrath. But now that our peace is made,
or rather, God having made peace by the blood of his Son, we may justly expect
that he will remove all signs of his displeasure and revenge. I remember upon
this subject, what David says to God, when he saw the Angels destroying
Jerusalem, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but these Sheep, what have
they done? 2 Samuel 24. In the same manner every Believer may say unto God, Lo, I
have sinned O Lord, I and my Brethren have done wickedly, but these inaminate
Creatures, what have they done? our sins have defiled the Earth, and all things
that may be objected against Heaven, it is, to have yielded Light and
assistance to us Rebels. Seeing therefore that thou have blotted out our Sins,
and pardoned our Rebellions, spare these harmless Creatures, which are punished
only for our sakes.

At present we can find no difficulty to understand the forementioned passages
of holy Scripture, and such as tend to the same purpose. For when David and St.
Paul assure us, That the Heavens shall perish, that they shall be changed as a
garment. I answer, that they shall perish, in respect of their qualities. and
not of their substance; and that the change shall not be, as when one Garment
is cast off. and another is taken; but as when the spots and blemishes of an
old Garment are taken away, and it becomes fresher. When your clothing is
grown old and worn out, if it were in your power to make it become new again,
and as fresh as ever it was, you should never dream of seeking for new Stuff.
That which is impossible to Men, is possible with God, Luke 6. And when our
Savior in St. Mathew's Gospel, says, That the Heavens and the Earth shall
pass away, but my words shall not pass away; I might say, that these words are
to be understood comparatively, that is to say, that the Heavens and the Earth
shall pass away, rather then that the words of God should fail of an
accomplishment; our Savior confirms this interpretation, when he says in St.
Lukes Gospel, It is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass away, then that one
tittle of the Law should not be fulfilled. The Holy Scripture is full of such
kind of expressions, but I would rather stick to the answers which I have
already given to the former passages, and to say, that the Heavens and the
Earth shall pass away, not in regard of their substance, but only in regard of
their accidental qualities.

In St. Peter's expressions, I find a double comparison, or allusion, the one
relates to the Tents that are pulled down, when the pieces are taken asunder.
This comparison is very proper, for this World is like a great Tabernacle, a
glorious Pavillion, God shall pull off all the coverings, he shall cut the
Cords, and separate every piece. But he shall one day raise it up again, gather
every piece; and make it a Royal Tabernacle, full of splendour and glory.

The other comparison is borrowed from Goldsmiths, who cast the Gold and Metals
into pots, and then melt them in the fire: Now as they do not destroy, by this
means, the Gold and the Silver, but they cleanse it from dross and from dirt,
they cause them to appear in all their brightness and beauty, and give them a
new shape and form. Likewise the fire of the last Judgment, shall not consume
the Heavens and the Earth, but shall only give them a new form and beauty.

The strangest objection in my opinion, is occasioned by the words of St.
Peter, The Earth and the Works that are therein shall be burnt up; But I answer
to this, that there is a great difference between burning, and being totally
consumed and abolished. If it were in the power of a Man, whose House is burned
to the ground, to raise it up again from its ruins, and to make it more
beautiful and glorious then before, by his word alone, he would never seek for
other Materials. Now I shall say again, that what is impossible with Men, is
possible with God, he has already Created the World by his Word, and he is
able to restore it again by the same word. Art has found a way to make
beautiful Vessels of melted ashes, and shall not Gods Hand, unto which all the
skill of Art, and the strength of Nature, cannot be compared, be able to gather
up the ashes of this Earth, and to make of it a Body full of glory and light?

From hence you may perceive, how we are to understand, that there shall be new
Heavens and a new Earth; they shall not be new in regard of their substance and
matter, which shall have been from the beginning of the World; but they shall
be new in regard of those noble qualities which God shall give them. When a
debaucht fellow leaves his wicked life, and applies himself to the practice of
Piety and Virtue, we commonly say, that he is not the same, but that he is
become another Man. Besides, when a Man has cast off his old rags, and puts on
a glorious Garment, we are wont to say, that he is another Man. We shall have
much more cause to say, that the Heavens and the Earth shall be new, when God
shall have renewed them. In short, he shall enrich the World, with so many
wonderful beauties, he shall fill it full of so much glory and excellency, he
shall cause it to be so perfect, that we shall have just reason to look upon
it, as upon a New World, and to say with the Apostle, The old things are passed
away, behold all things are become new. I would not have you think, Christians,
that this opinion is grounded only upon humane reason, it is drawn from the
words of St. Paul, who speaking of the earthly and insensible Creatures, as may
appear by his intention, he says, not only that they are subject to Vanity,
not willingly, but because of him who has subjected them, he means Man, who by
his Sin and Rebellion has spoiled the World, and corrupted Nature; but he adds
immediately after, That they hope to be delivered from the Bondage of
corruption, to be in the glorious liberty of the Children of God; afterward he
says, for we know that the whole Creation groaneth and travaileth in pain
together until now; and before he says, That the earnest expectation of the
Creature, waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God. In which passages
pray take notice, that St. Paul says not, that these Creatures shall be
abolished and totally destroyed, but only, that they shall be delivered from
Vanity, and from the bondage of corruption, unto which the Sin of Man has made
them subject; and that this blessed deliverance shall be brought to pass, at
the day of the Redemption of our Bodies, that is to say, at that day when God
shall redeem our Bodies from their Graves, and raise them up to the highest
glory and happiness, which has been prepared for us from the Creation of the
World.

Then shall happen that which is wont to be seen, at the Marriage of a great
King, or at a Coronation, or a Triumph, for not only the Prince and his Spouse,
and all their Court appear, in their richest and most glorious Attire, and
laden with their most precious Jewels, and the usual Pomp of Triumphs, was as
extraordinary and glorious, as Invention could make it. In such occasions, the
Princes Palace is adorned with the richest, with the most magnificent and
rarest ornaments; and the Town where this Solemnity is kept, shows forth some
Signs of the public rejoicing; many places are beautified with several
Rarities, Theaters are erected, the Streets are covered with Flowers and
Tapistry, fires are kindled, and Torches are lighted, and there is no corner
but shows some expressions of the public joy. Likewise, when our Lord Jesus
Christ shall come down from the Clouds of Heaven, upon a Chariot of Triumph,
when he shall come to consummate his Marriage with, and to Crown his Spouse. He
shall not only appear in his greatest Glory, and most Divine Pomp, but the
Church also his Spouse, shall be clothed with a Garment brighter than the Sun,
and Crowned with an Immortal Glory. All the Blessed Saints shall appear in
their attire of Joy, having Palms in their Hands, and Crowns upon their Heads,
and the Companies of Holy Angels shall sing round about. At that time Paradise,
which shall be as his Palace and Bridechamber, shall be adorned and enriched
with all the light anp glory, which I have already essayed to describe unto
you. The whole World also, and every part of it, shall partake of this great
Glory, and Celestial Pomp. The richest Coronations, the most Magnificent
Triumphs, the most stately Nuptials, are gone in a few hours; Therefore the
fires of Joy are soon put out, the hangings of the Streets are taken down, and
the Arches and Pageants disappear, and the City is to be seen in its wonted
dress. But as this Glory and Joy of the Church shall never end; Therefore the
World shall for ever and ever bear the signs of it. The Ornaments which it
shall receive in this joyful day, shall never be taken away, and the Celestial
fires of gladness, shall never go out.

Although it is my opinion, that the World shall never be totally Destroyed,
but that it shall become more beautiful and glorious than before. I shall not
undertake to give you a description of its several parts, nor to tell you how
it shall be employed; for example, I shall not determine whether we are to
understand our Saviors words in the Gospel, literally, That the Sun shall
become Dark, that the Moon shall not give its Light, and that the Stars shall
fall from Heaven; or whether these Heavenly Bodies shall still continue,
whether they shall be decked with a new Light and Glory, and to what purpose
they shall serve; for then we shall be enlightened with a greater Light, then
that of all the Heavenly Bodies. I shall only propose two Things; First, That
as in the humane Body there are some Members, which at present are useful, but
then they shall only be for Ornament and Beauty. Likewise in the great World,
there are many needful things, which shall then be of no use, nevertheless,
they shall be preserved for the Beauty and Perfection of the World. Secondly,
That as Man the little World, shall then be more Beautiful and Perfect, then
when God first Created him; likewise this great World shall receive more
Beauty, more Ornaments and Perfection, then when God drew it out of its first
Chaos. As much difference as there is between the second Adam and the first,
between the Heavenly Paradise and the Earthly; so much there shall be between
the first and second World. So that we shall have good cause to say of this
great Palace, which is to be destroyed, and reared up again by the Almighty
hand of God, as the Holy Prophets said of Solomon's Temple, which we have
already applied to our glorified Bodies. The glory of this second House, shall
be greater than the glory of the first.

Some inquire whether we shall know one another in this State of Eternal Glory
and happiness, I mean, whether the Subject shall know his Prince and King;
whether the Sheep shall know their Shepherd, and the Shepherd his Sheep;
whether the Father shall know his Son, the Son the Father, the Husband his
Wife, and the Wife her Husband, and so forth.

Although this question is of the number of such as are more curious, then
needful to be known; nevertheless, a reply seems to bring with it some kind of
comfort and satisfaction. I should judge that this Treatise should not be
perfect, if I did not say something to this matter, but what I shall say, shall
be with the same moderation and reservedness, as I have expressed in answering
to the former questions; for although what I shall speak, seems to me very
plain and without any difficulty; others may have different thoughts, without
any prejudice to their Salvation. However, I may establish for an infallible
Truth, That the Glory of Heaven, as well as Grace, shall bring Nature to
perfection, but shall not destroy it, it shall add to it other excellencies,
but shall not take away those that it has already. It shall not abolish any of
the Faculties, but it shall beautify and enrich them with new Ornaments.
Therefore by consequence, it shall not take away our Memory, which is one of
the rarest gifts and abilities, of the reasonable Soul.

I confess that it is said, That the former things shall be remembered no more,
and that they shall come no more into our mind. But this is to be understood of
the evils and calamities of this present life. And we are not to understand the
words, so that to speak plainly, we shall totally forget all the former evils
and miseries, and that we shall not remember to have undergone them; St. John
says the contrary, when he represents the Angel opening the fifth Seal, that
he saw under the Golden Altar, which was before the Throne of God, the Souls of
them who had been Martyred for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of the
Truth, crying out with a loud voice, How long O Lord, Holy and True, do thou
not judge and revenge our Blood, upon the Inhabitants of the Earth. It is true,
these words may be understood in a figurative sense, as when God said unto
Cain, The voice of thy Brothers Bloodcries from the Earth unto me; and as St.
Paul says, That the Blood of Jesus Christ speaks better things, than the Blood
of Abel. However, from hence we may conclude, that the remembrance of all the
Miseries and Evils which we have endured in this Life, is not repugnant to our
future estate of glory. This remembrance is so far from prejudicing our
felicity, that on the contrary, it shall increase and enlarge it; so that it
shall cause it to appear sweeter and more pleasant When the Prophet says, That
the former things shall be remembered no more, that they shall never come to
mind; he understands that the former evils shall never be felt, and that we
shall be for ever sheltered from all Misery and Misfortunes.

I cannot express this by a nobler and more proper example, then that of
Joseph, when he went out of Prison to take into his hands the Government of
Egypt, and that he had strengthened himself, by a rich Alliance in Marriage, he
named his eldest Son Manasseth, which signifies forgetfulness, or forgetful;
for he said, God has made me forget all my labor, and my Fathers House.
Although this holy Manhd not forgotten altogether all those things, for he knew
afterward his Brethren, and told them of the mischief, which they had intended
against him, and which God had turned to good. But he spoke in this manner,
because God had changed his Misery and imprisonment, into glory and honor. In
this sense we are to understand these words, The former things shall be
remembered no more, because instead of the Evils and Miseries which we endure
here below, we shall enter into an Eternal Glory and Happiness. The Prophet
expounds himself sufficiently, in the next words, for when he had said, The
former things shall not be remembered, nor come into mind, he adds immediately
after, be you glad and rejoice in that which I Create. The Holy Ghost confirms
us in this interpretation in another place, by these words, All Tears shall be
wiped off from our eyes, there shall be no more sorrow, nor crying, nor pain,
but eternal Joy and Gladness shall be upon our heads.

Seeing God intends not to destroy those gifts and abilities, which he has
bestowed upon us in this Life, much less shall he abolish our knowledge, which
is one of the brightest Beams of his Glory. This knowledge shall be so far from
diminishing or decaying, that it shall then increase more and more, until it
comes to the highest perfection and glory. As the Air loses nothing of its
twilight at break of day, when the Sun rises upon our heads, but rather
loses all obscurity and darkness, which the presence of the Sun drives away,
until it be perfectly enlightened. Likewise our understanding shall loose
nothing of that light and perfection which it receives now from the breaking of
the day of Gods Grace; but as the Son of Righteousness rises upon i^ more and
more in joy and Salvation, it shall perfectly loose all Darkness and Ignorance
by degrees, until it be fully enlightened. From hence it seems we may conclude,
that we shall know all the persons in Heaven, whom we have known here below on
Earth; for if the glorified shall remember the wicked who have Tormented them,
they must needs remember also Believers, who have bestowed upon them their
Alms, and done them good. If it were otherwise, the Apostle St. Paul would not
tell the Corinthians, We are your glory, as also you are ours, at the day of
the Lord Jesus; And he would not write thus to the Thessalo. What is our hope,
our joy, and our Crown of Glory? Is it not you before the Lord Jesus Christ at
his coming? verily you are our glory and our joy. Now if in the estate of
Glory, St. Paul should not know the Corinthians and Thessalo unto whom he had
Preached the Gospel; how shall they be his Joy, his Glory, and his Crown, at
the coming of the Lord Jesus? This reason seems to me as clear as the Sun.
Nevertheless, I cannot affirm, that in Heaven we shall know again them whom we
have known upon Earth, by the features of their countenance, for there shall be
a wonderful alteration. The faces of all the Saints shall be so beautiful, so
perfect, and so full of light and glory, that the most knowing shall not be
able to judge them to be the same, whom we have seen upon Earth. Some therefore
fancy, that we shall know one another by the assistance of the discourse; but
our voice shall then be changed, as well as our countenance, and it is
doubtful, whether we shall discourse of the former things happened on Earth,
for our chief employment shall be to behold Gods face, and to sing forth his
praises. I had rather therefore affirm, that we shall know one another by an
infused knowledge, by which we shall know all things, which are possibly to be
known, and by the light of that glory with which God shall fill our Souls. In
short, this knowledge shall proceed from no other principle, then that of all
the knowledges which we shall have in that State of Glory and Perfection.

I am therefore more than fully persuaded, that we shall know in Heaven our
Parents and our Friends, and generally all the persons whom we have known here
below, but we shall also perfectly know them, whom we never knew in the World,
and never saw with he eyes of the flesh. We shall know the holy and Blessed
Virgin Mary, the Patriarks, the Prophets, the Apostles, the Evangelists, the
Confessors, the Martyrs, and generally, without exception, all the Saints who
shall be Crowned with Glory and joy in Heaven. There is no body can question,
but that in the Celestial Paradise, we shall have more knowledge and
understanding, then ever Adam had in the earthly. Now when God caused a deep
sleep to fall upon him, when he took one of his Ribs, and formed therewith a
Woman, he had seen none of this done, nevertheless, when his eyes were open, he
knew her, therefore he declared his judgment in this manner, This is bone of
my bone, and flesh of my flesh. And shall not we when God shall rouse us up
from the deep sleep of Death, with the sound of the last Trumpet, know the
Spouse of the Son of God, which he has drawn out of his side, and fashioned
with his own precious Blood? St. Peter when he was enlightened by a beam of our
Saviors Glory in his transfiguration, knew Moses and Elias whom he had never
seen before. And shall not we know all the Children of God upon Mount Sion,
when we shall be transfigured our selves, and that we shall shine all as the
heavenly light, whereof that of Mount Tabor, was but an imperfect shadow and
representation. But although we shall know in Heaven all the persons whom we
have known on Earth, we shall look upon them in another manner, and love them
with another affection, for all that we have of the animal and earthly life,
shall be totally abolished; and as our knowledge shall be clear and certain,
our love shall be pure and heavenly. I am not able to express this better than
St. Paul does, in these words, Although I have known Christ according to the
flesh, nevertheless I know him no more according to the flesh. Christians,
consider well these expressions, they will be able to remove all difficulty and
doubts out of your minds. We are all fully persuaded, that all the Inhabitants
of Heaven, shall know very well our Lord Jesus Christ, for how can it be
otherwise, but that we must know this glorious Monarch of Men and of Angels,
whose sacred countenance shall shine as the Sun, and who shall sit upon his
Magnificent Throne, about which Legions of Seraphims fly, and who shall be
there adored for ever, by all the Church glorified. Nevertheless St. Paul
says, That although he has known Jesus Christ according to the flesh; That is
to say, according to the manner of this low and earthly life, when he lived
here on Earth; at present he did not know him in the same manner, he did not
consider him otherwise, but as he is at present invested, with an unspeakable
Glory and splendour. In the same manner, although we shall know all them whom we
have known on Earth, we shall no more know them according to the flesh, that is
to say; according to this animal and sensual life, our love shall have nothing
of earthly or carnal, but it shall be altogether Spiritual and Heavenly.

I beseech you Christians, consider well what St. Math. tells us in 22. Chap.
The Saduces who say, that there is no Resurrection, came to Christ to entangle
him with this difficult question. Master, Moses said, if a Man Die having no
Children, his Brother shall Marry his Wife, and raise up seed unto his Brother.
Now there were with us seven Brethren, and the first when he had Married a Wise
Deceased, and having no Issue, left his Wife unto his Brother; likewise the
second also, and the third, unto the seventh, and last of all the Woman Died
also; therefore in the Resurrection whose Wife shall she be of the seven, for
they all had her? Our Savior answers not that this Woman shall belong to none
of those Husbands, because they shall not know her, nor distinguish her from
other Women, but he replies to them, you err not knowing the Scriptures, nor
the power of God, for in the Resurrection they neither Marry nor are given in
Marriage, but are as the Angels of God in Heaven. From hence we may conclude,
that although in Heaven we shall know one another, we shall have nothing of
that carnal love which we have at present, and which causes us to put so much
difference between one person and another. A father may know his Children, but
his love shall not be grounded upon considerations of flesh and blood; he shall
love them only, because they are amongst the Children of God, and the Heirs of
his Kingdom, and because he shall see them appear in the Image of the Heavenly
Father, clothed with his Light, and Crowned with his Immortal Glory. Finally,
we shall love no body but in God, and for his sake, as they shall be in God and
God in them. In this manner it shall not be possible to love them more or less.
Charity or Love the Queen of Virtues, shall then sit upon its Throne, and
attain to its highest degree and perfection.

If you think seriously upon this, Christians, you shall easily find arguments
to answer the vain objections of such as say, that if we come to the knowledge
of one another in Heaven, that shall be able to disturb our satisfaction and
rest; for as it will be a comfort and joy to meet there with our Parents and
Friends; in like manner it will be a trouble and dissatisfaction, not to find
there all such whom we have formerly loved. We may retort the same objection in
a stronger manner against those that believe that we shall not know one another
in Heaven, for we may say also, that if we know not the persons, we shall not
know whether our Parents or our Friends are there; and that this is as likely
to disturb and trouble the quiet and satisfaction of our minds. But to argue
in this gross manner, is to confound Heaven with the Earth.

Grief and displeasure can never be admitted in a Paradise of joy and perfect
happiness. In this glorious condition, our knowledge shall be so clear, our
Charity so pure, our Love for God so servent, that as we shall love all things
which God shall love, and where his Image shall appear, so it shall not be
possible for us to love them whom God shall hate, them who shall bear the marks
and similitudes of the Devil.

When David was yet here on Earth, he said unto God, Lord shall not I hate them
that hate thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, they have been to me as mine
Enemies, Ps. 39. In the same manner we shall rather speak in Heaven, in the
estate of perfection, when God shall be in us all in all, and we shall be all
in God. Some there are that inquire what kind of language we shall speak in
Heaven? some reply, that we shall speak the Language of Angels, grounding their
opinion upon what St. Paul speaks to the Corinthians, When I should speak with
the Tongues of Men and Angels, If I have not charity, I am become as sounding
Brass and a tinkling Simbal.

But this is a Chimerian opinion, for as the Angels are pure Spirits, by
consequence they can have no Tongue, nor proper language. I confess in some
holy Apparitions, Angels have spoken to Men, but it was by moving the Tongues
of their borrowed Bodies, or by employing some other corporal Organ, then they
did speak in the Language of those unto whom they were sent, they had no
particular or proper Dialect. But if Angels did speak, their Language would
excel, as much that of Men, as the Angelical Nature excells the Humane; by the
Tongues of Angels therefore our Apostle understands an excellent Tongue, better
then that of Men.

Others fancy, that in Heaven we shall speak no other Language, but the Hebrew,
because say they, that it is the Tongue which God has Sanctified from the
beginning of the World, in which he spoke to the Patriarcks and Holy Prophets,
in which he proclaimed his Law upon Mount Sina, in the audience of all the
People of Israel, and in which he has Recorded his Sacred Law, with his own
Finger. They say, that it is the Language which Adam did speak in the Earthly
Paradise, in the state of innocence, and which all the Inhabitants of the World
did speak before God, sent amongst them a Division of Tongues. Others are yet
of opinion, that as then we shall attain to all Knowledge and Sciences, we
shall not be ignorant of all kind of Languages, but that we shall speak them
all in a most perfect manner, and that with them we shall declare the wonderful
Works of God, as the Apostles did at the day of Pentecost. As the holy
Scripture is silent upon this matter, I shall affirm nothing.

But in general terms, I may say, that as God caused a division of Tongues to
punish Man's insolency and pride, and that as the differing Languages of People,
is an effect of their Sin; it is most certain, that this confusion and
difference shall be altogether taken away, and that nothing shall be said in
Heaven, but shall be very well understood by all the glorified Saints. I may
add moreover, that in case we should speak so well all manner of Languages
which have been in the World, it is nevertheless very likely, that we shall all
speak but one Language, that we may all praise God with the same voice; but
whether this shall be the Holy Language, or another more perfect and majestic,
which God shall sanctify for this purpose, we cannot know, until God of his
infinite Mercy shall have raised us to this estate of Glory and perfect
Happiness. From what we have already said, Christians, you may easily
understand, that our happiness has three steps or degrees; the first is
attainable in this Life, the second at the Egress of the Soul out of the Body,
the third at the great day of our glorious Resurrection; for already in this
Life, God bestows upon us the First Fruits of his Glory, and the fore-tasts of
Heaven. The Spirit of God and of his Glory, rests at present upon us, which
fills us full of an unspeakable glorious joy, and with the peace of God which
surpasses all understanding. When our Souls depart out of this wretched and
crasie Body, God gathers them up into the bundle of Life, he introduces them
into the blessed company of the Angels and Glorified Spirits, and admits them
to the Contemplation of his Face, which is fullness of Joy. But in this joyful
day when Christ shall come down from Heaven to judge the quick and the dead, he
will carry us both in Soul and Body to the highest Glory and Happiness whereof
we are capable; for this reason the Name of Glory is ascribed to this high
degree of happiness, which is promised to us at the blessed appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ, as in the 8 Chap. to the Romans, where the Apostle says,
That the Creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of
him who has subjected the same, in hope, because the Creature it self shall be
delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
Children of God. And in the 3. Chap. to the Colos. he says, you are Dead, and
your Life is hid with Christ in God, when Christ who is your Life shall appear,
you shall appear also with him in Glory. Therefore this glorious appearing is
styled, a blessed Hope, that is to say, the fulfilling and accomplishment of
all that we expect or hope for, as in the 2 Chap. to Titus, St. Paul says, We
expect the Blessed Hope, the appearing of the Glory of our great God, who is
the Savior Jesus Christ.

Then shall be the consummation of the Glory, and of the head, and of the
Members, for then the Son of God shall cause the Damned to feel that Power
which he possesses in Heaven and in Earth, and in the Depths; he shall
discover himself to the faithful, in his greatest Glory and most Divine
Splendour. Therefore this glorious Day of his descent from Heaven, with the
Angels of his power, is mentioned as the first day of his manifestation, of his
appearing, and of his Kingdom; for this cause, when the Holy Ghost speaks of
this day, it styles it, The day of the Lord Jesus Christ, or the day of the
Lord Jesus, as also the Day of the Lord, and the day of God. As it shall be the
Day of the Lord Jesus, it shall also be our Day, therefore St. Paul calls it,
The day of our Redemption, because that in this day, our Lord shall redeem our
Bodies out of their Graves, and shall bestow upon, both our Souls and Bodies,
Ephesians. 4. all the Fruits of that Redemption, which he has purchased for us with
his Blood, Romans 8. and shall raise us up to the highest Glory, and most perfect
happiness, Heb. 9 It is the happy Day of the Consummation of our Marriage with
this Divine Lamb. It is the day of our Joy and Triumph, with the glorified Men
and Angels. It is the day of our Coronation, and of our entrance into our
Kingdom, when the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords shall Crown us with his own
hand, and put us in possession of an Empire prepared for us from the beginning
of the World. In a word, it is the day when we shall come to the Lord Jesus and
be with him, as he is with the Father, that we may be all in one.

Because of the glorious and wonderful things which shall come to pass on this
day, it is named The great Day, St. Jude calls it thus, when he speaks of the
Revolted Angels, he says, That God has reserved them in everlasting Chains
under darkness, unto the Judgment of the Great Day. In this manner many
understand the words of St. John, when he describes the Foul Spirits, and
likens them to Frogs, which he saw coming out of the Dragons Mouth, and of the
Beast, and out of the Mouth of the False Prophet, and says, They are the
Spirits of Devils working Miracles, which God sent forth unto the Kings of the
Earth, and of the whole World, to gather them to the Battle of that great Day
of God Almighty, Revel. 16.

Lastly, this glorious Day is not only called The day of Judgment, the Day of
the Lord, the Day of our Redemption, and the Great day, but oftimes without any
addition, it is styled the Day, and that Day, as in the 10. Chap. to the
Hebrews, Let us consider one another to provoke unto Love and good Works, not
forsaking the assembling our selves together, as the manner of some is, but
exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye see the day approaching. In
the first Epist. to the Thessal. You are not in Darkness, that that Day should
surprise you. Thus in 2 Epist. to Timothy, and first Chap. St. Paul says, I
know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that,
which I have committed unto him against that Day. And when he remembers the
good and charitable Deeds of Mesiphorus, he prays for him in this manner, The
Lord grant unto him, that he may find Mercy of the Lord in that day; And in the
4 Chap. speaking of himself he says, I have fought the good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the Faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give at that
Day.

It is so styled, because of its excellency, it is the Day of Days, the end of
all the Seasons, the Consummation of all Ages and Times, after this there shall
be no more alteration of Days, Months, and Years. Therefore an Angel is
represented in the Revel. lifting up his hand to Heaven, swearing by the living
God, who has Created Heaven and all things therein, the Earth and all things
in it, and the Sea, and the things that are there. That there shall be no more
Time; for instead of this unconstant time which flies away, without leaving any
sign of its being an everlasting Eternity, shall succeed an Eternity always the
same, always Blessed with Happiness, always glorious and joyful. This Divine
and Magnificent Day shall begin at the end of all other Days, but shall never
draw to an end. Therefore St. Peter in these words, calls it an Eternal day or
Eternity, 2 Pet. 3. Glory be to the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, both now and
for ever, Amen. And in expectation of this Day of Days, all Creatures are
groaning and travailling in pain until now, but especially Believers, who have
the First Fruits of the Spirit, groan in themselves, desiring with an earnest
and holy desire, to see the breaking of this great and glorious Day. It is the
end of all the Prophecies, and the accomplishment of all Gods gracious promises
to his People in all the Ages of the World. It is the end and price of our
Spiritual Calling, the fulfilling of all our desires and expectations, the
Crowning of all our Labors, and the highest step of that glory and happiness,
unto which we pretend.

You, Devout Souls, that delight in the contemplation of Celestial things, I
pray consider with me, the accomplishment and the perfection of three kinds of
works, which have been succeeded by their several Rests. The first was that of
the Creation of the World, for in six days God Created the Heaven and the
Earth, and all things in them, and when he had finished his Works, and found
that they were good and perfect, he rested the seventh day, Genesis 1. and 2.
Therefore he Blessed and Sanctified it. The second great work was that of
Redemption, for when our Savior had fulfilled all the Prophesies which
mentioned him, when he had caused the meaning of all the ancient Types and
Figures to appear in his person, and in his sufferings, when he had fully
satisfied the justice of God, and purchased for us with his Blood, an Eternal
Redemption, he cried out, all is finished, John 19. and he bowed his Head, and
gave up the Ghost. After this, Christ had nothing more to do, nor to suffer,
but he is gone into Heaven to Rest from all his Works, Revel. 5. and to take
possession of all power, riches, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and praise.
The third Work is that of our Glorification, when we shall see new Heavens
appear, and a new Earth, when our Bodies shall be clothed with Incorruption
and Immortality, and united again to our Souls, and when in both Soul and Body
we shall attain to the highest glory, and most perfect happiness. Then he that
sits upon the Throne of Eternity shall say with a loud voice, Revel. 21. All is
finished.

Afterward the Sabbath of Sabbaths shall succeed that Eternal rest and that
peace, which shall never be interrupted by any unhappiness. We may say, that
the first rest is that of God the Father, the second belongs to the Son, the
third is the rest of the Holy Ghost, that shall have then gathered all the
Saints together, reared up the House of God to the roof, and perfectly
enlightened and sanctified the Catholic Church, from whence shall proceed its
Eternal Glory and Happiness; or rather, we may say, that this last rest, is the
rest of all the Three Persons, of the most holy and most glorious Trinity, for
then they shall rest from all manner of Works for ever and ever, and we in the
bosom of their Glory; we shall also enjoy an everlasting test. When the Works
of Creation were finished, the Works of Redemption were next expected, and
after the Works of Redemption, we hope for the Works of our final
glorification. But when God shall have brought us all into his Glorious Rest,
and that he shall have declared for the third time from Heaven, All is
finished. We shall then expect nothing, neither from Gods justice, nor from his
mercy, for all Gods Enemies shall be then destroyed, and it shall not be
possible to add any thing to the grievousness of their punishments, nor to the
violence of their torments. There shall be no more Tears to be wiped, no more
evils to be feared, nor advantages to be expected, not Crowns to receive, for
then all the Children of God shall be perfectly glorified. They shall enjoy God
himself, who shall he their inheritance for ever, and the bottomless fountain
of all their Delights, so that it shall not be possible to add any thing to
their infinite Glory, nor to their Eternal happiness God shall then as it were,
take away all means of expressing any greater liberality and bounty.

Abraham leaped for joy, when he saw the Birth day and humiliation of the Son
of God, how should we rejoice and be transported out of our selves, when we
think upon this glorious Day of the appearing of our Great God and Savior?
when with the eye of Faith we behold him sitting upon the Clouds of Heaven,
coming to put a period to Sin and Death, to shut up the Devil and his Angels in
the bottomless pit of Hell, to deliver his Church from all Evils, Enemies, and
Dangers, and to promote it to the highest felicity, and to an everlasting glory?

After this, Believing Souls, I must draw the curtain, and suffer my pen to
fall from my hand, for mine eyes dazzle at the sight of so much light, and my
Soul is surpriprised at the consideration of so much glory and so perfect an
happiness.

Although I have continued in this Treatise longer then I first proposed to my
self, I must needs confess, that whatsoever I have said upon so rich and
glorious a subject, falls far short of the Truth. But I am persuaded, that
there shall be here enough, for pious and devout Souls, that seek not for the
ornaments of Language, nor for the flourishes of Rhetoric, but seek for the
true and solid comforts of Gods holy Word. You Christian and Believing Souls,
for whose sakes I have undertaken this Work, I entreat you by the Glory of God,
and by your own Salvation, to preserve in your minds the Ideas of these things,
that I have now spoken of* Imprint them in your Memories, grave them upon your
Hearts, with the point of a Diamond, and especially take delight in following
my direction, and you shall assuredly find both joy and comfort. Think often
upon Death, let it be the most familiar and most pleasant subject of your
Discourse, expect it at every Moment, and lead such a Life, as if Death were
already upon your Lips. Fear not the many troubles of this humane Life, doubt
not, but that God has determined the time and manner of your going out of the
World, and that every kind of Death of the Children of God is precious in his
sight. Seeing that you are to live yet but a moment here upon Earth, settle not
here your Hearts, but enjoy your Riches and advantages, as not enjoying them,
remembering that the fashion of this World passes away; seeing that it is Sin
alone, that makes Death appear so terrible to us, hate all manner of Vice, and
study the practice of Piety.

And seeing that there is no body at the hour of Death, but wishes that he had
lived well; think upon your latter end, and you shall never be able to Sin. If
your mind is disturbed with the consideration of those things, which shall
happen after our Decease, learn to rest upon the wise Providence of God, that
sees into the depths of Eternity, that provides for all things, and that draws
Light out of the greatest Darkness. Are you cast upon a Bed of Sickness and
Disease, open the eye of Faith, and you shall see your selves encompassed about
with holy Angels, and in the Arms of God himself; dread not the violence of
pain, for God shall never forsake you in your grief, he shall never suffer you
to be afflicted, above what you are able to endure; fancy him not as a dreadful
and a merciless Judge, but look upon him as a gracious and a loving Father, who
desires not the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he should repent and live.
If Death appears to you with a frightful Countenance, if it fills you full of
Terror, cast your eyes by Faith upon the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
you shall see there, all the Weapons and Armor of this Death broken in pieces.
You shall see there a Divine and precious* Blood running down, which has
satisfied for all your Sins, and marked unto you the way to Gods Eternal
Sanctuary. Let not the Grave that is digging for you, terrify you, seeing that
the King of Kings has been laid there before you, and filled it with his most
Divine Perfumes. Let Death seem to you never so Dreadful, remember that our
Savior has overcome it by his Resurrection, fear not therefore to encounter
it, seeing that our Great God and Savior shall make you partaker of his
Victory. And that you might beget in your Souls an earnest longing to go to
Heaven. Look upon Jesus Christ there, who prepares a place for you, and desires
that you should be eternally with him, to behold his Joy and Glory. Fear not
the separation of the Soul from the Body, seeing that Death which shall
separate you from your selves, is not able to separate you from the Spirit of
the Lord Jesus. The Soul of our Souls, the Seal of the promises of God, and the
earnest of our future Inheritance. Instead of looking backwards, and longing
for these perishing advantages, and for Honors that can only dazzle the eye;
consider that Death shall wipe away all Tears, remove all your grief, and raise
you above all the storms of the World, above all the miseries and troubles that
cover the face of the Earth. That you may be able to follow this Death more
cheerfully. Remember that it draws you out of a place all polluted with Sin,
and infected with Impiety, to transport you into a new Heaven, adorned with
Righteousness and Holiness, and perfumed with the Prayers, Praises, and
Thanksgivings of the Glorified Saints; remember that it frees you from all
remains of corruption, and gives Deaths wound to all your Lusts. Mind not so
much the false appearance of Death, for to the wicked it is as it were the
Subburbs of Hell, the jaws of the bottomless pit, and the beginning of their
endless Torments; but to you Believers, it is the Gate of Heaven, an entrance
into Paradise, and a passage to a most happy Life Learn to relish now the Joys
wherewith your Souls shall be for ever satisfied, when God shall Crown you with
his Glory, and make you Drink of the Rivers of his Pleasure. Seeing that your
Soul is going to put on a Garment of an Immortal color, and to dwell for ever
in the Palace which God has built with his Almighty hand. Cast off willingly
this wretched, crasie, and corruptible Body; depart willingly out of this
Earthly Tabernacle, which turns of it self into Dust. Consider well, that if it
falls by Death, it shall rise again at the Resurrection, and that when it shall
have been the Dwelling and the Food of Worms, it shall at last become the
Temple of God, and the Tabernacle of his Glory. Finally, O Religious Souls,
shut your eyes to the World, and to all the vanities in it, which the World
adores, and aspire to the real advantages which God has prepared for you,
before the Creation of the World, and which you shall enjoy, when the World
shall be no more. Let your precious Faith, and your blessed hope, enter into
Eternity it self, to behold that extraordinary happiness and glory which God
shall accomplish, when he shall bring us both in Soul and Body, into his
Celestial Paradise, to see his face, in which is fullness of Joy.

Seeing that this perfect happiness, and infinite Glory, which never entered
into the Heart and thoughts of Man, shall never be perfectly accomplished; but
at that Day when Jesus Christ shall appear from Heaven, to be glorified in his
Saints, and to become wonderful in all Believers; Think always upon this
Glorious Day, the end of all our wishes, the fulfilling of all your hopes, and
the perfection of all the designs which God has conceived in himself from all
Eternity.

You Devout Souls, that are grieved to see the World prosper, and Satan's Empire
flourish, to see Gods Children subject to all the Darts of Death, take good
courage, and rejoice with an holy Joy, for shortly, all the Enemies of God, and
of your Salvation, shall be punished with an everlasting punishment, as from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Shortly, the Devil,
his Angels, his Agents, and Slaves, shall be bound up in Chains of Darkness,
and cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, and shut up in the bottomless
pit. Shortly, Death shall be no more, and this Church of Jesus Christ' whose
Miseries and Afflictions cause you to weep, shall be shortly clothed with
unspeakable light and glory. It shall enter with Joy and Triumph into the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and you your selves shall sing, with all the glorified
Armies of Heaven.

Seeing that Christ shall come as a Thief in the Night, and shall surprise all
the Children of the World unawares, prepare your Souls Believers with the love
of God, and an expectation of your Merciful Lord, behave your selves in the
same manner, as you would do, if you were now at the Eye of this great
Festival, as if you did spy already, the breaking of this most happy day.
Entertain now the same affections and joy, as if you did hear the voice of God
and the Trumpet of the Archangel, as if the Earth were already in a flame, and
as if Jesus Christ himself were coming in the Clouds of Heaven. And seeing that
no impure thing shall enter into the Heavenly and Holy Jerusalem, and that
without Holiness, no Man shall see the face of God, cleanse your selves
Christians, from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the fear of the Lord; forsake all manner of Vice, give your selves
over to Virtue, and to the practice of good Works, imitate the diligence of the
Faithful Servant, that you may not be ashamed at the coming of your Great
Master. Take heed that you be not like the Wise Virgins, that slept as well as
the foolish, but watch and pray, that you may not enter into Temptation, for
the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. Redeem the time, for the days
are evil, and make haste to put on the Garments of Righteousness and innocence;
fill your Hearts with the Holy Oil of Faith, of Hope and Charity. Take your
Lamps in your hands, and let your Souls shine with a Divine Light.

In this blessed disposition, let us go and meet our Heavenly Bridegroom, and
hasten his coming, by our Prayers and Groans. Let our Souls be full of Love,
let them sigh for our Divine Jesus, and being moved with the same affection as
St. John, let us say to him with an earnest desire, Come Lord Jesus, and if he
answers, for certain I come quickly. Let the Longing of our Souls increase more
and more, that we may be able to Pray more fervently, and to cry out from the
bottom of our Souls unto Heaven, Come Lord Jesus, even come Lord, come quickly.
Amen.

A Prayer and a Meditation for a Believing Soul that rejoices and comforts it
self, in looking upon Deaths Destruction, and the everlasting and Blessed Life
which we hope to enjoy, both in Soul and Body after the Resurrection.
O Great Judge of the World, bottomless Fountain of Life and happiness, thy
Gracious hand has put into mine Heart, the seeds of Immortality, the
first fruits of Heavens Glory, and the foretasts of everlasting Delights. Thou
have made me to behold by Faith, the joys and happiness of Paradise, where thou
shall receive my Soul when it shall depart out of this wretched World, and to
Meditate upon the Glory which thou preparest for my Body, when thou shall take
it to thy self, to make it like to thy Glorious Body. Now raise my thoughts and
my hopes to this highest glory and happiness which thou have promised to our
Souls and Bodies, when thou shall come down from Heaven with Flames of Fire, to
revenge thy self of such as know thee not, and will not obey thy Holy Gospel,
and to be glorified in thy Saints, and become wonderful in all Believers. Let
me sometime consider that glorious Throne, where thou shall sit to judge the
quick and the dead, before which the greatest Princes, Kings, and Monarchs, as
well as the vilest Servants, Subjects, and Slaves; and generally all the Men of
the World shall appear to receive in their Bodies, according as they have done,
whether it be good or evil. O that I might rejoice in an expectation of seeing
the total and entire destruction of all the Enemies of thy Glory, and of our
Salvation. That I might look upon Satan his wicked Angels, his Agents, and the
instruments of his Kingdom, at if they were already bound up in everlasting
Chains, cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone, and shut up in that
bottomless pit, from whence they shall never be released. That I might think
upon that Blessed time, when Death shall be no more, when all the living shall
be Immortal; but chiefly give me Grace to behold with the eye of that precious
Faith which thou have formed in my Soul, the joy and Coronation of thy Church,
to consider that Divine dwelling, where the stately and most magnificent City
is built, with pure Gold, Pearls, and Precious Stones, where thou thy self art
the Light and the Sun, where the uncorruptible inheritance is, which cannot be
defiled and cannot fade away, where the River of living water runs, which is as
bright as Crystal, where the Tree of Life is, which yields fruit every Month
of the year, whereof the Leaves are for healing of the Gentiles. Give me Grace
to comfort my self, in the expectation of that blessed estate, where we shall
neither hunger nor thirst, where there shall be neither giving nor taking in
Marriage, but where we shall be as the Angels of God, where thou shall cloth
us with Light, and incompass us about with the beams of thy Glory, where thou
shall put into our hands Palms of Victory, Crowns upon our Heads, and in our
mouths the Songs of the blessed, and of all the Holy Angels, where we shall sit
with the Patriarcks, Prophets, Apostles, Confessors and Martyrs, and with all
the Princes, Kings, and Monarchs that have lived in thy fear, and that are dead
in thy favor. Where we shall for ever solemnise the Divine Nuptials of the
Lamb, and shall be inflamed with his love, where we shall behold God face to
face, and shall be changed into his glorious Image, and satisfied with his
Divine likeness. O Lord give us Grace to think continually upon his glorious
and joyful day, which shall put a period to the current of time, which is the
accomplishment of all the Prophecies and Promises, the body and reallity of all
types and figures, the Crowning of all our Works, the fulfilling of all our
desires, the highest of all our hopes, and the perfection of all the designs
intended by God the Father from all Eternity. And seeing that we know not when
this beautiful day shall break forth, which shall never end, give us Grace to
expect it at every moment, and behave our selves in such a manner, as if we
were already at the Eve of this everlasting Sabbath, and of this glorious Rest.
That we may provide holy oil in our Lamps, faith, hope, and charity in our
hearts; that these Lamps may be ready and always burning; that our Souls may be
clothed with the Wedding Garment, with Righteousness and innocence; that we
may not stumber in the vain Delights of the World, in the pleasures of the
flesh, but that we may spend the days and the nights in watching and Prayers.
Give us Grace to lift up our heads, looking for our Redemption, as if we did
already bear the sound of the last Trumpet; as if we did see already the Lord
Jesus coming in the Clouds of Heaven. O that we might not only expect him, but
go to meet him, and hasten his coming by our continual Prayers and earnest
desires. O most powerful and merciful Lord, forgive our impatient wishes, and
hasten that day for the elects sake. Lord Jesus come with the Angels of thy
power, and the thousands of Saints, and cause thy glory to appear, and thine
eternal Happiness. Come with the Weapons of thy just resentment to require
Justice, and to destroy all the ungodly, for there is no Faith amongst Men, nor
charity: All flesh is become corrupt. Come and destroy this World, which is as
an House, infected with a spreading Leprosy, but rather come to free it from
corruption and vanity, unto which our Sins have made it subject. Come and
purify with an universal fire this wretched Earth; which was cursed for our
Crimes. Come Almighty Lord, come and trample upon the pride of the World, and
of all the Enemies of thy Sacred Truth. Come and execute judgment upon her
that is drunk with the Blood of thy holy Martyrs. Come and bind the roaring
Lion in Chains, and shut him for ever in the bottomless pit. Come and put to
Death the Murderer of thy Brethren and Members, and totally abolish it. Lord
Jesus hearken to the crying of thy people, and to the groans of thine
inheritance. Come and take thy Church out of this cruel Egypt, where our Sins
have inthralled it, deliver it out of this Babylon, where it has been kept so
long in Bondage. O merciful Lord, it is high time that thou should introduce
it into thy Celestial Canaan, where the Milk and Honey of the most refined joys
and divine comforts flow continually. That thou should bring it into the holy
Jerusalem, the City of Peace and of everlasting Rest. Come therefore to wipe
away the Tears, and stop the crying of thy afflicted Children. Come and take
them out of this cruel and infamous Prison, open to them the Gates of thy
glorious Palace. Come and cloth them with thy Light, cause them to drink of
the Rivers of thy pleasures, and Crown them with thine Immortal Glory. Lord
Jesus hasten this day of this Divine Coronation and magnificent Rejoicing. We
have been fighting and traveling upon this Earth, long enough separated from
thee, our Souls long for thee, they can no longer live without thee. O
wonderful Lord, whose Works are so great, that they are past finding out, and
whose Wonders are so many, that they are not to be numbered; thou have with the
Father perfected the Creation of the World; thou have performed all the Works
of our Blessed Redemption, perfect also the Works of the future Glorification
of thy Church. Take us up to that highest Glory and Happiness which has beex
prepared for us from the beginning of the World; and which is the price of thy
Blood, and the fruits of thy Death. O bountiful and glorious Lord, put us in a
condition, that we may have nothing to dread, nor nothing to desire, nor
nothing to pray or wish for, but that we may only have cause to return to thee
Thanksgiving, and to celebrate thy Divine praises. That in this glorious and
everlasting day, we may sing continually with the Seraphims that fly about thy
Throne, holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God of Hosts, all that is in the Earth is
his Glory, and with the Blessed Saints; now is come to pass Salvation and
power, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ, for Death is
swallowed up into Victory; the accuser of our Brethren, is shut up in the
bottomless pit; he that accused them day and night before God. They have
overcome him by the Blood of the Lamb. They have not loved their own Lives unto
Death. Unto him who has loved us, and washed us from all our Sins in his
Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God his Father, to him I say, as
to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be Glory, power, and Dominion (...) ever Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS In this BOOK.
CHap. 1. That there is nothing more dreadful than Death, to such as have no
hope in God, Page 1. Chap. 2. That in all the Heathens Philosophy, there is no
solid or true comforts against the fears and apprehensions of Death, p. 8.
Chap. 3. Of diverse sorts of Death, with which we must encounter, p. 16. Chap.
4. That Jesus Christ our Lord has redeemed us from Eternal Death, and by
Degrees does deliver us from a Spiritual Death, p. 22. Chap. 5. Why we are
subject to the Corporal or Natural Death, and what advantages we do thereby
receive in Jesus Christ, p. 28. Chap. 6. From whence proceed the Fears of
Death, p. 44. Chap. 7. The first Remedy against the Fears of Death, is to
Meditate often upon it, p. 52. Chap. 8. The Second Remedy against the Fears of
Death, is to expect it at every hour, p. 65. Chap. 9. The Third Remedy against
the Fears of Death, is to consider that God has appointed the time and the
manner of our Death, p. 77. Chap. 10. The fourth Remedy against the Fears of
Death, is to separate our Hearts from the World, p. 109. Chap. 11. The fifth
Remedy against the Fears of Death, is to renounce Vice, and to apply our selves
to the practice of Piety and Sanctification, Page 147. Chap. 12. The sixth
Remedy against the Fears of Death, is to repose our selves upon Gods good
Providence, p 206. Chap. 13. The first Consolation against the Fears of Death,
God will not forsake us in our most grievous pangs, p. 267. Chap. 14, The
second Consolation against the Fears of Death, is to look upon God as a
Merciful Father, and to trust upon his infinite goodness, p. 296. Chap. 15. The
third Consolation against the Fears of Death, is to represent continually unto
our selves, the Death and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to trust
upon the Merits of his Cross, p. 315. Chap. 16. The fourth Consolation against
the Fears of Death, is to Meditate often upon our Lord Jesus Christ, as he did
lie in his Tomb, p. 335. Chap. 17. The fifth Consolation against the Fears of
Death, is to Meditate upon the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, p. 342.
Chap. 18. The sixth Consolation against the Fears of Death, is the Ascension of
Jesus Christ into Heaven, and his sitting at the right hand of God, p. 346.
Chap. 19. The seventh Consolation against the Fears of Death, is our strict and
unseparable union with Jesus Christ, by the means of his Holy Spirit, and the
First Fruits of our Blessed Immortality, p. 357. Chap. 20. The eighth
Consolation, is to consider that Death frees and delivers us from all the Evils
that are in the World, and what we daily suffer, p. 375. Chap. 21. The ninth
Consolation, Death shall deliver us from Sin, which we may see Reigning in the
World, and from the Relics of our Corruption, p. 391. Chap. 22. The tenth
Consolation is the Glory and Happiness of our Souls at their egress out of the
Body, p. 412. Chap. 23. The eleventh Consolation, is the glorious Resurrection
of our Bodies, p. 443. Chap. 24. The twelfth Consolation, is the Destruction of
Death, and the Eternal and most Blessed Life, which we shall enjoy both in Soul
and Body, after our Resurrection, Page 486. The Several Prayers and
Meditations, proper for every condition, the devout Reader shall find at the
end of those Chapters, unto which the Prayers are suitable.
A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS Printed for John Starkey Bookseller, at the Miter in
Fleetstreet near Temple Bar.
DIVINITY.
1. A Discourse of the Freedom of the Will; by Peter Sterry sometime Fellow of
Emanuel College in Cambridge, in folio, price bound 10 s. 2. The Jesuits
Morals, Collected by a Doctor of the College of Sorbon in Paris, who has
faithfully extracted them out of the Jesuits own Books, which are Printed by
the permission and approbation of the Superiors of their Society. Written in
French, and exactly Translated into English, in folio, price bound 10 s. 3. A
Practical and Polemical Commentary or Exposition upon the third and fourth
Chapters of the latter Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy. By Thomas Hall, B. D. in
folio, price bound 10 s. 4. Tetrachordon: Expositions upon the four chief
places in Scripture, which treat of Marriage, or nullities in Marriage. Wherein
the Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce is confirmed by explanation of
Scripture, by testimony of Ancient Fathers, of Civil Laws in the Primitive
Church, of famousest Reformed Divines. And lastly, by an intended Act of the
Parliament, and Church of England, in the last year of Edward the Sixth. The
Author J. Milton, in quarto, price 1 s. 6 d. 5. The Christians Defense against
the Fears of Death, with seasonable Directions how to prepare our selves to Dye
well, Written Originally in French, by the Reverend Divine, of the Protestant
Church at Paris, Char. Drelincourt, and Translated into English by Marius
d'Assigny, in octavo, price bound 6 s. 6. The Living Temple, or the Notion
improved; that A good Man is the Temple of God. By John How, M. A. sometime
Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxon, in octavo, price bound 3 s. 7. A Confutation
of the Millenarian Opinion, plainly demonstrating that Christ will not reign
visibly and personally upon Earth, with the Saints for 1000 years, either
before the day of Judgment, in the day of Judgment, or after it. By Tho. Hall,
B. D. price bound 1 s.
PHYSIC.
8. Basilica Chymica and Praxis Chimiatricae, or Royal and Practical Chemistry;
augmented and enlarged, by John Hartman. To which is added his Treatise of
Signatures of internal things, or a true and lively Anatomy of the greater and
lesser World. As also the Practice of Chemistry of John Hartman, M. D.
Augmented and enlarged by his Son, with considerable Additions; all faithfully
Englished, by a Lover of Chemistry, price bound 10 s. 9. The Art of Chemistry,
as it is now practiced. Written in French by P. Thybault, Chemist to the French
King, and Englished by W. A. Doctor in Physic, and Fellow of the Royal
Society, in octavo, price bound 3 s. 10. Medicina instaurata, or a brief
Account of the true Grounds and Principles of the Art of Physic, with the
insufficiency of the vulgar way of preparing Medicines, and the Excellency of
such as are made by Chemical Operation. By Edward Bolnest, Med. Land. in
octavo, price bound 1 s. 11. Aurora Chymica, or a rational way of preparing
Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals for a Physical Use. by which preparations
they are made most efficacious, safe, and pleasant Medicines, for the
preservation of the life of Man. By Edward Bolnest. Med. Reg. Ord. in octavo,
price bound 1 s. 6 d. 12. The Surgeons Storehouse, furnished with forty
three Tables cut in Brass, in which are all sorts of Instruments both Ancient
and Modern; useful to the performance of all Manual Operations; with an exact
description of every Instrument, together with one hundred choice Observations
of famous Cures performed, with three Indexes; 1. Of the Instruments; 2. Of
Cures performed; 3. Of things remarkable. Written in Latin by Johannes
Scultetus a famous Physician and Surgeon of Vlme in Suevia, and faithfully
Englished by E. B. Dr. of Physic; in octavo, price bound 8 s.
LAW.
13. An Abridgment of diverse Cases and Resolutions of the Common Law,
alphabettically digested under several Titles. By Henry Rolls, Sergeant at Law,
published by the Lord Chief Justice Hales, and approved by all the Judges, in
folio, price bound 40 s. 14. The Reports of that famous Lawyer Henry Roll,
Sergeant at Law, sometime Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, of diverse Cases in
the Law adjudged in the time of King James, approved by all the Judges, in
folio, price bound 16 s. 15. The Reports of Sir George Crook Knight, in three
Volumes, in English: allowed of by all the Judges. The second Edition,
carefully Corrected by the Original, in folio, price bound 45 s. 16. The first
part of the Institutes of the Laws of England; or a Commentary upon Littleton;
Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke, the eighth Edition in folio, price
bound 18 s. 17. The second part of the Institutes of the Laws of England,
containing the exposition of Magna Charta, and many ancient and other Statues.
Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke. Third Edition, with an Alphabetical
Table added, in folio, price bound 14 s. 18. The third part of the Institutes
of the Laws of England, concerning High Treason, and other Pleas of the Crown,
and Criminal Causes. The fourth Edition. Written by the Lord Chief Justice
Coke, in folio, price bound 6 s. 19. The fourth part of the Institutes of the
Laws of England, concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts: Written by the Lord
Chief Justice Coke. The fourth Edition, with an Alphabetical Table not
heretofore printed, in folio, price bound 9 s. 20. Brief Animadversions on,
Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records to the fourth part of the
Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the Jurisdictions of Courts, by
Will. Prynne Esquire; in folio, price bound 12 s. 21. Thesaurus Brevium, or a
Collection of approved Forms of all sorts of Original and Judicial Writs in the
Kings Bench, with their special directions, by J. C. in folio, price bound 6 s.
22. Brevia Judicialia, or an exact Collection of approved Forms of all sorts of
Judicial Writs in the Common-Bench, together with their Returns: by Rich.
Brownlow, in folio, price bound 12 s. 23. The History of Gavel-kind; with the
Etymology thereof, containing a Vindication of the Laws of England, together
with a short History of William the Conqueror. By Silas Tailor, in quarto,
price bound 3 s. 24. The Complete Solicitor, performing his Duty, and teaching
his Client to run through; and manage his own business, as well in His
Majesty's Superior Courts at Westminster, as in the Mayors Court, Court of
Hustings, and other Inferior Courts in the City of London, and elsewhere. The
fourth Edition, in octavo, price bound 3 s. 6 d. 25. Action upon the Case for
Slander, or a Methodical Collection of thousands of Cases in the Law; of what
words are Actionable, and what not. By William Shepherd Esquire; in octavo, price
bound 2 s. 6 d. 26. An exact Abridgement in English, of the Cases reported by
Sir Francis Moor Knight, with the Resolution of the Points of the Law therein
by the Judges. By W. Hughes, in octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 27. An exact
Abridgement of all the Statutes in Force and Use, made in the 16, 17, and 18 of
King Charles the First; and the 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 of King Charles the
Second. By William Hughes Esquire; in octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 28. The
Touchstone of Wills, Testaments, and Administrations, being a Compendium of
Cases and Resolutions touching the same, carefully Collected out of the
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Canon Laws, as also out of the Customs, Common Laws,
and Statutes of this Kingdom. By G. Meriton in twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d.
29. A Guide for Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of
Highways, Treasurers of the County Stock, Masters of the House of Correction,
Baylifs of Manors, Toll-takers in Fairs, etc. showing the extent and power of
the several Offices; the third Edition enlarged, Collected by George Meriton in
twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d.
HISTORY.
30. The Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holstein's Ambassador into Moscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, began in the year 1633. and finished in 1639. containing a
complete History of those Countries; whereunto are added, the Travels of
Mandelslo, from Persia into the East Indies, began in 1638. and finished in
1640. The whole Illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures. Written
originally by Adam Olearius; Secretary to the Embassy. Englished by J. Davis,
the second Edition, in folio, price bound 20 s. 31. The Works of the Famous
Nicholas Machiavil, Citizen and Secretary of Florence; containing the History
of Florence, the Prince, the Original of the Guelf, and Ghibilin, the Life of
Castruccio Castracani, the Murder of Vitelli, etc. by Duke Valentino, the
State of France, the State of Germany, the Discourses on Titus Livius, the Art
of War, the Marriage of Belphegor: Nicholas Machiavels Letter in vindication of
himself and his Writings: all from the true Original newly and faithfully
translated into English, in folio, price bound 18 s. 32. I Ragguagli di
Parnasso, or Advertisements from Parnassus, in two Centuries, with the Politic
Touchstone. Written Originally in Italian by that famous Roman Trajano
Bocalini, Englished by the Earl of Monmouth, in folio, price bound 8 s. 33. The
present State of the Ottoman Empire, in three Books; containing the Maxims of
the Turkish Polity, their Religion and Military Discipline, illustrated with
diverse Figures. Written by Paul Ricaut Esquire; late Secretary to the English
Ambassador there, now Conful of Smyrna. The Fourth Edition, in octavo, price
bound 6 s. 34. The History of Barbados, St. Christophers, Mevis, St. Vincents,
Antego, Martinico, Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all
twenty eight; in two Books, containing the Natural and Moral History of those
Islands: illustrated with diverse pieces of Sculpture, representing the most
considerable Rarities therein described, in folio, price bound 10 s. 35. The
History of the Affairs of Europe in this present Age, but more particularly of
the Republic of Venice. Written in Italian by Battista Nani Cavalier, and
Procurator of St. Mark. Englished by Sir Robert Honywood Knight, in folio,
price bound 14 s. 36. Il Cardinalisimo di Santa Chiesa, or the History of the
Cardinals of the Roman Church, from the time of their first Creation, to the
Election of the late Pope Clement IX. with a full account of his Conclave, in
three parts. Written in Italian by the Author of the Nipotismo di Roma, and
faithfully Englished, in folio, price bound 8 s. 37. The World Surveyed, or the
famous Voyages and travels of Vincent le Blanc, of Marseilles, into the East
and West Indies, Persia, Pegu, Fez, Morocco, Guinney, and through all Africa,
and the principal Provinces of Europe; in folio, price bound 10 s. 38. The
History of the Life and Death of William Laud, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
containing the Ecclesiastical History of the Three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, from his first rising, viz. 1621. to his Death 1644. By
P. Heylin, D. D. in folio, price bound 10 s. 39. A brief Account of Mr.
Valentine Greatrakes, the famous Stroker, and diverse of the strange Cures by
him lately performed. Written by himself to the Honorable Robert Boil; in
quarto, price stitched 1 s. 40 The Memoirs of Philip de Comines, Lord of
Argenton; containing the History of Lewis, XI. and Charles VIII. Kings of
France; with the most remarkable occurrences in their particular Reigns, from
the year 1464. to 1498. Revised and Corrected from diverse Manuscripts, and
ancient Impressions, by Denis Godefray, Councellor and Historiographer to the
French King, and from his Edition lately Printed at Paris, newly Translated
into English, in octavo, price bound 6 s. 41. A Relation of Three Embassies,
from His Majesty Charles the Second, to the Great Duke of Moscovy, the King of
Sweden, and the King of Denmark, performed by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Carlisle, in the year 1663, and 1664. Written by an Attendent on the Embassies;
in octavo, price bound 4 s. 42. Il Nipotismo di Roma, or the History of the
Popes Nephews, from the time of Sixtus the Fourth, 1471. to the Death of the
late Pope Alexander the Seventh, 1667. Written in Italian, and Englished by W.
A. Fellow of the Royal Society; the second Edition, in octavo, price bound 3 s.
43. A Relation of the Siege of Candia, from the first Expedition of the French
Forces, to its Surrender, the 27th of September 1669. Written in French by a
Gentleman who was a Voluntier in that Service, and faithfully Englished; in
octavo, price bound 1 s. 44. The History of Algiers, and its Slavery, with an
account of that City, and many remarkable particulars of Africa. Written by
Sieur d' Aranda, sometime a Slave there; Englished by J. Davies, in octavo,
price bound 3 s. 45. An Historical and Geographical Description of the great
Country and River of the Amazones in America, with an exact Map thereof.
Translated out of French; in octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 46. The Secret
History of the Court of the Emperor Justinian. Written by Procopius of Cesarea,
faithfully rendered into English, in octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 47. The
Novels of the Famous Don Francisco de Quevedo Villegas, Knight of the Order of
St. James, whereunto is added, the Marriage of Belphegor, an Italian Novel:
Translated from Machiavel: faithfully Englished; in octavo, price bound 1 s. 6
d. 48. The History of the late Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogul;
together with the most considerable passages for five years following, in that
Empire, with a new Map of it; to which is added, an account of the extent of
Indostan, the Circulation of the Gold and Silver of the World to discharge it
self there, as also the Riches, Forces, and Justice of the same, and the
principal cause of the decay of the States of Asia; by Monsieur F. Bernier,
Physician of the Faculty of Montpelier. Englished out of French, by H. O.
Secretary to the Royal Society, in two Parts, in octavo, price bound 7 s. 49.
The Amors of certain Great Men, and famous Philosophers; written in French,
and Englished by J. D. in octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 50. Deceptio Visus, or
Seeing and Believing are two things, a pleasant Spanish History; faithfully
Translated, in octavo, price bound 2 s. 51. The History of France, under the
Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine, viz. from the Death of King Lewis XIII. to the
year 1664. wherein all the Affairs of State to that time are exactly related By
Benjamin Priolo, and faithfully Englished by Christopher Wase, Gent. in octavo,
price bound 4 s. 52. The History of the Twelve Caesar's, Emperors of Rome.
Written in Latin, by C. Suetonius Tranquillus, newly Translated into English,
and Illustrated with all the Caesar's Heads in Copper Plates, in octavo, price
bound 5 s. 53. The Annals of Love, containing select Histories of the Amors of
diverse Princes Courts, pleasantly related. By a person of Honor, in eight
Parts, in octavo, price bound 3 s. 6 d. 54. Anew Voyage into the Northern
Countries, being a Description of the Manners, Customs, Superstition,
Buildings, and Habits of the Norwegians, Laplanders, Kilops, Borandiens,
Siberians, Samojedes, Zemblans, and Islanders, in twelves, price bound 1 s. 55.
The present State of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, as to the
Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue, and Territory of
the Dutch. Collected out of diverse Authors, by W. A. Fellow of the Royal
Society; the second Edition, in twelves, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 56. The Present
State of France, containing the Orders, Dignities, and Charges of that Kingdom.
Newly corrected, and put into a better method than formerly. Written in French,
and faithfully Englished, in twelves, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 57 The present
State of the Princes and Republics of Italy. The second Edition enlarged, with
the manner of Election of Popes, and a Character of Spain. Written Originally
in English; by J. Gailhard, Gent. in twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 58. The
Policy and Government of the Venetians, both in Civil and Military Affairs.
Written in French by the Sieur de la Hay, and faithfully Englished, in twelves,
price bound 1 s. 59 The Voyage of Italy, or a complete journey through Italy,
in two Parts, with the Character of the People, and the description of the
chief Towns, Churches, Palaces, Villas, Gardens, Pictures, Statutes,
Antiquities; as also of the Interest, Government, Riches, Force, etc. of all
the Princes, with Instructions concerning Travel. By Richard Lassels, Gent. who
traveled through Italy five times, as Tutor to several of the English
Nobility, Opus Posthumum, corrected and set forth by his old Friend and
Fellow-Traveller, S. W. never before extant, in twelves, price bound 4 s. 60. A
Relation of the Coasts of Africa called Guinnee, with a Description of the
Countries, Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants, of the Productions of the
Earth, and the Merchandise and Commodities it affords; with some Historical
Observations on the Coasts, being collected in a Voyage made by the Sieur
Villault Escuyer Sieur de Bellefond, in the years 1666, and 1667. Faithfully
Englished. The second Edition, in twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 61. A Relation
of the French King's late Expedition into the Spanish Neatherlands, in the
years 1667, and 1668. with an Introduction discoursing his Title thereunto, and
an account of the Peace between the two Crowns, made May 2. 1667. Englished by
G. H. in twelves, price bound 1 s.
POETRY and PLAYS.
62. The Works of Sir William Davenant Knight, consisting of those which were
formerly Printed, and those which he designed for the Press. Now published out
of the Author's Original Copies, in folio, price bound 24 s. 63. Andronicus
Comnenius, a Tragedy, By John Wilson, in quarto, price stitched 1 s. 64.
Heraclius Emperor of the East, a Tragedy. By Lodowic Carlel Esquire, in quarto,
price stitched 1 s. 65. The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral. By Walter Montague
Esquier, in octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 66. Aminta, the Famous Italian
Pastoral. Translated into English, in octavo; price bound 1 s. 6 d. 67.
Paradise Regained, a Poem in four Books, to which is added Samson Agonistes.
The Author John Milton, in octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d.
MISCELANIES.
68. A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France, upon
Questions of all sorts of Philosophy, and other Natural Knowledge, made in the
Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most ingenious Persons of that
Nation. Englished by G. Havers, in two Volumnes in folio, price bound 30 s. 69.
A Treatise of the Sybils, giving an account of the Names and Numbers of them,
of their Qualities, the Form and matter of their Verses, and of their Books.
Written in French by David Blondel, Englished by J. Davies; in folio, price
bound 8 s. 70. A Justification of the late War against the United Neatherlands,
in two Parts, Illustrated with several Sculptures, by Henry Stubbe, in quarto,
price bound 4 s. 71. Reliquiae Wottonianae, or a Collection of Lives, Letters,
Poems, with Characters of sundry Personages, and other incomparable pieces of
Language and Art, also additional Letters, to several persons not before
Printed. By Sir Henry Wotton, Knight, the third Edition, with large Additions,
in octavo, price bound 6 s. 72. The Golden Calf, in which is handled the most
rare and incomparable wonder of Nature, in transmuting Metals, viz. how the
entire substance of Lead was in one moment transmuted into Gold Obrizon, with
an exceeding small Particle of the true Philosophers Stone, at the Hague in the
year 1666. Written in Latin, by John Frederick Helvetius, Doctor of Medicine
at the Hague, and faithfully Englished, in twelves, price bound 1 s. 73.
Accidence commenced Grammar, and supplied with sufficient Rules; or a new and
easy Method for the Learning of the Latin Tongue. The Author John Milton, in
twelves, price bound 8 d. 74. Tho. Hall's Translation of the Second Book of
Ovid's Metamorphosis Grammatically, in octavo, price bound 1 s. 75. The Rules
of Civility, or certain ways of Deportment observed in France amongst all
persons of Quality, upon several, occasions faithfully Englished, in twelves,
price bound 1 s. 76. The Art of Complaisance, or the means to oblige in
Conversation, in twelves, price bound 1 s. 77. A Letter from a Gentleman of the
Romish Religion, to his Brother, a person of Quality of the same Religion,
persuading him to go to Church, and take those Oaths the Law directs, proving
the lawfulness thereof by arguments not disagreeable to Doctrines of the Roman
Church, in quarto, price stitched 6 d.
Printed March 25. 1675.

FINIS.

