A PLEASANT AND PROFITABLE Treatise of HELL.

WRITTEN By Hieremy Drexelius. S. J.

Fear him that can destroy both Soul and Body into Hell. Matthew. chapter 10. v. 28.
Printed, 1668.

The Translator to the Reader.
I Presume your intent is (I wish the event may correspond) to march on toward
Heaven: Now that you may not miss your way, which is dangerous; I have provided
you of a Guide, which is the Fear of God. You must not begin your journey, but
by his Conduct; nor hope to finish it without erring, unless he go on with you
hand in hand. Be not dismayed, if he lead you through the desert to the Land of
Promise, through Hell to Heaven: for that is his Native Country, whose
passages he is well acquainted with; and from whose desolate shades he is able
to usher you to the comfortable splendor of Paradise. He requires no other
Salary for all his labor in the enterprise, then your serious perusal of this
slender Treatise of Hell. Startle not at this frightful word, least you
discover humane fear to be more prevalent with you, then that of God: If it
chance to be, I fear, at the first sight, you will shrink back, and either not
undertake to read, or quickly cast away the book, with an -- I look for
Novelties to cheer me up, not for sad discourses of Hell to drive me into
Melancholy: or, I have other business, and cannot attend to reading. But with
your good leave, no business concerns you more, then your right progress
toward a blessed Eternity. And it is undoubtedly a principal point of Wisdom,
to go down into Hell alive, by reading, and a lively consideration; as well to
escape going thither after Death, whence there is no return; as also to
vanquish humane fear, which is prejudicial, and beget in your soul a wholesome
fear of God: Without which you can neither begin, nor hold on with success,
your intended journey toward eternal bliss. Lay hold then on this Manual Book,
which if leisurely read, will not a little conduce to attain the chiefest Good,
and avoid the worst of Evils.

Farwell.
A Treatise of Hell.
CHAP. I. The Authors design in this Book, with Advice to the Reader.
LEarnedly spoke Philo the Jew: Lib. de some.
The House of God is the thought of a Wiseman. This House the Eternal Wisdom
enters into, this it Inhabits, in this it sweetly reposes. To see, to speak, to
hear, to write, are humane actions, yet such as are not wholly denied to
Brutes: for Wild-Beasts do likewise hear and see, and herein some of them go
far beyond man himself. Amongst Animals, some are reported to have spoken; unto
the Elephant is ascribed something not unlike to writing: but to think and
discourse with reason, is proper to Man alone. God associates himself to men
whose thoughts are Holy and without spot, and here he abides as in his own
Mansion House: hence flowed that learned saying of Philo, The House of God, is
the thought of a wiseman.

Here now arises the dispute, what is fittest for man to busy his thoughts in,
setting a part his Creator. In this quarrel King David enters the Combat, and
avers, I thought upon old days, and the eternal years I had in mind. Ps. 76.6.
This thought is most profitable; this becomes man, and is not unworthy of God.
Here is discovered a plain of such vast extent to think on, that none was ever
able yet to run it over with thinking. One may seek an end in this matter,
which he shall never find: Eternity knows no end, its not acquainted with any
bounds, and for limits it admits of none: Eternity best deserves to be thought
on.

Ten years ago I exposed a draught of Eternity to the pulick view: it remains
now for us to set before your eyes something as to the eternity of the Damned:
this requires our more serious reflection; it being not sufficient for us to
scrape somewhat from the outsides of it, which may serve us to hear, write, or
talk of; we must proceed further, and lodge Eternity in the very bosom of our
souls. wherefore the task of this Chapter shall be, to declare what we mean,
when we write on the eternity of the Damned.

SECT. 1.
THe wiseman of Rome friendly expostulates with Lucilius in this sort: Sen. ep.
102:
As he is troublesome, who awakes a man from a pleasant Dream, because he
bereaves him of that counterfeit, which yet resembles real pleasure: So thy
Epistle did me wrong, for it took me off once and oftener from considerations
that suited with me. I was well pleased to enquire after, yea and believe too
the eternity of Souls: For well might I believe the Opinions of great men.
Besides I had so much hope, that I now began to be irksome to my self, now I
despised the remnant of my feeble age, as being about to enter into that
immense time, and the possession of all ages: But the receipt of thy Epistle
awakned me, and so I lost my goodly Dream; which, notwithstanding i will to
again, when I have done with thee, and hereby redeem what formerly I lost.

I am almost now of that Opinion, which Flavius Lucius Dexter of Bar^inona, an
ancient Historian, one who had Command in the Eastern Empire, and an intimate
friend to St. Hierom, delivers in a Chronicle of his at the year of Christ our
Savior sixty four in these express words: Lucius Annaeus Seneca native of
Cordova in Spain, by intercourse of Letters betwixt him and St. Paul, had a
good Opinion of Christian Religion, became a Christian privately, and is
believed to have been his Disciple; to whom he writ with much feeling during
his abode in Spain.

For my part I affirm nothing in this particular, but reverence the testimony
of the Ancient Chronicler: Yet certain it is, Annaeus Seneca did not only begin
to think of, but likewise to believe an Eternity. We may observe this man's
deep-searching Wit; he attempted, and went on most attentively to weigh
Eternity in its proper Balance: The contemplation whereof he compares to a
Dream, which lulls asleep the toylsome watches of the outward senses, and
commands the inward to keep strict Sentinel. This, this is to meditate, and to
be withdrawn from this, Annaeus was much unwilling; in regard this kind of
meditation proved so beneficial to him, as himself declares saying: I contemned
the small residue of my life, and stretched my self forward into that Volume of
Ages never to be unfoulded.

Seneca by this time had a loathing of all things, if compared to the sole
possession of that never ending Circle of times. When Heathens meditate in this
manner upon Eternity, what does it behove us Christians to do? Our belief of
Eternity is bootless, if we seldom or tepedly think on it. Many are the
reasons which may move us daily to meditate upon eternity: take this one in
lieu of many: Eternity mollifies our hearts when they are as hard as flint and
Steel; it quite vanquisheth all the stubbornness of our Soul. That man is lost
whom Eternity does not draw to a better life; he may take his course, he may
perish, who is in such a dead-sleep, as this dreadful thunder cannot awake him.

Here one may object: The Flames of Hellfire may well be cast in their way,
who run amain toward Hell: why do you with them terrify those, that are daily
longing after Heaven; that abstain from sin not so much for fear of punishment,
as for love of God? What need these so frequently to contemplate those flames
eternal? They need very much. Wherefore I shall lay down three documents,
whereunto we are concerned often to look back in this ensuing discourse.

SECT. 2.
THe first Document is: All Holy men are partakers of no small comfort by this
contemplation of Hell: for whilst they assuredly trust themselves to be out of
the reach of those scorching heats, their hearts even leap for joy; accompanied
with most amorous thanksgiving, most profound contempt of themselves, and a
most ample extolling of the Divine bounty. But for as much, as men of an
upright conscience do slip and have their faylings, therefore Eternity ever and
anon plucks them, as it were by the sleeve, and says: -- Beware, look to thy
self, thou art not yet shot free: thou know not whether in Gods favor thou
shall give up thy Ghost: Final perseverance is a mere gift of God, a mere
Grace, which we are not able by any actions of our own to merit: in this point
it is not lawful to call God our debtour, he stands disingaged to every one. If
then God deny to bestow this grace upon thee, thou art utterly undone for ever.

This serves as a strong bridle to every good man; since we are not ignorant,
that diverse have served God, some forty, some fifty years, some longer; and yet
have sustained the loss of their former Holiness by a sinful end; witness that
unfortunate Hero, of whom Cassian makes mention. This, if seriously weighed,
may stir up in each ones soul many pious affections.

The second Document is: Wheresoever an attentive meditation of Eternity
preceds, there must needs follow a great care, a fervor of spirit, and a
wonderful exactness in doing all our works. This cogitation alone teaches
manifestly, that we owe all to God, as to our Sovereign Lord; and that we can
never serve him so worthily, as we ought; but must needs acknowledge, that what
ever we do is not answerable to, but far below so great a Majesty. This same
consideration of Eternity puts us in mind of the present condition of our life;
and withal warns us, that now it is time to take pains in erning repose without
end; that years eternal will ensue, in which we may neither labor, nor merit
any thing at all.

I remember to have read, and that with admiration, of a certain man, who
framed this conceit of Eternity: What living man (said he to himself) endowed
with reason, and in his wits, would lay claim to the Kingdom of France, Spain,
Poland, such wealthy Dominions as these, upon condition, that before he came to
be absolute Lord of them, he should lie with his face upward upon a delicate
bed of Roses for forty years together? It may so fall out, that some one may be
found overjoyed with the bargain, and so may begin to throw himself upon that
soft and well-sented lodging: yet questionless he will not continue his posture
for the space of three whole years, but will forthwith depart from the former
agreement, and say, Let me rise, I would be deprived of three, yea all Kingdoms
rather, then be constrained to lie continually, as I consented to do, upon
never so soft a bed.

And does the matter stand even thus? Will no one of Reason, if he might enjoy
three Kingdoms, take up his quarters, as aforesaid, during the space of thirty
or forty years? what raging madness then, and blind folly is it, for trifles,
for toys, for bables to will and do that, for which thou may be tormented
upon a hot-glowing-Grid-iron not for forty, nor four hundred, nor four
thousand, nor yet four hundred thousand years, but for all Eternity? If
therefore we provide not for our selves and affairs while we have time and
space, we are worse then mad, and something more then Furies has seized on us.

SECT. 3.
THe third Document: I wish I could but obtain this one favor of all who read
these things, that they would accustom themselves to make use of two sorts of
Spectacles; the one Purple-coloured, the other blew; this later is to be used
in this manner: whenever matters go well with us, when the Body, Soul, or
both, are well disposed; as often as comely and beautiful Objects are
represented to the sight, or harmonious concent tickles the Ears. or
delightful attractives charm the taste, or Sabaean Odours satiare the Nostrils,
or things of smoothest temper flatter our touching, or in brief, when ever any
thing contributes to our delight, pleasure or satisfaction; then, then is the
time to lay hold of our Sky-colored Spectacle, and reason thus with our
selves: Behold, this pleases, that satisfies, the other gives content; but what
is all this compared to the Eternity of the Blessed? what is this drop of Honey
to that Sea of Delights in Heaven? Wherefore do I debar my self from that Ocean
of Pleasures above, by gathering scattered drops here below? O cast an eye up
then toward that blessed Eternity; aspire thither, where there is all plenty
of pleasure, that either is or may be imagined.

Amongst Banquets and sporting, yea amidst great variety of Dainties, this
Discourse may be serviceable unto us. This Secret of Art may be made use of,
when we are soothed by any kind of Complacence whatever. Lo, this is the right
use of the Azure Spectacle; to raise the mind from things present and terrene,
to those to be met with hereafter in Heaven: by this means we may be moderate
amongst allurements to excess, and environed with Pleasures may pass without
peril.

But now on the contrary, when we are not well at ease, when pain Arrests the
Body, when sadness seizes on the Soul; upon occasion of what Corrasive or
Affliction soever, take into your hand your Purple Glass, and speak to your
self as follows: Does this vex thee, so much, does that Torture thee so far,
as almost to make thee Frantic? Yet what a Flea-biting is this, if thou regard
the Eternity of the Damned? Look down and take a view of Hell: what ever here
molesteth by Sufferings, Crosses or Disasters, is and may be reputed one of the
choicest Felicities on Earth, if we but lend an eye to those never ending
Torments beneath.

Wherefore then do thou burden Heaven and Earth with idle Complaints? This
both discovers thy Impatience and Folly: It Is clear, thou know not what Hell
is, otherwise these Complaints would cease. After all this thou tellest me thy
Miseries are many, thy Callamities intolerable. What? For want of house-room,
art thou enforced to lie in a Stall? But the Damned are confined to
Swine-sties, which are replenished with Fire and unsufferable stench for ever.
What? Hunger and thirst frequently pinch thee? Know, that there is neither
crumm of Bread, or drop of water to assuage either; they hunger, they thirst,
and that for ever. What? Thou swimmest in thine own tears, through sharpness of
Affliction? Even this, if thou will, may be turned into consolation. There is
Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth for ever. What? Thy Enemies weary thee out,
envious and slanderous people make havack of thy good name? Yet what is this to
Hell? where the most hateful company of the Devils and Damned must be endured
for ever? What? sadness and cares pine thee away? But there despair
everlastingly will rent thy heart a sunder. To make short; if here the hardness
of lodging hinder thy repose: there an abyss of Flames will encompass thee on
every side, without hope of one sole minute of rest for Eternity.

Who so employes these Spectacles, will not grumble though evils in their
height rush in upon him: things burdensome and ungrateful may befall others,
but what ever happens to him is welcome and easily supported, while he cries
out -- O my God, All these Afflictions, which have an end, are tolerable, are
pleasing, yea and a Paradise too, when I remember the endless miseries of the
Reprobate.

SECT. 4.
THese kind of Spectacles have ever been, and are still in request with men of
renowned Sanctity, St. Gregory ownes so much, When (says he) I renew the
memory of Job sitting on the Dunghill, of John almost famisht in the Wilderness,
of Peter hanging on a Cross, of James beheaded by Herod's sword: I think, how
severely hereafter he will chastise the Reprobate, since here he handles so
sharply those whom he loves: If bosome-friends he so dealt with during the time
of favor, what will become of Enemies in time of Fury and Revenge?

Out of experience in trifles (says St. Tom. 5. ep. 5.
Chrysostom) a scantling may be taken as to matters of moment. If at any time
you have been in a Bath too hot, or been scorcht with a burning Fever; step
down to Hell, and then you will clearly perceive, that if a Bath or Fever be
so terrible and afflictive to us; what shall we do when we shall fall into that
Fiery Flood which issues from that Dreadful Tribunal? certainly we shall whet
our teeth through excess of pain, wherein we shall find no releif.

Now that we may not err in the right use of these Glasses take to your
consideration one only night, passed over without Sleep or quiet, either
through Troubles and cares which Goar the mind, or by reason of the Stone, the
Gout, the Griping of the Gutts, or Tooth-ake, which rack the body: O what a
night is this! how long? how painful? But tell me, what if we were to abide
these Pangs, for one, ten, an hundred, a thousand, a Million of years? what if
world without end?

Take likewise into your consideration what ever sad, wretched, horrible, or
cruel has been, or shall be to the worlds end, and compare it with that of
Hell, Tom. 4. hom. 9. ad Cor.
and you will be constrained to say with St. Chrysostom: All we suffer here is
mere matter of Laughter and Pastime, in comparison of their sufferings: because
these are temporal; there their worm dies not, neither is their fire quenched.
Imagine if you please the torments caused by Sword, Fire, Beasts: Alas! these
are not so much as a shadow to the other. You may look upon Executioners
appointed by Magistrates for the punishing of Malefactors, how they Hale and
Drag Offenders, how they tear in pieces with Scourges, how they thrust them
through the bodies, how they make the living Fuel for the merciless flames.
When this is sum'd together, what is it? a Play-game, a sporting fit, to theirs
in Hell: For these have an end, those endure for Eternity.

In all things as well pleasing as displeasing to sense, we are to take our
prospective in hand, otherwise that only will appear to be great, which is near
at hand; pain and pleasure present will have power to move, things to come, as
far distant, will be of no force with us. Therefore in all things we See, Hear,
Smell, Taste and Touch, these Prospectives are useful for a further discovery.
Hom. 2. ep. 1. 2d Thessal.


SECT. 5.
IF any thing (says St. Chrysostom) in this life seem to thee of estimation
and value, cast up an eye to Heaven, and it will become vile; if any thing seem
terrible, think on Hell and it will be ridiculous. If at any time lust of the
body assail thee, think the pleasure of that sin to be of no value, nor to
deserve the name of pleasure: For if the fear of laws on earth have power to
restrain us from impiety and wickedness; how much more forcible will the memory
of things to come be, as, a never dying torment, a perpetual rack? If we dread
an earthly King, and so forgo many crimes; what effect with us should the
terror of an eternal Sovereign obtain? How then shall we conserve in our
selves a continual fear? if we give ear constantly to what is written: For if
the apparition of a dead man strike us so much, how much more should those
unquenchable flames do* who carries a daily remembrance of Hell, does not
easily fall into it.

Phalaris Bull was formerly reputed an horrid torment; its rise was in this
manner. Phalaris being Tyrant of Agrigentine in Cicily, a skilful artisan
framed a Brazen Bull, into which when any were cast, and fire made underneath,
their cries resembled the Bellowing of a Bull. The hansel of this cruel
invention was first bestowed upon the Inventor of it. Into this Prison of Fire
and Brass was St. Eustachius thrown, together with Theopiste his Wise and
Children, where they finished a glorious Martyrdom. Their Torments you might
call Hell; but O mild, O short Hell! we are most sensible of what our selves
feel, and therefore upon every occasion of trial we may say -- what is this to
Hell, what to Eternity? Go too then, and suffer willingly. Much skill is
required to meditate rightly on these things, before they come to pass.

CHAP. II. Darkness the first Torment of Eternity in Hell.
IN these Countries, which we inhabit, the nights are longest in Winter, and
shortest in Summer. Yet it may so happen, that to some one a Summers night may
seem longer, then one in Winter. How long must that night needs be, which in a
few hours made that Head hoaty, which was black before? This truth is made out
as well by witness of credit, as experience. Didacus Osorius by the King of
Spain being imprisoned at Sevil, through grief in one nights space became white
like Snow: at such an Exchange, Martial admiting sings -- One night, how long
ere thou be gone?
Thou youth and old age joyn'st in one.


More truly may I say: O night how long art thou, which brings not old age, but
Death a thousand times, and oftener! Such nights are in Hell, where the wretches
are ever a dying, and never dead indeed. Alas! the night is long, which exceeds
a year, and extends it self beyond the limits of an age. That night is
excessive long, after which never day appears; that night is full of Horror,
which is enveloped in eternal darkness: with such night, with such obscurity as
this, does God revenge himself of his enemies; whose dwelling is remote from
Sun, Moon and Stars: Job. 3.
A darksome hurlwind possesses their night; it is not counted in the days of
the year, nor numbered in the Months: Darkness and the shadow of death obscure
it, a mist possesses it, and it is wrapped in bitterness. The Damned neither
see, nor ever shall see their Maker, for whose sight nevertheless they were
made. This darkness is their first Torment, of which

SECT. 1
THere be two kinds; one called utter darkness or of body, the other of the
mind or inner darkness. Those far surpass that of Egypt, though never so
horrid and palpable. Fire burns in Hell, but gives no light: so that all are
shut up in a darksome Prison.

Elegantly speaks St. Ad Theod. laps.
Chrysostom of this punishment saying: We shall all mourn most sadly, when the
Fire with vehemence oppresses us: We shall see none, besides those who are
fellows in damnation, and a vast sollitude. Who can express what dreadful
frights will arise from this darkness? As that fire has no power to consume, so
it cannot shine; otherwise there would be no darkness: which brings upon those
Inhabitants Fear, Trembling, Solitude, and a numness with amazement.

As for inward darkness, which Schoolmen term Pain of loss, or a privation of
the sight of God; this is so great a punishment, that none greater can be
inflicted: For as to see God is bliss it self, and the top of Felicity, so to
be deprived of the vision of God for ever, is the chiefest pain of the Damned;
whence arises in their wills a mavelous kind of sorrow.

The Faulcon, while his eyes are covered with the hood, flies neither after
Duck nor Mallard, Heron, nor other Prey: but so soon as the hood is plucked off
and he espies his game, to the persuit whereof he is carried by Nature, it is not
facil to keep him quiet on the Fist, he baits, he strives to break the Lures,
and is in danger either to hurt himself, or weary his Faulconer; so violently
is he carried after the Fowl he once sets Eye on.

Not unlike to this is man's condition: While we live in this world, we seem to
be hoodwinkt, we walk in darkness. Hence it is no marvail, that we are not
ravished with desire to see God: there is a veil betwixt him and us, which takes
off our eagerness: but immediately after Death has rent the Veil, and the souls
at liberty from bodily contagion, it being now placed in the vast extent of
Eternity, and put into possession of its freedom, will forthwith be carried
away with such violence toward its Creator, that of all Torments, this will be
greatest, to be but one sole minute debarred from the fruition of God. What
then will it be, to be divorced for all Eternity from the beloved Center of
Bounty? the very height of bliss is to see God: which King David prudently
weighing says, Ps. 16.15
I shall be filled, when they Glory shall appear: The extract then of all
miseries will it be, for ever to be banished the presence of God.

SECT. 2.
Every loss is so much the greater, by how much the greater good it deprives us
of. It Is a great Fine to be enforced to pay ten thousand Crowns, twenty or
thirty is greater, but above all is an hundred thousand: Yet this is far
exceeded by another damage, which robs one of many Millions of Gold, yea of all
Treasures too, during life. Such a mulct as this is that penalty of darkness,
which at one stroke divides from all good, not only for life, but O! for all
Eternity.

Here St. Chrysostom astonished In this point (says) if you mention a thousand
Hells, Tom. 5. ad pop.
you come short of the grief a Soul endures by her separation from Heaven.
Hell, I must confess, is intolerable; yet far more unsufferable is it to lose
the Inheritance of Bliss. Let this matter serve to busy thy thoughts in. Tom.
2. in Matt.
He inculcates the same in another place. A thousand hells put into one scale,
weigh nothing, to the being exild from Glory, to the being hated of Christ, and
hearing from him, I know you not.

Every tree that does not yield good Fruit, Matt. 3.10.
shall be cut down, and cast into the fire. Here is a double punishment of the
Tree: To be cut down, and cast into the fire. A tree were more gently dealt
with, if it were singed with fire, then if it were so grubbed up by the roots,
that hereafter you may despair to have it either flourish or bring forth fruit.
The like is man's case in this particular, whose pain would be milder to undergo
those scorching heats, then to be for ever banished from the Face of God.

A semblance, or shadow of what I say, may be met with even in this life: Such
as have grievously sinned against God, are sometimes scourged with a twofold
whip: The first of pain; so Antiochus and Herod yet alive, burst out into
swarms of Vermin, as if they had been dead Carcasses, or rotten Cheese,
certainly they were smitten by God. The second is the scourge of Anguish or
sadness, whereby all solace is taken from the offender, who by this time finds
no comfort in God. This is an ante-past, or foretast of Hell: whereof
notwithstanding eminent Saints have had their share: Therefore Holy David cries
out Cast me not away from thy face: turn not away thy face from me. Now as it
fares both with Saints and Sinners, who even in this life taste of the pain of
Sense and Loss, that they may be informed what passes in Hell: So those whose
wickedness hurls them down thither, groan under the heavy burden of both kinds
of punishment, and shall see no light for ever.

SECT. 3.
ANy one mortal sin is sufficient to make us lose this blessed Vision of God:
for, as the Master of Divines delivers, who ever commits a mortal sin, turns
away his will from his last end, and thereby deserves never to attain that end,
for which he was created. Long ago was the Sentence pronounced against thse,
Matt. 7.23.
Depart from me all ye that work Iniquity. This is a most grievous punishment,
which by man's Fault is yet much increased: as will appear by the following
example.

A certain person might have been possessed of an Inheritance worth ten thousand
Crowns, but through a sloathful carelessness lets the time slip, and so falls
short of it. When it is too late, he perceives what a Fat Morfel has escaped him;
whereupon he storms, he rages, he is ready to tear himself in pieces; and
sometimes by violence of grief dies indeed. This same happens to each one of
the Damned; I might, says he, grace was not wanting, I was called upon: I
might, Alas! I might, it was in my power, but I would not. I am justly excluded
from that Sovereign Good, and for ever I shall not behold light, because I
would not behold it.

A grief it is not to be expressed, for one to call to mind, how through his own
fault he is deprived of so great a good. Wonder not, this cannot be expressed;
for since our thoughts cannot dive into those hidden joys of Heaven; since we
comprehend not what it is to see God; no marvail we do not set a sufficient
estimate upon the loss of it. An Infant, when the Patents die, knows not what
it loses by their death: therefore it neither sighs nor weeps. Thus we do, when
we sin: we little know, poor wretches! what Treasures we cast away.

None in this life is overwhelmed with such extreme Miseries, but he may find
some slender space to breath in. Besides we have no exact knowledge how affairs
stand in the World to come. Hence you may perchance find some one who, with
Gilimer King of the Wandals, will laugh under a great burden of evils. But
know, all Laughter is banished from hell.

In every mortal crime, Aversion and Conversion are chiefly considerable. To
speak with Divines, he that sins, averts himself from the Creator, and
converts himself to the Creature: which is a twofold injury to God: To aversion
therefore corresponds the pain of loss, as to conversion that of sense; this
yields to the other so much, that he, who felt the first alone, would be far
from laughing, would have Hell enough in that one pain of loss. Genesis 4. chapter 14.


Wicked Cain anciently made this grievous complaint: Lo thou do cast me out
this day from the face of the Earth, and from thy face shall I be hid. And yet
there was hope he might return to the state of Grace. What shall I say now of
those Captives in Hell? they are cast out from the face of the Earth, they are
hid from the Divine Countenance. God has now done, what he formerly threatened
he would do: he has forsaken them, he has hid his face from them, they are left
to be devoured; all evil and Affliction is come upon them; the greatest whereof
is, They are cast out from the Face of God. This which Holy David with iterated
Vows besought God, might never befall him, is now their Lot; they are cast
away, never to be admitted to favor again.

He needs must have matter of excessive grief, who, being ready to be Anointed
King, should upon a sudden be hurried away, and made fellow-prisoner with
Theives. Look upon Nabuchod^n^ser, the worlds terror, seated under the Canopy
of Glory, from whence he was thrown headlong to be a Companion to Bruits,
amongst them to learn how to play the Beast, who had acted his part so ill
amongst men. Behold King Sedecias snatched from his Royal Throne, whom, it was
not thought sufficient to bereave of all the gifts of Fortune, unless he were
deprived of both his eyes too. Then was verified that of Boethius, The greatest
part of misery is to remember one has been happy. No otherwise shall the Damned
be haled away into Infernal Dens for Eternity, when they might have been
elevated as Kings amongst the blessed; never to have the least sense of any
evil, always to be in the perfect fruition of the chiefest good. The loss of
this may rightly be termed a loss, and such an one as can never be worthily
deplored, because never to be recovered.

SECT. 4.
What other Petition should one that wants his sight make, Luke 18.41.
but that of the blind man? Lord that I may see? In case one damned might have
leave to ask some one of the Joys of Heaven, he would ask none else but this
Let me see God. I covet not a place more pleasant, I am not ambitious of better
company, I do not refuse to abide still in these Flames, only -- Let me see
God. But this no Law permits, Still I crave, at least after a thousand years
let my suite be granted. This is by no means lawful. I am content with a denial
till ten thousand years be expired: Neither will this be allowed. O that I
might after twenty thousand years obtain my request! That will by no means be
granted. At least after fifty thousand years let my Petition take effect. Nor
this neither. Ah! when a hundred thousand are come and gone, then -- Let me see
God. The Laws of God are opposite to this, as well as the former. O that my
Prayer might be heard, when a hundred thousand thousand years are past! Here
may nothing be obtained, it is in vain to sue for favor, the Gate of Grace is
shut, the entrance to Heaven is close locked, God thou shall never see: Psalm. 48.
He shall not see light for ever.

Ponder this well (says St. Chrysostom): Let us consider I beseech you, and
weigh maturely, what difference there is betwixt these sober matters, and our
Bables and Toys. If a man had used his utmost endeavors, and left no wind
unsailed, that he might compass Honors, Riches, or a beloved Espouse, and in
this persuite had spared neither Labor nor Charges, till all things were in a
readiness to Solemnize the Nuptials, and then another should unexpectedly step
between him and home: were not this enough to force the poor man off his
Senses? Here Shame and Loss meet to his Destruction, which must be endured; or
he must shake hands with fury, or clash with his opposer.

Couple me now this man thus frustrate of his hope, with another buried in
everlasting darkness; and you will find a palpable difference: that may remove
his quarters, chase other Honors, and win a new Espouse; but this can neither
change place, nor escape his torments, he is wholly void of hope and most
desperate for ever. Nevertheless he is forced to acknowledge that God was
careful of him, God called him many times into his way again; but he slighted
the Call, and refused to follow his guide. He knows right well wherefore he was
Created, wherefore by Christ redeemed, wherefore Baptized, whitherto invited:
hither forsooth that he would vouchsafe to come, and mount the Throne of Glory
in that blessed Kingdom, where he might live eternally in the embracements of
his Creator. But I, says he to himself, am in fault, I neglected, I plunged
my self into these dreadful flames: whereupon my pain, fury and confusion is
horrible, is immense. Esaias exclaims: Esa. 32.
Darkness and palpableness are made upon the Denns for ever.

Thus much the Devils themselves acknowledge, when they are upbraided in
possessed persons: O miserable wretches, you shall never see God. Whereat they
will fume, fret, gnash the teeth, and by uncouth motions of the body manifest
in some sort how incredibly they are tortured upon that sole account.

SECT. 5.
CHrist our Lord briefly explicates his most blessed Vision of God, when he
teaches all the felicity of Angels to consist therein: Mart. 18
They always de see the face of my Father. When in a Sermon he expounded that
Parable of the Kings Marriage, he concludes it with this saying of the King:
chapter 22.
Cast him into the utter darkness. In the Hebrew Phrase under the notion of
darkness is signified a most loathsome Prison, such as we have none in this
world. St. Austin discoursing hereof says: He must needs be separated from
God, Psalm. 6.
who while he has space, will not become better.

Such is the condition of this life, and pestered with so much sadness, that
sometimes we are only minded to be sad: No Sirens charms, no gracious
entertainments, no Allurements of Pleasures past, are of force to cheer us up:
so obs^inately are we sometimes bent to sadness. It is Authentically Recorded
of an Emperor of the last Age, that he was so oppressed with sadness, as no
Musical Harmony, no Plays or Pastimes, no mirth or pleasing conversation
whatever, was able to reduce him to cheerfulness. Good Lord! what means all
this? what instruction may we gather hence? This surely: O Mortals! Do you not
perceive that all humane affairs are a mere painted vanity? See you not now
that your selves and all you have, wholly depends on God? Learn this after all,
that all your Joys amassed in one, are not powerful, without God, to raise up
to mirth a Soul drenched in Melancholy.

The matter stands thus indeed: thou have, O God! guilty persons enough who
confess this truth. Nevertheless, if but for one sole moment, God did show His
Divine Countenance to a man overwhelmed with nere so much grief, all Clouds of
sorrow would in a trice be quite dispersed: far better, then his would be who
suddenly awakeing out of a dismal Dream, should find himself in some stately
Palace surrounded with a joyful company of his Bosome-friends.

Moreover to see God is an Ocean of such immense delight, that, though a man
were in Flames of fire, yet whilst he saw God, through excess of joy he would
not be sensible of burning. If you search narrowly what effect the sight of God
imparts to the beholder, it appears manifestly, that the loss of it, infinitely
surpasses all sorrow, all Grief, all Calamity, all Punishment whatever.

SECT. 6,
THis darkness or privation of the sight of God, is the first and chiefest
punishment of the Damned eternally: herewith the blindness of man's heart is
justly chastised, it being the first and last of evils in this life. He is
altogether miserable who is possessed with this blindness: For neither
Admonitions, nor Examples nor Menaces, nor Instructions, nor any other warning
will take hold to do him good. This blind madness has seized on him, and leads
him headlong into wickedness: It Is all one to commend a chaste and sober life
unto him, as to praise colors in presence of a blind man.

Of this stamp were those two wicked old men, treacherous Judges of the chaste
Susanna, Dan. 13.9.
who subverted their sense, and declined their eyes that they would not see
Heaven nor remember just judgments. Impure Love had so besotted these men,
that their Conscience, will, and reason were involved in a night of darkness:
even as one, who begins to tumble in obscurity, sees not how to stop his
course; so they, as they began to slide, fell at length into horrid wickedness.

Hence let no man wonder, if many, polluted with foul offenses, proceed without
scruple; since blindness has prepossest their souls. Their former faults
bereaved them of day, so now they go on secure under the shadow of a wicked
night: they subvert their sense, decline their eyes that they may not see
Heaven. Job made a Covenant with his eyes, that they should not behold a
Virgin; they with theirs, not to look up to Heaven; fearing perchance least it
should strike them with terror, or amendment.

This is the property of a Soul plunged in darkness and sin, which therefore
the pain of loss does most justly torture: you would not see God, you shall not
see him for ever. Hereupon Hieremy the Prophet exhorts in this manner, Give the
Glory to our Lord your God, before it wax dark.

The Grecian Orator St. chapter 13. v. 16.
Chrysostom delivers this most worthy rule of Christian Philosophy, This, it is
true, is sweet; but not immortal: which may be thus applied to all things. To
Feast and pamper the body, is sweet, but short. To please the Palate and seek
after dainties, is sweet, but not permanent. To loose the Reins to
Laciviousness, is sweet, but not lasting. To flow in wealth, is sweet, but
changeable. To be honored and praised by all, is sweet, but not eternal. To be
revenged of our enemies is sweet, but not stable. To live as I list, and to
follow my humor in every thing, is sweet and pleasing, but alas! not perpetual.
Contrariwise, to be excluded from the sight of God, is most bitter and
perpetual; afflictive above measure, and immortal. Let us not therefore (says
St. Tom. 4. ep. in 2. ad Cor.
Chrysostom) abandon our selves to floath and delicasies for a moment (for
this present life is no more) and thereby incurr the torments of infinite ages:
But let us take pains for a moment to merit a Crown everlasting. Do not you see
that even in worldly matters, most men walk this path, and prefer before a
little toil a long rest: albeit they often meet the contrary? How much sweat do
they frequently spend for a little fruit, and sometimes none at all? Take a
view of the Husbandman who labors the year about, and in the end finds his
Harvest shorter then his hopes. As Well the Commander, as Common Soldier, pass
over their lives in perils, if they be cut off by untimely death; the one
leaves his Wealth, the other his Trophies to be buried in dust. What excuse
then shall we have, who in secular affairs undergo much hardship for a little,
a very little, and that uncertain ease; and in spiritual matters do quite
otherwise, for a sloathful moment acquiring to our selves pains unexplicable?
Wherefore I earnestly beseech you, awake at least now at length out of this
dangerous Lethargy: for the time will come when neither Father nor Brother,
Child nor Friend, Neighbor, nor any other shall be of power to deliver us: but
if we be destitute of good works, we shall be left in the Lurch to our utter
destruction.

SECT. 7.
WE are therefore excellently well admonisht by Isidorus Pelusiota: Let us
fix our eye upon Eternity, as upon a mark, and learn wisdom daily out of the
Oracles of Heaven: let this alone terrify, while each one says to himself, do
I lose God in this moment? I lose then all pleasure, all good together with him
eternally. Let this alone comfort us, do I deserve in this minute to see the
Face of God? with this I merit all pleasures, all good for ever.

St. Gregory affirms the same: you relinquish and yet retain all; if you so
make use of temporal things, that with all your heart you pass to eternal. If
you desire (says St. Chrysostom) to enjoy the things of this world, ^. Epist.
ad Tim.
seek after Heaven: will you get under your command these things present?
Despise them utterly.

Ermenigildus, a most Holy young man, son to the Spanish King, when his Father
Leuigildus had commanded this message to be brought unto him, that he should
either dye, or receive the Communion after the Arrian fashion: He, sticking
close to the true Religion, returned this answer to his Father, who was an
Arrian: It is not hard to part from a Kingdom, which cannot be possessed for any
long time; for his part, his sole ambition was to enjoy that Kingdom, which
makes the Kings thereof immortal.

In the self same manner we must make use of our discourse, Let us bid adue for
ever to all those things which debar us from the fruition of the chiefest good:
for the loss of many things, we know, is gainful to the loser, and we must not
count that lost, the privation whereof is recompensed in a most ample sort.

When King Demetrius made himself master of Athens, Lachares an Athenian
Philosopher besmeared his face with ink, clothed himself in a Countey weed and
carried on his arm a basket covered over with green Leaves: in this Equipage he
stole out privately at a Postern Gate. Now that he might with more ease escape
the Troopers of Tarentum, who pursued him, he got a Horseback too, and
scattered several pieces of Durick Coin along the way as he rid: which while
the horsemen solicitously gather up, he breaks from them, and by means of this
Stratagem secures his arrival into Baeotia. So true it is that our loss is
gain, when we part with some to preserve the rest, when we throw away a small
proportion to secure the whole, Why then do we not cast away to keep, why do we
not sustain some loss to become winners? Let us ever be afraid of this own
loss, to lose God for ever: Let every one daily make this prayer in his own
behalf: Psa. 50. Isa. 26. Ex. 33. Ioh. 14.
Cast me not away from thy face. My heart has said to thee, my face has
sought thee out: Thy face O Lord I will seek. Show me thy face. Lord show us
the Father, and it suffices us. I am ready O Lord, to do all thou shall
command, to suffer all thou shall lay upon me; to fulfill thy holy will, and to
abstain from whatsoever thou forbidest. Only this I earnestly crave, turn not
away thy face from me. Let me lie in darkness O Lord, let me be despised and
live in obscurity; only this is my Petition, Turn not away thy Face from me.
The smallest evil, if it endure for ever, becomes exceeding great from the
poise of Eternity: what then shall we say of the greatest of evils?

CHAP. III. The second Torment of Eternity in Hell is Weeping.
IF he who has care of a Vineyard leave carelessly growing upon the Vine a bunch
of ripe Grapes, and before they be rotten brings them not to the Press, the
Wine they make will be so base and unsavory, that even a drunken man will be
loath to drink of it. Tears of Piety are a precious liquor, a most Noble Wine,
such as would relish in the Palate of an Angel, so they be powered out in time.

St. Bernard affirms our tears to be dainties for Angels, when they proceed
either from a Holy sorrow, or from the love of God. But if Tears flow out of
season, or not from a motive of virtue, they degenerate into a sour and
decayed wine; they become unpleasant and fit for none to drink.

Those two Monsters of Kings, Herod and Antiochus wept, but their weeping was
counterfeit, their Tears came too late. Esau says St. Paul, Heb. 12.
found no place of Repentance, although with Tears he had sought it. Tears out
of time are ungrateful and carry a taste of the Dreggs.

The space of this life is a time to weep in. They that sow in Tears, Ps. 125.
shall reap in joyfulness. Going they went and wept, casting their seeds. This
is the way to power out Wine of the choicest perfume, most Delicious to the
taste of Angels.

Sometimes in the night the Elephant is observed to mourn sadly, as one who
bemoans his own slavery. While we live we are in a night, and alas! too often
are slaves to Vices; Why do we not bewail this most wretched Servitude? He
leaves Grapes to rot upon the Vine, who with Peter and Magdalen refuses to
weep. In the other world tears come too late, let us Weep amain in this. Woe to
those miserable Creatures, who go into that House of Eternal wailing: there
they must begin to weep, but shall never meet with the end of it: Eternity
fills their eyes with perpetual tears.

This is their second Torment in Hell Weeping; whereof our Savior speaks
expressly: Matt. 13 Luke 13.
There shall be weeping, and gnashing of Teeth. Darkness of which we treated in
the precedent Chapter, serves to torment the eyes; and weeping, the subject of
the ensuing, is a continual rack to the ears.

SECT. 1
CHrist in his most Divine Sermons, made frequent mention of the tears of the
Damned, least the testimony of that excessive pain should be forgotten. Hence
are those words so often repeated: There shall be weeping and gnashing of
Teeth. Weeping, (says St. Bernard) by reason of that unquenchable fire;
Gnashing, S. Bern. super qui habitat.
for that their worm never dies. Their weeping proceeds from their pain, their
gnashing of Teeth from the fury they are seized with. The cruelty of their
Torments enforces them to weep, the vehemence of repining, envy, and obstinate
malice, causes in them gnashing of Teeth. Hitherto this holy Father.

Concerning timely weeping, truth it self has spoken: Matt. 4
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Here we sometimes
take a pleasure in weeping; there eternal rears are void of all comfort. That
of the Poet is well known: Weeping does our pain assuage,
Tears from grief, us dis-engage.


But in Hell all sorts of torments receive increase from weeping, as does the
fire from Oil or Brimstone cast into it.

In case the damned let fall one only tear every day, and God (as he might
easily do) should keep these daily tears together, they would at length amount
to an Ocean of tears so vast, that it alone would far exceed all the Seas of
this world. Nevertheless though the Damned howl and wail most bitterly, yet
they shed not one sole tear: even as graceless children, who when chastised by
their Parents, part not with one salt drop from their eyes, because they are
grown stiff-hearted against stripes: In like manner the damned, whose will is
most obstinate, albeit they rage. they roar, and fill the air with horrid
outcries, notwithstanding no moisture of piety issues from their eyes. All of
them fill their Denns with confused howlings, as beasts do, which are presently
to be lead away to the slaughter. Out, alas! what Music is this, which will
never cease for all eternity?

What St. Paul testified of the joys of Heaven: Neither eye has seen, nor ear
has heard, etc. The very same may be affirmed of the furious howling of the
Damned: Such lamentable complaints, such outrageous wailings, such terrible
roarings are those of the damned, that no one has ever heard the like.

Let us call to mind, I beseech you, those cruel Gardens of Nero, wherein he
used to supp, while Christians on every side being fastened to stakes, were
burned with a slow fire to serve as Torches in the night. How sad and
lamentable were the howlings of these Christians? Imagine only a thousand tied
in this manner amidst the flames, and as many more with their thighs broken
upon a Rack yet alive, with pitiful moans bewailing the greatness of their
torments. What a doleful noise would this be? But alas! what are a thousand
Crucified men encompassed with fire, what are a thousand upon the Rack^ if
compared to so many thousand thousands, so many Millions of damed men and
Devils, all whose fearful outcryes and wayling each one, as an evil most near
unto him, shall distinctly perceive?

SECT. 2.
GOD has most wisely ordained, that what shall mervailously delight all the
blessed, the contrary thereof shall incredibly torment the damned. Frequent
mention is made in holy writ, of Celestial Harmony and Music of the Blessed,
all whose exterior senses shall enjoy their several delights: So contrariwise
in Hell it will be a special torment to hear incessantly the horrible
complaints, howling and mourning of so many hundred Millions; as if so many
Oxen were roasted alive, or so many mad dogs strugled to break their chains,
but could not.

How ungrateful Music would it be, if your neighbor had a Kennel of Dogs, who
with continual barking should keep a restless sick man all night awake? But O
how melodious would this cry of dogs be! O how gentle, how short-lasting would
this Hell appear; if compared to those fiery caverns replenished with eternal
howling!

Yet this is a just punishment for unchaste amorous songs, for lascivious
strains: in place whereof, woe, woe, woe everlasting will fill their ears. The
damned will curse God and his Saints without ceasing, yea and themselves too,
together with all who have been their companions in sin: The Father will curse
his Son, the Son the Father; the Mother her Daughter, and the Daughter her
Mother; they will curse all the years, days and hours of their lives for ever.

But they will weep with dry cheeks for nothing so much, as for that shameful
loss of time: to have lavisht so many good hours, so many days, weeks,
months and years, and that with so much idleness, will be unto them cause of
most peircing grief, but alas! too late.

Peter Reginaldus recounts, how a Religious man being at his prayers heard a
doleful voice: he demanded who was there, why he mourned, what would he have?
Whereunto the voice made answer; I am one of the damned. Wherefore (replied the
other) do thou mourn so sadly? to whom the voice said, I and the rest of the
damned bewail nothing so bitterly, as to have consumed the space of our lives
in wickedness. Out alas! one hours time had been sufficient to gain that,
which from henceforth for all eternity will not be granted.

This saying was too true, but too late: hereupon grew that pious custom
amongst the virtuous, every hour to raise up the mind toward Heaven, with
these or the like words: O my Lord, O my God! I have now spent another hour,
whereof an account must be rendered: have mercy on me, O God, now and in the end
of my life.

SECT. 3.
NOw therefore our sighs avail us; now, if we will, our tears are as so many
Pearls: now we have opportunity to weep, that we may not sigh and weep forever.

When Antipater had written to Alexander King of Macedonia, many things
relating to his Mother, and the King had read them; he said: Antipater does not
know, that one small tear let fall by a mother, is able to abolish whole
Epistles stuffed with slanders. I may in some sort averr the same of those
guilty Inhabitants of Hell: the Damned were not pleased to take notice, that
with one salt drop from the eye, if serious, if timely, all offenses what ever
might be quite washed away.

For this reason St. Ser. 16. in Cant.
Bernard exclaims: Who will give water to my head and a fountain of tears to my
eyes, that with weeping I may prevent weeping, and gnashing of teeth and strait
bands of hands and Feet, and a great weight of Chains pressing, binding,
burning, and not consuming? There shall be weeping: By St. Matthew alone, this
is four times repeated: Matt. 8.13.
The children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. The same is itterated: And shall cast
them into the Furnace of fire; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. In
the very height of jollity and mirth at the Wedding, against one ill clothed
this sentence passed: Cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

Weeping wants no solace, while the dead, we mourn for, is yet within our
doors; but so soon as he is carried out not to return, so soon as he is cast
into a hole, not to come out till the day of Judgment, here whole showers are
powered out, here we give him a most sorrowful and last farwell: Thus all
mourning in this world has its comfort. Yea, even as those, who dream they weep
when the dream is over, find their cheeks dry, and wonder they were so sadly
deluded; in like manner when the deceitful dreams of this life are past, and we
awake to eternity, we shall both admire and condemn our tears without fruit.
Indeed our wailing here is like that of Dreamers; there, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth, and that through excessive pains.

Be pleased I pray, now and then to make some small trial hereof: apply your
finger to a slender wax-light set on fire but for half a quarter of an hour: O
what howlings, what showtings out will follow hence! you would think the whole
man were thrown into the fire, when alas! only the fingers end is scorched.
What, I beseech you, are these imaginary, these painted Flames to Hell? There
shall be weeping, there shall be gnashing of teeth. Weeping shall proceed from
fire, gnashing of teeth from unexplicable cold. Where mark by the way, the
damned shall ever have their senses most lively, that they may suffer.

This may be observed, in those who are sick of a Feavour, in whom because the
sense of pain is quick, therefore they whet their teeth to cut the violence of
their Malady in pieces. In this sort the damned enjoy the quickness of senses
most entirely, that they may be sensible of their torments; therefore, as if
they could mitegate their sufferings, they are said to weep and whet one tooth
against another.

With good reason they shall weep, they shall howl, because while they lived,
Christ Crucified before them wept, and powered out of all his most delicate
Members plenty of blood, but in vain: their good Angel often wearied their ears
with wholesome admonitions, but in vain: all the blessed moved them to
amendment of life, but in vain: God himself thirty, sorty, fifty, threescore
years and more called upon and invited them to take a better course, but all in
vain. They would not weep for a short space, let them weep therefore for ever;
they slighted to hearken to good counsel, let them therefore cry out and never
be heard.

SECT. 4.
IT falls out sometimes that a Traveller standing on the top of a Mountain,
beholds some in the Valley underneath attempting their passage over a most
dangerous ice: he does not only look upon them, but he likewise warns them to
beware they go not forward to their utter destruction; because it often happens
that in Winter as well the deep Lake, as the smooth sliding River is Crusted
over with a slender Ice, which being covered with flakes of Snow counterfeit a
secure passage, where it is dangerous.

When Travelers ignorant of the way approach to this deceitful B^idge, they
set foot upon it, and go on as secure from pe^il as if they walked upon sure
ground. But the Ice, unable to bear the weight of their bodies, suddenly
divides it self, and swalloweth up those in the waters, who suspected nothing
less then drowning.

This when the Passenger from the Hill espies, being privy to the danger, he
shouts out, he warns them to proceed no farther, unless they be resolved to
perish; but to steer their course another way.

If those in the Valley either hear not, or slight so trusty a Moniter, they
runn upon their own ruin. Does the Ice deceive them? Does the water swallow
them up? Does the cold destroy them? Let them thank themselves. They were
forewarned; but their rash boldness contemned the warning: He is lost through
his own fault, who perishes in this manner.

No otherwise God and his Saints have formerly given, and do continually give
warning: Pleasure is a fraudulent Ice, depart from it; it cousens the eyes with
a brickle out side, trust it not; this deceitful way will ere long fall in
pieces, do not go forward, unless ye have a mind to be overwhelmed. But the
miserable wretches with scornful laughter, refusing to be admonished, walk on
stoutly into eminent danger, not as if they were to find their way on a
slippery ice, but as people who run a dancing.

Thus the Foolhardy march on, they laugh, they sport, they dance, till at
unawares the ice break, and the poor miscreants alas! sink down never to come
up again; they are buried for ever; though never dead; nor ever to dye, though
always dying. Now they lament and bemoan their condition, but their sorrow is
bootless. They rejected good admonition, and now though with tears they call
upon their Moniters they are not heard. Deservedly do they perish, who posted
on so eagerly after their own perdition.

Our most loving God shouted long and loud enough, but none would hearken to
him. Pr. 1.24
I called (says he) and you refused: I stretched out my hand, and there was
none that regarded. You have despised all my Counsel, and have neglected my
reprehensions. I also will laugh in your destruction.

How long and loud did Christ call upon them? St. Luke affirms, he traveled
through their Cities, Towns and Villages, Preaching unto them the Kingdom of
God. And when he spoke these things unto them, he cried out: He that has ears
to hear let him hear. What I pray, Luke 6.
did he cry out? Woe to you, who laugh now, because you shall mourn and weep. As
if he had said; Behold I foretell you, this ice whereon you stand will give you
the slip, you will be drowned: these short laughters will have an end without
end. But these things were told to such as were deaf, who, now they have
recovered their hearing, abide eternal torments.

SECT. 5.
TAke here this most wholesome admonition: Let us make this our business, when
we are in misery when we are oppressed with any calamity, let us think
attentively: If this Misery endured for ever, if I were always to suffer this
affliction, to what a height of torment would it grow by the only endurance of
it? The biting of a Flea or Gnat, were it to last for ever, how unexplicable a
Torment would it be? What horror then will possess the damned arising out of
this one cogitation: This fire must be endured for ever, this howling must be
heard eternally, this stench must be suffered without end. Hence flows in them
most bitter weeping, and perpetual horror.

Terror, Trembling, Wailing and Anguish environ the slaves of Hell on all
sides. But forasmuch as these punishments cannot be avoided by any centuries of
years, any ages, chapter 24.
or Millions of Ages; therefore holy Job rightly terms their horror
everlasting.

One night sometimes appears to a sick man longer then a year: How many years
then, how many ages will one only year of the damned contain, whereof you can
point out no single minute, which is not liable to a most dreadful death?
Everlasting sorrow is companion to eternal death.

John Climacus makes mention of a Religious man, Grad. 4. de Obe.
whom he saw, whose countenance was almost continually moistened with Tears: He
asked that same man the cause thereof. My Brother said Climacus, what is the
reason I pray, why your eyes are so well furnished, that they always weep? I,
Father am fully persuaded that I do not sevre these Religious men, but Christ
and his Apostles: And in regard I am constantly about the fire (he was Cook to
the Monastery) I employ my thoughts in ruminating those everlasting Flames,
this makes me weep.

A most wholesome thought without doubt; to think upon Hell fire, and the Tears
of the Damned. There (says St. Cyril) they sigh without ceasing, and no one
pitties them; they cry out from the Depth, and none is moved with their cries;
they lament, and no one sets them at liberty. This doleful condition by often
thinking on it aforehand may be escaped.

SECT. 6
MAny Religious men of old dispatched away a Messenger from Mo4nt Nitria,
Pelagius lib. 3.
and with unanimous consent besought St. Macarius, he would be pleased to give
satisfaction to the desires of many, and come to Nitria; if he did not
condescend, they let him know, within a short space he should be overwhelmed
with their company. St. Macarius was easily persuaded and forthwith arrived at
their quarters: He was no sooner come, but all of them fed their eyes with
beholding so worthy a person, and after a while all were desirous to satiate
their ears too. Whereupon they jointly request Macarius he would add to the
favor of his coming, this other of exhotting to virtue souls well disposed to
hear him. Great matters were expected from him: But Macarius begun his Sermon
not with words, but weeping: Let us mourn, said he, and let our eyes produce
plenty of tears, before we flee hence to that place, where tears scald bodies.
This was the beginning, this the prosecution, this the confirmation, this the
Epilogue of his Exhortation. Which speech of his, though short, yet was it so
serious, that all fell a weeping, all prostrated themselves upon the ground,
and earnestly made this Petition; O Father, pray for us.

Macarius hit the Nail on the Head: Tears while we live purge, after death they
punish; here they wipe away our stains, there they scorch the guilty. There
shall be weeping and most bitter howling as well of Devils, as Damned. Imagine
the worst you can to torment the Ears: The shouting of men, the Barking of
Dogs, the Howling of Wolves, the lowing of Oxen, the roaring of Lions, with
the ungrateful noise made by other Beasts; the Claps of Thunder in the Clouds,
the steep fall of Waters, and whatever may be conceived offensive to the Ears;
Alas! all that is nothing to the most desperate weeping and gnashing of teeth
they endure in Hell.

Resort hither all you, whose breasts boil with hatred and envy; all you who
though slightly offended, snarle, and Wild-bore-like whet your Tusks to
revenge: Here you may take a view of your own picture in the damned. Hearken
the kingly Prophets admonition: The sinner shall observe the just: Psalm. 36.
and shall gnash upon him with his teeth.

Enter into consideration of our life, and you shall find, that we eagerly
conspire to each others ruin. What profit then I pray do we pursue? This one;
so soon as our adversary lies open to our fury we sheath the Sword of Revenge
up to the Hilts in his overthrow: This is the work of malice, this unsatiable
envy persues amain. Even as dogs when they quarrel, show their teeth; so we
doglike men, or inhumane dogs deal one with another, and now and then fall at
odds for a bare bone.

O you, who swell with hatred and pine away with envy, why do you assume the
nature of dogs, why do you imitate the Damned? There, there shall be weeping
there shall be gnashing of teeth. Who ever rightly understands the meaning of
that eternal We, easily lays aside all envy, and malice; often ruminating with
himself: Neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, what God has prepared for
those who forsake him. In Hell shall be weeping, in Heaven rejoicing, such as
ear has never heard: it is in thy choice now to begin to weep with those, or
to rejoice with these: either this, or that will last for ever.

CHAP. IV. The third Torment for Eternity in Hell is Hunger.
THat exquisite Master of Rhetoric Quintilian had the boldness to say: Quinti.
decl. 12.
The Plague is happy War is happy, and all kind of Death is easy: But Hunger
is hard, the most pinching of necessities, the most deformed of evils. An evil
unspeakable that needs must be, to which the greatest of evils compared are to
be held in esteem: such an evil as this, in Quintillians opinion, is hunger;
amongst all miseries worthily accounted the chiefest. This assertion is not
without reason: since both by ancient and modern History it is apparent, that
extremity of hunger sometimes brings men to that height of madness, as to tear
their own flesh in pieces with their teeth, Baron ad an. 491.
and to nourish their bodies by imparing them. Zeno the Emperor did thus, who
was buried before he was dead.

Is it so indeed? is nine days hunger so cruel a kind of death, that
whatsoever death compared unto it, may be reputed a gentle punishment? What
then will a Famine of ten years, of a hundred, a thousand, a million of ages
be, from which all hope of releif is quite cut off? I may truly say of this:
hunger is the sharpest of necessities, hunger is the worst of miseries.

This rageing evil is the third torment of that doleful eternity. The Prophet
long ago threatened this kind of punishment: They shall suffer Famine as dogs.
Psa. 58.
He is truly miserable, who having a desire to eat, finds nothing to assuage
his hunger: much more is he, who always gapes after meat with a greedy
appetite, but meets with nothing, nor ever shall, to satisfy his stomach. Nay
further yet, he is not only afflicted with extreme hunger, but is parched with
most vehement thirst beside. Such is the hunger, such the thirst of the damned;
whereof in the ensuing Chapter.

SECT. 1.
CHrist threatens in good earnest: Luke 6.
Woe to you that are filled: because you shall be hungry. Such hunger shall
oppress you, as will exceed that of a day, a month, a year; and such an one,
to whom not a few, but all things shall be wanting. No one will, no one can
give either crumm, or drop. The remembrance of dainties past will sharpen and
set their stomachs on fire, that the pain of Gluttony may accompany the fault
and the punishment be answerable to the offense: Wis. 11.
By what things a man sineth, by the same also he is tormented.

One may offend many ways by Gluttony: First, when too much meat and drink is
taken, even against our stomach, which frequently grumbles not for want, but
excess. The stomach has its mouth, which wants not words: the stomach is
filled with indignation, and Belching says: O I am oppressed, I am surcharged, I
faint, I perish: Too much kindness kills me: Fain I would be refresht, not
stifled: I would be nourisht, not choked: I am not to be stuffed with meat, as
a Boulster with Feathers: This sort of good will hurts me worse then hatred or
emptiness. These are the complaints of the stomach: Of which St. Tom. 3. in c.
2. Joan.
Chrysostom declares that, What exceeds necessity in eating, does harm; but
nourishes not: Fullness is the root of all Diseases. So the first fault in
Gluttony is, to feed too plentifully.

The second fault is, to have a longing of such delicate and costly viands,
that of necessity the Sea must be divided into, and shell fishes fetched from
the unknown shores of the remotest Seas. Besides the Feasant, other sorts of
fowl must be had, to satisfy ambition in the Kitchen. What a dainty stomach
will scarcely admit of must be brought in from the farthest Ocean: To please
the Palate, which loathes ordinary fare, search is made far and near: the whole
world must be ransacked for belly cheer, which is then daintiest when dearest:
So Alagabalus Emperor, inhabiting the Sea cost, would never feed upon fish.
These kind of people are possessed with a hunger of greater extent, then their
belly: they vomit that they may drink, and drink that they may vomit: Bankets
sought for throughout the World, they greedily devour, which by and by they
reject the same way they were received.

Observe here by the way: That is accounted a Soverain dish though otherwise
most vile, which the appetite most longs for. Hence it may come to pass, that
one may offend more grieveously with feasting on toad-stools, then another on
Partridge and Feasants. Esau was reprehended for over greedily gurmandiling a
dish of Pulse-Pottage, not for eating fat Hens or Capons.

The third fault is, to lavish too much time and treasure in feasting; many
feast in a Circle as the children of Job did; they leave scarce one day in a
year free from Riot and Excess in Banqueting.

Parents now and then Prophecy to their children: Woe be to thee my boy, when
thou come into strange countries, where thou shall want those dainties thou
did enjoy at home: How uncouth will it be for thee either to take pains or
starve? The like may be returned to the Parents: Woe be to you, who feed
plentifully every day, how will you be able to digest Hunger and Thirst?

The fourth fault of Gluttony is, rashly to violate the Laws of Fast, or at
least to expound them as they list. Hence the fast of forty days in Lent is
changed into ten or twenty days temperance. Many believe they are fasting,
when they are not drunk. We are now come to that pass, as to persuade our
selves, that fasting was only ordained for Religious People: others are so
favorable Interpreters of this Law, as they still find some excuse to free
them from fasting. But the Physician, you say, and my Confessor exempt me from
fasting: true, but over entreated by your importunity: I believe they would be
of another opinion, if they met with one less eloquent, and more indigent.

The first is, Drunkenness, the Origin of many crimes, and of all Vices the
most dangerous, because if a drunken man chance to fall suddenly, which is not
unusual, or be surprised with some disease, which hales him to the Gates of
Death; where poor wretch! unable to grieve for his sins, or to raise his mind
up to his Maker, in the state of mortal sin and ignorant of his sad condition,
he is hurried away to Eternity, alas! a prey to Death and to the Devil.

SECT. 2.
VVO therefore, woe to you that are filled, In spec.
because you shall be hungry. With good reason said Reginaldetus: Infinite men
shall be damned for this sin of Gluttony. Gluttony has an ample command, and is
much assistent to all sorts of vices. chapter 16.
Lo this (says Ezechiel) was the iniquity of Sodom, fullness of Bread, and
abundance, and the idleness of her.

For this cause our Savior most carefully warns us: Look well to your selves,
Luke 27.34.
lest perhaps your hearts be overcharged wi h surfeting and drunkenness. For
that is the malice of this vice, not only to burden the body, but likewise to
fasten the soul to earth, to trample it under foot, and throw it headlong into
Hell. Here is Hunger and Thirst, here is a long fast, Because you shall be
Hungry.

Consider what a great share of our misery it is, that we neither value, nor
sufficiently understand the affairs of the next life. Which of us has made
trial of extreme Famine? Hence we weigh not our own, nor the Famine in Hell. A
pattern of this manifestly appears in Cities Besieged, and in close Prisons:
For to that extremity are people brought by rageing hunger, that not only
Dogs, Cats and Horses, but also Mice, Serpents and Toads are greedily devoured
by them: they pluck the Grass up by the roots, they strip their Bucklers off
their skins to feed on: Hunger compels them to convert into man's meat the
Excrements of Birds and Beasts; yea and the bodies too of their dearest friends.

Cambises, Lib. 3. de tra.
as Seneca relates, conducted a vast Army through Sands and Deserts into
Aethiopia: but being scarce well entered upon their march, their Victuals and
Provision failed, their way was unknown unto them, and that barren and
barbarous Nation afforded them no releif. Tender sprouts and tops of trees
supplied their wants in the beginning, afterward they boiled skins or what ever
they met with to assuage their hunger; in fine, neither finding Herbs, Rats nor
Cattle, they slaughtered every tenth man, a remedy against Famine worse then
Famine it self.

This was but a little, Hunger put them upon more cruel designs: The Mothers
butchered their own Children, as if they had been Chickens, and with their own
teeth tore in pieces members dearer then their life. This may yet seem little
when compared to more wild attempts: How often have people in Prison massacred
themselves through hunger, and fed upon their own limbs? what way soever they
could lay hold upon arms or shoulders, thither their teeth hastened to make a
prey of themselves to their own destruction.

SECT. 3.
NOw to the matter in hand: This hunger which we behold with our eyes, we are
not sufficiently capable of, and how then shall we understand that most rageing
and eternal Famine in Hell? by how much our hunger is more Rampant, by so much
it is the shorter; whereas that other, though most furious, is nevertheless
everlasting. Woe to you, because you shall be hungry.

Good Lord! what a Country is this, which sets before us for great dainties,
Horseflesh raw, Mice and Toads, with Pigeon dung; of which notwithstanding we
cannot obtain our fill? we would esteem it a special favor to part from life,
but even that is denied. Apoc. c. 9.
They shall desire to dye, and death will fly from them. Everlasting hunger is
unexplicable, everlasting thirst intolerable.

To these Torments that other may be adjoined: Divines affirm, that the
delights in Heaven shall be so abundant, as to fill all the Members and Senses
of the blessed with peculiar happiness: Hereupon the taste and tongue shall swim
in a juice of most delicious sweetness; in so much that each one of the blessed
may seem to enjoy this Divine repast, according to, and beyond all they can
desire.

Contrary wise that malignant tongue of the Damned shall flow in bitter Gall;
this was foretold by the Hebrew Prophet: Deuteronomy. 2. chapter 32.
The Gall of Dragons their Wine, and the Venim of Asps uncurable. No sweetness
can be of force to mitigate this hunger, or temper the bitterness of this Gall;
their torments are uncurable.

Moreover some are of opinion, that they are afflicted with most cruel fits of
the toothache: who ever has experienced these in this life, let him imagine how
afflictive they will be after death. In case there were no other torments in
Hell, besides those of the teeth or headake, or Gout or Stone, and these being
to endure for ever, what expenses, labor and royl would one undergo to be quit
of them? But we fear and fear not these things, while with exceeding
cheerfulness we commit sins more to be feared.

In Inns now and then we feed plentifully, we drink off full bowls, we sing
merrily we dance and skip about: but as soon as the Host brings in the
reckoning and calls his guests to an account, they are at a stand, they look
one upon another, and at length break forth into these words: would to God we
had never come hither! our shot is wonderful dear.

While we are here on our journey, we live in an Inn and unmindful of the
reckoning, Feast jovially, carouse till within night, sing, sport and dance.
But who will discharge the shot? O people ill advised! We must pay a just
reckoning, though a dear one. It Is we have Banketted, Quaffed, and played the
good fellows; it is we have wasted our health, age and substance in riotous
company keeping: Now mine Host calls for a discharge, just debts must be paid,
Creditours will have satisfaction either from our Purses or Persons.

We have eaten, but with excess, with too much expense and delecacy; we have
Feasted, but too often, and at too high a rate: We have fasted, but in a
profane manner and too seldom; we have buried our selves in Wine, we must now
digest the surfeiting. Woe, because we shall be hungry: eternal Famine, thirsts
eternal expects us: O what a Supper after a full, but short dinner! while the
damned lived they seem to have licked nothing but salt, so rageing is their
thirst in hell.

How horrible a torment thirst is, it is hard for any one to express, unless he
have made some certain trial thereof: In this particular we may well credit the
sick, who are frequently so tortured with thirst, that they esteem it the very
dregs of their distempered cup, or their greatest disease.

SECT. 4.
THe Rich Glutton thrusting out his scorched Tongue cries in hideous manner: I
am tormented in this flame, O one drop from the tip of a finger to refresh me.
Lo, how modestly be begs? He does not crave a Basin of water, nor a Barrel of
Oil, nor a Vessel of Wine: but what is most obvious, a drop of Water, which
yet he obtains not. This wealthy Banketter is grown so poor, that he does not
ask a Goblin of Crystal, but the extremity of a finger; not the choicest Wine
from Greet, but a small parcel of water; not to have some Noble Cub-bearer, but
the Beggar Lazarus.

Mark well what thou say, O thou Purple Gallant; Lazarus has scabbed hands,
thou will be loath to drink water which drops from his finger. Ah! let me have
but one sole drop, and that from the hand of Lazarus, which I shall esteem as
the choicest of Distelled Waters.

For all this he gets nothing, no body hearkens to him; both Ears and Gates
are close shut. And why, I pray, is one drop denied to this Glutton in so
extreme hunger and thirst? Abraham was a practiser of Hospitallity, and might
have said: Give him one little drop, it will do him no good; so great a flame
will not be assuaged by so small a dew.

But their manner of proceeding is far otherwise in the next world: For as
Heaven is repleanisht with Joy and Pleasure, without the least mixture of
sadness; so Hell is stored with mere Grief and Pains void of all solace,
mitigation, or ease. Hence ellegantly and truly said St. Austin: No death is
worse or greater, Lib. 6. de Livi. c. 12
then where Death dies not. So no Hunger and Thirst is more cruel or deadly,
then where Death cannot be obtained by Hunger and Thirst.

SECT. 5.
TWo brothers as it is recorded, the one wise, the oter a Fool, went a
Travellin together, and came at length to a place divided into too ways. Pet.
Regin. In spec.
The Fool was taken with the more pleasant way, the wise man preferred the more
rugged, as more secure. Here they fell at debate, wherein the wise man deemed
it better to yield then contest: So both were surprised by Robbers, both were
cast into Prison, but the one a part from the other: whence after a time they
were brought before a judge. Here the wise man accused the Fool, and laid all
the fault on him: the fool retorts all the miscarriage upon his brother. In
conclusion the Judge makes this Decree: Both are guilty; the fool, because he
should have submitted to one wiser then himself; the wise man, because he
should not have condescended to a fool. This is plainly our condition: the Soul
and Body are brothers, but extremely unlike; the soul by its descent being
Noble and Wise, is not afraid of a thorny way to Heaven, she loves temperance,
and enters into strict league with Fasting, as knowing well how these things
avail her: the spirit is prompt. On the other side the body from its birth is
foolish, so espying a way that smiles with many delights, it presently hastens
thither: it is forceably persuaded that all it has to do, is to eat, drink,
sport, sleep well fly from labor, follow idleness, and repose amongst
pleasures; these things agree well with the body: but toil hunger, watching, it
hates and avoydes, as one would the Plague.

The Soul again endeavors with all her Rhetoric to evince, that a smooth way
leads not to Heaven, as does the sharp and stony; and that they who cannot away
with thorns, covet not Roses. But the body is slow in obeying, dull in
admitting wholesome counsel; it will not be friends with subjection and
frugallity: so at length the soul yields, and permitting the body to live as it
lists, becomes of a Master, a slave. In this manner they go and perish together,
thus they fall into the hands of thieves, vices and Devils.

These brothers are parted in the end, and committed to several prisons; the
body to the Grave, and the soul to hell: whence both are to make their
appearance before the Sovereign Judge at the latter day, where each will accuse
the other. Now because the foolish body would not be obedient to the soul, and
the wise soul was not of courage to subdue the wantonness of the flesh, both
convinced of impiety shall receive sentence of eternal torment. This inevitable
decree, like a sharp two edged sword, Apoc. c. 1.
shall pierce through both soul and body. Wherefore our Lord says: Matt. c. 10.
Fear him that can destroy both soul and body into Hell. Where hunger and
thirst eternal shall serve as a sauce for their torments; neither shall they
have any other liquor to their feast, then boiling brimstone: Fire and
Brimstone is part of their cup. Psa. 10.


SECT. 6.
ALL this notwithstanding, men much addicted to Gluttony are little moved to
what has bin said: they gape after bankets and costly Viands, they thirst after
full cupps, what ever you say of Famine in the next life. O Christians, a
little more consideration would do well: to eat and drink is not forbidden,
provided it be not against conscience, or with neglect of Divine Laws. We
despise good counsel, and dare transgress the commands of God; not reflecting
that the Gibbet is erected before our doors: Woe to you that are filled, because
you shall be hungry. Fault and punishment are linked together; many crimes
proceed from Gluttony, not to be expiated even with most rageing hunger and
thirst. Great was the hunger of Erisichthon, but far inferior to that in Hell:
all our famine is a mere dream to that of the damned: Hereby we are admonished
to beware all intemperance.

Those who feasted in old time, were accustomed to leave some part of their
meat on the table, to teach us not to eat for pleasure, or till we could eat no
more. It Is a Proverb amongst the Germans: Mirth when it comes to the height must
be broken off: so we must leave off Feasting, before the Feast end. Who is so
sottish, as when he knows for three or four hours feasting he must fast a
whole year, to command presently a feast prepared for him?

Yet such sots are we, that though we know our abstinence and fast continue but
a few hours, nevertheless we are resolved to fare daintily, and please our
Pallates: Hence are those invitations: Come let us take wine, Esaias. chapter 56.
and be filled with drunkenness, and it shall be as to day, so also to morrow,
and much more.

O wretched fools! within a while it will not be as to day, your mirth to day
is waited on by a sad to morrow: Fullness must be accompanied with Famine, and
drunkenness tormented with thirst. After a short space that doleful song will
amuze your ears: you have received your share of goods in this life, away with
you now, there is no more due to you: heretofore you feasted, now you must
fast; let others feast, that formerly fasted.

For this reason thus says our Lord: Behold my servants shall eat, and you
shall be hungry: behold my servants shall drink, Esaias. chapter 65. v. 13.
and you shall be thirsty: behold my servants shall rejoice and you shall be
confounded: Behold my servants shall praise for joyfulness of heart: and you
shall cry for sorrow of heart, and for contrition of spirit you shall howl.
Though you were deaf to admonition, yet it was told you often and long ago,
that delicasies were paid with torments: This none would give ear to: I called,
and you have not answered; I spoke and you have not heard; and you did evil in
my eyes: Es. v. 12.
and you have chosen the things, that I would not. Now your jovial, but short
madness shall be requited with long and everlasting Famine, fleeting pleasures
are to be expiated with perpetual thirst. It Is now too late to apply a remedy to
this hunger and thirst: Such a supper suits well with such a dinner.

Therefore be sober and watch: Pet. 1. c. 5. Ose. c. 4.
for Fornication, and Wine, and Drunkenness, take away the heart. He that has a
horror of eternal famine, let him now endure hunger neither long, Luke c. 6.
ver. 25.
nor cruel. Blessed are ye, that now are an hungered because you shall be
filled. Christian suffering has a seast prepared for it, which lasts for ever:
but to wantonness and intemperance eternal punishment is appointed. Who often
meditates on hell, escapes it.

CHAP. V. The fourth Torment for Eternity in Hell is Stench.
It Is pleasant to live, Hom. 5. in Ep^st. ad Heb.
but now and then it happens that life is more displeasing then death it self.
This St. Chrysostom observing said: Every one well descended and of good
education, judges it more unsufferable then death, to be cast in Prison, to
abide stench, to lie in darkness and Fetters with Homicides.

Look down into Hell, and you will confess, there was never so noisome and
cruel a Goal, neither that under ground of the Messenians, called The Treasure;
nor that of the Persians, called Lethe, or oblivion; nor the Quarries of
Syracusa; nor the Labyrinth of Creet; nor the House and Dungeon of the
Athenians; nor the Tullianum of the Romans; nor the Ceramon of the Cyprians;
nor the Decas of the Spartans; nor the Ancon of Gilimer; nor that infamous
Prison of Actiolinus, which for cruelty surpassed all sorts of torments:
Neither were there ever detained in any Prison so many in thraldom, as God
punishes damned Captives in his grand Prison.

This Prison of God under ground, if you look upon the place, is most deep; if
upon the Jailer, he is most cruel; if on the foulness of it, it is most
stinking; if on the imprisoned, it is of vast extent containing innumerable;
yet if you consider the infinite number of offenders, it is exceeding strait:
In fine, if you seek after its continuance, it is eternal; none can escape
thence, all passages and gates being closely locked up. And forasmuch as all
the filth of the whole world is devolved into this Dungeon, it is a most nasty
sink, a Den replenisht with loathsome stink: This is the fourth torment of
eternity, intolerable stench. How unexplicable this torment is, how far beyond
our conceit of it, we will now declare.

SECT. 1.
THe holy Scripture frequently proposes to our consideration the intolerable
stench of Hell. Psalm. 10.
Holy David says: He shall rain snares upon sinners: fire and brimstone, and
blast of storms the potion of their Cup. Now as drops of rain may not be
numbered, so the pains of the wicked: He shall rain torments upon them like a
turbulent shower, or swift running torrent. He shall rain snares; wherewith
they shall be so fast bound, as it will be impossible for any of them to
escape, or to break their chains, or to undermine the Prison walls, wherein
they shall be enclosed. Their part shall be in the Pool burning with fire and
brimstone. Apoc. c. 21.


Here let us come nearer to our present matter; and consider attentively, how
great will the stench be of one burning in brimstone? How if a hundred, if a
thousand be joined in the like flame? This yet is nothing to the brimstone in
Hell; whose stench arises from diverse causes.

The first, after the world is buried as it were in one grave, after the
general judgment, all the Ordure of the Earth shall run down into that sink of
Hell, whereby the world shall be purged. The Psalmist foretold: Psa. 96.
Fire shall go before him, and shall inflame his enemies round about. Divines
relying on this Prophecy affirm, that fire shall go before the worlds judge as
an apparitour, and shall bring all before the Tribunal, till the whole
judgment be completely ended: that done, and the definitive sentence
pronounced, that fire like a thunderbolt shall throw down the wicked headlong,
and as an Executioner shall set upon and bind that guilty multitude so fast, as
they shall despair of ever escapeing: Then will it hurry them like chained dogs
into their kennels, he shall inflame his enemies round about: and together with
them all the filth and mud of the world shall flow down into the Lake of hell;
for hell is indeed the sink of the earth, the receptacle of all ordure.

The second cause of stench is Brimstone, Ubi supra
whereof the eye of our Lord, St. John speaks: Their part shall be in the pool
burning with fire and brimstone: which is the second death. The sacred volumes
of Scripture are wonderful exact in observing every word: In the pool, which
contains stinking and immovable waters, which do not grow less, do not flow
out, nor are dried up: after a thousand years this pool will be like it self;
after thirty, yea threescore thousand years it will lose nothing it once had;
after a hundred thousand, after a thousand Millions of years that pool will not
have one drop of it dried up: As it was in the beginning, so it will be then,
and for all ensuing ages.

Moreover, such as had plunged their soul in wantonness and lust in this life,
shall be drowned in that pool: in these baths of brimstone they shall swim
and sweat and be thoroughly drenched for their cleansing. The greatness of this
may be best learned from experience; if the water of a fish pond were all drawn
out, and the fish for some days space were not removed; they would fill the
air with such incredible stench; that no one, though in the open air, would be
able to abide long there.

What a torment will it be in hell, to be seated in the midst of unsufferable
stink, without power to stir one foot thence for all eternity? long custom
makes tolerable sorded and ill sented trades: but those torments in hell can
by no means become more gentle.

SECT. 2.
THe third cause of that stink is the bodies of the damned, more noisome then
any dead carkase. Esaias foretold: Out of their carcasses shall rise a stink. All
of them shall be tortured with the stink of one, and one with that of all. What
a strange kind of Incense is flesh rotten and crawling with Maggats? In
Lucifers kingdom numberless carcasses of the damned, like stinking carrion,
shall lie for ever upon hot coals.

Lust is possessed with a certain kind of rageing fury, so as it tramples reason
under foot: but these unbridled motions may be restrained, if timely begun
with. For this cause a Religious man in the desert of Scythia, subdued
wantonness in this manner: The comeliness of a woman, Lib. Sen. patr. sect 10.
he had formerly seen, frequently ^an in his fancy: this remembrance, these
representations he resolved to banish quite out of his breast. He strugled
long, he fought valiently, and overcame himself many ways; yet he perceived
all he did, was only to preserve himself from being overcome. In the mean while
the Divine Providence sent a man out of Egypt who casually related, that
beautiful woman was deceased. The Champion of Christ took hold of the relation,
and seriously weighing what might ^edownd to his best advantage, he at length
made this resolution: To depart from his Cell, and hasten to the dead woman's
Tomb. Where determined to triumph over unchaste love, he makes this attempt:
when the night was come, he rowls away the gravestone, digs up the earth, and
comes at last to the dead body: then speaks thus to himself: Behold, quoth he,
thy treasure; behold thy delight: why do thou not carry thy dearest away with
thee? Part at least of this Gold, thou have so sweat for, shall bear thee
company. He spoke the word, and made it good indeed; for part of the winding
sheet; well drencht in matter and corruption, he privately made his own. Thence
returning back to his poor cottage, this well-sented booty he placed as a
Looking-glass before his eyes: where several times scoffing at himself, he
said: Lo thou ha^^ now what thou desired; enjoy it, glutt thy self with it:
satisfy thy eyes, feed thy nostrils, yea now I give thee leave to be all nose;
imagine this is a Hand-kercheif sent as a token from thy Dear; why do thou
not wipe thy mouth and nose with this delicate Linen? so long did this noble
combatant mortify himself with stink, till all impure thoughts quite vanquished
fled from his mind. Thus lust, though never so Rampant, was conquered by stink:
thus Cupid, that skilful and wicked Archer, by stench was routed and put to
flight.

Let us call to mind here, I beseech you, how not a small parcel of a winding
sheet, not one member of a rotten carcass, but innumerable bodies of the damned
send forth most intolerable stink not for a few days, but for endless ages.

St. Bonaventure was bold to say: If one only carcass of the damned were here
in this world, it alone would suffice to infect it all.

SECT. 3.
THe fourth cause of stink is, the Devils themselves; who, though spirits,
carry about them this most loathsome smell; yea it is as proper for hell and
Devils to stink, as it was true which the ancients said, hell is full of stench.

Severus Sulpitius recounts, how the Devil clothed in Purple, with a Crown on
his head, appeared to St. Martin, and spoke to him these words: Thou shall know
Martin, in what manner thou may worship me; I am Christ. But Martin being
warned from above not to credit the Father of lies, said: My Lord did not
promise to come in this Equipage: I know Christ all bloody, crowned with
Thorns, and hanging upon a Cross; but this strange King I know not. He had
scarce ended these words, when this counterfeit Christ disappeared: and to the
end it might be manifest, who that King was, and of what kingdom, he left such
a horrible stink behind him, that Martin conceived he was now an inmate of
Hell, and thus he discoursed with himself: If one only Devil stink in this
manner, what will the stench be of all Devils and damned men together?

Antiochus Epiphanes, Match. 9.
a fair picture of a wicked man, being now sensible of vengeance from Heaven,
and having swarms of vermin within his members, stunk so horribly, that his
whole Army was extremely averse from that loathsome malady: Yea, as the
Scripture testifies, he could not endure his own stench. How then in hell shall
he for ever abide the stink of Devils and all that damned crew?

Mezentius the Tyrrhenian King, not unlike to Antiochus, despiser of men and
Gods, proceeded so far in cruelty by his wit, that he slaughtered men not with
the Ax, nor the Gallows, nor fire, but with stench: for to a living man he tied
the putrified body of one dead, so long, till the corruption of the dead killed
the living. A kind of torment most Barbarous, most cruel, and so much the more,
by how much the slower. But what is this compared to the torments in Hell? what
is a noisome smell of a few days to that other which remains for ever? when
therefore we look upon our Fires, Racks and Gibbets, we may justly exclaim, O
mild and gentle torment of Mezentius, which bereaves of life by being fastened
to one stinking carcass! But O death, more dreadful then any death, to be
tortured with the stench of so many devils and damned; always to dye, and
never to make an end of dying!

SECT. 4.
IN the Prisons of Japonia even to this day is matter found sufficient for the
exercise of Christian Fortitude, where many together are thrust into a
loathsome Denn; whence there is no passage out, unless it be to the Sword, the
Gallows, or the fire. What ever these captives feed on, what ever they take
inwardly as meat and drink, what ever they part with again, all that, they keep
amongst them to their incredible torture of their sense of smelling. Hence the
Goals of Iaponia are more infamous then then the stable of Augias King of Elis,
and more unsufferable then death it self. But since we have mentioned the
Prisons of that Country, lo here a late and lively pattern of one of them.

Charles Spinola, by Nation of Genua, by birth a Marquess, Priest of the
Society of Jesus, before he came to be burnt alive for the Faith of Christ, was
for four years space Prisoner in Iaponia,

The Prison where he lived, was sixteen hands in breadth, twelve in height, and
four and twenty in length, altogether in form of a Cage: for it had neither
wall, nor fence of timber, other then scales, which were two fingers assunder
one from another; whereby the Captives were exposed to wind and weather: for
though it was covered over with tiles, yet because the staves stood disjoined,
as Bird-cages do, it gave entrance not only to heat and cold, but also wind,
rain, snow, and all sorts of tempests: Herein were enclosed two and thirty
Prisoners. The Gates which by reason of their straitness scarcely gave way for
a Man's body, were kept close locked. At the side was a narrow window, no bigger
then a good trencher, wherein the Guard put in meat for the Captives. About the
Prison was a way eight handfuls broad, whereon was a double Palizado compacted
of thick and long stakes, sharp at the ends and hedged about the top with
thorns: hereat no entrance was allowed, but at one place. Besides, houses were
erected in two several places, one for the Court of Guard which stood Sentinel
day and night; the other for the Captains service, who frequently commanded the
soldiers to walk the round. In fine the whole place was strongly fortified on
all sides, especially where the chief Gate opened a way to go within the
Palizado. Within this Fortress lived so many years that illustrious Champion of
Christ, without having liberty to set foot out of the pales, which the Guard
refused to grant him. Other circumstances of cruelty, appertaining to this
Prison, can hardly be conceived, much less declared: all the senses of the body
were constrained to undergo their several Torments.

Mervailous was the straitness of the place, where one could neither lie down
without difficulty, nor walk one step forward: so much do Charles his Letters
testify; We are kept in great straits, no one being allowed more space, then
two hands breadth and four inches: whence in the night time they could not
stretch themselves out to take their rest.

Their Victuals were as strait as their room: their life was a continual fast,
and that so strict, that they had meat enough to keep them alive, but not to
satisfy their hunger: their ordinary dainties were a few dishes of cold Rice,
boiled in fair water; besides one mess of Sedges or Gladen, which is a mixture
of unsavory herbs, so bitter, as it could scarcely be eaten: hereunto was added
a small pittance of raw and falt roots, or a couple of salt herring either hot,
or cold. Hereupon the Prisoners were afflicted so much with famine, that when
the soldiers threw them a hard crust of ill made and worse baked bread, they
fed upon it as greedily, as if it had been March-pane, or Sugar-cakes.

Now in regard this Prison was seated on the summit of a high hill, it lay all
open to all injuries of weather: and though in summer the winds gently
breathing did somewhat abate their trouble, yet the violent heats of the Sun
heating on them upon every side, and the great number of prisoners, did not a
little increase their misery: this made Charles affirm, he was continually
moist with sweat both day and night.

Thus were they vexed with summer, but in the winter their sufferings were
intolerable; because they were neither sheltered from the sharpness of the air,
nor from the showers of rain, nor abundance of snow, which the wind blew in
amongst them. They were more sensible of piercing cold, for that they stood in
great want of clothes, which the Soldiers would by no means permit to be
brought in to them. Thus much Charles writ to father Provincial, saying: I
assure your Reverence, here is none of us, who regarding only the inferior
appetite, would not rather be burnt alive, then endure this Prison: Since none
of us have scarsely rags to hide our nakedness; neither will our keepers afford
us so much as a piece of a Matt, to defend us from wind, rain and snow; whereby
our Cold is wholly unsufferable.

Ambrose Fernandez, threescore and nine years old, and Charles his companion in
Prison, being seized with a Palsy through abundance of snow; in twelve hours
time, as it is reported, made an end of his Disease and Life together.

Moreover lest that the eyes should want their torment too, the watch would not
suffer any light at all in the Prison; no, not so much as a Lanthorn that very
night when Ambrose was suddenly taken with his fit, though Charles earnestly
besought them to let him have a candle.

But that which did more terribly afflict the Champions of Christ, was the
continual stench, whereof we treat; and of which Charles makes mention in a
certain Epistle, saying: The grievousness of stink forces me to sigh up to
heaven. This stink arose from that crowd of men in so narrow a Prison, from the
corruption of the Air, and from their own excrements they were compelled to
keep amongst them, and from the sweat of their bodies, from which they were
never free all Summer. The Soldiers were so barbarous, as not to suffer them
to have clean linen brought in, or to let them wash their foul: in so much,
that it is particularly related of Charles, that in three whole years he
neither changed his shirt, nor apparel. Hence so much filth and vermin swarmed
amongst them, that the distressed Captives through biting and stinging of
insects were wholly deprived of rest. And that they might experience alive,
what the dead without feeling endure after death, they were covered from head
to foot with all sorts of vermin bred in the putrefaction of the place: which
corrupt matter, so often as it rained, overflowed the pavement of the Prison. A
kind of torment far more cruel, then at first sight it appears. Against all
these encumbrances they had no other remedy, but Patience and a lively trust in
God: their patience was so great, that Charles in a certain Letter affirms: In
vita Caroli.
This Prison seems to me a Paradise. And truly this prison, though worse then
death, if compared to hell may worthily be esteemed a Paradise

Therefore St. Hierom says of himself: For fear of hell, Ep. 22. ad Eusto.
I condemned my self to prison, and became a companion of Scorpions and wild
Beasts. He that seriously contemplates those fiery Prisons, finds fault with
the straitness of no place, but converts every Prison into Paradise.

SECT. 5.
HEre now, I beseech you, let us make use of discourse to our purpose: Imagine
hell to be nothing else, but a loathsome and starving prison, where a thousand
Captives for stench and vermin can neither sit nor lie conveniently, where
their meat is rotten Rice, and drink muddy Water; where they cannot sleep for
famine, stink and pain; and that all this should continue a thousand years:
Imagine, I say, that hell is but such a Prison as this: notwithstanding, who
would not tremble at the very name of this hell? But if the matter be well
scanned, and weighed according to what is revealed in holy Scripture, it will
manifestly appear, that the most loathsome prisons in Japonia, or any other
barbarous nation, compared to hell, maybe reputed a flourishing Garden, the
delights of Thessaly or Paradise it self. The reason is clear: In our prisons
we have some meat, sleep, and time to rest; in hell is neither meat, sleep, nor
rest; there corrupt Rice would taste like Ambrosia, puddle Water would drink
like Nectar. In our prisons none ever counted a thousand winters; in hell
(which is most sad) a hundred thousand years strike not off one tittle from
eternity: after a thousand millions of ages eterninity is entire.

Again, Our prisons, though dreadful, yet are they without fire, and the
prisoners have a singular comfort, that they can die: the Dens of the damned
are full of flames, and are not free from the second death: because in hell
death is always present, but death without death, and a continual death which
lasts for ever.

Alas! how far are we from thinking on these things, how little do we consider
things worthy our thoughts every hour? Much better in this point, and more
considerate was St. Bernard: I tremble, Sermon. de 5. regionibus.
says he, I quake all over at the remembrance of that country, and all my bones
are shaken: that is a place in which their is a worm immortal, stench
intolerable, hammers striking, palpable darkness.

O Awake all you that are Saints and Sinners, especially you that are slaves to
luxury: if you will not taste how sweet Christ our Lord is, how delicious
Paradise; take a taste at least of the bitterness of hell.

SECT. 6.
THis hellish stink fitly admonishes us, how many ways we offend by smelling:
for we are not only bound to keep in order our eyes, tongue and ears, but our
nose also: though for the most part we will not abide any ill smell. Hence we
frequently have an aversion from distressed Captives and poor sick folk,
because they carry a scent of Garlic rather then Saffron or Musk. Therefore
the Judge out of the clouds will upbraid these tenderlings: I was sick and in
prison, and you did not visit me. Mat. c. 25.
Impatience forsooth is so nice, that where there is any suspicion of stink,
thither we will not be drawn with Coach and Horses. Them we love, their
familiarity we sue for, who breath Cinnamon, Civet and Balsom. But ere long the
case will be altered as Esaias foretold: c. 3.
For sweet savor there shall be stink.

Moreover they sin by smelling, who fill their beds, garments and closets with
sweet odours: yea what they more frequently use, must have a touch of
outlandish perfumes or precious ointments, that they may be still provided to
cherish the nostrils. This, it is true, is not accounted a heinous crime, yet
God established under pain of death: Exodus c. 30.
Such confection you shall not make unto your own uses, because it is holy to
the Lord. What man soever shall make the like, to enjoy the smell thereof,
shall perish out of his People. Hence therefore we sin by intemperance of
smelling: so, many things, which seem to us trifles and of small moment, the
eye of God observes, and deems worthy of punishment.

It is here worth our frequent and serions reflection, to know what the holy
Scripture means, in proposing unto us the stench of brimstone. Genesis c. 19.
Our Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorah brimstone and fire from our Lord out of
heaven: and he subverted these Cities, and all the Country about, all the
Inhabitants of the Cities, and all things that spring of the earth. This shower
of brimstone and stench, punished the heat and stench of lust; this rain was
requisite to cure the ardor of luxury.

Extreme heat is as proper to the fire, as extreme stink to brimstone: since
therefore they were corrupted with lasciviousness of the flesh, they were also
burned with fire and brimstone; that they might learn by their punishment what
their fault deserved. A man addicted to venery is guilty of a twofold pain:
while he lives, he wallows more and more in the mire of impurity; after death
he is thrown into a bath of boiling sulfur.

SECT. 7.
LUst therefore in hell shall in a special manner be tormented with fire and
brimstone: which St. Gregory learnedly asserts; Then, says he, Lib. 4. Mor. c.
17.
the rageing fire burns those, whom carnal delight had polluted. Every wicked
man is enflamed with a proper fire, such as himself had enkindled in his heart
by heat of temporal desires, while he now boyls with these, now with those, and
sets his thoughts a burning more and more with diverse allurements of the world.
Now then let weeping expiate, what the soul negligently given to pleasure did
transgress. It is altogether worthy of credit, that few are plunged into those
flaming gulfs, who were not t^inted with stench of wantonness

Here now, let every one living learn to be wise in time, and beware, he be not
smothered in the puddle of Luxury, Wine and Drunkenness, c. 4.11.
as Osee testifies take away the heart, but most of all fornication: this last
so steals away the heart, that it hardly ever restores it.

It is wholly to be admired, and dreadful above measure, that under one sole
thought (which Divines call deliberate delight) should lurk numberless pains,
endless torments and death everlasting. The business is manifest: Mat. c. 5.
Whosoever shall see a woman, to lust after her, has already committed
adultery with her in his heart. Here one cast of the eye, one only thought, one
secret consent to lust contains innumerable, infinite millions of ages,
wherewith that glance, that thought, that consent is to be revenged, but never
expiated. This I say, is wonderful and horrible to amazement.

I will say what I think: though we perhaps think of these things, yet we do
not thoroughly weigh or examine them. Hence it comes as Isidorus Clarus
delivers it, Tom. 1. Orat. 53.
that we would rather be smudged for a moment, then shining for eternity;
lascivious for an hour, then glorious for ever, such is our inconsideration,
and (to speak plainly) sottish rashness. One that fights for his life might
securely say, I thought not on eternity; so may he, who is defiled with the sin
of envy, lust and avarice. None ever sins grievously, who often thinks on pains
eternal.

Therefore In all thy works remember thy latter ends, Eccl. 7.
and thou will not sin for ever. Remember, I say, thy own later ends, not
others; and do this not hastily, or carelessly: for in this many deceive
themselves, who think of these things, as if they were not concerned in them.
Remember then thy later ends, and amongst other thoughts give some place to
everlasting stench. What is he better for delights, who is to be buried in Hell
fire? Ah! let us be wise in time; lest a moment of pleasure be accompanied with
eternity of pain.

CHAP. VI. The Fifth Torment of Eternity in Hell, is Fire.
After Curtius had assigned a difference amongst several torments, he at length
pronounces: Fire is the worst of punishments. Man's cruelty, witty in the
invention of pains, has found out many exquisite torments, but none sharper,
or more violent then Fire. Valerian the Emperor, who succeeded Decius in
cruelty, if he could have invented any more afflictive then flames, St.
Lawrence must have felt the extremity of it. Tyranny in old time scarce met
with any punishment more barbarous, then with a slow fire to burn and roast men
alive. Fire is the worst and most grievous of punishments.

If any one guilty of treason, or other heinous crimes, could be so burnt a
thousand times, that his pain endured but for an hour; then it might be rightly
said: Fire is the worst of torments. To be burnt, I confess, is a most bitter
death: but, O mild hell! O temperate flames, to be burnt a thousand times
alive! this dismal sentence (to burn a thousand hours) would seem more gentle
to the damned, then a free grant of life would be to one speedily to be
beheaded.

But the decree is firm and stable, it cannot be changed or recal'd: the words
of Christ are most plain: Go into everlasting fire. All Churches of
Christendom openly teach, the wicked must be tormented with flames eternal.

This then is the fifth torment in hell, fire eternal, whereof we will
discourse according to our ability in this present chapter.

SECT. 7.
Profane Poetry had a custom frequently to enterlace one verse with another,
which sacred has not altogether abolisht: hence is that repetition of verses in
the Psalm: The King to come our Lord, come let us adore: come let us adore,
being often iterated. The like is observed by our Savior in his most divine
exhortations; so Mark 9. preaching to the People, he said: It is good for thee
to enter into life maimed, then having two hands to go into hell, into the fire
unquenchable, where their worm dies not, and the fire quenches not. He was
not weary with repeating the same thrice in one place; for a while after he
says: It is good for thee to enter into life, lame, rather then having two
feet, to be cast into the hell of unquenchable fire, where their worm dies
not, and the fire quenches not. Lastly he iterates the same: It is good for
thee with one eye to enter into the Kingdom of God, rather then having two
eyes, to be cast into the hell of fire, where their worm dies not, and the
fire quenches not.

This Canticle Christ our Lord sung before them: as if he had said, sing after
me: Where their worm dies not, and the fire quenches not. Who would not be
terrified with so dreadful threatening from the mouth of God? Questionless, he
that often with attention sings this doleful verse, in a better world shall
sing for ever, a joyful Alleluia. This one testimony were abundantly
sufficient, though the sacred Oracles of Scripture spoke no more.

The difference betwixt hell fire and ours is most notorious, and first in the
manner of burning. Our fire seems to St. Austin painted; that other real: a
difference so palpable, that there scarcely remains any likeness betwixt a true
and painted flame. Here, I beseech you, let us proceed leisurely to the matter
in hand.

How extreme and sharp a pain is it, to have the end of the finger burnt only
for half an hour in a slender Wax light? how much greater to have the whole
hand burnt? But what unspeakable torture to have the whole body? albeit the
fire that burns seem only painted. In Japonia this present age we live in,
Christians were most cruelly tormented with slow fire: amongst these Charles
Spinola was one, of whom in the precedent Chapter: He with three and twenty
more underwent his trial in this sort. A fire was made twenty five hands off
from the Pillars, to which the Martyrs were tied, that the pain might be so
much the sharper, by how much the longer; and that they might be gently
roasted, ere they were burnt. If the fire chanced to break out of any side, it
was straight way forced in again. The Christians were nor bound in chains, but
with Osier-twigs, and that in a loose and careless manner: this was done out of
the Devils subtilty, to the end the Champions of Christ, forced through
extremity of torment, might easily break their bands, and sodeliver themselves
from flames: where this as a sign, was agreed upon amongst the Barbarians,
that whoever endeavored to escape the flames, should be esteemed to have
renounced Christ. While therefore the fire slowly approaching entered into their
bowels, Charles stood immovable, with his eyes fixed in heaven, where, after a
few hours space, he should be partaker of the most ravishing embracements of
Christ, to whom he offered the sacrifice of his body in a Holocaust. That most
bitter torment endured for the space of two or three hours. Father Sebastian
Chimura, native of Japonia, (as it is certainly related) with his arms a cross
before his breast, and his eyes lifted up to heaven, stood three hours alive in
those rageing flames.

A torment so horrible, as not to be expressed, for a man with a slow fire for
three hours to be roasted quick What kind of torment then, O God! how
unspeakable, how incomprehensible, not for two, or three hours, not for a day
or two, or a year, or a thousand years. but eternally to be burnt in hell, and
not be consumed? Here we want words to declare our mind: No one, I will not
say, can express, but not sufficiently conceive that infinite sharpness of
torment. Holy David trembling at the wrath of God, says, Fire shall devour
them, our Lord in his wrath shall trouble them. Ps. 20 As in a Forge a hot iron
so takes in fire, that it seems to be nothing else but fire, and yet remains
iron; so in like manner flames in hell will penetrate the bones of the damned,
together with the marrow.

SECT. 2.
ANother difference of our fire from that in hell is, light and splendourours
burns and shines; that of hell, as God has established, burns, but shines not;
unless it be to increase their torment, who while they lived kept bad company,
by discovering to them their companions in pain. So a thief shall see him that
helped him to steal, so the gamster his play-fellow, so the adulterer her with
whom he sinned; they shall behold each other, and pine away with grief; yea
they would rather be blind, then by seeing make others pains their own.

Excellently well said Isidorus: Sent. li. 1.
Hell fire shall shine to the wicked to increase their misery and damnation, by
seeing what may augment their grief, but nothing which may redound to their
comfort.

The third difference of both fires: ours consumes all, theirs nothing: here of
St. Lib. 21. Civ. de D. c. 4.
Anstin bears ample testimony. If the Salamander lives in fire, and the
Mountains of Sicily long since, and to this day burn, and yet remain entire,
they testify sufficiently, not all that burns is consumed: and the Soul
declares, not all that can suffer pain, can dye. Whence we learn how the bodies
af men perpetually tormented, neither loose their life in flames, nor are
destroyed by burning, but are pained without perishing. Who but God the
Creator of all things gave this property to the flesh of a dead Peacock, that
it might with ease be preserved incorrupt for a whole year? Who bestowed that
cold virtue upon Chaff to keep snow from melting; or that hot quallity, to
bring green fruit to maturity? How wonderful a thing is that when by casting
water on Lime, you set it on fire? Why then shall not God have power to raise
bodies from death, and to torment the damned with fire eternal; who made the
world full of numberless miracles, in heaven, in earth, in the air and waters:
since the world it self is doubtless a greater miracle. and more excellent,
then all those its silled with? Why may we not avouch, that even spirits
incorporeal though wonderfully, yet truly, may be afflicted with pain of
corporeal fire? What therefore God foretold by his Prophet concerning the
punnishment of the damned, shall come to pass, indeed it shall: Their Worm
shall not dye, and their fire shall not be quonched. Esa. 66 24.

The fourth difference: Our fire, according to its fuel, either lives and
enencrea^es or decays and goes out: but but hell fire is nourished by Gods
justice, never to be quenched by any Sea, it is unquenchable. This one word,
unquenchable, thrice repeated by our Lord, will either be of force to make us
fall out with vice, or else it will demonstrate we are worse then brutes.

SECT 3.
THis fire in hell shall be greater, Deuteronomy. c. 25.
or less, as every ones offense deserves; the Divine Justice will use it, as a
scourge; According to the measure of the sin, shall measure also of the stripes
be. Even as amongst many guilty persons one is more sharply chastised then
another with one and the same whip.

Hence appears the madness of certain men, who scarcely aim at any thing, but
hell; their words are these: While we are on the way to the Region of utter
darkness, let us post thither with might and main: let us make much of our
selves, while we may: since, we know, we shall deserve scourges, let us deserve
them to the purpose.

Go, you mad men, go; esteem it your chiefest felicity to swim in pleasures:
glut your selves to day with wine and delights, perchance to morrow you will be
drowned in flames. All the slaves in hell are dreadfully tormented, those most,
who have most grievously and often offended God: For he will give fire and
worms into their flesh, that they may be burnt, and may feel for ever, Judith
16.

Briefly and pithily, above others, does St. Prosper set before our eyes this
punishment of fire eternal: his words are these: Continual sighing, painful
feeling, extreme grief, affliction everlasting, torment souls without killing,
punishes bodies without dying. Now as no pain with us pinches more sharply,
then fire; so nons sooner consumes and ends our pain. What fire then is that,
which tortures most bitterly, and never ceases?

Moses, Gods Ambassador, found out a word signally expressing eternity of
hell fire: A fire, says he, Deuteronomy c. 32.
is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn into the lowest parts of hell. The
Prophet Hieremy spoke to the same purpose: Jerem. c. 17.
Thou have kindled a fire in my fury, it shall burn for ever. The Powder which
kindles eternal flames, is the wrath of our Lord: while we live, we experience
the anger, not the wrath of God. So it is written, Machabees c. 5. Antiochus
being alienated in mind, considered not, that for the sins of them that inhabit
the City, God had been angry a little. God indeed is angry a little, however he
lift up his arms and seem to threaten stripes in good earnest: his anger is yet
little, because joined with clemency. But when this anger is contemned, and
clemency slighted, then patience offended becomes fury, whereby fire is
kindled to burn for ever. You, says God, your selves kindled this fire, when
by your often iterated crimes you despised my clemency: when my anger was
little, you were impatient; you transgressed my Laws, and by contempt fell upon
what was forbidden. Now the time of revenge is come: I will punish you with
horrible and unheard of torments: you have kindled a fire in my fury; now my
fury shall burn even to the lowest part of hell.

Nature, says Seneca, makes pain either to lerable or short: but God the author
of Nature punishes his rebellious and stubborn subjects with long and
intolerable pain: long, because eternal; intolerable, because with most rageing
fire.

SECT. 4.
HEre I most earnestly beg of all Christians, that when any sickness or pain
accosts them, when the Gout, Stone, or any other malady or trouble molests
them, they would lay hold on this thought: this affliction, or pain, were it to
endure ten, a hundred, a thousand years, would you not think you were already
in hell? What would you do then to be set free? Do that now to escape eternal
torments. And know for certain the trouble you suffer, though grievous; the
pain you endure, though excessive, is not so much as a shadow of hell. Here
God strikes with one hand only, and that gently; there he scourges with both,
and that most severely: here he often lays but one finger on you, there with
all his fingers, yea and the whole hand too he lays load on.

Eustachius that Christian Champion, whom we mentioned before, being with Wife
and Children enclosed in a hot glowing Ox of brass, was bitterly tormented;
yet this was no small solace to him, that his pains would quickly have an end,
and his reward would last for ever. Let us deeply imprint this in our memory.

It was frequent with all religious persons by daily meditation, as it were; to
touch these flames eternal. Apud Rosw. c. 44.
Paschasius Deacon relates out of Greek, that twelve Anachorets, as a complete
Senate, met together; and every one for himself declared, what he thought he
had profited to that day, and what chiefly had been the matter of his
contemplation. After all of them had unbosomed themselves, the twelfth and last
spoke what he had to say. I shall set the words entire, that his religious
simplicity may appear: thus then he began his speech. You, fathers, having your
conversation in heaven, are endowed with heavenly wisdom: no wonder. But I,
deeming my self unworthy of those things, perceive my sins, what way soever I
go, keep me comp^ny on every side: therefore I have adjudged my self to hell,
saying: abide thou here, as thou deserves, after a while thou shall be reputed
one of that place. I see therefore such moans, such incessant tears, as cannot
be recounted. I hold some gnashing the teeth, others quaking and trembling all
over from head to foot: then throwing my self upon the ground, and taking up
dust. I beg of God, I may never make trial of those miseries. In like manner I
look upon that immense Sea of boiling fire, whole waves flow too and fro, and
roar exceedingly; so as some may imagine, they ascend even to heaven: in that
dreadful Sea, innumerable men are plunt ged, who jointly with one voice cry and
howl in such sort, as no one ever heard upon earth: they all of them burn, like
withered sticks; the mercy of God having forsaken them, to give place to his
Justice. Here now I bewail mankind, that dare talk, or attend to any thing
else, but to shun those many evils, the world abounds with. These things I
busy my mind with, meditating upon mourning, as our Lord says; and esteeming
my self unworthy either heaven, or earth; I frequently ruminate that of the 51.
Psalm. ver. 4. My tears have been breads unto me day and night.

The like account many have made with themselves: Lo, may every one say, thou
have deserved pains immortal, and that more then once: but whether God have
blotted out all thy sins, thou can not manifest by an acquittance: thou
hopest they are forgiven, or will be, and so do well. Mich. 6
For all that, see thou be wary, and walk carefully with thy Maker, for this
our Lord requires. This is to be wise in time.

SECT. 5.
BUt how many do all quite contrary! They hoard up money with as much anxiety,
as if they meant to carry it into heaven. The smoke of honor and empty
reputation is maintained by them, as some thing sacred; they would rather dye,
then be despised. Yet for all this, these same people now and then asperse
others same so much the more desperately, by how much they are accustomed to
speak favorably in their own behalf. Many are solicitous for bodily welfare,
and will not easily deprive the palate of pleasure it defires.

Thus we march on to eternity, not foreseeing things to come, unmindful of
those past, and eagerly bent upon things present. In this sort most spend their
days; some busy their souls with their Coffers, others with the belly: and yet
every one would seem to be serious, when the most of his trade is in trifles.
Vices in most bear such sway without control, that it may be questioned,
whether they have any earnest belief of heaven and hell.

Foolhardy mortals! Let us learn, I beseech you, to allay the heat of this
violent impetuosity with some spark of flames eternal. Anger and lust have no
small resemblance with rageing fire: scarce any vices, when they get the head,
run on with so much fury. Lust, like an untamed horse, shakes off reason as
that would do his rider. Anger is excellently decyphered by Paulus Orosius:
Lib. 2. con^ Pagan.
Fury void of reason, ranks grief and revenge amongst virtues; whatever anger
contrives, boldness undertakes to execute. Anger, says St. Chrysostom, is a
tyrannical passion: because nothing so much disturbs tranquillity of mind, as
unruly anger. We may mitigate this fury with fire everlasting.

It Is a maxim amongst Physicians: Fire is a remedy against Fire, for if the
finger or hand chance to be burned, it is a present cure to apply it to the
fire, or candlelight: thus fire through likeness will to fire. In like manner
when any place is set on fire, it is usual to shoot off a Gun or Cannon against
it, that the gentler fire may be vanquished by the stronger. Alas! how often are
our hearts inflamed with brutish motions? Against this burning then let us
discharge that roaring Cannon: Depart ye accursed into everlasting fire. What
do thou mean silly wretch? if thou be resolved to perish, it may be easily
done: one hour, one minute of an hour will serve by lust or anger to commit
that, which thou may lament for ever. Thus one fire may become a remedy for
another.

SECT. 6.
WHo ever considers the origin of the Carthusians, It began An, 1082.
will scarcely ever behold any of them without sighing: take briefly this story
which concerns it.

A learned man being dead at Paris, while the duties for him were a doing in
the Church, raised himself up on the beer and with a horrid voice exclaimed: By
the just Judgment of God, I am accused. Here upon the Funeral was put off till
the next day: when singing the same words again, the dead man from his Coffin
cries out: By the just Judgment of God I am judged. It did not yet appear what
was become of him: so they expected till the third day: when being busy, as
before, the dead man shoots out, By the just Judgment of God I am condemned. O
thrice miserable, who shall be so for ever! Now, that, which would make any one
to tremble is: this man in the opinion of all was reputed a Saint of an upright
life; so deceitful are the judgments of men. The whole City of Paris was
witness of what passed. Hereupon Bruno with his Companions left the City, and
betook themselves into the Wilderness, where they might learn rather to
converse in heaven, then upon earth. This was the beginning of the Carthusian
Family.

Whence you may frame this discourse: Is it so? Are men gifted with learning,
and sanctity (as the world thinks) accused, judged and condemned? What then
will become of me poor wretch? I will therefore as much as in me lies, have a
care of my soul. Let others who mind not eternity, pamper their bodies; let
them live and like; to morrow perhaps they will be dust and ashes. These
proceedings I am not enamoured of, these steps I trace not; because I seek for
another period of my travels. If I cannot dwell in those austere mountains of
Carthusia; at least I will decline those meetings, where they sport, and play,
and wast their time in feasting: if I cannot wholly forbear eating f flesh, yet
will I renounce the wantonness thereof: if I cannot keep continual silence, I
will at least forbear back-biteing and lascivious talk: if night and day I be
not in the temple, as religious persons are, yet no hour shall pass wherein I
will not remember God. Henceforth when sufferings occur, I will not only
esteem them little, but mere nothing in comparison of flames eternal. In this
sense venerable St. Tom. 10 Sermon. 109
Austin spoke: What soever, though never so grievous, any one endures in this
life, compared to hell fire, is very little, yea nothing at all.

It is so indeed, all our pains are toys, and slight flea-bitings, in respect
of punishment everlasting. The least torment in hell surpasses the greatest in
this world. Pains, which accompany sickness, become tolerable by frequent
intervals, which are not to be found in hell. Grief, when excessive, makes us
insensible: none can grieve much and long together, except it be in hell:
nature having so sweetly disposed, that if our sorrow be of long continuance,
it is likewise of easy sufferance. In hell sorrow is intolerable, and
exceeding long, because eternal.

CHAP. VII. The Sixth Torment of Eternity in Hell is, the Worm of Conscience.
THe Jewel of ancient Fathers, and star amongst Bishops, St Austin, spoke
agreeably to what we experience: In Psalm. 47.
Amongst all tribulations of man's soul, none is more pinching then a bad
conscience.

It is a great punishment for the Father, to stand by, while his Son is
executed; but much greater if he be compelled to play the Executioner; and most
of all, if the Gibbet, whereon his son is hanged, be erected before his own
door, to serve as a sad spectacle to renew his gr^f. Yet all this is a mear
trific in regard of that punishment, which forces the guilty person to be his
own hangman; as it happens, When the Offender turns his teeth against himself,
and with incessant gripes of conscience tears himself in pieces.

This is the Sixth Torment of Eternity in Hell, which Christ in the conclusion
of one Sermon repeats thrice: Where their Worm dies not, Mark. Chap. 9
Presently after he iterates the same words, Where their Worm dies not: and
ends with the same; Where their Worm dies not. The like method is observed by
the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 66 Who closes his Sermons with, Their Worm dies not.
This punishment must needs be unspeakable, whereof we now treat.

SECT. 1.
I Dolaters of old time understood well, how great a torment was that of a
troubled conscience. Quintilian exclaims: Declam 12.
O sad remembrance, O conscience more grievous then all torments! This same was
the opinion of all wise men. St. In Psa. 143.
Gregory avouches: Amongst many tribulations of man's mind, and numberless
afflictions, none is greater then a guilty conscience. Here (says Seneca) we
must needs acknowledge, Ep. 97.
that the conscience is beaten with its own wickedness; which torments it much,
because perpetual anxiety bears it company. Malice drinks up a great share of
its own poison, it is its own punishment. No guilty person is well at ease.

To these St. Austin subscribes, saying: Whither shall a man fly from himself,
In Psalm. 45.
which way soever he fly, he draws himself after him, and which way he draws
himself, he is a torture to himself. He is his own punishment who has a guilty
conscience. God knows what pain his soul endures, what crosses, what torments,
what hells. How many vices a man has, so many racks he suffers; and these so
much more bitter, by how much more interior.

The reason hereof is at hand: When adversity environs us on every side, when
heaven and earth conspire to trouble us, we may take our refuge to God: tho
none comfort us, God is abundant solace unto us. But if the conscience be
defiled, no content may be found either amongst creatures, or in the creator:
all things are bitter, all full of gall* Whither now would you have recourse?
to God? He is your enemy. To conscience? that is your Executioner. To the
blessed? they are offended. To your companions? they will but increase your
grief. To delights and pleasures? these will more defile the conscience. So
true it is, no punishment is worse, then a wicked conscience.

Nevertheless, while we live the but chery of conscience allows some respite:
its nipping sometimes ceases, either with reading, working, talking, feasting,
traveling, or at least when we are a sleep. But in that castle of cruelty, in
Lucifers territory, it admits of no truce, no breathing space of quiet, no
sleep, no banket^ing, no comfort; night and day this viper gnaws the very heart
strings. Their W^rm dies not.

SECT. 2.
MAny things there are, from whence proceeds this torture of conscience in the
reprobate: the chiefest of all is, The loss of everlasting glory. Heaven is
shut up, hell is shut up, none may pass hence thither: it is decreed: that
heavenly banquet was neglected, it is now irrecoverable, there remains no hope of
beatitude.

Esau, a clownish fellow, and one, who took barbarousness from brutes, amongst
whom he converted, nevertheless he was heinously displeased, when his brother
snatched from him his fathers blessing. For, Genesis c. 27.
Having heard his fathers words, he roared out with a great cry: and being
dismayed, said: bless me also, my father. How then will the damned roar, each
one having the approbation of his conscience? Thou have lost thy fathers
blessing; all right to and hope of heaven is quite gone; for a contemptible
dish of portage thou have sold a Kingdom. Accursed that thou art, excluded from
heaven for all eternity. This Worm which has begun to gnaw thee, thou shall
not be able to shake off thee any more; thou have heard with thine own ears the
Judges sentence: Go, depart from me ye accursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Amidst these swarms of Worms the damned shall behold, Hom. 40 in Evang.
as St. Gregory testifies, the glory of the blessed: To the end that sinners in
pain, may be more tormented, let them see their glory, whom they despised; and
receive new ^orture from their punnishment, whom they vainly loved. Thus the
damned behold the bliss of Saints, but at a great distance. As if one shut up
in a high tower, almost pined away with famine and encompassed with worms and
stench, should look down into most pleasant Gardens, where many much in love
one with another did swim in delights: alas! what a tormenting sight would this
be? this would only serve to augment his sufferings.

If one hunger-starved see a table well furnished with dainties, but dare not
touch a bit, he becomes more hungry; especially if through his own fault he be
barred from eating. This is the condition of the damned: They shall suffer
hunger as dogs, Ps. 58. Their conscience therefore will so afflict them, as not
to give them leave to think on any thing that may delight. A guilty conscience,
like a mad dog, with barking and biteing peretually, will drive the wretches
into most desperate madness. Thus the conscience is wont to revenge it self, it
having formerly not been hearkened to, when it gave wholesome admonition.

SECT 3.
THe second thing, which conscience shall upbraid the damned with, is Neglect
of Virtue and a multitude of crimes. The conscience will rehearse, as out of a
scrowl, all that was ill done, and all that was carelessly omitted. Whence they
will condemn themselves of wicked folly; each ones Conscience casting sloth in
their teeth, will say. How often should thou have prayed, when thy time
passed in sleep, or play? Thy prayers were seldom, sluggish and drowsy ones:
thou payest for it now. How often should thou have fasted, when thou chose
rather to feast, then obey? but now chou payest for it. How often, without
prejudice to thy estate, might thou have given alms, when thou was more
addicted to avarice, then mercy? thou suffers for it now. How often was thou
warned, how often craved to pardon thine enemies, and like a good christian
forget injuries, but thou would not? thou art punished for it now. How often
amidst crosses was patience recommended to thee, but thou refuse to be patient?
therefore thou art now chastised. How often might thou have practiced
humility and charity, which needed but a good will; no labor, no running,
sweat or starving was required here; this might have been done without
whipping, hair-cloth, or other austerity, but thou refused? thou art now justly
scourged. How often was reason brought to invite, to draw thee to the right use
of Sacraments, but thou would not be persuaded to it? suffer hardly.
Opportunity was never wanting to thee, thou always to it: thou had power,
but would not: pay now, pay for thy wickedness. Lo here, how many ways thou
have multiplied sins; when it had been far more easy to have practiced virtue,
then vice.

See, miserable wretch, how with sport and pastin^e thou have lost a Kingdom:
it was in thy power to have been happy for ever, if thou would: a short and
easy labor would have purchased a blessed immortality, which thou refused to
undergo. See, fool, how for a filthy and fading pleasure thou have cast away
immense delights. It appears now thy flesh was dearer to thee then heaven.
Do thou perceive now what pleasures thou pursued? I foretold thee, I warned
thee, I frequently checked thee: But all in vain, I did nothing, but loose my
labor. I am now meet with thee, when all hope is fled from thee, thy folly is
justly recompensed with pain.

Open thine eyes, thou sordid slave, to behold, how thou have lost all, for
wallowing in impurity but a moment. Thou art now remote from the honors,
treasures and delights of the blessed, which it is impossible for thee ever to
attain. Thy lust has plunged thee into this abyss of torments, thy incontinency
has drawn upon thee these unquenchable flames: that merry and short madness of
thine is waited on by eternal mourning. Do thou deplore the privation of
Paradise? thou have deprived thy self. Do thou bewail the joys of heaven were
neglected? thou did neglect them. Do thou lament that heaven gates are
shut? thou did shut them against thy self. At this very instant thou might
have been most happy, but happy thou would not be. It was easy to have
merited heaven, but delays, and careless negligence have brought thee hither,
blind and mad as thou art, whence thou may not go out for eternity. Here is
no freedom, no salvation: despair a hundred, a thousand times, despair
eternally, dye eternally, yet thou can never meet with death after infinite
ages. Thou art cast away from the face of God, because thou averted thy self
from him. Thou perishest by no ones fault, but thine own; perish for ever.

Such Sermons as these the Conscience makes, but too late: all hope is turned
into despair.

A timely penance is so efficacious, that it blots out all sins; and
punishment for sins forgiven, or at least diminishes it; besides, it augments
the favor of God. For this reason, that Angel of the desert St. John, instiled
this one thing into the ears of those that resorted to him: Do penance for the
Kingdom of heaven is at hand, Mat. 3. Do penance. Penance in hell has none of
these effects: it washes not away the least sin, it takes off no pain, nor
restores any of Gods grace. They are enemies to God, who first begin there to
do penance, they obtain nothing, they are wise when it is too late.

All these particulars those banished souls from heaven know well, hence it is,
their worm dies not. They behold, as in a table, their faults committed; they
behold them, and have a horror of them. Their ridiculous vanity, their
superfluity in apparel, and all their vain glory they utterly detest: their
rash judgments and envy: Their base covetousness and sordid luxury they most
furiously curse. They see, unhappy that they are, immense herps of lascivious
thoughts plainly before their eyes. The foulness of intemperance is abominable
to them; the Lethergy of sloth, the fallacy of voluptuousness, the
blandishments of impure love they execrate; but all this comes too late. They
cry out with most bitter, but fruitless moan: All those things are passed away
as a shadow; but in our naughtiness we are consumed, Wisdom. c. 5. It was in
our power to avoid things forbidden, and perform things commanded, but we would
not. This will be the canticle of the conscience for ever: Their worm dies not.

SECT. 4.
THe third cause which racks the Conscience in hell, is; the contemning Gods
grace. Job. c. 29.2.6.
Job made a wise wish when he said: Who will grant me, that I may be according
to the former months, when I washed my feet with butter, and the rock powered
me rivers of oil? Job 29.2.6. It is scarce credible how much it gauls, to be
tumbled down from the height of plenty to the ebb of poverty. The damned know
well, that formerly they rowed in abundance. They had right to heaven, they
might if they would, have inherited that blessed Kingdom. They remember the
butter of divine grace flowed plentifully to them, wherein they might have
bathed themselves, but they refused it. They apprehend most lively, that rivers
of oil from the rock, and fountains of divine love and mercy were streamed upon
them by Christ: all which through their own fault they neglected. Now they cry
out, but in vain: Who will grant us that we may be according to the former
months, when we washed, or might wash, our feet with butter, and the rock
Christ powered out rivers of oil, of his precious blood? now neither one drop
of oil, nor butter runs any more. The fountain of Gods mercy is dried up: the
rivers of divine grace stream not at all. The blood of the heavenly Lamb was
shed in vain for us; the pains and death of Christ avail us nothing; all done
for us is bootless: alas! we are utterly undone.

This will rent asunder the hearts of the damned, that with slight labor, with
a resolute will they might have won heaven, but would not; that grace offered
them a thousand times, they a thousand times rejected. Hence the wretches will
furiously rage against themselves, and will incessantly sing to themselves this
doleful song: O time precious above measure! O days! O hours estimable above
gold, whither are you gone, never to return! We blind and senseless, with eyes
and ears shut, loosed the reins to lust, and by joint example drew one another
to destruction. Hither, unhappy that we are, we posted amain; and desp^sing all
admonition ran upon death, alas! death eternal. What good do we reap now from
all that the deceitful world fobb'd us with? the memory of pleasures past is
worse then death to us: all delight is gone and quite vanished away: which
though we might have enjoyed for some ages, what had those joys been to these
torments? Alas! we leaped only at a shadow of bitter pleasure. Who was it, that
did so cruelly bewitch us?

O that we had but once a year seriously meditated on eternity! O that we had
now but one day, one sole hour at our own disposal!

But O, these wishes are in vain: we are utterly undone, all our hope is turned
into despair. Accursed be the day in which we were born: accursed be God, by
whom we were created.

Here I stop my pen, and send back these impious words thither, from whence
they came. Let him be wise and beware in time, whoever desires to escape this
dreadful butchery of conscience.

SECT. 5.
IT were incredible, if our eyes were not witnesses, how industrious and witty,
how attentive and serious, how watchful and quick-sighted, how knowing and wary
we are in amassing together things of this world. When affairs of the body are
to be looked after, then it is, we are wise, careful and laborious: here is the
center of our lives and actions. Behold, I pray, how exquisitely some have
their Garments Embroydered; see, what artificial pictures, edifices and statues
others possess; look upon that fine linen, which many wear, for whiteness like
snow, for thinness equal to the spiders web, look upon those masterpieces of
art, clocks, music, with other foreign merchandise: O how acute and
unfatigable are we in raising works of handy-craft to perfection, in heaping up
wealth, in dispatching worldly business, and attaining honor! When as, God
knows, all these things are fading, transitory, and pass away in a moment.

Contrary-wise when any thing is to be done for heaven, good Lord! how dull and
stupid, how slothful and heedless, how frosen and drowsy are we? In this
business alone we go coldly to work, we languish, we loyter, we lay us down by
the way. T. Kem. l. 3 c. 3.
It was most truly spoken: For a little Prebend a long journey is undertaken;
for everlasting life, many will scarce once lift a foot from the ground. Here
we are all, as if we were struck with a palsy; we snort, and the devil stands
sentinel. But when the soul once awakes indeed, the conscience will no longer
be lulled a sleep: it will pinch, gnaw, vex and torture for eternity. Their
Worm dies not.

This Worm is fed with unexplicable dolours, with sorrow void of all comfort.
The damned grieve for the loss of beatitude without hope of ever repairing that
immense damage: they think without ceasing, it was their own folly drowned them
in that Ocean of sadness; neither will it ever be in their power to divert
their fancy from that dismal thought to any other, that may exhilerate them.

St. Bernard did contemplate these things attentively: Lib. ^, de^ co^fi^. c.
12.
What is so painful, says he, as always to have a mind of that which you shall
never compass and always to loath that you shall ever have? The damned shall
for ever covet that, which they shall never obtain; and what they utterly
dislike they must endure eternally. Amongst so great a multitude of
spectatours, no ones eye will be more troublesome, then every ones to himself.
There is no sight either in heaven, or earth which the darksome conscience
would rather avoid, but cannot. Darkness is not covered from it self; it
beholds it self, that can discover nothing else. The works of darkness follow
them, they can hide themselves no where from darkness, no not in darkness it
self. Here is the worm that dies not, the remembrance of things past; which
being once cast into, or rather bred in the soul by sin, sticks so fast, that
henceforth it can never be plucked away. It does not cease to gnaw the
conscience, wherewith being fed, as with inconsumptive food, it preserves its
life perpetually. I tremble at this gnawing worm, Mat. 2^
and living death: I tremble for fear of falling into the hands of living
death, and dying life.

Therefore while the soul endures, the memory endures: but what an one? stained
with sins, rough with crimes, swollen with vanity, evergrown and neglected
through contempt. All which, though they have gone before, yet are they not
passed: they have passed from the hand to the mind. That, which is done, cannot
be undone: wherefore though the doing was in time, yet the having been done
remains for ever: that does not pass away with time, which goes away beyond all
time. It is therefore necessary that should torment for ever, which thou shall
ever remember to have done amiss. Hitherto St. Bernard.

SECT. 6.
ADivine and Suffragan Bishop of St. Th Can
Dominicks Order, a faithful writer of the History of his time, relates a
strange passage in this manner: A Bishop there was in in Germany, of Princely
race, from which by his life and means he did degenerate. This same man at
first was somewhat bashful in gapeing after gold, and in giving way to secret
venery; afterward he proceeded further, so, as not careing to amend his life,
he loosed the reins to things forbidden; and freely abandoned him self to
rapine and luxury. God checked him sundry ways; one while by sickness, another
while by other calamities inviting him to reform his life. In fine, as he led a
debaucht life, so he took a miserable end. At that very time Conrade Bishop of
Hilde^heim, was got out a bed to go to Mattins: Hildemensis.
which ended, he betook himself to his study, to prepare for a Sermon next day.
Here being for some space in an ecstasy, he thought he saw a Bishop with a
Mitre on his head, but with his face covered, hurried away to judgment:
Presently his accusers laid to his charge, that he was chiefly infamous for
rapine, and guilty of lust. Here the Judge spoke to some of his attendance;
Examine his cause, and give sentence. They did so: and forthwith the
Executioners took away from the condemned Person his Mitre, Ring, and other
Ornaments, which they cast at the feet of the supreme Judge. The attends rise
up, and, as they go away, each one for a conclusion of their Judgment, says:
Therefore while we have time, Paul. Gala^. c 6. us 10.
let us work good to all.

These things the foresaid Bishop beheld; who after he came to himself; found
his head busied with enquiring, what Bishop it might be, which died at that
time.

When, lo one weeping at the Gate declares, how his Master, (whom he named)
coming last evening ino the next village, was suddenly dead. Conrade at this
lamentable accident fetched a deep sigh, resolving with tears night and day to
repeat: While we have time, let us work good to all. An impure conscience is
here unquiet, hereafter it will be furiously tormented for ever.

SECT. 7.
THe force of conscience is incredible, especially after the scene of this life
is acted: for in the presence of God every one will so blush at his own faults,
that though heaven were set open, and the soul uncleansed were invited to
enter; nevertheless through horror of its own stains it would fly back, and
refuse to go in, till all its spots were expiated. So much the conscience has
aversion of, and blushes at her own offenses.

Therefore while we have time, let us work good to all: for as St. Austin
discourses: Who ever does not deceive himself by flattery, understands well, in
how great danger of eternal death, and how far short of perfect holiness he
lives during his pilgrimage here on earth.

Now then let us look to it, and not resist the wholesome warning our conscience
gives us. The conscience is never silent, if it meet with a peaceable and
attentive hearer. And truly this is exceeding profitable, so to feel the worm
in our bosom here, as not to be troubled with it hereafter eternally. St. Sermon.
DeiCon vert.
Bernard attests thus much, saying: It is best then to feel the worm, when it
may be stilled. Therefore let it bite now, that it may dye, and so bite no
more. While it bites here, it feeds upon what is putrified, and biteing
consume; it, that it may be consumed together with it, lest being made much of,
it should become immortal.

It is therefore much better to be warned here then by our conscience to be
murdered hereafter: for, as the same Saint adds, Lib. de Anim^
Those who are exilled from heaven shall be tortured in flesh with fire, and in
spirit by the word of conscience. There is pain unsuff^rable, horrible fear,
incomparable stench, death of soul and body, without hope of pardon and mercy.
Yet shall they dye so, as that they shall ever l^ve; and so live that they
shall ever dye.

What shall we do, O mortals? Our life is short, the way long, the end of the
way doubtful, time little, nothing more certain then death, nor uncertain then
the hour, the continuance of reward and pain everlasting, both which depend on
a moment for eternity. What then O mortals, what shall we do?

CHAP. VIII. The Seventh Torment of Eternity in Hell is, the Place, and Company.
CAto Censor, A man of approved virtue was accustomed to give this admonition
to them, who were about to buy Land, that in the first place they should be
sure to provide for good neighbors. An ill neighbor, is a great evil: whence
that saying of Themistocles, delivered by Plutarch, is well known; for, having
a farm to sell he commanded the crier, who gave notice of the sale, he should
likewise certify, That it had good neighbors. A ruinous and inconvenient
building, if it be near bad company, will meet with few buyers.

All exiled from heaven have such places of abode, that our styes, and
dogkennels compared to them, might seem places or lodgings fit for Kings.
Besides, the inconveniency of the place, there is company displeasing beyond
expression, of so many millions of devils and damned men, all sworn enemies to
God, so as, if they were in Paradise; they would make one abhor it.

This then is the seventh torment of eternity in hell, the place and company;
that miserable above measure, this detestable beyond imagination. The Judge in
his definitive sentence comprehended both, saying: This house of flames, this
dreadful prison, which was prepared for the devil and his angels, did not
concern you in the beginning: Mat. 25
but in regard you valued more the familiarity of mine enemies, then my favor,
Go now, go and dwell amongst them, whose company heretofore you were so much
taken with: go into fire everlasting, which was not prepared for you, but for
the devil and his angels. It sometimes comes to pass, that a Schoolmaster for
the fault of on^, commands rods to be made ready; but for as much, as others by
and by become faulty too, he says: These rods were not tied together for you,
but because you have committed the same offense with that untoward boy, you
shall likewise be whipped with him.

In like manner Christ speaks to his enemies: My intent was you should have
enjoyed the society of Angels; Paradise was made ready for you: but since you
have cast away all goodness, and would not obey me, but the devil: Go
therefore, go, go, and make your abode in the devils den; remain in that
company your selves have provided. Of this both place and company we now treat.

SECT. 1.
BEfore we enter into the Place, lets take a view of the ground. Antientently
at the left hand of the entrance into Yrimalcions house, not far from the
Porters lodge, was painted upon the wall a mighty dog in a chain, over whom was
written in Capital Letters; Take heed, take heed of the dog.

Many such dogs as these are in hell: so many Cerberus's, as devils, which are
far more ravenous then all Cerberus's. Here both by writing and words I
exclaim: Take heed, take heed of these dogs. But now let us look upon the place.

It is agreed upon as well by ancient Fathers, as Divines, that those
comfortless caverns of hell are seated in the center of the earth: holy writ
likewise affirms the same. For after they, who rebelled against Moses, were
separated from the people of God: Number. 16, v 32
The earth brake in sunder under their feet: and opening her mouth, devoured
them with their tabernacles, and all their substance: and they went down into
hell quick covered with the ground. This prison of the wicked is rightly seated
in the lowest place, as the habitation of the blessed is on the highest,
noblest, and most pleasant.

Of that prison we may frame this discourse: In case the damned amount to
thirty times a thousand millions of men, or a hundred thousand millions and
that fiery prison according to its whole dimenfion of height, breadth and length
contain one German mile, it will have room enough for that wonderful number of
men. Streitness suits well with the prison; it being proper for liberty to
enjoy an ample habitation. But the crowd of the damned, those dogs and swine,
shall dwell in a narrow compass, and shall be like grapes in a wine press, or
salt harrings in a barrel, or bricks in a kill, or pieces of wood in a pyle, or
hot glowing coals in an iron-grate, or like sheep butchered in the shambles;
they shall be close and streitly thronged together. The narrowness of the
prison, and their being pressed one near to another, makes no small addition to
their torments. Into this slender compass God will conveigh all the sewers and
filth of the world.

The greatest joy this world affords is not a little diminisht by loathsomness
of place. Who would esteem it a pleasure to take up his quarters for any long
time in a tallow-chandlers, or curriers shop, in Augias stable, or in a vault
filled with rotten carcasses? so ungrateful a place as this, by reason of its
stench, would quite banish out of the breast all thoughts of pleasure. What
then will happen in that forge of Gods wrath, in that horrid cave of eternity,
wherce all joy is removed, and where there is nothing to be found, but extreme
dolours? How much will this deep, obscure and stenchful place increase their
pains? yea, what I tremble to think of, a place most remote from heaven, and
closely shut up with a thousand locks, iron grates, and percullises?

Abraham cries out from above: Luke c. 16.
Between us and you there is fixed a great Chaos, (a Chaos of flames:) that
they which will pass from hence to you, may not, neither go from thence
hither. And yet Abraham's abode was not in heaven.

In our prisons there is ample liberty, if you look upon the habitations of the
damned: Their Sepulchers, Psa 43.
their houses for ever. Princes and Kings, Emperors and Popes are shut up in
this house: neither has Craesus, nor Alexander any other dwelling place St.
Luke c. 16. bears testimony: The rich man also dyed: and he was buried in hell.
O profound Sepulcher! Into this now are his stately buildings and towers
converted, into this his pleasant fountains and triumphal arches, into this his
groves and flourishing gardens, into this his bathes, his theaters, and
magnificent palaces: his whole house is no more, then a narrow tomb. Neither do
they live here at their freedom and liberty, but are enchained and fast bound.
The great King gave command Mat. 22. Bind his hands and feet; and cast him into
utter darkness. These guilty persons cannot walk, nor so much as stir whither
they will: they are tied hand and foot, and as if they were fastened to Spits,
they become fuel to that devouring fire.

SECT. 2.
IT is manifest out of ancient history, that several men, and those none of the
vulgar sort, were enclosed in cages, as if they had been outlandish birds.

Alexander the great commanded Callisthenes Olyntheus, Sen and others.
either for suspicion of treason, or for persuading the King not to affect the
title of Lord from the Athenians, to have his ears, lips and nostrils cut off,
and to be cruelly mangled in other members, whereby be became a spectacle of
misery and deformity, and then to be shut up in an iron cage with a dog, and so
carried about for a show. Lysimachus, who had been his Scholar, moved with
compassion to so great a man, gave him poison, thereby to put a period to the
punishment his faults deserved not, but his freedom in speaking. O happy cage
of Callisthenes; compared to the flaming prisons the damned endure!

The like misfortune, which befell Callisthenes, has also involved others.
Tamerlan, the worlds terror, Lissius pol, c. 5.
having overcome Bajaset the Turkish Monarck, shut him up in a cage of Iron,
and so in derision showed him to all would see him three years together.

Christiern King of Denmark, in the year one thousand, five hundred, Ex Jovio.
twenty two became an Apostate from Christian religion. Afterward by reason of
his cruelty he was deprived of three Kingdoms, miserably condemned to perpetual
bondage, and in the year one thoussand, five hundred, thirty two, like an
unruly beast, was cast into a grate, where he ended his days. But O gentle
prisons of Bajaset and Christiern, if compared to those of the damned!

Valerian a Roman Emperor received no better usage from Sapores King of
Persia: Baron. ad An. 262.
for being encaged as well as the former, he was never permitted to stir out,
but when he was forced, instead of a footstool, to lead his back to Sapores to
mount on horseback. In fine Valerian had his skin pulled off, and his flesh
rubbed with salt. Thus also was Renzus son to Frederick imprisoned till death.

After the same manner Mark Bishop of Arethusa, Suidas,
famous for eloquence and sanctity of life, a most renowned Martyr, in the time
of Julian the Apostate, was first committed to boys to be stabed with bodkins,
then besmeared with brine and honey was enclosed in a cage, hung in the open air
under the scorching sun, and so was exposed as a prey to hornets, wasps, gnats
and flies, that he might feel himself dye.

But O how mild were these punishments! how delightsome these cages, in respect
of theirs in hell! All torment here is but imaginary, and a mere shadow: as
being solaced either with the shortness of their continuance, or sweetened with
the hope of everlasting reward: we know our present tribulation is light and
momentary.

Hence the Champions of God, the more pain they endure, the greater recompense
they expect Whereas those prisoners in hell neither receive comfort from time
past, which they neglected; nor from that to come wherein their torments shall
continue for ever. Divine Justice has so decreed, that the wicked shall find
their enemies their executioners, whose persuasions they followed, and whose
friendship they formerly sued for: and forasmuch as heretofore they haunted
pleasant meddows to sport themselves in, Wisd. 2
they shall now inhabit straight cages for their punishment. This shall be
their condition for eternity.

SECT. 3.
WEre there no other torment for souls guilty of eternal death, then to be shut
up in so loathsome a prison amongst so many sworn enemies for ever; this, this
alone would be abundantly enough. What then shall I say of their many other
torments, of their worm of conscience, their hunger, thirst and perpetual
flames, which shall never have an end? their torments are many indeed, which
last for eternity; eternity, which may be measured, if you regard its
beginning; but if you seek for an end of it, which you shall never find, it is
wholly unmeasurable.

The Prophet Esaias chap. 34. has a lively description of this place of
everlasting banishment: The torrents thereof, says he, shall be turned into
pitch, and the ground thereof into brimstone: and the land thereof shall be
into burning pitch. St. Apoc. c. 19. Matthew. ^ c. 13. c. 106
John calls this prison a Pool of fire and brimstone. Christ, the furnace of
fire. Holy Job, the dark land, ohat is covered with the midst of death: a land
of misery and darkness, where is the shadow of death, and no order, but
everlasting horror inhabiteth.

Here, say you, I would gladly be informed, how to frame a lively and lasting
conceit of this unconsumable Aetna, this recepticle of all miseries, whereby I
might frequently have a remembrance of it.

To this purpose I call to mind a conference, which passed betwixt two intimate
friends; the one whereof might well be termed Orestes, the other Pylades: this
demanded to know, in what manner he might best represent to himself that
dungeon of the damned. Whereunto Orestes replied, in my judgment, the business
is to be performed in this sort: Let some one, in the spring or autumn, when
the season of the year is sharpest, be conveyed down into the bottom of a deep
pit under ground, where there is neither fire, nor table, nor bed. Hither once
a day let a crust of mouldy-hard bread, with a small cup of stinking water, be
cast down by a rope: this dainty fare must likewise be seasoned with reading
this lecture, that the party so enthralled is without ceasing to meditate on
eternity both day and night. Well, said Pylades: I deem that an efficacious way
to imprint eternity in the mind. Yet oblige me with a further courtesy, and
make me partaker of a more ample discourse touching the man before mentioned.

SECT. 4.
THat man in the beginning will esteem three weeks as irksome, as three whole
years: and if he chance to be restored again to his liberty, he will openly
profess his sufferings were excessive. What were his sufferings I pray? hunger,
thirst, cold, want of sleep, with privation of all comfort. Hitherto the
miscreant says true. But observe, I beseech you, how tolerable this prison is,
how plentiful his diet, what freedom he seems to enjoy, when you look down upon
that close imprisonment in hell: he had his share of meat and drink to preserve
his life, in hell is neither one drop, nor crum of comfort.

Besides no one derided that poor man in the pit, none insulted over him, no
one loaded him with stripes; whereas in hell they are perpetually oppressed
with all these calamities.

Again, that silly wretch might pass over the day in quiet and the night in
rest, though both were accompanied with difficulty; but in hell is not so much
as one sole minute of ease, or sleep to be found.

Moreover, that man's breast was not torn to pieces with sadness; all grief,
horror amazement, howling, anguish and despair did not any ways afflict him: as
they do incessantly them in hell.

That man's thraldom was free from torments, he was molested with no other
disease then hunger, thirst and cold: but the damned are racked in all the
members of their bodies, and their souls being drencht in affliction always
live in flames and never dye: this death is more bitter to them then death it
self.

In a word, albeit that Caitif be remote from delights, though he behold no
sun, haven o company, but be debarred all sport and relaxation of mind; yet he
cherrishes this hope in his bosom, that one day he shall enjoy himself again,
he shall see the suns face, meet with his beloved companions, and return afresh
to his accustomed pastimes and delights. Whereas, God wot, all their hope in
hell is changed into despair: they know certainly at their first entrance
thither, they must never look upon the sun any more, they must never meet again
either with their wished for company, or content. The sight of God, the society
of Angels, together with all celestial pleasure is quite taken from them
eternally without hope of recovery: Despair lives in hell, as at home; it
spares none of these Inhabitants. Lo here, O Christians with what facility we
may gain knowledge of Eternity.

SECT 5.
A Learned man of St. Dominicks Order recounts this passage to my present
purpose: Joan Junier.
A Jester, says he, a nimble-witted buffon, in an assembly of noble men, took
upon him to play the preacher, whom he had heard that morning; and with an
intent to draw mirth out of serious matters he thus begun his Sermon: You know,
my masters, how much my company conduces to your jovial entertainment; whether
you be carousing, feasting, gaming or dancing I am still, as the fool in the
play, ready to cheer you up. But listen, I beseech you, to what lately befell
me: as I lay upon a down bed and could not sleep, I began to think with my
self: if thou were so fast bound here for twenty, or thirty years space, that
thou could neither stir hand, nor foot. what would thou do to purchase
liberty? How if thou could riot otherwise obtain it, then by bidding adieu to
all company keeping and not? I said to my self, nay I would swear it (if need
required) that I would utterly forswear all my potcompanions, all jollity, play
and danceing, rather then be in this sort debarred of my freedom. But say, I
pray thee, what course would thou take, if thou were in Pluto's Court; not
buried in feathers, but flames; not amidst ripplers, but devils; where all
chatting for merriment is wholly forbidden, where one small drop of water is no
less precious, then a celler stored with the choicest canary: whither one may
enter, as beasts did to the sick Lion, whose footsteps you might behold all
going in, but none coming out again? To go down into hell is an easy matter;
but who was ever seen to have returned thence? Now then if thou were there,
tell me seriously, what would thou do?

His Sermon being thus ended, he found himself so suddenly changed; that one
might justly persuade himself, he was become another Porphyrius, who played the
Jester to Julian the Emperor; and who, whiles acting upon the stage, he scoffed
at the rites of Christian Religion, found himself suddenly changed into another
man, and openly professed he was a christian: yea and as a christian obtained the
crown of Martyrdom with the loss of his head. So serious conclusions follow
out of jesting premises: so that other caviller drew earnest out of jest, to
his own great advantage and others.

It Is a true and sure way of reasoning, from a slight and transitory pain to
frame a right estimate of pains eternal. To which purpose give ear to S.
Hieroms admonition: Ad Po. and Ocean.
Do we think, brethren, that the Prophets Preach in Jest, the Apostles speak in
a laughing manner, or Christ thunders out menaces like a child? Those are no
Jests, which are accompanied with real torments.

SECT. 6.
BEsides the place of hell, which is infamous for all kinds of torments; there
is likewise company by all means detestable. As the blessed in heaven will be
replenisht with unexplicable delight when they behold Christ the worlds
Savior, his most glorious Mother and Disciples, together with so many Quires
of Angels, and millions of triumphant Saints: So the reprobate will receive an
addition to their horrid torments from that execrable company, from which they
shall never be delivered. What sentiment would thou be of, if sound and in
health, thou should be constrained to lodge night and day in the same Hospital
with sick folks covered over with ulcers, sores and rottenness? What if thou
should see their limms flowing in their own putrified matter and corruption?
How would thou be able to endure the stench of some, the mourning and
lamentations of others; the sighs of this, the complaints of that man; the
cough of the lungs in one, and in another wailing till he give up the ghost? O
what a hell, say thou, would this life be! Nay, how mere a nothing would this
be compared to hell! that, which thou call stench, would smell like balsome;
these moans would be harmonious music; that pain thou speak of, would prove
a play-game; it is a paradise indeed, thou look on as a hell. For if it be
troublesome to converse with a few who hate thee; what may be imagined more
grievous, then to abide there, where no one loves another, but every ones
breast boyles with hatred toward each other?

These fashions are in request in Satan's Court; all burn with such deadly
hatred, that, if it were in their power, they would tear one another peicemeal
with their teeth. For these inmates of hell extremely abhor the image of God
both in themselves and others: yea, as they have an excessive spleen against
God, so they have a tooth against every thing that resembles him. How cumberson
then is it to live amongst such domestics, as these?

Amongst this accursed crew the eyes shall be chiefly tormented with the
presence of them, who have any way been the cause of their condemnation;
whether they be parents, or wife, or children, or friends, or other companions
in sin: amongst whom the devils are not to be reckoned in the last place, who,
by the judgment of God (as Divines affirm) shall be appointed to torment men,
that they may find by experience to what tyrants they submitted themselves.
Never to be able to rid themselves of this society, is a far greater torment,
then to be cast into a ditchful of snakes, without ever being released thence;
or to be continually stung by those poisonous creatures, and never killed by
them.

You would easily imagine, this unsociable company might be of force
sufficient, to make us eschesh the wicked meetings of drunkards, gamesters,
perjured persons, and lascivious talkers, whose vices often stick close to
such, as communicate with them: especially being we ought to beware, lest we
hurt others by our bad example. Christ makes this public proclamation to the
world, Matthew. 18. Woe be to the world for scandals: he that shall scandalize one
of these little ones that believe in me, it is expedient for him that a
Millstone be hanged about his neck and that he be drowned in the depths of the
sea. Woe be to the world for scandals: Woe be to that man by whom scandal comes.
Sins of ill example, which we call scandals, bring with them hot service in
Lucifers kingdom. Therefore Eccles 7. It is better to go to the house of
mourning, then to the house of banketting: for in that the end of all men is
signified, and he that lives thinks what shall be.

It behooves every one to look to himself, while he has time. All men have two
ways to enter into eternity, out of which there is no way left to return. Have
thou made thy entry into heaven? fear not, thou shall never be thrust out
again. Has hell taken possession of thee? rest assured, no door, no nor so
much as a chink, will ever afford thee passage thence: thou art now become a
Citizen, thou have taken house-room, thou have settled thy abode: here thou
must dwell eternally. Thou know well that warning of Ecclesiastes, chapter 11. If
the Tree shall fall to the South, or to the North, in what place soever it
shall fall, there shall it be.

CHAP. IX. The Eighth Torment of Eternity in Hell is, Despair.
THe ancient Thebans mervailed, that the commonwealth of the Lacedaemonians
did so flourish, that their Citizens were kept in such order, as vices were
seldom heard of amongst them. Hereupon they sent Philonius the Philosopher to
pry into their proceedings, and to bring back in writing what he observed
either concerning their laws, or government. Philonius having curiously marked
all particulars returned to Thebes, where being to give an account of his
Embassy in public, he laid open upon the Theater, rods, snares, whips, racks,
axes, wheels, and gibbets; then after some time of silence, he broke forth into
these words: Behold, quoth he, and become eyewitnesses, you Theban Citizens,
what keeps the Lacedaemonians in order: no one offends amongst them, who is not
forthwith chastised: virtue goes not without reward, nor vice free from
punishment: hence it is, their manners are better then ours.

God, the worlds lawgiver, with admirable wisdom performs his part; and that
orderly discipline may not go to wrack, he does not threaten gibbets, racks,
nor wheels; but hell fire, which burns for ever. Nevertheless (such is man's
impiety) the world dares still transgress the laws of God: what, I pray, would
not man's boldness attempt, if they were only punishable for an hour, or a day;
or to be imprisoned for a year or two? To all such as swerve from Gods
commands, we know, thraldom without end, pains eternal are decreed; and yet
(which cannot be spoken without wonder,) transgressors of divine laws are
Numberless.

Whence, (I beseech you) does this incredible temerity proceed? The fear of
God is not before their eyes, Psalm 13. because the mercy of God, so often as
men offend, hinders him from throwing down Thunderbolts upon the offenders,
therefore they become audacious above measure: whence many void of fear trample
the ordinations of Heaven under foot, and loose the reins to wickedness
forbidden. A deceitful hope sooths many up, and leads them insensibly into the
gulf of despair; which is that torment of eternity we now treat of.

SECT. 1.
HOpe in this world is an admirable lenitive for all sorts of affliction, and
miseries whatever: it may fitly be termed a Sovereign ointment, that appeases
all our aggrievances. Hope chiefly regards profit and the end: though tears
trickle down abundantly, yet they are easily wiped away with this sponge. Those
noble champions of Christ, those invincible Martyrs, though they suffered much,
yet were they much comforted with the fruits of patience. The like solace are
they partakers of (to speak with St. Bernard) who do good and suffer evil.

It happens sometimes that one purchases a Farm, for which he pays many
thousand crowns, and yet for all that says, he does not repent him of his
bargain, because all his charges will in time come back again with interest.
Their torments in hell are exceedingly increased, for that their sufferings
bring them in no profit: whereas with us one small tear, so it be serious, is
able to wash away many heinous offenses: it is not so with them, for, albeit
their pains be never so grievous, yet do they not expiat one venial sin, nor
deserve so much as a drop of water.

How heavy a burden is it for pesants and laborers to work without wages! So
is all toil without hope of recompense. In this manner slaves, who labor for
their masters, not themselves, esteem their pains troublesome, because
fruitless; yet they may receive comfort from the end of their labors, which
death brings to a period. This is a benefit wholly denied to those slaves in
hell, who shall seek for death, Apoc: c. 9. Sermon. 112.
and shall not find it: they shall desire to dye, and death shall fly from
them. The wicked, says S. Austin, shall live in their torments: but they shall
so live in them, as if it were possible, they would dye; but no one makes an
end of them, that their pains may last for ever. Their pains there are not only
endless, but likewise so perpetually renewed, as that they are always new. They
shall burn, says Job, c. 20. and all sorrow shall fall upon them. Whence they
will be seized with most desperate fury, and most furious despair.

Some indeed despair, and that but once, because death allows them no longer
time. But in hell they despair a thousand times an hour, yea their despair is
without ceasing, like unto a continual or hectic fever. Whatever the damned
think on, that is to them rageing despair: they would, if it were in their
power, tear themselves in pieces with their teeth, stabbe themselves all over
with sharp knives, and draw death to them with open arms: but death will fly
from them.

SECT. 2.
SUch as despair through extreme adversity, sometimes bereave themselves of life
by water, sword, halter, poison or precipices, fancying hereby they shall find
an end of their life and misery together: whereas in hell no end may be found
either of calamity, life or death. There is no water, no sword, no halter, no
poison, no precipice can kill them, howbeit all these particulars do there
torment them, as does also continual and never ending despair. At which the
Judges final sentence does chiefly aim: Depart from me accursed, into
everlasting fire: from this no appeal may be granted, the decree is
irrevocable; and, as St. Austin speaks, this sentence of God is unchangable.

The Angel which St. Apoc. c. 10.
John saw swore by him that lives for ever and ever, that there shall be time
no more. But there shall be eternity, and a reward of things done in time. This
immutable oath of the Angel, this fatal sentence of our Lord, the damned shall
so certainly perceive, that this storm of words, this horrible thunder shall
perpetually sound in their ears: into fire everlasting, into fire everlasting,
everlasting alas! unto fire everlasting. Not one syllable or tittle of these
words fail of their effects: these words which the damned hear and understand,
we hear and understand not.

Now as the habitation of the blessed is replenished with all delight, so that
of the damned is an epitome or abridgment of all dolours. What ever is
afflictive, deplorable or dreadful, those beneath are sensible of; what ever is
delightful, pleasing or comfortable, those above do plentifully participate.

In this world of ours no malady so great, but has its remedy: all affliction
may, if we will, be mitigated. Our grief is frequently appeased by reason, by
rest, by pleasing conversation, and chiefly by process of time: one while our
friends and kindred, another while such as have suffered the like disasters,
but principally hope either wipes away, or asswages our Calamity. Whereas, God
knows, in that region of utter desolation all gates are shut to the least
solace: No ease no comfort may be expected from heaven, or earth; from their
condition past, present, or to come. What way soever they turn their eyes, they
behold arrows of eternal death shot against them. On every side they are
environed with mourning and anguish, grief and extreme sadness, together with
torments exceeding all number. They may truly say: The sorrows of death have
compassed me, Psalm. 114 and the pangs of despair: we have found tribulation and
wailing. Hereupon they will not cease to curse the name of our Lord perpetually.

SECT. 3.
THis despair of the wicked will be augmented above measure by the certain
knowledge they have, that with all their unspeakable sufferings not the least
blemish of sin may be washed away: such is the venom of one mortal sin, that
even venial defects accompanying it to hell must be chastised for ever. Take
this example: our ordinary failings are, idle words, effused laughter, some
small excess in diet, carelessness in the castody of our eyes, distraction in
prayer: these and such like, while we live, are casily expiated. One morsel for
borne to curb our appetite, one gentle sigh, a little patience, or an easy
keeping our hands or eyes in order, blot out those lesser stains: whereas if
they be joined with one heinous crime in hell, both shall be punished eternally:
which adds no small fuel to enkindle the fire of despair.

We must needs acknowledge, in this life the hand of God is armed with
meekness, when he strikes: but in the other it is heavier then lead, harder then
iron, and when extended to revenge, he never pulls it in again.

The despair, we speak of, arises from hope in excess, which is called
presumption: this the wise man warns us to eschew: Say not: I have sinned, and
what sorrowful thing has chanced to me? for the highest is a patient rewarder.
Of sin forgiven be not without fear, neither add thou sin upon sin. And say
not: The mercy of our Lord is great, he will have mercy on the multitude of my
sins. Slack not to be converted to our Lord, and defer not from day to day: for
his wrath shall come suddenly, and in time of vengeance he will destroy thee.
Ecclesiast. c. 15.

Admirably well said St. Gregory: Lib 1 R^^ c 3
He has an orderly trust in the mercy of God, who corrects what he did amiss
by repenting, not repeating the same fault. He that does otherwise is not
guided by hope, but is thrust headlong by temerity.

SECT. 4.
It Is a point worthy of credit, that scarce any Christian is adjudged to hell,
who in this life did not hope to live longer, and thought death farther off,
then it was. Out of this deceitful hope, springs everlasting despair.

It is likewise a matter no less credible, that amongst those desperate slaves
scarce one may be found, who during life did not often secretly despair in this
manner: Lo, I but do and undo, I shall never lead other life: it is too too
hard to relinquish old customs, all my endeavor is to no purpose; it is in
vain to strive, I shall never become better while I live: let us therefore hold
on, and enjoy good things present; death posts on amain; we must all be gone
quickly let us then take our leave of these timely delights, and solemnize our
departure with pleasure. Th s in reallity is to despair.

O Christians, as you tender your selves and your own salvation I beseech you,
and by the death of Christ conjure you, beware of this dargerous roek: unless
you desire without peradventure to suffer wrack. It is never too late to am^nd
while we live. Have we fallen into the same offense a thousand times? Let us
^i^e again a thousand times by penance. It Is never past time, to become
better: every day, every hour, each one may say with the Psalmist, Psa. 76. I
said, now have I begun.

He that is grown so feeble, as that he will not endeavor to amend his
failings, but permits the reins to corrupt nature, shall quickly be plunged
into all kind of vices. Such an one may justly be termed desperate, who sets
heaven to sale, who deems that dreadful dungeon of hell tolerable, who,
wretched man that he is, thinks of nothing less, then eternity.

Most truly spoke St. Bernard: Despair contains in it self the accomplishment
of all malice. Despair is much augmented by ignorance of God There is a certain
person who has some thoughts of amendment hereafter he is resolved to play the
man; but in regard he knows not, how good God is therefore his thoughts suggest
unto him: what art thou about to do? will thou lose this life, and that to
come? Thy sins are too too many, and grievous: if thou did lay down thy life
for them, thou could not make satisfaction. Thou have lived delicately
hitherto, will thou now change upon a sudden? thou can not master thy
customs; whatever thou do, thou will slide back into thy former crimes.
Leave then these things to their ordinary course. By these degrees the
miserable man sinks; for, according to St. Bernard, wilful despair is the way
to hell.

SECT. 5.
IN the prisons of this world you may sometimes meet with men of such desperate
behavior, as to paint upon the very walls of the prison a p^ir of gallows,
whereof I am an eyewitness: they seem to rejoice they must be so exalted in
death, since they make a jest of the manner of their dying. Some likewise have
been found, knaves in grain, as well as the former; who, while their comrades
were turned off the ladder, would pick pockets and cut purses: meaning
perchance not to be idle spectators, but actors too. Our proceedings are like
to these villains (pardon the expression) we throw the dice of eternity with
equal boldness.

We are here in prison, uncertain what day or hour we must be brought forth to
execution: and yet we sport and play, as if we feared nothing: we prodigally
wast our time, as if we had no other business in hand but toys and trifles*
It Is true, we either think our selves, or hear others discourse on eternity,
but without feeling of it, as though it were of no concern to us. We are daily
spectators of untimely deaths, without so much as reflecting we may chance be
the next for whom the bell shall toul. When any mention is made of eternity,
who is moved therewith? or if any be moved, alas! of how short continuance is
that motion? We behold a world of miseries, and many justly chastised for their
crimes; but are so far from amendment, that we boldly commit sin, even within
sight of the gallows. This can be nothing else, but a secret kind of despair;
which indeed is the high rode to despair eternally.

A Soldier at Rome, L^b. 4. Dialog
as St. Gregory relates, being mortally wounded lay some time for dead: but
after a while returning to himself, rehearsed what he had seen in the other
world: A spacious bridge, quoth he, opened a passage into most pleasant meddows:
under the bridge glided a stream both muddy and stenchful: on the farther side
of it, besides many flourishing groves. I discovered a numerous multitude all
clothed in white, to whom the place breathed forth most grateful perfumes.
Here might you likewise behold many edifices of admirable structure, whither
diverse endeavored to make their way over the bridge, but all in vain: for who
ever had not led a virtuous life could by no means pass, only people of an
upright life and a spotless conscience were allowed passage: others, who were
defiled with sin, were tumbled headlong into that noysom river.

During life we walk on stoutly beside this bridge: the sea is never so
turbulent nor the heave^s so inexorable, as to make us loose our confidence:
the remedy against all our evil is, it will have an end. But such as are
already cast off the bridge, such as drink full draughts of Cocytus, are wholly
destitute of hope. So true it is, where hope ceases, there despair begins
without ceasing: in Lucifers territory is mere despair, thence all hope is
exiled for eternity: what ever is heard, seen, or understood there, foments
despair. There is everlasting dolor, everlasting moan, everlasting death;
where they find no end to appease their misery.

SECT. 6.
THerefore, O ye accursed, the just Judge has brought upon you evils, he has
glutted his arrows in you. Your wound is uncurable, your stripe is very sore;
with the stroke of an enemy I have stricken you, with cruel chastisement, your
sorrow is uncurable, for the multitude of your iniquity, Jer. chapter 30

God long ago moved this question to the Prophet Jeremy, c. 1. What see thou
Hieremy? To whom the Prophet said: I see a rod watching. Our Lord demanded the
second time: What see thou? to which Jeremy answered: I see a pot boiling
hot. All our pains in this life, what are they, but rods without cruelty? with
these, towardly children are chastised, and give God thanks they are so ge^tly
dealt with.

Holy David says, Ps. 22. and 44. Thy rod, and thy staff: they have comforted
me. A rod of direction, the rod of thy kingdom. Although we be struck with this
staff, or rod; yet are we not miserable: these strokes are signs of love, these
wounds are a beginning of our cure: whereas that boiling pot is not a mark of
direction, or solace; but of perdition and despair. Let us therefore so be
affrayed of it, that we beware in time: we easily perceive by what means we may
avoid as well presumption, as despair.

God, like a Giant, stretches forth his two mighty arms, Justice and Mercy:
lay hold of whether you please. He, that takes only Mercy by the hand, exposes
himself to presumption: he, that embraces Justice alone, sinks under the burden
of despair. Doubtless God has exhibited both in this and the other world many
remarkable effects of his Justice, who looks upon these only is near to
despair; as on the contrary, who only considers the attractives of Mercy,
confides above measure: happy are they, that observe a mean: thou may march
on securely betwixt Mercy and Justice. This is attested by the Oracles of
truth: All the ways of our Lord are Mercy and Truth, Ps. 24.

The royal Prophet did contemplate daily these two arms of God: Mercy and
Judgment I will sing to thee. O Lord, Ps, 100. The matter is so indeed: we must
steer our course betwixt Justice and Mercy, thereby to shun the rock of
presumption, and the gulf of despair: both which are extremely perilous; and,
during life, admit of cure; but, when death closes up our eyes, they become
uncurable for ever.

CHAP. X. Eternity is cause of Continual sighing to the Godly.
SOlomon with admirable variety describes the unexplicable circle of eternity:
Ecles. c. 1.
Generation passes, (says he) and Generation comes: but the earth stands
for ever. The sun rises, and goes down, and returns to his place:
compassing all things goes forward in circuit, and returns unto his circles.
All rivers enter into the sea, and the sea over flows not. In like manner all
sorts of pains, as so many streams, empty themselves into eternity in hell; and
yet eternity like an immense ocean, is always the same, neither ebbing, nor
flowing, but infinite, but unchangeable.

After a hundred centuries of ages are disburdened into this abyss, a hundred
more will be swallowed up; and still more, and more without end. After the
damned crew shall have dwelt in hell so many ages, as to think they have lived
in flames for all eternity by past, yet eternity is not one jot diminisht.
After the revolution of so many ages, eternity is not a minute less, it is ever
entirely the same. After a thousand thousand years are come and gone, the
circle of eternity is as large, as whole, as unavoidable, as it was in the
beginning.

This is the ninth unspeakable, unconceivable torment in Gods prison. Now
forasmuch as people yet alive busy their thoughts with eternity, we assign a
triple difference thereof: eternity which makes the pious daily sigh, eternity
which is a fearful dream of the wicked, and eternity which is an everlasting
punishment to the damned. The first of these three is the subject of this
present chapter.

SECT. 1.
THe divine espouse commending the humanity of her beloved, says Cant. 2. His
left hand under my head, and his right hand shall embrace me. Under these words
lies hid a mystery, which must be unfolded. In the left hand of the beloved
are honors wealth and plenty: in the right length of days, or eternity. Here
the espouse as if she were wittingly and willingly blind exclaimes, the left
hand I see not, because it is under my head; so little do I value honor,
riches, or transitory goods. But the right, wherewith he shall embrace me, I
behold, though yet I enjoy it not: all the eyes I have are fixed in
contemplation of eternity, things eternal are they I esteem. Yet in regard I
have not possession of a blessed eternity, nevertheless I rest assured, He
shall embrace me, Eternity delayed breeds torment: as Hope that is differred
afflicts the soul. Prove. 13. Eternity stirs up in the virtuous a daily
longing after it.

Boniface, a Citizen of Rome, having for some time kept company with Aglae a
noble matron, became at length so penitent for his fault, that he resolved to
wash out that stain by the practice of most heroic virtue. This made him sl
ght all danger of looseing the goods of fortune, yea and his own life too: this
made him visit martyrs in prison, and kiss their chains: this made him
encourage such as were to suffer, and after death to bury their bodies. Being
taken up with these employments he took his journey to Tarsus, where he
performed the like good offices to the champions of Christ. His daily
exhortation was: they should be constant in their sufferings: their labor
though short, would merit reward without end. With these words he mervailously
excited himself and others to lay down their lives courageously. While he was
busy with these employments he was apprehended, and had his flesh torn off his
bones with iron hooks; they thrust under his nails sharp needles, and poured
into his mouth melted lead. Amidst these torments he persevered constant; he
believed his pains momentary, and the crown he expected to be everlasting; he
repeated to himself his former exhortation, and often redoubled: I give thee
thanks, O my Lord Jesu. In this manner he gloriously finished his combat.
Eternity is cause of continual sighing to the godly.

SECT. 2.
ST Frances of Assisium, the Jewel of his age, through frequent weeping began
to be troubled with sore eyes. Diverse persuaded him to forbear his daily tears;
to whom with a deep sigh he said: For the love of that light, which is common
to us and flies, I do not judge it meet to debar my self of the rays of light
eternal. Being likewise asked, how in such thin clothes he could endure the
austerity of winter? He answered, if we were warmed with love of our eternal
country, we should easily be sheltered from cold here. This life was to St.
Francis occasion of patience, as eternity was of desire.

Christ our Lord, undertaking to teach his followers how to sigh incessantly
after eternity, said Mat. 10 Fear ye not them that kill the body. A hidden
argument, but according to art: Do not for this reason fear, says he, because
they kill. If any one had power to detain another in the fire, or such like
punishment alive, him you might justly fear. The sharper the pain inflicted by
men, the sooner it bereaves of life; the more grievous the torment, the quicker
the end. You have then no reason to fear them who can kill the body but once,
and that often with one blow: fear him that redoubles daily mortal wounds, and
always killing never kills.

Behold the antitheses of this divine Orator: The fear of a short death is to
be overcome by fear of death eternal. Our Lord therefore would glve us to
understand, that the souls of men are immortal, subject to the sole pleasure of
God; and that the bodies are to be raised from death to reward, or punishment
everlasting.

Behold likewise with what artificial brevity of words Christ comprehended
great mysteries; the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the body, and
an eternity of well, or woe. Eternity causes in the virtuous continual sighing.

Sir Thomas More, Sand. Lib. 1
a man every way accomplished, was cast into prison not to his disgrace; but for
manifesting his sanctity to the world. His wife came to visit him with an
intent to bring him off his resolution. But in vain. She ^^ade her onset with a
two forked argument, and pleaded her cause with prayers and tears beseeching
him chiefly by all conjugal fidelity, he would preserve his life, yet a while.
What fault have I made, quoth she? wherein have your children, kinsfolk and
family so much offended, as to be so soon deprived of you, my beloved husband?
All our lives depend on yours. For my part I had rather dye a hundred time
(...) survive after your death. (...), my dearest More, subscribe to the Kings
decree, and you make your self and us all live many years longer. Are you so
much fallen out with this present lif^, as that you will obstinately run upon
your own death? Death knows well when it is to come for us; why then do we of
our own accord send for it, as if it had forg^tten us? That you may have
compassion for many of your friends, have pity on your self, and do not
despise the best share of your life, which is yet behind. I doubt not, but God
out of his goodness will grant you many more years to live, in case your self
be not out of liking with your own life.

Her Husband gave ea^ p^tiently to what she said, and when she had ended her
speech: How many years, quoth he, do thou think I shall live, my dear
Aloysia? to whom she quickly made answer: you may well live twenty years, and
upward. Whereunto Sir Thomas replied: your design then is, to have me exchange
an entire eternity for twenty years. Surely you have small skill in
merchandise, who would part with costly wares for a trifle. Had you mentioned
twenty thousand years, you might have had some seeming pretense for your folly.
But alas! what are twenty or thirty thousand years to eternity? A small point,
a shadow, a moment, a smoke, a mear nothing. Wherefore I will joyfully undergo
not only imprisonment, but all the calamities likewise of this life, so long
as it pleases God, and upon condition my eternal recompense may be secured: to
loose any thing of that, is to loose all. What he said, he made good by a
courageous death.

SECT. 3.
JOhn Godfrey Bishop of Wortsburg, a bright shining star amongst Prelates, a
man of so much greater sanctity, by how much it was more concealed: This good
Prelate, I say, frequently used this sentence worthy to be engraven in cedar
and gold: Every moment I stand at the do r of Eternity. Hence proceeded that
custom of placing in every room of his palace a dead man's scull, or some other
bones of the dead, either real or drawn out in mortar, lest at any time he
should forget the memory of eternity. At his exequies a funeral Oration in
latin extolled many things in him worthy commendation, but this one
especially: that he was so addicted to busy his thoughts perpetually with
eternity, as that he read over leisurely three several times a treatise of
eternity. Work must needs go well forward, where there is ever a fresh
remembrance of eternity: This was a practice of most heroic spirits to pause
seriously upon eternity both night and day.

Here I may not pass over in silence that passage worthy of credit: A Priest
and a religious man, P. Hermanus Hugo.
eminent in all kind of Schollarship, was carried on so fervently with desire
to imprint eternity in his heart, that with great care he read over seven times
a little book of eternity; which doubtless he had done oftener, if death had not
overhastily summoned him to eternity.

Pachomius, after a long exhortation to his Disciples, came in the end to this
conclusion: Above all things, said he, let us bear in mind the last day, and
every minute be afraid of eternal puuishment.

This holy man knew well which way virtue was to be ^cquired. Eternity stirs up
in the pious, frequent and sometimes doleful sighs. For since we are exposed to
a twofold eternity, the one blessed, the other cursed: and since we have no
acquittance to ascertain us of beatitude, no marvail if they be in a particular
manner seized with fear and trembling, who now approach to the confines of
eternity. Besides, though we have great hope of attaining everlasting
happiness, nevertheless because we are not yet in possession of it, we have
just cause to fear and sigh. The delay of so great a good provokes both sighing
and weeping.

Hermenigildus King (of whom we spoke before) son to Levigildus King of the
Visigothes, having renounced Arrianism became a Catholic; and endured with
much fortitude wrongs imposed on him by his own father, who threatened to take
away his life, unless he would abandon Catholic Religion. To whom the young
prince returned this generous answer: You may determine concerning me, father,
what you please: Do you resolve to take from me a Kingdom? It is but one which
daily perishes: that other which is immortal you have not power to deprive me
of. Do you cast me into prison? you stop not our free passage to heaven,
thither, thither we will take our journey. Will you break off the thread of this
dying life? I expect a better, an eternal one. These words were becoming so
royal a person It is no loss, but gain, to exchange temporal goods for eternal.
Eternity makes the virtuous often long after it.

SECT. 4.
IEzonias anciently said to Ezekiel, chapter 11. v. 2 etc. Son of man, these are
the men that conceive iniquity, and devise most wicked counsel in this City,
saying: were not houses builded of late? This is the caldron, and we the flesh.
Therefore prophecy of them thou son of man. Those wicked men thought they were
amidst the dainties in their own City, as flesh in the pot, which is not easily
taken out by any. All goes well with us, say they, our city and our houses are
as fortresses unto us, we are safe enough; our enemies cannot annoy us. To
these same men Ezechiel prophesied on the behalf of God: Ubi sup^a.
I will cast you out of the midst of the caldron, and I will give you into the
hands of the enemies and will do judgments in you. You shall fall by the sword.

The like befalls them, who are much enamoured with this mortal life. They
think they are flesh in the caldron; they are well at ease; gay clothes costly
fare, and many pleasures they account their heaven: eternity as they think not
on, so they desire it not, being well appayed with their caldron. Let us leave
them to run their carrier; by and by the case will be altered. They shall be
cast out, they shall fall by the sword, they shall be thrown into other
caldrons, wherein they shall fry and boil for ever. Contrary-wise, while the
wicked snatch at a minutes pleasure, men of good conscience steer their course
upward, like unto fat which in a boiling pot swims on the top; whereas others,
like lumps of flesh sink down, and remain in the bottom. This choice fat, the
world as a busy, but foolish cook, scums off, and casts away for froth: all
good men are reputed, as the refuse of this world. However they pass through
these sufferings with joyfulness: having had a foretast of blessed eternity,
which they are already in love with: Eternity makes the pious languish for it.

Amongst the people of Israel diverse were found, whose bosoms boiled with
desires of enjoying the land of promise. The desert, which they inhabited so
many years, became now loathsome to them: especially after their eyes gave
testimony of the fruitfulness of the country, which appeared in exquisit figgs,
goodly pomegranats, and a huge bunch of grapes brought thence. What do we? said
they. Let us go up and possess the Land, because we may obtain it Number. 13.

Such expressions as these daily fill the mouths of the godly: What do we here
amongst Sepulchers of the dead? why do we snatch our food from things which
fade in a moment? Let us go up, and possess the Land, whose fertility is
eternal. St. Austin being enflamed with this desire, Lib. 3. de Lib. arb.
composed the third Book of Free Will, which he closes with these words: So
great is the beauty of Justice, so much the delight of light etetnal, that
albeit it were not lawful to stay therein any longer then one days space; for
this alone, numberless years of this life, abounding with dainties and plenty
of temporal goods, might in reason worthily be despised. For it is not written
falsely, or out of any ill will: Because better is one day in thy courts, above
thousands, Psalm. 83. Eternity is cause of continual sighing to the godly.

SECT 5.
AVgustus Caesar, Monarck of the world, now and then passed whole nights without
sleep. He had a plentiful treasury, the world paid him tribute, entire
provinces were ready to do him service most of his affairs succeeded
prosperously both at home and abroad. And yet for all this he was sensible
something was wanting, but what he wanted he knew not in particular. Every good
Christian knows distinctly what he wants, after what he languishes, so far as
frequently to rob him of his rest: though he possess all things, he is
persuaded he enjoys nothing, till he be in perfect fruition of a blessed
eternity. Whatever he is master of besides, he undervalues, so long as he is
not in possession of bliss eternal. This is the scope his desires and
endeavors aim at, this is the center toward which his spirit makes apace.
Eternity makes the devout languish.

What feeling, I pray, had the Prophet Jonas, when he lay hid alive in a whales
belly, as in a moveable and walking prison? almost every instant he expected
nothing less then death. Yea, being buried, before dead, he found by experience
the same fish was both his prison and his executioner: being aboard in a living
bark, he suffered wrack a thousand times. Hence out of the Whales belly, as out
of hell he exclaims, Jonas 4. And thou have cast me forth into the depth in the
heart of the sea, and a flood has compassed me: all thy surges, and thy waves
have passed over me. The waters have compassed me even to the soul: the depth
has enclosed me, the sea has covered my head. I am descended to the extreme
parts of the mountains: the bars of the earth have shut me up for ever.

How fervently did this man wish to be freed from his thraldom? He minded
nothing else; if ever I get out of this beast, if ever I set foot on dry land,
if ever, Oh! ever I escape out of this rolling sepulcher into the open air: Ubi
supra.
What things soever I have vowed, I will render for salvation to our Lord.

No otherwise do devout persons aspire to eternity, While they live, they
struggle with waves; which makes them urgently hasten to the haven. Eternity
stirs up in the virtuous often sighing.

It is a custom in the Catholic Church, on days appointed for penance to
abstain from expression of joy in divine office, signified by the Hebrew word
Alleluia, in testimony of our grief for sin; in place of which joyful word, you
may hear these, for ever, for ever. Let us learn. I beseech you, this new song,
and sing daily to our selves: for ever, for ever, for ever. Then especially is
this canticle useful, when the flesh inclines to wantonness, and will walk the
broad and pleasant way. Upon this occasion that forcible charm must be again
and again reiterated: For ever, for ever, for ever the wicked shall burn, and
the friends of God shall rejoice: and as the joys of these, so the torments of
those shall never have end.

St. Austin said patly to an occasion given: These things I sing every day to
my self. We may follow his example, and each one say for himself: These things
I sing every day to my self: not the burning of Troy, but of Hell I daily
contemplate, as I do those infinite, and unavoidable windings of Eternity. We,
who are Christians, may think of, and sing these things. After the sorrowful
time of Lent follows a joyful Easter: more melodious harmony will resou^d in
the heavenly Jerusalem; In the streets thereof Alleluia shall be sung, Job 13.

CHAP. XI. Eternity the Fearful Dream of the Wicked.
BION, one of the principal amongst the wisemen of Greece, was wont to say: The
way to hell must needs be plain, facil, and like a beaten rode wherein there is
no danger of stumbling, since almost all walk thither hoodwinkt. Thy speeches
are oracles of truth. Bion: it is so indeed. The d^scent to hell is easy, most
easy; thither whole multitudes, go, yea run with their eyes close shut. Some
may likewise be found, who sleeping and dreaming walk, and yet miss not their
way thither: they subvert their sense, Dan. c. 13.
and decline their eyes, that they may not see heaven. Such as walk sleeping,
think indeed upon eternity, but they think on it as in a dream, a most fearful
dream; which therefore they strive to shake off: even as they do to whom some
doleful passage is represented in sleep, which by the next days mirth and
jollity they endeavor to digest and wholly extinguish in their fancy. The like
strain is in ure with the wicked, some of whom say: When we see these things,
we will believe. Thus they pass on blindfolded; scarce ever awake to
themselves; as for Eternity, they think on it seldom, and slightly, or rather
dream on it, and in this sort they march into the next world. Eternity is a
fearful dream of the wicked; as we shall now declare more at large.

SECT. 1.
TO some we said Eternity was a dream, but a dreadful one: for who is become so
flinty as not to be terrified with eternity, though it appear only in sleep?
yet forasmuch as they look upon it as a dream, they understand it not, they
make no reckning of it, they let it not sink into their brains, nor weigh it in
its proper balance: whence they quickly forget it, such as these are noted by
Ecclesiasticus c. 34. The dreams of them that do evil, are vanity.

Upon Easter day some devout women went to the monument of our Lord to anoint
him, whom they thought still dead: but when the Angels which appeared in white,
told them he was alive, they returned back from the Sepulcher, and related what
they had heard and seen, for joyful tidings to the Apostles, And these words,
says St. Luke chapter 24. seemed before them as dotage, and they did not believe
them.

Much after this same fashion it fares with us: Is not eternity frequently
enough, plainly enough, distinctly enough set before our eyes, and inculcated
unto us, by sermons, pictures, exhortations, pious discourses and spiritual
books? But what affect, I pray, has all this? These things seem before many as
dotage; or a dream. They are struck with fear for a while, but anon together
with their dream fear likewise vanishes.

Jonas the Prophet, unwilling to obey Gods commands, betook himself to the sea:
where the Mariners trembling at the danger of a horrible tempest, fell to
their prayers, and to disburden the ship, they threw over board such wares, as
they were laden with. Mean while Jonas dreaming of no danger lay fast asleep
under deck: here the master of the vessel finds and awakens him, saying: Why
art thou oppressed with sleep? Rise, invocate thy God, if perhaps God will
think of us, and we perish not, Jon. c. 1. By and by upon mutual consent they
drew lots, and the lot falling upon Jonas, he was cast into the sea, the rest,
who had thrown their goods into the water escaping.

While we live, we sail in a tattered and leeking ship through a stormy and
raging sea; where we are as near to eternity, as Mariners to the water: we are
often three fingers distant from death, though many times not so much: one
breathing space suffices to act that, which an entire eternity cannot expiate:
We are frequently minded of the danger we live in, by one who speaks to us in
this sort: Why art thou oppressed with sleep? Rise, invocate God. He that
values his salvation, shakes off drowsiness, arises from the place of his
repose, and throws over board such ladeing, as would hinder his safety: I mean,
he betakes himself to prayer, fasting, and alms deeds; and chooses rather to
loose all, then not to do penance in good earnest for his sins.

Contrary-wise how many be found, who refusing to submit to the will of God,
are in such a dead sleep, as not to hear what peril is threatened by the roaring
tempest? to these kind of people eternity seems but a fable, or a dream. O
dangerous lethargy! which makes them pass over with a deaf ear wholesome
admonitions, till at length death seises on them, and as it were betwixt
sleeping and wakeing casts them into the vast ocean of eternity.

SECT. 2.
IT is recounted of a certain man, Merff. Ser, 3. in dom. 2. post Epiph.
more commendable for his lineage, then his life; that he was a mere worldling,
and hardhearted to the poor. This same person attended by his servant, betook
himself to his rest, when, lo, about midnight the servant is made partaker of
this vision: He beholds his master hurried away to Gods Tribunal, where he is
accused and condemned: thence by a crew of infernal spirits, who insult over
him, he is plunged into gulfs of fire: where diverse sad passages were
represented unto him. Lucifer welcoming his new guest, said; This friend of
ours was much taken with hot bathes, whence he used to repair to a warm and
soft bed for his ease; he was wont to cheer himself up with full bowls, and
melodious harmony; see therefore that all these particulars be prepared for
him. Here the miserable wretch cries out, and furiously curses the day of his
birth, the glorious company of heaven, yea and God himself. Amidst these
execrations and howling his unhappy soul was thrown down with horrid noise into
a pool of flames Provided for him. After this lamentable representation the
servant awaking rises up, and runs to his master, whom he found stark d^ad.

Out alas! how hiddenly does death steal upon us? woe be to them whom it arrests
at unnawares when they are asleep: they shall make their entrance into their
habitation for eternity, whence they may never return to their former dainties,
or delights. God in his wrath threatens most severely: I will make them drunk,
that they may be drousie, and sleep an everlasting sleep, and not arise, Jer.
chapter 15. Abundant examples bear testimony hereof.

Balthazar the Chaldean King sitting at a banquet saw a hand writing on the
wall, whereat he was astonished though he understood not what was written.
Daniel, who was skilful in the interpretation of it, he honored with a purple
robe and a chain, and moreover decreed he should be esteemed as a person in the
third place next to the King. Where notwithstanding no mention at all is made
of any repentance: albeit that very night Balthazar was slain.

This same lot falls upon all them, wh^^ look on eternity, as on a dream: for
such as these, though they busy their thoughts with almost infinite matters,
yet they never seriously fasten them on Eternity; but live as they list, and
wallow in wickedness. To these, as to King Balthazar, this short writing is
prophesied: This life is a moment, but on this moment Eternity depends.
Herewith they are terrified, they tremble, they have an horror to be burnt in
eternal flames, they are amazed to think that after a thousand millions of
years Eternity is no whit at all diminished: they extol this truth, but make
no use of it to amend their manners: they reverence these mysteries, but better
not their lives: they hearken to, and esteem those who unsold these hidden
secrets unto them; mean while either they do no penance, or persevere not
therein: We believe these things, say they; yet they do not bid adieu to their
accustomed vices. After fear of short continuance they return afresh to
carousing, to voluptuousness, to usury, to envy, and dissension, as vicious, if
not more, then ever.

To persons thus indisposed, that, which Da^iel told the King, may be fitly
applied: And thou, O Balthazar, after the knowledge of all these things, have
not humbled thy heart. And thou, O Christian, after all these particulars were
declared unto thee, have not amended thy covetousness and injustice; thy
bawling and bitter tongue, thy inveterate malice thou have not corrected: thy
unbridled lust and lasciviousness are haunted, as formermerly: thy riot and
drunkenness is not laid aside: thou sports and rants as much as ever: swearing
is still in vogue with thee. Eternity, alas! is carelessly thought on by thee,
it seems no more then a fearful dream: eternity never took deep rooting in thy
breast; and now upon the sudden thou must be thrown into that immense ocean of
eternity. These matters thou might, nay thou ought to have foreseen, if thou
would continue under the notion of a Christian. He may ascribe his own
destruction to himself, who being warned of his danger bewares it not.

SECT. 3.
SAul put the people of Ifrael into great fright; for as it is record^^ in the
first book of Kings, c. 11. The spirit of our Lord seized on Saul, and his fury
was exceeding wrath. And taking both the Oxen, he cut them into pieces, and
sent them into all the coasts of Israel by Messengers, saying: Whosoever shall
not forth, and follow Saul and Samuel, so shall it be done to his Oxen. The
Israelites were slow in coming to the Kings standard: but so soon as they
received this message, The fear of our Lord invaded the people, and they went
forth as it were one man, three hundred and thirty thousandmen.

Christ the commander of heaven and earth, a King of far greater sovereignty
then Saul, menaceing in good earnest makes this proclamation: Fear him who
after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea I say to you fear him,
Luke c. 12. He does not threaten Oxen, but men with fire eternal: and yet what
reckoning do many make of these threats? they value them no more then a dream:
and thereupon with much boldness transgress the laws of God.

Tell me, I pray: What temerity would that traveller be guilty of, who being
weary upon the way should espy a wall full of chincks, rotten, and eady to fall
down, and yet by reason of his weariness should dare to take a nap under it,
when a passenger hastily awaking the careless follow should speak thus to him:
friend what do thou mean? what makes thee stay here in such imminent danger?
arise quickly and betake thy self to some secure place this wall is a falling
every minute, how dare thou sleep here? be gone speedily. What would you say,
if the traveller after all this should refuse to depart thence? and say to him
who warned him of his peril: Do not molest me; look you to your self: I am
resolved to take out my nap. He that will perish, let him perish hardly, this
fellow is determined the ^uinous wall shall be his tomb; let him be buried, in
Gods name, in the grave he has chosen.

Man's life is indeed a tottering wall: what day, hour or moment it will fall,
who can tell? the time is uncertain albeit most certain it is, a work ^^ill
cemented cannot stand long everyday, hour and moment you may well expect a
downfall. Nevertheless, we fool hardy and rash-brained people lean to this wall
and nod without fear. Each one is seized with his peculiar sleep: this man lies
snorting under the sleep of avarice, that under lust, another under
drunkenness, envy or pride. The royal Prophet saw and admired many who slept in
this manner: They slept their sleep, Psalm. 75.

Thus every one gives way to his proper sleep, which holds, him closely
oppressed with a deadly lethargy? though there want not several persons to a
wake him out of it. Christ calls, his Disciples call, the ancient Fathers call;
Catholic Preachers call from their Pulpits; all with joint consent admonish us
not to trust to a ruinous wall, which already reels, and by and by will lie
equal with its foundation. Moreover they show us where the defect is, and
change us without delay to put our selves in security. Notwithstanding some are
so fast asleep, that they listen to no admonition at all: others by so many
clamours awake, it is true; though to little purpose; because ever and anon they
fall into their slumber again; and give you no other answer; then the traveller
did: Let us a one, we will take out our (...), we are w^ll where; we are,

All this notwithstand faithful monitours cease not to redouble their
admonitions, and these they repeat so much more earnestly and continually, by
how much they perceive their danger more imminent and certain: for in this
case, it is not the body alone, whose safety lies at stake; but the eternal
welfare of both soul and body which is exposed to utter perdition: everlasting
death makes a prey of those, whom this wall takes under its ruins.

But alas! after so many iterated warnings, many trust to this staggering wall,
shut their eyes, and sleeping securely dream on eternity; wherewith they are
terrified, no otherwise then dreamers use to be, who together with their dream
shake off dread too.

Thus we live, thus we slumber, thus we dream, thus we perish: for upon a
sudden the wall falls, and oppresses such as slept under it. Immediately after
an entire Eternity is represented to their view, which is now no shore dream,
but an everlasting torment. O travelers too too rash! O sleep, no less deadly,
then destructive! Tell me now, I beseech you, whether you do not believe these
particulars as matters of undoubted certainty?

SECT. 4.
IT is a business worthy of credit, that, in case any of the damned appeared
again from hell, and pulled these sleepers by the sleeve, and charged them to
look to it, and foretold them in what danger they lived, they could
notwithstanding not awake them: so great is the blindness and stupidity of man's
soul. Hereupon Abraham refuses to condescend with the rich glu^tons request of
sending some of the dead to warn his brothers yet alive: the reason whereof he
alleges in these words: If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, (if they
despise the admonitions of the living) neither if one shall rise again from the
dead, will they believe, Luke c. 16. The matter is plainly so indeed. Orat de
Lazaro.
Whence St. Chrysostom said: Hell is not seen to unbelievers, to such as
believe, it is manifest.

When mention is made of punishments inflicted on offenders, how often may you
hear such words as these? This was sent into banishment: that was whipped for his
fault: another was condemned to the galleys: another was beheaded: he was
hanged: that other was stretched upon a rack: and lastly this fellow was burnt
to death. Even malefactors hear such p^ssages as these, and yet become no
better by hearing of them. Many, who are guilty of death, though their pardon
be granted them, yet they commit the same crimes again, or worse.

Like unto these are we, if we would acknowledge the truth: how often by means
of penance do we obtain pardon for our sins, and so escape hell? how promptly
do we undertake any thing to purchase our freedom? When, God knows, almost in
the turning of ones hand we slide back again, and become worse by abusing of
our liberty. We take our leave of anger and envy; covetousness and pride we may
not endure; we are wholly out of likeing with lasciviousness; we abhor
stealing; and profess our selves sworn enemies to all debauchery. But alas I
upon the next occasion we loose the reins to anger, envy dominiers in us; we
enter into league with avarice and pride; we steal as readily as ever, our
wantonness draws us into the mire again; feasting and riot have reduced us to
their friendship: in a word; we commit the same, if not more horrid offenses,
then formerly. Is not this to look upon eternity as a dream, and in the mean
while to act things meritorious of flames eternal?

In that prison, which Pharao had in Egypt, two of his guilty Courtiers were
detained, to each of whom happened a different dream, which neither of them had
the skill to interpret: whereupon turning to Joseph their fellow prisoner they
said: We have seen a dreum, and their is no body to interpret it to us, Genesis c.
40. There are many dreamers on Eternity, but few interpreters: let us help them
with our interpretation.

SECT. 5.
IN the first edition, which we published of Eternity, we set it forth adorned
with several pictures: whereunto we now adjoin these ensuing particulars, which
are not so much to be read over, as to be considered with attention.

Imagine a pyle or heap of hot glowing coals, Monachium.
which for bigness equals this city of Munichen, and which for three or four
cub^^^ goes down into the earth: let one man alone be cast into this mass of
fire, upon this condition: not to be released from the bed of flames, till all
the coals be taken away one by one: which is to be performed no otherwise, then
by a Vultur, which once in a hundred years shall carry away only one, and no
more.

Lo, this man amongst nine sorts of torments, which eternity brings with it, is
tormented only with that of fire; which yet by reason of its continuance is
esteemed intolerable. Here now let arithmetic declare, how many thousands, how
many millions of years might pass, ere that man be freed from so vast a pile of
burning coals. This seems altogether as unexplicable, as unsufferable.

Yet with your leave, O blind mortals! this is nothing to hell: for that man is
exempted from the ninefold torments of Eternity, saving that of fire alone,
which he endures. Besides he has hope his pains will have an end, though after
a long expectation.

But now to the end we may take a more particular view of the damned, who lie
buried in tombs of fire, let us frame to our selves this imaginary spectacle.

Conceive you see a certain person in a most deep pit under ground fastere^ to
an iron bed with chains; so, as his hands, neck and feet are tied together with
a ring of steed: under and over this bed is plenty of ho^ burning coals. This
miserable wretch has no other comfort left him, but this: that when first he
was bound there (as we suppose) it was told him, one should come every thousand
year, and take away from his heap of burning coals only one: and so likewise
after a another thousand years the same should happen to him, and still the
same course should be observed till the whole mass were removed.

Let us think here, alas! let us think, how many millions of millions of years
must come and go before this bed of flames be thus taken away, and cease to
burn. But O! what a gentle hell were this, in respect of that most de^perate
eternity, replenisht with other torments? While eternity lasts you may exhaust
a thousand such flameing bed^, and yet meet with no end of eternity, which
never, alas! never shall have any end.

Many wonderful things are recounted in the lives of Saints: for God indeed is
Marvailous in his Saints, Psa. 67. For my part I think nothing less to be
admited, then what some account most admirable. Grad. 6 de mortis memoria.
That Auachoret of whom Climacus makes mention, surpassed others in the
ponderation of eternity. He lived in Mount Choreb, as careless of himself, as
of heroic virtue: th^s man approaching to his end, say as h^ were dead for an
hours space: after which returning to himself, he besought all there present
they would avoid the room, and leave him thenceforward to lead a more serious
Life. This said, he shut up to close the entrance into this cell, th^^ there
only remained open a little hole whereat he might receive a small allowance of
bread and water. Within this Cave he spent twelve whole years, without speaking
a word to any, but God and his Angels; and without any other sustenance,
besides bread and water most sparingly taken. He sat here night and day like
to one in amazment ruminating in his mind continually the wheel of Eternity,
and seriously weighing aswe^ the endless joys of the blessed, as the torments
of the wicked without end; he had always before his eyes the stroke of death
most certain; he looked toward and sighed after heaven, having his cheeks for
the most part moystened with silent and incessant tears: in this sort he spnet
twelve years, when at length death long expected drew near: upon notice whereof
diverse resorted to his poor cottage, and forcibly brake down the way into it,
all unanimously going in, and begging of him he would please to bestow upon
them some spiritual legacy at his departure. Whereat he fetching a deep sigh,
said: Pardon me, fathers, I beseech ye, and excuse my former errors: Whosoever
seriously considers death, which is the gate to eternity, will not sin.

This man amongst all other Saints I least admire, as I said before, though he
lead a life worthy of admiration; because, whoever fixes his mind upon
Eternity, will steer a course not much inferior to his. And truly, it is
better to shut ones self up within four walls a hundred years together, and to
treat the body with much austerity, then to run the least hazard of a blessed
eternity. Each one may persuade himself, what the Angel said to Lot, is also
said to him: Save thy life; make have, and be saved, Genesis c. 19.

CHAP. XII. Eternity is an unexplicable and a particular punishment of the
Damned.
GOD scourged Pharao and the Inhabitants of Egypt sundry ways: he sent amongst
them fountains streaming with blood, frogs, ciniphes, flies, death of cattle,
ulcers, hail, locusts, darkness, great plagues in flicted by strength of arm:
but so soon as the tenth came, their stubborness was overcome, and the
destruction of many ensued. And it came to pass at midnight, our Lord struck
every first begotten in the land of Egypt, neither was th^re a house wherein
there lay not a dead one, Exodus 12.

When God chastises his enemies with nine sorts of grievous punishments, he
never adds the tenth whereby he takes them out of this life: no end appears, no
death no destruction: for to speak with St. Gregory, There is death without
dying, an end without ending, because death lives, Lib. 9. Mor.
the end always begins, and deficiency cannot decay. That, which the Egyptians
accounted a most horrid torment, would be a most singular comfort to the damned
to be killed and utterly destroyed.

What a country is this, O God! which esteems death as a special favor, what a
country is this? Holy Job with good reason terms it a land of misery: indeed it
is the very sink of all miseries.

We have run over in our discourse eight sorts of punishment in hell: take now
the ninth, the most grievous of all the r^^^; which as it exceeds all
expression, so it can neither be comprehended, nor compared to any other
torment of the damned; whose eternity is unexplicable: as you may perceive,
since we are unable to declare it sufficiently by words, and so must content
our selves to give you an unpollisht draught of it.

SECT. 1.
ETernity of the damned is altogether beyond expression. Imagine this
punishment were accompanied with these four inconveniences: Let a Be sting
your right hand, a Gnat suck your left; let a Beetle seize upon your right,
cheek, and a pricking thorn ranckle in the left: admit these alone were the
pains in hell, or any one of these. Fancy likewise that only your hand were
bitten with a Gad-fly, yet this suffering without any other would be
unspeakable, if it were eternal.

What I pray would it be, if you were pinched all your life with a streit shoe?
what pain must he needs undergo, who had but one ear-wig making her nest
within his brain? Conceive what pain you please, though never so slight, if it
must be endured without ceasing till death, how grievous would it appear? but,
if you must groan under its burden for eternity, how unexplicable?

Where should I find words to declare my meaning, if I should go about to
express the ninefold torment of Eternity? Here words, here all due capacity
fails me. Tom. 7.14. Ap.
However Surius relates a passage, which conduces to set before our eyes at
least after an imperfect manner, what I say.

Lydwine, a most religious Virgin, a mirror of patience and all kind of
Sanctity, endured most piercing Diseases eight and thirty years, with patience
equal to her pain. To this Saint with much ado was brought a man grown to that
height of impiety, that he could by no means be drawn to lay open his sins in
Confession. But at length with much difficulty they wrought upon him so far,
that he was content to discover in some sort the wounds of his conscience to
Lydwine, who had already one foot in the Grave, and beg of her a remedy for
them. He, as it is usual for such brutes to do, making a jest of it, came to
the sick Virgin; and that he might prove as good as his word, he began in a
laughing manner to rehearse a large Catalogue of his sins. The Saint besought
him by all the heavenly court, he would give over the rehearsal of those things
to her, which should be declared to a Priest, and which others without offense
could not give ear to. Nevertheless as he began, so he went on with his story;
where, after a long recital, he told her, it was his custom to boast of his
heinous crimes amongst his companions. When Lydwin perceived she was enforced
to hear a Narrative consisting of so many wicked sentences; she demanded of
him, whether he would give her leave, as an interpreter, to manifest them to a
Priest? to whom he smileing said: I do give you leave, upon condition, that I
be not compelled to turn crier and blazon out these my excellent virtues.
Lydwine desirous to help the poor man, carried on the business with much
discretion; and with exceeding grief of heart did penance for the sins related
to her, as if they had been her own. Afterward the man came to see her, and
said: I conceive you have made my confession for me to the Priest, what
penance do you now enjoin me? No more but this, replied the Saint, you shall
lie one whole night upright on your bed, without once turning on any side:
perform this; and leave the rest to me. Hereat the man laughed for joy: And do
you command me nothing else, quoth he? is this all the substance of my
penance? I extol those ears, that prov^ so favorable judges of my cause: if
it be so easy to make satisfaction for my sins, I will do as you command. In
the evening he was scarcely well laid in bed, when he began to be sensible of
his trouble; it seemed hard to him not to have the liberty to turn himself on
either side; whence he thought his bed was never so uneasiy; but when he
reflected, he was forbidden to stir himself, this lying upright became most
irksome to him. While he lay in this posture, his busy thoughts burst forth
into these words: Behold I am sound and well in health, I lie also upon a soft
bed; only I want freedom to turn me hither and thither as I used to do. But
what need I care for that? sleep, sleep till fair day in the morning, sleep
securely while sleeping is good. Fain would he sleep, but cannot; such an Army
of different thoughts muster themselves before his fancy. What do thou want,
said he to himself? thou have but one night to spend thus in quiet, and then
thou have fulfilled thy promise. Well: but what if thou were constrained to
pass three or four nights in this manner? I would rather dye. Would thou so?
certainly I could never have believed so great trouble in so small a matter.
But wretch that I am! how slender, nay null is my patience, who am so soon
overcome with this slight difficulty? How patient is Lydwine amidst so many
dolours! What if thou must lie upon a hard logg of Wood for many weeks
together? What if thou had over and besides to afflict thee, the Colic,
Gout, Stone, or Head-ake? such pains as these have some resemblance of Hell.
And to what place I pray thee do thou belong? questionless to that, whither
so many horrid offenses will usher thee in the end: Thou have been bold a
thousand times to commit heinous faults, for which long since thou deserved
Hell. What kind of beds do they lodge on there, what covering have they, what
sheets? have they no other torment, but that they cannot turn themselves on
either side? what Feathers keep them warm? have they not flames instead of
feathers? And how many months, how many years shall their torments continue?
for ever, (if we give credit to the Gospel) so it is indeed, for ever. What
without end? assuredly without all end. What? after a hundred thousand millions
of years shall their pains find no end, nor any hope of an end? How then do we
behave our selves, who dally with, and make a Play-game of Eternity? though to
speak more properly, it is not to make a pastime on it, but to become mad in
good earnest. Well then, henceforward I will either be another man, or no man.
What he said, he ratified indeed: O what a change did he make in a short time!
Now he betakes himself most readily to holy confession, who ere while hated it
worse then death.

SECT. 2.
THis same passage, I beseech you, let us take a view of with attention. To lie
upon a bed of Down always, to lie upon it for eternity, would be a torment
wholly unexplicable: what then will all that dreadful mass of torments be in
Hell?

One sick of a burning Fever is sometimes so inflamed with thirst, as he is
persuaded a whole hogshead of Springwater will not suffice to quench it. Good
Lord! who will assuage the thirst of the damned? they shall burn and thirst,
but neither all the Rivers in the world, not all fountains, nor all seas shall
be of force to appease their scorching drought; therefore they shall not have
one sole drop.

O my God! how much does the heat in Summer molest us? how we languish, how we
faint, how we pant for breath! we throw off our garments, our bedcloaths are
cast a side, we roll up and down as impatient of heat; our bed scalds us, and
nothing affords us a cooling refreshment. But O! what is this to that stove of
brimstone for eternity, where no mitigation is, not may be hoped for? no cooler
evening, no refreshing night, nor dewy morning appeases their ardours. They
have night, it is true; but it is a fiery night, it is a night replenisht with
dolours, it is a night everlasting. Ah! let pains at least terrify us, if rewards
be not strong enough to invite us. The eternity of the damned is a punishment
unexplicable.

What ever is in Hell, is torment: which way soever they turn themselves, they
are environed with dolours. Above them is Paradise, but shut from them
eternally: below them is the abyss, never to be unlockt again: before them is
the eternity of all their torments: behind them is the most piercing
remembrance of pleasures past: on their right hand they have the Devils to
torture them: on their left are their companions in misery: within them is
anguish, the worm of conscience, terror and despair.

Do we Christians believe these things and live as we do? Esaias. chapter 53.
Who has believed our hearing? and the arm of our Lord to whom is it revealed?
We are persuaded these things ought to be believed, but we believe them very
coldly. Our belief has scarcely any soul; it is not lively; as if I should
point at a painted table with my finger, and say: this is Abraham ready to
sacrifice his son; Abraham, I say not living but painted. Such for all the
world is our faith, not lively, not breathing forth heat, not animated, but
drawn with a Pencil. We believe and believe not.

Wherefore I lay down here a brief method of meditating every day upon eternity.

A certain Father having Wealth in abundance, provided his daughters of a
handsome settlement: they persuaded the old man, he would be pleased to bestow
upon them in his life time, what means he intended for them at his death:
promising withal, their Father should be plentifully furnished with all
necessaries. For the first year they made good their promise, and treated him
with much liberallity: but when it fell out that he lived longer then they
expected, they grew weary of the old man, and unmindful both of Piety and their
Promise, they began to deal more niggardly and harshly with him. He to find a
remedy for his folly by a wile, procures a great Chest filled with Sand and
Stones, to be secretly conveyed into his Chamber. This he opened in the night,
and with that small stock, which he had reserved, he held on counting money so
long, till at length it amounted to a considerable sum, which he purposely
expressed in such a voice, as his son in Law might easily over hear him:
Afterward he locked up his wealthy Coffer. Next morning his Daughters spoke
more lightsomly to him, and demanded why it was so late last night ere he went
to rest? To whom the Father made answer; My Children, when I judged all was
silent, and none could take notice of what I did, I took a view of my Treasure
yet remaining: which of you two deserves better of me while I live, shall enjoy
it after my death. Hence proceeded a strong emulation, both of them striving
which should manifest greater respect to their Father. After the old man was
dead they opened the Chest, wherein they found besides Sand and Stones a
Staff, with this Inscription: Avarice brought the children to,
What Piety could not make them do.


Much after this manner, though out of a superior motive, may we fill our Chest
with Sand, or little Seeds; that what Piety could not persuade us to, Eternity
may. Thus then we must go to work: Let every one fill his Coffer, Trunk or
Desk; or what else is nearest at hand, as his Purse, Hat, Cup, or Gloves with
Poppy, little Stones, Pease, or any other small Grain, and when he is to
meditate on Eternity he may begin to reckon in this sort, that every Poppy
seed, little Stone, or Pease may stand for a hundred or a thousand years.

For example one Grain signifies a thousand years; two grains, two thousand;
ten, ten thousand; a hundred, a hundred thousand, a thousand, a thousand
thousand years, and so of the rest. This is the first point belonging to our
Method.

The second is: Although you substract ten or a hundred grains from those in
your Coffer, Hat, Dish or other Vessel, almost nothing will appear to be
subtracted or taken away. Mean while it is most certain, Eternity remains
entire; though so many thousand years pass, as you cast into your Chest Poppy
seeds, Pease, or other grain. This is most undoubtedly true: For all this
number has its end, albeit you fill a most capacious house with little seeds,
and every one stand for a thousand years.

The third: When during Eternity, so many thousand years are gone, as there be
small grains in your Coffer, yet eternity is whole, without any diminution; not
so much as the least parcel of it is impaired. Nay, though that same Coffer be
three, four, five times emptied, and every grain signify a thousand years;
nevertheless nothing is taken off from Eternity, it continuing durable, and of
as vast extent, as when it first begun.

The fourth: This same thought, if serious and attentive, will somewhat afflict
the mind, yet must we not therefore leave it off, but must go on forward. He
that meditates may rouse himself up in this manner: Go too in Gods name, lets
proceed yet farther.

The fifth: By this kind of meditation the soul will by little and little grow
warm, and break forth into these or the like expressions: What do we mean? the
trash and toys of this life we eagerly pursue, and look not after Eternity.
It Is too true, we busy not out mind with years eternal.

The sixth: Our understanding must be so by degrees informed, that it may frame
a conceit of those hidden secrets from what we perceive by our eyes. The
Philosophers Maxim is true: Our understanding must take instruction from our
Phansy.

Now as we may not with one step mount to the top of a Ladder, but by degrees;
and as we cannot all at once fill a streit neckt bottle with Wine; so it is not
possible by a slight and sudden thought of eternity to imprint it either in
the understanding, or will. By degrees we are to proceed from less to more.
Even as we fill a Hat, Cap or Chest, and by every seed we take out, we reckon a
thousand years; so likewise when a great room is filled, we must order our
computation.

The seventh is to make a Colloquie to ones self: What is all affliction in
this world, compared to infinite millions of years, through and after which
eternity shall endure, and that without any moving toward an end, or being in
the least impaired? Here every one is constrained to acknowledge: Although what
ever calamity the world contains fell upon me alone, yet what would this be to
pains eternal? Again: though I alone enjoyed all pleasures the world can
afford, and that for an hundred years together, what would this be to an
eternity of bliss? What then do I, fool that I am, that I do not take another
course? From this time forward at least I will learn more wit.

If it chance that any one be oppressed with pain in body, sickness, or grief of
mind; then chiefly is the time to entertain this thought: If this pain or
pensiveness were to continue ten, twenty, an hundred thousand years; O God! how
unexplicable would it be? But what would this be in comparison of those most
sharp pangs of eternity, which after Millions of ages know no end, but remain
entire?

Lo here a brief method to meditate on Eternity.

SECT. 3.
IT is most true, which one returning from the other world declared: No one
beleives, how sharp are the torments in Hell: No one understands their length;
no one sufficiently weighs their eternity.

Out alas! we are too much taken up with trifles, in which we are often
entangled till death; we now and then wrangle for we know not what, and as a
Jest, or a Dream think upon eternity: whence it comes to pass, that we seldom,
or slightly correct our misdemenours.

I, who write these things, as well as others who have written on eternity, do
openly make this Proclamation: We have cured Babylon. Jeremy chapter 51.
It was in its free choice whether it would be cured or no. The way is streit,
the gate is narrow, and few enter in thereat. Many are called, and few are
chosen. Therefore Hieremy the Prophet cries out with a loud voice: chapter 51. v.
45.
Let every one save his life. If he cannot do it otherwise, let him condemn
himself to perpetual imprisonment, and bury himself alive. It Is better to pass
out of Prison to Heaven, then out of a Palace to Hell.

The ancient Philosophers had notice of this truth: Seneca exclaims; I was well
pleased with inquiring after the Eternity of Souls yea and I did believe it
too. Epist. 101.
Behold how they pondered the Mystery of eternity, who were deprived of the
rays of truth: What are Christians obliedged to do? The same Seneca spoke
wisely, when he said: Amongst evils our best comfort is, they will have an end.
The end is a lenetive against all misery.

You may meet with one, who bewails the burning of his house: another who
complains he has no friend, no one to assist him, none that cares for him. This
man is afflicted through pains of body: that grows pensive because he is in
desolation of spirit: One deplores his neediness and want, another deems it
worse then death, to see himself despised. To what purpose, I pray, are these
lamentations? The best remedy in misery is, it will have an end: this remedy
eternity is destiture of: It comprehends all kind of punishments, but is wholly
void of any end of them: Hence the eternity of the damned is a torment
unexplicable. Lib. 5. Hist. Angl,


Venerable Bede faithfully rehearses a remarkable passage, which happened in his
time. In the County of Northumberland lived a man of great piety called
Drithelm; who through extremity of sickness was brought to the gates of death,
so as in the beginning of the night he seemed to be dead indeed, and as such
lay all the night following. Next morning, being unexpectedly restored to
himself; he said, to the amazement of those present, he was permitted to live
yet longer, but after a far different manner, then hitherto he had done.
Wherefore he addicted himself to spend more time in Prayer; he distributed all
his Goods amongst his Wife, Children, and the poor; that done he renounced all
worldly cares, and betook himself to great austerity; which gave sufficient
testimony, what horrible things he had been eyewitness of in the other world.
What he had seen, he did not promiscuously relate to all, but only to such, as
he knew were unfeigned friends of Eternity. Amongst these was King Alfride, a
man of eminent Learning, who frequently and attentively gave ear to Drithelm,
while he discoursed of Hell. Concerning which, he enlarged himself chiefly in
the explication of that horrible darkness, that incomparable stench, those
lamentable howlings and tears, those swarms of Adders, the insulting of Devils,
the balls of fire and bitter hail: which served to afflict the Damned, when
they were forced to make a dismal exchange, by being snatched out of flames and
thrown amongst Ice. These particulars compared with the delights of Paradise
Drithelm much insisted on. Out of which narration the greatest profit redounded
to himself, for in a Monastery his abode was fevered from the rest, and situate
on the bank of a River, where his principal employment was, to cleave fast to
God, with his desires to visit Heaven, to multiply Prayers without ceasing, to
chastist his body, and with perpetual sighs ^o meditate on Eternity. And that
all might perceive he was in good earnest, he used often, for the mortifying
his flesh to go into the River, which ran by his Cell, sometimes to the middle,
sometimes to the neck, and stay therein so long till the Ice in Winter frose
about his body: at his comeing out he did not dry his clothes by the Fire, or
Sun, but kept them on wet as they were, to the greater vexation of his body: in
so much as he seemed rather to be apparelled with Ice then Garments. Some
spectatours, moved with compassion toward the man, asked him: How is it
possible Drithelm, you should be able to endure such piercing cold? to whom he
readily returned this answer: I have beheld sharper things, and more bitter
colds then this.

Who ever shall ruminate with attention the punishments of eternity, See
writers of S. S. lives
may pronounce the same of the greatest sufferings of Martyrs: I have seen
greater then these. James a Noble Persian, was by King Isdegerdes commanded to
be cut in pieces from head to foot joint by joint. But one that contemplates
eternity will say: I have seen sharper torments then these. Serapion had all
his bones broken: Nicephorus Martyr after broyling on a Gridiron, was cut
piecemeal. Yet still one may affirm: I have seen more cruel usage. Ianas Martyr
not without bitter taunts had his fingers cut off, as if they were to be sown
to spring up again; his skin was pulled over his ears, his tongue plucked out,
himself was thrown into boiling Pitch, and lastly all his Limbs were bruised
upon an Engine. His companion Barachisius was scourged with Thorns, had his
flesh miserably rent, and in fine had all his bones torn a sunder and broken.
But I have beheld more bitter passages. Saturninus being tied to a wild Bull,
whom they made more wild with prickling, was hurried through rough and craggy
ways, and so drawn in pieces: a horrible torment no doubt. Nevertheless I have
seen more horrible. Martina, a Noble Virgin, being fastened to four stakes, was
beaten with staves and stripes, was torn with hooks, cast to the Beasts, and
condemned to the fire. Emmeramus Bishop of Ratisbon, after his fingers were
chopped off, his eyes pulled out, his ears and nostrils divided from his head,
his hands and feet were cut away, and his tongue out of his mouth. Leodegarius
Bishop of Auston in France, when he had undergone Famine and long Imprisonment,
was deprived of his Eyes, had the soles of his Feet wounded and separated from
his body, his Lips cut away, and his tongue plucked out. Yet worse pains then
these I have beheld. Alexander Bishop of Rome endured many stabs: Cassianus a
School master was run through with the Bodkins and Penknives of his Scholars;
whose hands by how much the weaker, so much more grievous was his Martyrdom.
Mark, Bishop of Arethusa, being pricked with Lancets on all sides, was anointed
with Honey, put into a wisket of Rushes, and so exposed as a Prey to Bees,
Wasps and Gnats. Notwithstanding I have seen more harsh dealing then this.
Blessed Maximus after he had bin rent with Hooks and had suffered the Rack, and
bin beaten with clubs, was stoned to death. Anthimus Martyr, was tormented with
hot glowing Aulls, broken potsheards, fiery shoes, and stretched upon a Rack.
Zoe, wife to Exuperius Martyr, after six days Famine endured in a dark
Dungeon, was hung up by the hair of her head, and stifled with smoke of burnt
Excrements. Glycerius having been beaten till his bones appeared, was cast
into the fire. Peter the Exorcist, companion to Marcelliuus Martyr, first was
torn with whips, then had Vinegar and Salt poured into his gaping wounds, and
lastly was roasted with a flow fire. Christiana Virgin, was likewise roasted
and basted with Oil; Serpents were let loose against her; her tongue was plucked
out, and shot to death with Arrows. Maxima and Donatilla were cruelly beaten
with rods, then had their wounds rubbed with quick Lime, and finally being
broyled on a Gridiron, were condemned to the beasts. Theonilla had the top of
her head taken off with a Rasour, which was afterward Crowned with Thorns and
Brambles; then being tied to four stakes she was barbarously beaten with thongs
of Lether, and had hot Coals thrown upon her belly; amongst which torments she
gave up the Ghost. Horrible pains were these no doubt, and sharp sufferings:
Albeit I have seen sharper and more horrible. Pantaleon having been for a long
time burned, was at last thrown into a Cauldron of molten Lead. Paul and
Iuliana, Brother and Sister, were tortured on the Rack, were afflicted with
boiling Pitch, beaten with rods of hot iron, seated in Chaires, and cast upon
beds struck full of Nails, and after three days abode amongst Snakes were for
the Faith of Christ consumed with fire. Blessed St. Barbara was cruelly
rotmented with burning Torches, stripes, and iron hooks, and having her breasts
cut off, suffered her head to be barbarously smitten with Hammers. Auxentius
had his feet bored through with iron, and then being hanged upon a Wheel, was
so long pierced with hot auls, till he ended his Martyrdom. Quintinus, of the
illustrious order of Senators in Rome, underwent mervailous torments; for
after he had been dressed with boiling Oil, Pitch and Fat, his sides were
scorched with burning Torches, all his body was beaten with Chains: Mustard,
Lime and Vinagre were poured into his mouth (O strange kind of drink!) and
himself was thrust through with two Iron Spits, from the Neck to the Thighs,
having besides sharp needles struck into all his fingers between the Flesh and
Nails. Do these seem great extremities of cruelty? But far greater are to be
found in Hell, and those eternal; in comparison whereof the former may be
reputed as a Playgame or a jest. We have seen far sharper pains then all before
mentioned.

Even this Age we live in has been witty in inventions of Tyranny. In some
places the bellies of men consecrated to God, being ripped open and stuffed
with Provend, have served as Mangers for Horses, or troughs for Hogs to feed
in. Quick Mice have likewise bin placed upon men's naked bellies, and covered
there under Basins, on the tops whereof a fire being made, the little creatures
were compelled to seek for their liberty, which finding no other way, they eat
into the bowels of liveing men. Hence Caligula, thou may learn something to
imitate. In other places men's bodies were cut asunder joint by joint; burning
Torches were put under their Armpits, and applied to their whole breasts; Hooks
were thrust into their entrals; and that they might be longer tortured before
death, fires were kindled under them. Some have been clothed in Bears-skins,
and so baited by Mastive Dogs, till they were devoured. Some again have been
rolled on sharp stones; some have been covered with a board, and pressed under
a thousand pound weight, and so bruised to pieces; with so much more cruelty
and pain, by how much their death was slower. These are cruel, most cruel
sufferings, yet who ever looks upon the pains of Hell with the eye of
contemplation, will constantly pronounce of all the torment of Martyrs
together: I have seen much more cruel, I have beheld much more dreaful. All the
inventions of cruesty found out by Tyrants, are small, are nothing at all in
respect of the Torments in Hell; which are eternal, alas! alas! they are
eternal.

SECT. 4.
GOd commanded Ezechiel to make this Proclamation: That all flesh may know that
I the Lord have drawn my Sword out of his Scabbard not to be revoked. chapter 21.
ver. 5.
Where this Sword is once unsheathed, it will never be put up again, it is
irrevokable. For the better understanding hereof, let us I pray betake
ourselves to a quiet posture, as he did in Mount Choreb, who did contemplate
Eternity with much attention. Let us sit down, and cast up our accounts on
Paper, or on our fingers ends in this manner: The Damned shall be tormented in
Hell a thousand years: that is not enough. Two thousand years: nor that. Three
thousand years: that is too little. Four thousand years: and that too. Five
thousand years: that is not sufficient. Ten thousand years: neither will that
suffice. Twenty thousand years: that falls short of their due. Fifty thousand
years: so likewise does that. A hundred thousand years: this compared to
eternity is nothing it will not do the deed.

To what sum would our computation amount, it we should go on reckoning half
a days space, as we reckoned before? What book of accounts would contain that
sum? By midday he that Calculated would be overwhelmed with his own work: in
fine, he would be constrained to say; the measure of Eternity is not to be
taken by the fingers; it cannot be reckoned, it cannot be summed up by any
numbers what ever; it is altogether numberless. Join what numbers you please
together, let your product rise to what height you will; Eternity goes beyond
it: how far? Infinitely; it surpasses all computation, and hides its end in
that endless revolution of Ages.

Ah, Mortals! ah Christians! ah! how little do we consider these things? how
seldom do we leisurely cast up our accounts in this manner? Indeed no one
beleives, no one beleives, no one beleives. These things I must tell you, are
not dreams, they are no Fables, nor Rhetorical flourishes; here are no
amplifications, no exaggarations at all. Matt. c. 25.
Eternal truth has uttered the Oracle: Depart from me accursed into fire
everlasting. The Sun is not clearer then these words, which makes me repeat: No
one beleives, no one beleives, no one beleives.

In our first part of Eternity, we lead the Reader on by the hand to a right
consideration of Eternity. Here now imagine a thousand Cubes, a thousand
Millions of years. These are soon said, but not so soon considered with
attention. They make thus many years, 1000 000000000000000,000,000,000,000: or
a thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand,
thousand times a thousand thousand years. After then so many thousand ages are
passed in Hell, as it is most certain, they will once be past; then each ones
Conscience of the Damned will say to them: Eternity is not yet begun, do not
therefore look for any end of it, which never will be: Eternity remains yet
entire: it is nothing at all lessened. And after again and again and again so
many more Centuries of years are come and gone, we must still say the same:
Eternity is not one jot diminisht. It is yet as durable as ever; it cannot be
circumscribed, nor impared; but shall endure for immense revolutions of ages,
and for ever beyond those.

SECT. 5.
TO conclude this I affirm: If any thing would, Eternity seriously considered
would drive a man off his wits. But God requires not men should go mad, but
that they should amend their lives. Give me a man, I beseech you, that
ruminates attentively the unexplicable windings of Eternity; and I will
likewise produce another, who shall be most ready to pass over fifty, yea a
hundred years in most rigorous austerity of life. But in regard we meet with
few such, who handle sharply their own bodies, who to appease God give
themselves to hardship, and languish after Heaven alone; hence that is most
true: no one believes, no one believes, no one believes. I will give the Reader
a farther account hereafter, why these words are so often repeated.

One would easily imagine the punishments for eternity well considered might
prevail so far with us, as to make us forbear what we know is displeasing to
Hitherto as Esaias complains, Our iniquities have made a separation betwixt us,
and God: Esaias. 59
Now therefore let us approach to him, and he will draw near to us.

For a Conclusion I add something, which conduces to the explication of
Eternity. Imagine there is but one Sea in the whole world, (as many Learned men
are of opinion) and that this Sea does neither increase nor diminish; as
certainly it will after the day of judgment. Let God now grant this special
favor and grace, (give us leave to fancy it so) that an Angel be sent to the
Captives of Eternity with these joyful tidings: Be of good cheer, for I declare
unto you great joy, though it will be long ere you be pertakers of it. God has
commanded that every hundred year I shall come down to the Sea, and carry
thence one drop of water: and when the Sea is drop by drop exhaust, your
torments shall have an end; and you shall be removed hence to the society of
the blessed. This would be exceeding great comfort unto them albeit they were
not to be released till after almost numberless revolutions of Ages. We
forsooth value not a benefit that comes so late, neither are we sensible of
such an end; but rather conceive that promise will never take effect. For how
many drops I pray are in the Ocean? who will sum them up? according to our
capacity they cannot be numbered, nor the pains of hell brought to an end. But
without all question, the Damned would be very capable of this favor: they
know well all that is finite is comprehended within certain limits, the bounds
of all things, but eternity may be easily found out; even the Sea it self,
though by drops only, may at length be emptied. Whereupon they would listen to
that promise of the Angel, as to most joyful news. But this comfort they are
wholly debarred of: Such a welcome message will never arrive at Hell: No such
thing may ever be hoped for. So vast an extent of time, it is true, will pass
away; wherein the Ocean by drops might be drawn dry: yet after all that
dimention of time the damned burn, and shall burn: No end may here be met with
here is no period, bound, or extremity, all things are eternal: Ezechi. 21.
That all flesh may know, that I the Lord have drawn my Sword out of his
Scabbard not to be revoked. The eternity of the damned is an unexplicable
torment. Hence even the dead bewailing our blindness cry out: No one beseives,
no one beleives, th. 51.
no one beleives. Therefore as Jeremy admonishes; Let every one save his life.

CHAP. XIII. Three Conclusions drawn from the foregoing Chapters.
Aurelius Prudentius, an Antique Christian Poet, in the reign of Theodosius the
elder, published two Books to Symmachus, in the one whereof he describes in
elegant verse the streit way to Heaven:

As first the way is rough, unpleasing sad, Difficil but in the end 'twill make
you glad: And recompense with joy your labors past.

In the other he lays down the large, plain way to Hell:

This leads astray, and painted goods does show,
In fine it is doleful, and will you orethrow.
How rightly does Holy Job accord with these? chapter 21.
They lead their days in wealth, and in a moment they go down to Hell. Now
every one has free liberty to choose: choose; which do you like: choose.

Joseph the Foster-father of Christ our Lord, being to return out of Egypt
into his own Country, had two ways proposed unto him: it was left to his
freedom, whether he would go into Jury or Galily. Matt. 2.
For the Angels command was no more, but; Go into the Land of Israel: whether
thou will take this or that way, is left to thee. Joseph prudently
deliberating, after he heard that Archelaus reigned in Jury in stead of Herod
his Father, was afraid to go thither. There is an open way either to Heaven or
Hell: it is in our power to make a prudent choice. Whether are we in love with?
It is inculcated to us a hundred, a thousand times, that in hell the Devil and
his Rebellions Angels bear sway; in Heaven Christ Reins with his Servants and
Friends: Now let us choose whither we have a mind to go. The consideration of
what ensues, especially three conclusions hereafter annexed, do not a little
conduce to make a profitable choice.

SECT. 1.
HAd any one of the Persian Monark Assuerus his Guests bin examined what
dainties were in the Kings Banquet, Est. c. 1.
he might easily have answered, the fare was Princely, and the Feast continued
half a year: thus much might have been said in general: in particular these
demands were fit to have been proposed.

1. Who were invited to this Feast? All Princes, the most valiant of the
Persians, and the Nobles of the Medes, and the Rulers of the Provinces: all
these were invited, and this lassed for half a year.

2. What kind of Banquet was there? It was in a Garden, it was furnished with all
sorts of delecacies; the wood being planted with Royal Garnishing, far
surpassed all the pleasant Groves and Gardens of Thessaly; and this continued
half a year.

3. How was the place adorned? Not only with Gold, but also with Pearls: for
Beds of Gold and Silver were placed in order upon the Floor paved with Emrauld,
and the Touchstone: which painting adorned with marvailous variety: and this
held for half a year.

4. What shelter covered those that were invited? Most costly: for there hung
on every side hangings of Sky-colour and Green, and Hiacinthine color, held up
with cords of Silk, and Purple, which were held up with Marble Pillars: and
this for the space of half a year.

5. What meats were set before them? Most choice, and fit for Kings; and this
endured for half a year.

6. What drink was prepared for them? Wine plenteous and the best, as was
worthy of the Kings Magnificence; and this for half a year.

7. What Cups, Dishes and other Vessels were made use of? Golden ones: for the
Guests drank in Goblets of Gold, and the meats were brought in change of
Vessels; and this for half a year.

8. What Music did exhilarate the ^nvited? Most noble: all the Graces, and a
Consort of Si^ens seemed to have met together, for half a year.

Were all the Guests merry? exceeding merry, for half a year. This particular
intelligence one of Assuerus his guests might give: the like might more
reasonably be affirmed of Heaven, if eternity were but to last for half a year.

But let us now proceed in questioning one of the Damned: What is the greatest
pain of the Damned? Darkness, or a privation of the sight of God, and this for
all eternity.

What is the second pain? Weeping, and Gnashing of teeth; this Music is in
Pluto's Court for all eternity.

What the third? Hunger and incredible thirst for all eternity. If this hunger
and thirst did but continue ten thousand times an hundred thousand year, it
would appear less burdensome, then formerly a Fast enjoined in the Sacrament
of Penance seemed.

What is the fourth pain? Intolerable Stench, arising from so many stinking
carcasses, from a Sea of Brimstone, and the Society of so many Devils. All the
stink in this world seems to breath Cinamond and Balsome, if compared to that
in Hell. It was often foretold them: you must expect to be bathed in sorrow, if
you hold on this course. But they turned the deaf ear to these admonitions:
they kept on their way, which lead them into a Bath, out of which they must
never go. How tolerable would it be to be tormented with this stench so many
years, as minutes have passed since the world began to this hour? But alas!
this stench will afflict them without end, for all eternity.

What is the fifth torment of the damned? Most dreadful fire; to which our
flames appear no more, then merely painted. That goes beyond expression, that
their fire is unquenchable; since no Rivers, no Seas, no Deluge is of force to
extinguish it; which Eternity it self cannot put out. The Judge gave warning
aforehand, the decree is confirmed, and intelligeable enough: Go into fire
everlasting. They shall be burned but not consumed for all Eternity.

What is the sixth? The worm of Conscience: So much the more grievous torment,
by how much it is farther extended. That this matter may be palpable to the
eye, we need imagine no more, then a fiery Cat sticking fast to each ones
bosom, and scratching and tearing it with her claws, in such sort, as though
it be torn in pieces, yet it grows together again, that it may be torn anew for
all eternity.

What the seventh? the place, and accursed company. These were the allurements
of sin, which might have bin avoided, but were not; now instead of dainties,
they are buried in a Tomb of Flames: and in lieu of the society of their
dearest friends, they are fast chained to the most execrable company of Devils
and damned men: This place they must inhabit for ever, this company will stick
to them for eternity.

What do you call the Eight Torment? Rageing Despair: which every moment
murders that impious crew, but yet it kills them not: as if a Knife or Dagger
were continually stabbed to the heart for all eternity.

What now is the Ninth? Alas! alas! alas! unexplicable, immense,
incomprehensible Eternity: This of all torments is the greatest. To suffer
Darkness, Weeping, Famine, Stink, Fire, the worm of Conscience, Despair, the
Cohabitation with Devils; for one, two, ten, an hundred thousand years, or for
so many thousand, as a skilful accountant could express in a sheet of Paper;
would amount to a number so great, as no Arithmeticians tongue could declare
it: Nevertheless it would be finite, and upon this score most welcome to the
damned, because at last after almost numberless Millions of years their
torments would have an end.

But the sentence is pronounced, and cannot be recalled. Their torments must be
endured without end: yea, as the Prophet has it, For perpetual Eternities.

This is it, which can never be sufficiently declared, no nor conceived, or
understood. Eternity causes in the virtuous daily sighing; it is to the wicked
a fearful dream; and to the Damned an unexplicable torment. Here now adjoyn we
three conclusions.

SECT. 2.
THe first Conclusion: All the world esteems precious is despicable, and a mere
shadow compared to Eternity. If all Silver, Gold and costly Gemmes were amassed
together in two Balls; all Ensigns of Honor, all glory of Triumphs; all
Salomons and Sardanaphalus his delights, all allurements of pleasure, all
sweetness of Voluptuousness were joined in one, they would be of no more value
then a contemptible Mushrum, base trash, or an empty shadow; or, to speak more
closely to the point, all aforesaid in respect of eternity is but like a bare
resemblance of a fly. Who would care for that Feast, which after one or two
morsels hastily swallowed, must be relinquisht? Who would extol that reward,
which passes through the Panch? such are the treasures of this life; vile
Morsels, Crumbs, Vanity, Nothing.

Excellently well to the purpose spoke St. Austin: Psalm. 68.
It does not suffice us, what ever is long in time, if it have an end, and
therefore deserves not the name of long. If we will be covetous, let us covet
eternal life. All besides this which we have amongst us, is but Nutshels, mere
Bables. Hence proceeded those words of St. Paul: Phi. c. 3.
I esteem all things to be detriment for the passing knowledge of Jesus Christ:
for whom I have made all things as detriment, and do esteem them as Dung.

The second Conclusion: No Religious man lives so spareingly, nor trears
himself so roughly; no one is so rigorous against his body as they would be, if
they were freed from the punishments of the other world. What we account a most
severe life, is a life swiming in pleasure, if compared to that perpetual
necessity they have in Hell to live and die for ever. We may be thought to sleep
most sweetly, though we pass over many nights awake: we though surrounded with
calamities, flow in delights; whereas they are tormented indeed, and every hour
dye a thousand deaths.

An Author worthy of credit recounts, Caesari. Heisterb. Lib. 2.
how Theodorick Bishop of Virecht had a Servant called Eberbach. This man was
in good repute with his Master, as well for his great prudence, as faithful
industry: yet could he not escape the envy of others, which moved him in a
frantic humor to make himself a slave to the Devil; hoping thereby to find
some releif against his malicious opposers. After some years Eberbach dyed; and
his Soul being separated from the Body was thrown into a Pool of Flames: in
which he was so tormented that after his return to this life again, he
affirmed: If one great fire were made of all the Trees and Wood in the world,
he would rather fry in that till the day of judgment, then abide one hour in
the former flames. He likewise gave a particular account of the cold, darkness
and other pains in Hell. While he was there most sharply tormented, a messenger
from Heaven spoke to him in this manner: Behold quoth he, this reward they
deserve, that serve the Devil. But tell me, if thou might go back to life
again, would thou take course to expiate thy sins committed? Whereunto he
answered: I will refuse no punishment, so I may go hence. In fine, upon this
condition that he should undergo voluntary penance, he was restored to life;
and in regard his body was not yet buried, he raising himself upon the Bier,
put all the standers by to flight. Presently after he began vigorously to do
Penance for his faults, adhering to Bishop Otho, who was going to the Holy
War. Under whom he chastised himself so severely, that he ran by his horse
barefoot, not careing how much he wounded his legs and feet with thorns and
sharp stones. Almost all the money he had, he distributed amongst the poor: he
fasted every day with bread and water, which he took most sparingly. Some
admiring this austerity of life, persuaded him to take a milder course: to whom
he replied: you have no cause to wonder at my strickness; I have endured far
worse: were you there you would be of another mind. When this Holy travel was
ended, he and his wife became Religious, to spend the remnant of his days in
expiating his crimes. These things he related of himself to John Xant, from
whom the Author had his intelligence.

Here we may fitly call to mind that wholesome admonition: I have suffered more
grievous things. And you O Christian, must suffer more grievous things, unless
you be content to undergo smaller crosses here with patience. Sometimes we
complain others do us wrong: here say to your self, you shall endure more
hereafter. Sometimes others fill your ears with complaints; tell them, they
must pass through greater difficulties: the like may be practiced in all
troubles and miseries. Wherefore do you exaggarate your grief through
impatience? Except you be careful: greater affliction will befall you. All you
suffer is nothing, if you look not upon those bloody Bathes of New, but those
fiery Gulfs of Pluto. Therefore lest you be constrained to endure more, satisfy
your self with undergoing less.

SECT. 3.
THe third Conclusion: All labor, which tends not to Eternity, is not only
vain, but for the most part hurtful. Concerning which matter Christ delivered
himself most expressly: Matt. c. 16.
What does it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and sustain the damage
of his soul. It is not only bootless for us to seek after Riches, Health, and
Pleasure; but even in vain do we strive to compass the whole world, if in
persuit thereof we lose our selves. Make use of, and enjoy Riches, Health and
Pleasures, in as great height as your heart can desire; when that is past, you
have purchased no more then Smoke and Shadows; if after this life you be
fastened to a stake encompassed with fire. Contemplate I pray, in what manner
some use here to torment others, by driveing a stake through their bodies, till
it come out at their mouths. A dreadful Spectacle no doubt. The miserable
wretches hang tied in this sort; and sometimes to the augmentation of their
pains are roasted with a slow fire, as well as chained and nailed to a post
hands and feet. Alas! how doleful is their suffering? especially, if it were to
continue a hundred thousand years, if for all eternity.

Alas! What does it profit a man, Lucas Bergen.
if he gain the whole world, and sustain the damage of his soul? We do in some
measure understand this Oracle; but as a learned Divine said; most men have a
mist cast before their eyes by the flesh. Hence St. Chrysostom made this true
assertion: Albeit that fire rage, Hom. 55. ad pop.
that River be all on flames; yet we laugh, and follow our sports, and sin
freely. What therefore may I more fitly repeat, then that of the Prophet? Let
every one save his life? Eternity comes a pace toward us, and we post toward
eternity: ere long we shall meet together.

Iosophat being instructed by Barlaam in the principles of Christian Religion,
Damas. Hist. de Barl. etc
saw as it were in a Dream, a Vision of Hell, with the different kinds of
torments used in that place; and with all heard a Voice that said: This is the
mansion of the wicked, who have wallowed in the puddle of Vices. After the
vision was over, he fell into a strange trembling, and tears trickled down his
Cheeks amain, wherewith all allurements of unchaste pleasure quite vanished away;
whence Iosaphat became wholly another man.

Good God! how obdurately malicious are we? Hell is not represented to us in a
Dream, but by an unerrable faith: and yet what a life do we lead? We indeed are
often changed, but still to worse: We alter our former wickedness, as if we
were weary of it, and take upon us a new habit of impiety far exceeding the
former. Whereupon every one may make this prayer with St. Bernard: Have pity
on me O my God, before I be tormented eternally in Hell. Nay, every wicked man
may pray, as Manasses did: Do not destroy me together with mine iniquities, 2
Paral. chapter 36.
neither be angry with me for ever, reserving evil for me; nor condemn me unto
those lowest places underground: Because thou art the God of Repentant sinners.
What expressions, O my God, may I, who am liker a Beast, then a man, rather
make use of then these? Spare me, pardon me, have mercy on me; do not remember
mine iniquities.

When Christ our Lord the day after Palm Sunday went from Bethania to
Jerusalem, he stepped aside to a Fig tree to gather some fruit to appease his
hunger, but finding none, he said: Matt. 21
Never grow there fruit of thee for ever. And incontinent the Figtree was
withered. Such as these are all the inhabitants of Hell, accursed Figtrees,
always barren, plucked up by the roots, and cast into the fire to burn for
ever: they will never bring forth fruit for eternity.

In Behemoths Kingdom there is no knowledge of patience at all, nor of
humility: no virtue is to be found there, the Soil is altogether fruitless, no
trees are to be found there, but such as sprung up for fuel: they will bring
forth no fruit for ever.

After our first Parents had tasted of the forbidden Apple, they were quickly
banished from that Garden of Pleasure, and an Angel in Arms placed to guard the
entrance thereof: this is attested by Holy Writ: And he cast out Adam, Gene. 3.
and placed before the Paradise of Pleasure Cherubims, and a flaming and a
turning sword. This was a most signal testimony of Divine mercy, there to place
a servant only, and not the Lord of Paradise with a sword to hinder all
entrance. It will not be so in the day of Judgment, when no servant shall be
permitted to have a sword: Our Lord will take the sword himself, and draw it
against the damned: Matt. 25
Get ye away from me you accursed. These words are but few, yet do they make a
volume of so vast a bulk as will never be sufficiently read over.

It behooves us therefore now to look well (...) us. The less misery each one
shall (...) to in the other world, the more (...) he undergoes miseries in this.

CHAP. XIV. What is the Fuel of Eternal Fire. With an Explication of the
grievousness of mortal sin.
Well said an Ancient Philosopher: The beginning of Wisdom is the knowledge of
sin. He will never sin grievously, who with attention ruminates the gravity and
ugliness thereof. Take sin out of the world, and you take away all evil
together with it. Sin is the only evil in the world, yea the very nursery of
all other evils, a most profound sea of all miseries, and a bottomless depth of
torments. Hence issued that of St. Chrysostom: Sin is a willing madness, a
voluntary Devil. This moved the Mother of St. Lewis King of France, while he
was young, to instill this principle into his heart: My son, I would rather
thou should dye, then sin mortally. well to our purpose spoke John Climacus:
Though we should fast a thousand years continually with Bread and Water; though
we should bring the whole world to mourn with us; though we should equal the
River Jordan by weeping drop by drop, yet could we never satisfy for our faults
committed.

This made the Wise man cry out: Ecc. 21.
As from the face of a Serpent, flee from sins. Who touches the cup wherein
Death has Vomited, to speak with Turtullian, and in which Poison is offered to
the taster? There is nothing in the world more formidable then sin: Upon which
subject much has been delivered as well by word of mouth as writing: whereunto
we will annex five assertions. who ever sins mortally:

1. Offends God most grievously, and makes him his adversary and foe.

2. He loses all Gods Grace.

3. He becomes guilty of all miseries and calamities.

4. He loses Heaven for all Eternity.

5. He throws himself headlong into everlasting pains in Hell.

St. Paul comprehends the whole business in a word: The wages of sin is death;
and all the train of death, sorrow, pain, sickness, anguish, which are
Harbingers, are followed by eternal death. All this, it is meet we should
consider more exactly, therefore we will proceed with our assertions in order.

SECT. 1.
THe first is: Whoever sins mortally, offends good grievously, and makes him
his adversary and foe. By sin the supreme God is wronged, so far, as man places
his final end in the creature with neglect of the Creator, This is an extreme
injury, and not much unlike to Idolatry: for which cause, sins in Holy Writ are
frequently called Idolatry. Such temerity as this is found in all grievous sin,
and is worthy of all punishment whatever. For in regard God is most present
every where, the sin is committed before his eyes, who so much abhors it; and
so becomes an injury to God, who is both Spectatour and hearer: Thus we affront
the Sovereign King before his face. Yea, and what is worse, we abuse benefits
to the displeasure of our Benefactour: For that very help, which God affords us
in every action, we turn against him: As if a Father should provide his little
Son of a Dagger, wherewith he might learn to defend himself; and withal should
guide his child's tender arm: yet the wicked Boy should strive to murder his
father, even while he held up the hand ready to stab him. This is every ones
case that sins: While God both helps and directs his actions, these he most
injuriously converts against God. Now for better manifestation of this
notorious affront take a view of what ensues.

So often as a man is about to sin, he stands betwixt God and the Devil, as
judge and umpire, whether he will declare for. God explicates his own Law, and
withal shows his Crucified Son, to withdraw man from sin. The Devil sets
before him pleasure, the bait to all evil, hereby to persuade and entice him to
sin: Whoever now sins, declares without any more ado for the Devil; because
turning away from God, he most unjustly adjudges the cause to the Devil. What
else is this, but to say indeed? Let Laws command, or prohibit what they will;
let Gods Son Crucified admonish, crave, move, or manifest what he please; let
God himself menace what he list from Heaven; the Devil invites me so sweetly,
he drinks to me in such a sugared cup, that he persuades, he gets the victory, I
go, I run after the Devil, I permit my self to be drawn by him: This Inkeeper
gives me content, what shot soever he demand. This is exactly the proceeding of
every one that sins grievously.

Thus God is put into one scale, and Pleasure into the other: man comes to
weigh them, and when he is determined to sin, he resolves rather to lose the
friendship of God, then debar himself of pleasure: and so prefers Barabbas the
Theif and Murderer, before Christ our Redeemer.

What more base, horrible, and unworthy so Sovereign a Majesty, then for a
creature to deal thus with its Creator? Be astonished O Heavens upon this,
Jeremy chapter 2.
and O Gates thereof be ye desolate exceedingly, says our Lord. For two evils
has my people done; Me they have forsaken the Fountain of living water, a most
clear fountain, and have thirsted after muddy water.

Yet for further Declaration of this particular: Man as we said, is drawn two
ways; this way God draws, that the Devil. It is freely in man's choice, whom he
will follow. The Devil ties man in a thread, (for he can do no more) and
proposes to him something which may either sooth the flesh or stuff the purse,
or puff him up with ambition: with these threads he draws man, whom he has
entangled, whither he pleases. Now that man may satisfy his Lust, or increase
his Fortune, or be seated on the Throne of Honor, he tramples underfoot the
express Law of God.

Contrariwise God binds man with cords not easily broken: He sets before his
eyes his numberless benefits, he requires from him due service, he threatens to
banish him from Heaven, and throw him into Hell for ever, if he be disobedient.
But all in vain, what ever God either promises, or menaces: The Devil bears the
Bell, and through man's wilfulness is obeyed before God: Man deeming it more for
his purpose, to follow the enticements of Satan, then the commands of our
Savior: wherefore he resolutely breaks a sunder all Bands which God has
imposed upon him.

Tell me now all you that wittingly run into sin, and constitute the Devil your
Commander; tell me what Hells, what Eternities may sufficiently expiate this
injury done to God?

Heretofore God bitterly complained of this proceeding: H^erem. chapter 2. v. 20.
Thou have burst my bonds, and thou said: I will not serve. This complaint is
suitable to the matter: for this in reallity every one does, who is resolved to
sin; he bursts his Bonds and says; I will not serve. Hence may Satan insult or
upbraid even Christ our Lord: Behold how thou art treated by thine own; thus
men whom thou have created, love thee, thus they honor thee for whom thou have
dyed; and upon whom thou bestowest thy self with all thou have. They know well
what they may expect from me, and yet they run after me; they suffer themselves
to be inveighled with a momentary pleasure; I have them ready to serve me at a
beck; they are not ignorant that I am their sworn enemy, and for all that they
love me, though I do but fobb them with vain hope of a small gain, Lust, or a
shadow of Honor. Take notice, how many of these march under my standerd. I was
not buffeted for them, as thou was, Christ, for thine; I was not scourged, nor
carried a Cross, nor died on it as thou did Christ for thine. Besides I do
not promise them Heaven, nor offer them Paradise; as thou do, Christ to
thine, whom thou instructedst with admonitions, teach with examples,
terrifiest with threats, and guidest with precepts. But all this is bootless:
they turn the deaf ear to thee, and willingly hearken to my suggestions. They
choose rather to fry in Flames eternally, then for a moment to live in
subjection to thy Laws. No wrong is done to them that are willing; they shall
perish, because they will perish: because they abandon their Creator, they
shall have me for their Lord and Master, to tyrannize over them.

What have we to say to these things, my brethren, says St. Cyprian? Do you
not by this time palpably perceive, O Mortals! how great an affront this is to
God? This then is that, which neither Hell fire nor eternity can sufficiently
expiate. We busy our selves now and then with enquiring; Why God punishes one
deadly sin, which is committed in a moment, with flames eternal? Several
answers are given to this question by Divines, amongst which scarce any one is
satisfactory: Touching this point we shall enlarge our selves in the ensuing
Chapter. However, he that would take pains to consider maturely, what we have
already discoursed; would acknowledge, I doubt not, that every heinous crime
must needs be infinitely displeasing to God; and that the injury, which by sin
redounds to his Sovereign Majesty, is so unexplicable, that it can never by any
torments be completely satisfied.

The matter is apparent: By how much the person offended is more noble and
sublime, so much more grievous is the offense. He that injures one equal to
himself, is blame worthy; but much more is he that being a Profane person, is
injurious to one in Holy Orders; whether Priest, Bishop, Archbishop, or
Cardinal; and more yet, if the party affronted be King, or Emperor, but most
of all (in the judgment of men) if he offer violence to the Popes Holiness:
thus the fault increases, according as persons wronged, are of a higher rank.
Hence in regard God, who is vilified, is of infinite Majesty; the offender is
guilty of infinite malice.

Wherefore the more clear knowledge one has of the Deity, the more exactly he
perceives and execrates the malice of sin. Certainly God has so much hatred
for sin, that an eminent Divine of St. Dominicks Order pronounced this
assertion: It is most certain, that if all created understandings were joined
in one, and all tongues were combined together, neither that understanding, nor
this combination of tongues were able to comprehend, or declare the hatred God
bears toward sin. Lud. Gr. par. 1. Memor. Lib. 2. chapter 7.
For seeing God is infinitely good, he has infinite love for goodness, and
infinite hatred for malice. Whence it happens, that the reward of that, and the
punishment of this is everlasting. Matt. 25
These shall go into punishment everlasting: but the just into life everlasting.

For the deeper impression of the great hatred God has against sin, let us
consider, if you please, what penalty a just Judge has often inflicted upon one
crime. The mind is manifest by its acting, and Gods hatred is declared by the
execution of his justice. What punishment I pray is that of the Angels? Lucifer
a stupendous Prodegy of all beauty and comeliness, was with many millions of
Angels thrown down headlong into those flameing gulfs. What wickedness trow
you, had they contrived? One proud thought was their offense. Alas! O God!
alas! must such a multitude of Potentates, (in respect of one whereof a
thousand Kings are of small account) be for ever damned? And have they no
respit allowed for mercy, penance, or the recovery of Grace? shall not all
eternity be of force to wipe away the guilt of one proud thought? may not
infinite ages satisfy for one sole crime, which was committed in a moment? With
good reason might God say to the Rebellious Angel and his associates: I could
quite destroy and annihilate you, but you shall remain to my Majesty, to the
blessed Angels, and all mankind, a Prodigious wonder, a spectacle of
wickedness, a mark of justice, and an eternal abyss of my fury toward you.

If any one were spectatour while the Sons of a thousand Kings and Emperors
were beheaded, he would sigh and say: This Royal Progeny must needs be guilty
of some execrable design, that makes them all without mercy thus generally lose
their heads; it is wonderful above measure that no place is left neither for
intercession, number, birth, nor clemency to plead for their delivery. The very
same we may here think, and admire so many Millions of Angels are thrown into
eternal flames, without any hope of pardon, mercy or favor; and that no regard
should be had of their nature and Celestial Origin, their exceeding great
numbers; nor the extenuation of their fault, but that altogether should be
involved as it were in the same whirlwind, all condemned of High Treason, and
adjudged to everlasting death.

Ah! my God, ah! how unspeakable is the malice of sin, that so highly provokes
the implacable wrath of God against it; and so implacable, as not to be
mitigated with any revolution of ages, or any torments whatever? Hence all hope
of pardon is exiled: These Rebels to God, shall be banished Heaven for all
eternity. The time of grace is past, no liberty may be expected: all
intercession is bootless, all Petitioning is in vain. The whole business is
concluded, the decree is settled without revocation. Heretofore they were
beautiful Angels, now they are ugly Devils; heretofore they were friends of
God, now as his sworn enemies they shall be tormented with fire everlasting.
And what offense brought them to this sad Catastrophe? we told you even now:
One proud thought. O King of Nations! who will not ^and in ^ear of thee?

Here now let no one deceive himself, and imagine the sin of the Angels was of a
far different rank from those of men. We may behold the like example in our
first Parents, as in the Angels. Who together with their posterity were
deprived of Gods grace, robbed of the garment of innocence, shut out of
Paradise, whence they were perpetually banished, and heard this fatal sentence
pronounced against them: You must dye. Neither was it sufficient for them to
dye once, they were liable to eternal death, which now began to domineer over
immense multitudes of people; yea even over all mankind, had not the Son of God
taken pity of us, and become man to dye upon the Cross for our redemption. We
had all bin lost, but that he vouchsafed to dye, who was immortal: for Original
sin had already infected the whole mass of mankind. What now I pray was that
horrible offense of Adam? He tasted of the forbidden Apple.

Alas! Was the only biteing of an Apple to be chastised with so many Tears, so
many Funerals, so many Calamities? But wherefore do we complain? This is the
nature of sin: it is infinitely displeasing to God, it is punished with
infinite pains, and in conclusion is never expiated. God is wrath, when he is
angry at sin.

Take yet a nearer view of the destruction of mankind. The whole world served
as a Tomb, to bury all men in, by a deluge of waters; scarce eight persons
being preserved alive from that inundation. What was the cause of such
prodigious mortality? Who tumbled into the angry waves so many hundred thousand
men? Sin, and especially that of Lust, Who consumed with fire those strately
Cities of Gomorrah, Sodom, and the rest? Sin, and chiefly Lust. Who ruined the
City of the Sichimites? Sin, and particularly that of Lust. Who slew five and
twenty thousand Benjamites, and forty thousand Israelites in Battle? Sin, and
principally that of Lust. Thus God proceeds, thus he vents his spleen against
all sin; in this point he knows not how to dissemble. No sin escapes without
punishment: for though many obtain pardon, yet none goes free from chastisement.

What punishment is that of Heli the Priest for his carelessness in correcting
his Children? what of Saul for disobedience? Of David for incontinence? Of
Nabuchod^n^sor for Pride? Of Ananias and Saphira for Avarice? What vengeance
was laid upon diverse others for seemingly small faults? Achan, for stealing
from the spoils of the enemies, lost his life. That poor man, for gathering
sticks on the Sabbath, was stoned to death. Oza for upholding the Ark from
falling was struck suddenly dead. The Prophet permitting himself at unawares
to be deceived, was strangled by a Lion. The Israelites murmur against Moses,
and are killed by fiery Serpents. The Bethsamites look upon the Ark less
reverently, and above fifty thousand men are slain. Boys scoff at Elizeus, and
forty two of them are torn in pieces by wild Bears.

God does not spare offenders. Ose. chapter 21.
Let Samaria perish, (let the soul perish) because she has stirred up her God
to bitterness. If into a Sea of Honey one drop of Gall fell, and turned the
whole Sea into bitterness, what would you say of that gall? you might rightly
affirm: it were unspeakably, nay infinitely bitter. Of this nature is sin: The
goodness and mercy of God is infinitely sweet, like unto an immense Sea of
Honey: But one deadly sin is of that bitterness, and contains in it so much
Gall, as to turn God, who is a boundless Ocean of sweetness, into most dreadful
bitterness of wrath and indignation. This is asserted by Osee: The Soul by sin
has stirred up her God to bitterness. Does she not therefore deserve to
perish? God himself complains of this dealing by the same Prophet: Ephraim has
provoked me to wrath in his bitterness. St. Hierom expounds it thus: By his
wickedness he has made me bitter, who was most sweet. God therefore does not
spare the offender.

I now leave off to admire the saying of holy Job: chapter 9.
I feared all my works knowing thou did not spare the offender. God is so far
from sparing offenders, that he punished most severely others sins in his own
son. Christ's most painful death manifestly declares with what hatred God
persecutes sin.

When a Medicine is prepared of liquid Gold, Pearls, or Bezoar stone, one may
reasonably affirm the Disease is dangerous, and life desperate: So we must
needs acknowledge the grievousness of sin was excessive, which could not be
taken away, but by the blood of Christ, which is of infinite value. Acknowledge
therefore O man (says St. Bernard) how grievous are those wounds, for whose
cure it was necessary Christ our Lord should be wounded.

Yea Christ, when he went to be Crucified, forbad them weep for his wounds and
death, that those tears might be shed for sin, which was the cause of so
ignominious a death. Christ's tears alone were sufficient to wash away sin: for
if all the Angels in Heaven assumed men's bodies, and with tears bewailed one
mortal sin for many ages, all their weeping would not be of force to Cancel it,
which only Christ's bloody tears would abundantly expiate.

SECT. 2.
OUr second assertion is: He loses all Gods grace, that sins mortally. Any one
mortal sin robs the Soul of all Divine grace. There is nothing more amiable
then a Soul adorned with Gods grace; nothing more ugly then a Soul without it,
though it be defiled but with one deadly sin. Sin is a most venomous Serpent,
whose sting is mortal, how ever his Poison seem to enter with delight. O that
we might behold with our eyes the deformity of sin, we should fly as fast from
it, as we now pursue it! sin is more terrible and deformed, then the Devil.
Lucifer a Prince amongst Angels surpassed the rest in comeliness, but all his
beauty was so defaced with one sin, that now he is most ugly, stinking and
dreadful to behold: his sole aspect, as many affirm, is able to bereave the
Spectatour of his life.

Divine grace is of such value, that one may justly pronounce, there is nothing
more precious in all the world. I declare my self. It may be affirmed of liquid
Gold, or of the water of life, that one drop of either is more esteemable then
a hundred vessels of the choycest Wine. This same may be patly applied to
Divine Grace: the least degree of it is far more precious then all the favor
of men, or all the worlds wealth besides. Imagine the World were all refined
Gold it were of no value in comparison of Divine Grace. Yet one mortal sin has
such opposition with it, that when sin is committed, it leaves not one sole
dram of grace in the soul.

What merit soever has been collected for many years, one sole sin destroys
in a moment. This is asserted by Ecclesiastes: c. 9.
He that shall offend in one point, shall lose many good things. If any one had
made himself acceptable to God by the practice of all kinds of Virtue, for
fifty, for an hundred years space; if any one had lead a strict life, and
fasted every day with bread and water; if any one had girt his loins with an
Iron Chain, whipped himself daily, and bestowed all he had in Alms; and after
all this, should commit one mortal sin; he would lose all the merits of his
life past, all the Grace of God, and of a bosom Friend, become a professed
Enemy to God.

The matter is certain, and admits of no contest: You may give credit to the
Prophet Ezechiel: chapter 18.
If the just man shall turn away himself from his justice, and do iniquity, all
his justices which he had done, shall not be remembered. Have thou committed one
sole mortal sin? all thy former labors are lost, all grace is lost; thou have
lost Heaven, God and all. Wherefore either recover thy losses, or resolve to
bewail them Eternally.

Amongst other punishments threatened by God to Israel, that as most dreadful is
rehearsed by Osee. c. 9.
Woe to them, when I shall depart from them. This departure of God from the
Soul is the death of it. An incomparable evil, an evil that surpasses all the
sufferings of Holy Martyrs, yea the everlasting torments of all the damned.
Take a view. I pray, of the misery of man deserted by God for sin: what ever
such a man does, what ever he suffers, while destitute of Divine Grace,
though he remove Mountains, leap into the fire; pluck the Stars from Heaven,
set whole Fountains on fire, and act wonders to be admired in all ages, yet
shall he not merit the least degree of Heavenly bliss, while he continues in
Gods disfavour. The reason of what I affirm is manifest: The Origin of all
merit is divine grace; therefore let him either purchase grace, or despair of
Heaven. I adjoyn another point altogether as deplorable.

He that has forsaken God, as aforesaid, might indeed throw himself down at
his pleasure, but all the strength he has cannot rise again: He cast himself
into a ditch, out of which he can never escape, unless God by his singular
favor lend him his hand. An Echo returns no answer, but when provokeed by a
previous noise: and he who has sinned, does not true penance, except he be
first excited by God. Nevertheless let none despair of pardon, though he have
fallen a thousand times. Have thou offended? Be of good courage: After a slip,
our steps are more warily, if not more constantly settled.

Seeing therefore the nature of sin is so cruel, de simil. chapter 190.
and its malice so detestable, St. Anselm generously cries out: If on one side
I saw the deformity of sin, and on the other the horror of Hell, by one
whereof I must needs be overwhelmed; I would rather throw my self into those
flaming Gulfs, then admit of sin: For I had rather go into hell innocent and
free from sin, then defiled with it, be seated in Heaven; since it is certain
only the wicked are tormented in Hell, and the just alone possess eternal
happiness.

Hereupon likewise the same Author discourses in this manner: Open thine eyes,
miserable Soul, and see what formerly thou have bin, and what now thou art:
what was thy condition then, and what now. Thou wast an Espouse of the Highest,
a Temple of the living God, a Vessel of Election, a Bride-chamber for an
eternal King, a Throne of the true Solomon, a seat of Wisdom, a Sister of
Angels, an Heir of Heaven. All these prerogatives thou did enjoy; but now
with tears lament thy sudden change. The Espouse of God is become an Adultress
of the Devil, the Temple of the Holy Ghost is turned into a Den of Theives, the
Vessel of Election into one of Corruption, the Bride-chamber of Christ, into a
puddle for Beasts to wallow in; the feat of Wisdom into a chair of Pestilence,
the Sister of Angels into a companion of Devils; yea she, who ere while like a
Dovesoared above the Heavens, now like a Serpent creeps upon the earth. Bewail
therefore, bewail O wretched Soul, thy doleful state; for the Heavens mourn for
thee, the Angels and all Saints deplore thy condition, the tears of Paul, and
bloody streams issuing from the body of Christ our Lord condole with thee,
because thou have sinned, and have not done penance for sin committed.

Proceed we now to a fuller examination of this point: He who has sinned is
either sepsible his Conscience is wounded, or he is not sensible: If he be
sensible, he is also miserable, because he groans under most piercing grief; a
guilty conscience is an excessive torment. But if he have no feeling of his
inward wounds, then he is miserable above measure: it is the worst of evils to
cherish ones own wickedness without perceiveing it, and to have lost all sense
after one is mortally wounded. Thus Drunkards while they are Carousing,
perceive not the strength of wine, which when digested they are sensible of.
Well said St. Chrysostom: The chiefest wickedness is to be wicked. Sermon. 5. de
jeju.
Albeit the Physician does not scarify a sick person, yet does his sickness
still remain with him: and although God does not punish the offender,
nevertheless he that offends is diseased, yea already dead.

Not unlike to this is that assertion of Seneca: The prime and greatest
punishment of sinners is, to have sinned. Neither is any crime without pain,
because the torment of wickedness is in wickedness it self. The Conscience is
scourged with what ever is done amiss. Where Vice is, there is also punishment:
Neither can a goared Conscience be without grief.

Though no one strike a wicked man, though no one maim or torture him with rack
or flames; yet he himself is his own Executioner. Peradventure he is
insensible, and has lost all feeling of his sad condition: He is therefore so
much nearer to Hell fire by how much he is farther off from the knowledge of
his own offenses. Such an one may be rightly termed dead and buried: Who has
sinned and is not sorry; who has grievously transgressed, and sues not for
pardon; who has lost Gods grace and sighs not for it; who is deprived of his
right to Heaven, and esteems it no damage; who is ready to be tumbled into
Hell, and laughs at it. What a brute is this? what a stone? what a block? this
is the malignant nature of sin, so to transform men into beasts, stocks and
stones, as that they perceive not their own scars, till they be discovered by
hell fire.

We then begin to abhor sin, when it is attended by rigorous chastisement. Yea
it often comes to pass, that such as through impiety have lost all feeling,
receive a foretast of hell before they part with this life. So those of Sodom
and Gomorrah had a trial of Hell, Hom. 4. Epist. ad Romans
before they came thither. Patly spoke St. Chrysostom: When mention is made of
Hell, if thou want faith and scoff at it, call to mind the burning of Sodom.
For we have beheld, we have beheld, I say, even in this life a representation
of Hell, in that conflagration of Sodom, as they can testify, who have
traveled to those places, and bin eye witnesses of Divine indignation thundered
down from Heaven. Imagine how grievous that offense was, which brought hell
upon them, ere they went down into Hell.

The wonderful and almost incredible effects of the Plague and Lightning, who
is of sufficient ability to declare? and yet much more exceeding all expression
is that Plague and Lightning of sin, which consumes and lays all wast. Sin of
all evils is the greatest and only evil: it is worse then Death, then Hell,
then any punishment, because it is the source from whence all punishment
proceeds.

Susanna being tempted to prostitute her Chastity, Daniel chapter 13.
broke forth into this gallant expression: If I shall do this, it is death to
me: and if I do it not, I shall not escape your hands. What do thou say
woman? mark well thy words: For if thou do not consent to the Adulterers, thou
shall dye: if thou do consent, thou shall escape death. Nevertheless she stands
to what she said: If I shall do this it is death to me. The chaste Matron knew
well there was another death, besides that of the body, a perpetual an Eternal
death, James 1.
in comparison whereof bodily death deserves not the name of death. That of the
Apostle is most certain: Sin when it is consummate, ingendreth death. Daniel
chapter 13.
Hereupon Susanna advances her resolution to the height: It is better for me
without the act to fall into your hands, then to sin in the sight of our Lord.
Learn of this noble Matron, O Christians, rather to lose the life of the body,
then the grace of God.

SECT. 3.
TAke now our third assertion: Whoever sins mortally, does wilfully draw upon
himself all kind of miseries and calamities. Because sin is the principal, yea
the sole and only Origin of them all. St. Cyprian in writing exhorts Donatus to
climb up to the top of the Mountain of sublime judgment, and thence to take a
view of the Seas infested with Pirates, and journeys by Land beset with
Robbers, Thieves and Menslayers, in great abundance every where, Cities rent a
sunder with dissentions, and whole Kingdoms overrun by wars; so as no place
may be found free from calamities, which have their rise from sin: Sin is the
firebrand and root of all misery.

Most truly said St. Hom. 5. ad pop.
Chrysostom: The several names of calamities are bare names to them that
discourse aright, that alone is calamity indeed to offend God. He has too mean
a conceit of God, who dares prefer before him any Lucre, or base delight. Were
there some other deity as amiable, rich, liberal and holy, which we valued more
then God, our folly might have some color of excuse; but since we esteem most
vile trash, and set more by a few drops, then the whole Ocean; and put an
higher price on creatures then the Creator of them; is not this down right
madness, manifest impiety, the worst of evils, the seminary of all calamities?

But what dare not foolhardy mortals attempt? Even Fables themselves discover
unto us man's temerity. Giants have a design against Heaven, Hercules invades
Hell, Jason with his fellows dives into the Bowels of the Sea, Daedalus takes
his flight through the air. This Lesson we learn from Fictions: The proud like
Giants assail Heaven, which is exposed only as a conquest for humility: Such as
despise God, make hell but a business of langhter: covetous persons Jason like,
hoyse Sails in pursuit of the Golden Fleece: Ambitious men, as Daedalus did his
wings, open their jaws to every breath of vain glory. Bold mortals stoutly
undertake any enterprise which leads them by the hand to forbidden wickedness.

And whence, I pray, proceeds Discord, Strife, War and utter ruin, but from
sin alone? All the health, comeliness and strength which is in man's body, by
means of sin becomes a prey to sickness and to death. This made the Royal
Prophet exclaim: Psalm. 37.
There is ^ealth in my flesh, my bones have no peace at the face of my sins.
This likewise moved our Heavenly Physician to arm us against all Maladies with
this wholesome document: Now sin no more, least some thing worse happen to
thee. Pestilence and all sorts of diseases made their entrance into the world
by the Portal of sin. Turn over the History of Kings, and you shall manifestly
observe, Pride brought them under the lash; read Ezechiel, and you may find
Rapine chastised, as well as Luxury by the Prophet Ioels testimony. No place
wants examples of divine justice: What misery did sin involve the Kings of
Israel in, what the Corites, Sodomites, Dathan and Abiran with multitudes of
the Jewish race, and infinite others? How many hundred thousands how many
millions of men has sin bereaved of life by Famine, Plague, War, Fire, Water,
and other untimely means? They have perished for their iniquity. Psa. 72.
Because they that are malignant, shall be cast out.

So unto all men death did pass by sin, that life is no beter then a continual
death. This truth receives light from the rehearsal of some of those many
instruments of death invented to take away life. Wherefore are Prisons in the
world? wherefore have we stocks Pillories, Shackles, Bolts, Halters, Racks,
Scourges, Grid-irons, Wheels, Scorpions, Frying-pans, Iron-combs, Gallows and
such like provision? had not these a beginning to revenge sin committed, or were
they not found out by such as were resolved to do amiss by tyrannizing over the
innocent? I must needs acknowledge the Variety of Punishments to be great, but
far greater is the diversity of crimes which deserve punishment. Proteus never
put on so many several faces, nor Empedocles changes, nor Pythagoras
trasmigrations, nor Chaldeans varieties, nor Evantius shapes, as sin does
different forms and representations.

Now as honesty and innocence of life elevate a man above the ordinary strain,
so lewdness and impiety cast him down below the meanest of men, and rank him
amongst brute beasts. Is he worthy the name of a man, who for ravenousness
contends with the Wolf; who by anger resembles the dog, by Pride, the Peacock,
by Avarice the Toad, by Levitv the Sparrow, by subtilty the Fox, by Greediness
the Vulture, by Fury the Lion, by Fearfulness the Heart, by Laciviousness the
Goat?

Hence King David gave unto Snakes and Asps the Epithete of angry, and of
foolish to Mules; Hieremy termed Horses Adulterers; Ezechiel called Pharao a
Dragon; St. John likened the Pharasees to a brood of Vipers; Christ branded the
shameless with the name of Dogs and Swine, as he did Herod with that of Fox.
Sin changes men into beasts; as is apparent out of Holy Writ: Psa. 48.
Man when he was in honor did not understand: he was compared to beasts
without understanding, and became like to them. This is no great change: Sin
converts a man into a Devil, as Christ plainly said to his Discisples: John 6.
Of you one is a Devil. He objected likewise unto the Jews: You are of your
Father the Devil. John 8.
Now the Devil according to St. Anselm, though warned by terror and menaces,
would not abstain from sin: neither would man beware of it, albeit he was
threatened with death if he did transgress. The Devil sinned once, but man
offends many sand times: he rebelled against his Creator, whereas man
impiously kicks both at his Creator and Redeemer.

St. In cap. 9. Joan. hom. 54.
Chrysostom inveighs severely against an envious person: An envious man is
worse then the Devil: the Devil indeed bears envy, but to men, not to his own
companions: whereas thou being a man do envy men, and practice hatred against
those of the same kind and nature with thy self, which Satan does not. A wicked
man may rightly be styled a Devil, yea hell it self: Apoc. c. 20.
And Hell and death (says the Apostle) were cast into the Pool of fire. How
could this be? was hell cast into hell? it was so, if we credit Expositours
upon this place: because he who steers a wicked course, may justly be termed an
Hell. For as hell is a place of torments, and an abode for Devils; so a man of
debaucht carriage suffers the pangs of a guilty Conscience; wherein the Devil
has taken up his quarters. Thus then this Hell shall be cast into Hell.

O sin, O blasting and pestiferous whirlwind! which killest in the budd both
blossoms, leaves and fruit of humane actions: which deprivest man of justice
and innocence, and robbest him of himself. O Poison, which do murder when
beloved, and infectest even the very Marrow of the Soul; and can not be
assuaged by an Ocean of calamities, nor extinguished by the flames of Hell!

God makes this question to our first Parent after his fall: Gene. 3.
Adam where art thou? Adam might with reason have returned this answer: I am no
where. He was then no where indeed: For by sin committed he was separated from
God; and punishment for his fault exiled him from Paradise: Neither was he in
himself, by reason of the remorse his Conscience endured; neither was he in
other creatures, which his offense had moved to Rebellion; nor in the world,
because of his own inconstancy. He was then no where, alas! he was no where,
where he might find repose: But he was like unto a swift running torrent, whose
streams in regard of their rapid motion can neither be affirmed to be here, nor
there.

Do you desire to know what sin is? Take a leisurely view of Adams fall. How
many millions of men were plunged into the depth of miseries by it? from it
sprung Famine, War and Pestilence; from it all Calamities, Disasters, yea death
it self. Such a tree might well bring forth such fruits; from such a cause such
effects were easily produced. True it is, the Son of God was fastened to a Cross
to expiate this crime; and yet how many millions suffer wrack in hell through
sin? Who ever will attentively consider these things, when soothing pleasure
invites him to offend, may freely say: I will not buy eternal repentance at so
dear a rate.

When the Heavens frown and burst forth into storms of Hail, Snow, Whirlwinds,
Thunder and Lightning; the cause is, that Exhalations and Vapors, through
their native lightness are easily drawn up, and afterward in various tempests
fall down to the earth again. No otherwise descend from Heaven upon us violent
storms of Dearth, War, Plague, Sickness and other miseries; which God indeed
rains down amongst us, but after the Exhalations and Vapors of our
transgressions had ascended on high: that lecture we learn from the Schools of
Philosophy, this of Divinity. St. Gregory speaks to the purpose: The evil we
suffer, our sins have deserved. The same is attested by Ecclesiasticus: Death,
chapter 40.
Blood, Contention and Sword, Oppressions, Famine, and Contrition, and
Scourges: For the wicked all these were created.

Sin Banished us from Paradise into this vale of tears, into this tempestuous
Sea, where boisterous Winds, and lofty Surges cause frequent Ship-wracks, and
all other miseries. Sin makes people miserable says Solomon. Pro. 14.
How came the Turks so often to infest Christendom? Whence proceeded so many
inroads of Barbarous Nations? So many Victories obtained against us? What is
the cause we are so much pestered with Famine and Plague? Why does that Face of
Heaven toward us seem to be all of Brass, and either drown us with too much
wet, or make us pine away for want of Rain? Whence do Diseases rush in upon us
by whole swarms? All these are effects of sin: sin is an abiss of all
calamities.

I must needs deliver my mind in Seneca's words: Epist. 95
He is deceived that thinks God can have a will to do hurt: he cannot. God
neither does evil, nor has evil: Albeit he chastise some, and keep them in awe
with punishments. His eyes are clean from seeing evil, and cannot look toward
iniquity: Therefore he bears extreme hatred against sin. Even as light of its
own nature has opposition with darkness, Comeliness with Deformity, Goodness
with Malice, Purity with Uncleanness, Life with Death: So has sanctity with
all wickedness. Wherefore as God loves sanctity beyond expression, in like
manner his aversion from sin is infinite. Marks of his aversion are these that
follow.

First he withdraws himself and his grace from a sinner. Then he punishes sin
with many calamities as with present coin, even in this life. Thirdly he takes
from the Malefactor all right to Heaven: Therefore we must either do true
penance, or bid adieu to Heaven. Fourthly every mortal sin he chastises with
flames eternal, and yet (which cannot be expressed without admiration) the
chastisement is less then the sin deserves. All Divines unanimously affirm, an
everlasting torment is decreed for every mortal sin, neither can it ever truly
be said: This sin has been punished sufficiently. What then is a mortal sin?
Alas! alas! Let all Angels answer this question, which yet they are not able
fully to declare, that which lurks under one deadly sin is infinitely
abominable.

That which Ludovicus Blosius recounts to stir up detestation of mortal sin is
exceeding dreadful: Monil. spur. c. 1.
If the Mother of our Lord, the most Blessed Virgin, had sinned mortally, and
had dyed without contrition, she had never attained Heaven, but must have been
tormented with the Devils in Hell. So rigorous is Gods justice.

This likewise was revealed to St. Lib. 4. chapter 7.
Brigit, who heard the Devils cry out to the supreme Judge in this manner: If
that thing which thou love above all things, which is the Virgin that bore
thee, and which did never sin; if I say, she had sinned mortally, and had dyed
without due contrition, thou art such a friend of Justice, that her soul could
never have arrived in Heaven, but must have been with us adjudged to hell.

The nature of one mortal sin is wonderful to amazement. Pliny admires Silver,
Gold and Brass, sealed up in a bag can be melted with Lightning, and both seal
and bag remain untoucht. Much more worthy admiration it is, that the soul can
be so murdered by the secret admission of one deadly sin, as thereby to become
a prey to eternal death without ever dying, or being destroyed. Hom. 4. ad Pop.


St. Chrysostom gives this prudent admonition: Brethren, be not children in
your understanding, but as to malice become little ones; for it is a childish
fear to fear death, as children do who are afraid of Vizards, and not of fire
to which they apply their hand: after the same manner we stand in fear of
death, which is but a contemptible bugbear, and fear not sin, which indeed
ought to be feared. Because it robs us of all Gods grace; makes us liable to
all sorts of miseries, and guilty of eternal Flames. Thus much concerning our
third assertion.

SECT. 4.
THe fourth assertion is: Who ever sins mortally, loses Heaven for all
Eternity. Sin shuts against us the gate of Heaven, the Empyrial Heaven, which
is adorned with all delight, which is for situation most sublime, for extent
most ample, and in every respect most complete, in a word the worlds wonder:
from this heaven does only deadly sin debar us. We acknowledge the Sovereign
Kings decree promulgated by St. Paul: Ephesians. 5.
No Fornicator, or Unclean, or covetous person (which is the service of Idols)
has inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. This loss is not the
last, though it be the worst: For in case no other harm proceeded from sin, yet
this alone were abundantly enough and too too great, to be for ever excluded
from the joys of Heaven. We may mention this damage, it is true; yet are we
unable to make a right estimate of it. well said St. Austin: If it were in our
power brethren, Psa. 49.
to hinder the coming of the day of judgment; yet in my opinion we ought not
to lead a wicked life. Suppose then, the fire of divine judgment should
afflict no body, but each one might swim in what pleasures he listed for ever;
notwithstanding if they were separated from the face of God, and never must
enjoy the sight of their Creator, their loss would be infinite, their
punishment immense: so as (to speak with St. Austin) they would have cause for
all eternity to bewail their condition, though they were not guilty of sin.
Amand. ho^. sap. Lib. 1. chapter 4.


That expression seems to have been framed amongst Rhetoricians: Who will
furnish me with Parchment as large as the heavens? who will provide me of
Quills, which for number should equal the leaves of the trees? Who will give me
a Sea of Ink, that I may write down the harms which proceed from mortal sin?
yet this is no exaggaration, for though there were so many Quils, so much
Parchment and Ink to write with, still it would go beyond the art of man to
sum up what damage accrues to man by sin, since it is eternal.

Truth it self proclaims to the world: It were good for him, Mart. 26
if that man had not been born. Since God has quite blotted out his image in
Heaven, and that most deservedly, in regard of that infinite affront offered to
so Sovereign a Majesty: which is so much more notorious, by how much the good
preferred before God is of less value. But all treasure, delight and Honor are
infinitely below God: therefore the wrong done to God is infinite, and
consequently the punishment must be proportionable.

Is not he much obleiged to the giver, who bestows on him gratis an hundred
Marks in Gold? Now our Tongue, or Eyes alone, which God has freely gigen us,
are infinitely more worth then a thousand Marks in Gold: to say nothing thing
of our Soul and Body, which are far more estimable then a thousand worlds.

Giles, one of St. Francis his companions, Catechizing an ignorant person,
said: A certain man wanted Hands, Feet and Eyes; to whom one of his friends
spoke in this manner: My friend if one should restore thee both Hands, Feet and
Eyes, what requital would thou make him? I would quoth he, become his servant
all the days of my life. Well then replied Giles, who gave thee Hands, Feet,
Eyes, Tongue, Ears, Soul and Body, together with the good thou injoyest? God
without doubt. If then thou would be his servant that only restored some few
Limbs, what is it meet thou should do for God, who gave thee all? Tell me now
what a base part it is to offend him with thine eyes, that bestowed them on
thee? or to affront God by word or deed, who framed both tongue and hands for
thee?

Hence arises in us an infinite obligation to serve God; from which if we
swerve by transgression, both fault and punishment must needs be infinite.
Because (according to St. Bernard) what was short in time or action, was
certainly long in the settled resolution of the will. Now as he is justly
condemned that wilfully persists in vice, so is he blameworthy that strives
not to better himself in virtue. In like manner, he who dies in sin, has a
living death in eternal pain; wherein he must abide for ever, that he may
suffer torment for ever, but never be consumed.

Alas! one merry moment of nimble winged time we prefer before treasures of
glory and delights eternal: we lose a needle, and are sorry for the loss;
Heaven is snatched from us, and we laugh at it. We know full well, that upon
every grievous crime an happy, or wretched eternity depends: the privation of
that, and possession of this is due to every great offense. Thus much we know,
and yet sin boldly; especially while we are not certain of one minute of life.
For who I pray, after sin committed, has so much as one sole moment sure to do
penance in? Nevertheless in a business of huge consequence, and such extreme
uncertainty, we expose our eternal weal to manifest hazard of eternal woe: so
freely do we exchange everlasting glory for endless torments: and in effect,
fools as we are, demonstrate our hatred to Heaven: For Heaven he hates, who by
contempt or carelessness intangles his soul with sin.

A Lacedemonian, says Plutarch, made a vow to throw himself headlong from the
Summit of Lucas. But when he beheld the dreadful height of the Rock, he was
struck with horror, and altered his purpose. Afterward being upbraided for
want of courage, he answered: I did not imagine that for performance of my vow
I needed a greater vow. Who ever designs to execute some difficult exployt,
must take upon him a resolution suitable to the exploit. But alas! what
comparison betwixt this precipe from a high Mountain, to casting ones self
headlong from Heaven to Hell? How then do so many throw themselves down from
the fruition of bliss, to thraldom amongst Devils? They shut their eyes ere
they attempt to do so, they consider not the infinite malice of sin, nor the
inexplicable windings of eternity: They jogg on toward Hell blindfolded. He
that is not pleased with his own blindness, endeavors by all means possible to
escape this downfall; and chooses rather to undergo what ever happens, then to
be cast into that abisse whence there is no redemption.

SECT. 5.
OUr fifth assertion is: Who ever commits a mortal sin, throws himself into
Hell fire for ever. Fire everlasting is an unexplicable punishment of sin. Were
there no other mischief in sin, this assuredly would be an abridgement of all
evils. The reward of sin is death eternal. The soul that shall sin, Ezechi. chapter
18.
the same shall dye: the justice of the just shall be upon him, and the impiety
of the impious shall be upon him. Admirable is St. Psalm. 49.
Austins discourse: How great a punishment is it, only to be deprived of the
sight of God? Such as have not tasted of that sweetness, if they do not desire
to see the face of God, let them at least be afraid of fire; those who are not
invited with reward, may be terrified with torments. If what God promises seem
to thee of small account, tremble at what he threatens. The sweetness of his
presence is offered to thee, and thou art not changed, nor moved, nor sighest
after, nor desire it. Thou still huggest thine own sins; and the delights of
thy flesh: Thou heapest to thy self straw, and fire will come upon thee. Fire
will burn in his sight. That fire will not be like thine, into which
notwithstanding if thou were compelled to thrust thy hand, thou would rather do
any thing then that. If he that compels thee should say: Either sign this
wrighting against the life of thy Father, and Children, or thrust thy hand into
thy own fire; thou would obey him rather then burn thy hand, or any member of
thy body, which could not abide in pain forever. Thy enemy therefore threatens
a slight evil, and thou do evil; God threatens eternal evil, and will thou
not do good?

What trouble soever the Devil causes in our souls, it is by means of sin.
Hence our passions rebel, and we are molested with fear, suspicion,
inconstancy, grief, anxiety, despair; whereby man's soul is reduced by sin to
resemble Hell. Esaias. 48.
There is no peace to the impious; says our Lord.

Such as abandon themselves to sin, are laden with so many Chains by the
Devil, till at length with their own weight they sink down into hell. While
they live they draw nearer to hell; as a great stone tumbled from the top of a
Mountain, tumbles so often, till in the end it lie in the bortome. In this
manner, while a notorious theif went up the Ladder, the Hangman encouraged him
saying: You have but one step further to go: and so he turned him off. In this
manner little birds with others of the same feather fly again and again to take
their food, till at last they are ensnared. In this manner Drunkards animate
their pot-companions; this one cup and no more: This course they continue, till
they drown each other in strong liquor. And the like method is observed by
sinners: In the beginning they think it much to commit one sin; by and by they
double, redouble and multiply offenses, till they come to hundreds.

Thus he who at first sinned privately and with much bashfulness, by degree^s
puts on a bold face, and dares now a^^t confidently what ere while he blushed to
think on. Thus the first naughtiness is seldom acted alone, but draws after
it a long train of impurities. The beggining was ind^ed with one crime, then
two, afterward more, till in proces^s of time the number increased almost
above number. Thus a sprout grows up into a wood; thus a drop swells into an
Ocean; thus a spark becomes a fire of that greatness as it is not to be
extinguished for all eternity. All these proceedings serve to recompense sin.

Whence some have arrived to such a generous resolution, that they choose
rather to dye then admit of one sin. The most chaste Joseph would rather lose
his good name together with his life, then to undergo the least impeachment of
Chastity. Daniell chapter 13.
The modest Susanna breaks forth into this exclamation: It is better for me
without the act to fall into your hands, then to sin in the sight of our Lord.
It was more pleasing to her to be stoned to death, then stained with Adultery.
Blessed St. Paul was sure, that death it self could not separate him from the
love of Christ.

St. Ambrose was resolved to undergo all hardship whatever, rather then act
any thing misbecoming his profession. Fo^t when Ruffinus put Theodosius the
Emperor in hope the Holy Bishop would change his resolution. No, quoth
Theo^dosius, I know well the constancy of Amb^rose; no fear of temporal Majesty
can make him forsake the Law of God.

St. Chrysostom with equal fortitude opposed himself against the menaces of
Eudoxia the Empress, and was so far from being dismayed with her fury, that she
was told in these express words: It is in vain to go about to terrify the man;
he fears nothing but sin. Lewis King of France, being yet a child, learned this
lesson of his Mother Blanch; Rather to part with life, then consent to a mortal
sin.

St. Anselm Bishop of Canterbury would rather leap into Hell then commit a
mortal sin. St. Edmund his successor in the same See, frequently said: I would
rather throw my self into a burning Furnace, then wittingly commit any sin
against God.

Democles, a comely youth, to escape the unnatural dealing of King Demetrius,
leapt into a hot boiling Cauldron. Such a death suited better with his generous
mind, then an unchaste life. So Papinian the Lawyer, though no Christian,
resolved to dye before he would Patronise the design of Caracalla Emperor,
against his Brother.

A man defiled with mortal sin is more vile and contemptible then a Dog, a
Swine or a Toad: For these owe but one death to nature, he two; the first to
nature, which is soon past; the second to God, which continues for eternity. A
man plunged in sin, may fitly be termed a nest of Basiliskes, a Den of infernal
Theives: of whom take St Paul's affirmation: They shall suffer eternal pains in
destruction from the face of our Lord and from the Glory of his Power -- they
are quite excluded for ever. 2 Thessalonians. chapter 1.9.


Out alas! What age ever brought forth such a Monster, that would not have its
fury satisfied with one death? What Executioner, what Tyrant contented not
their cruelty with Malefactors dying once, but after that would proceed to a
second death? One death has been sufficient to appease most barbarous Tyranny.
Whereas sin, more cruel then any Monster, or Tyrant, is not glutted with
murdering man once, but murders him eternally. When you behold an Offender
hurried to Execution, and his flesh plucked off with hot Pincers; you forthwith
imagine his crimes were heinous, since his punishment is so excessive: How
grievous then must that fault be, which can never be expiated with flames
eternal?

This point is often treated, these pains are frequently denounced by God, and
yet we are backward in forbearing sin. These particulars we are assured of, and
still hold on to violate divine Laws with extreme temerity. This fault we know,
deserves to be eternally banished from Heaven, that crime makes its Actour
punishable with fire everlasting, both in soul and body; in so much, as sin may
seem to blow the Coals, and to subminister Fuel for the duration of torments.
He that would seriously weigh what is here delivered, would he not bridle his
unruly appetites? would he not restrain himself from sin, and tread a better
path? It is down right madness to choose rather to perish, then amend ones life.

O Mortals consider these things: this matter is exceeding ferious, and of
mighty consequence. Heaven is not purchased with doing nothing.

All this notwithstanding men sin with as much freedom and security, as if God
were ignorant of their acting: they go on as boldly, as if God had not
forbidden them; and offend as confidently as though God did nor look on while
they offend. We admire the foolishness of Esau, who valued a dish of Pottage
above his birthright: Let us now admire no more all we that esteem a brutish
pleasure at a higher rate, then our title to the Kingdom of God; all we that
sell our Inheritance of Glory for an empty blast of humane praise. What is now
become of those Heroic resolutions; I will rather lose my life, then sin?

Plutarch tells you how Lysimachus was reduced to that extremity by thirst,
that he gave himself and his Army up into the hands of his enemies; and after
he had swallowed a cup of cold water, he cried our; woe is me, base fellow that
I am, that have parted with a Kingdom for so small pleasure! With how much
more reason may one that sins mortally exclaim: O wretch that I am, and
unworthy the name of man, who for a fleeting and beastly delight sell my right
to Heaven, prefer creatures before my Creator, Vice before Virtue, Death
before Life, and Perdition before Salvation!

Ah! covetous miscreant, for how slender gain do thou sell away Heaven? Alas!
Lacivious beast, why do thou change eternal joys for a moments pleasure? O
wrathful and envious man, how seldom do thou meditate on hell? And thou O
Drunkard, why will thou quaff away an Ocean of Celestial Nectar? Good Lord!
what height of folly is it, when a blessed eternity lies at stake, to part with
everlasting happiness for a minutes delight? Lust, Revenge, Drunkenness, and
all other vices please but for a moment, and merit torments for an entire
eternity.

Wherefore do we now wonder, that God eternally punishes the wicked, since the
reward of the virtuous is without end? Again, he that sins mortally for a
transitory pleasure, sells away himself to the Devil; what marvail if the
buyers title become perpetual? This made Elias speak plainly to King Achab: I
have found thee mine enemy, 3. Kings chapter 21.
for that thou art sold, to do evil in the sight of our Lord. Moreover it is
notorious, that he who grows obstinate in sin, augments his own pain: seeing
therefore those in Hell are obstinate in their sins (for in Hell there is
neither pennancenor amendment) they likewise increase their injury.

Understand (then) these things you that forget God: Psa. 49.
lest sometime he take you violently, and there be none to deliver you. The
very same, who is now offended, will be your Judge: from whom there lies no
appeal to any other; no frivolous defense, or foolish excuse will then be
admitted; favor at that time is bootless, intercession vain, pleading comes
too late, delays may not be expected: For the judge cannot be moved with
flattery, nor corrupted with Bribes; the last sentence is irevocable, the
decree eternal as well, as the punishment ensuing.

CHAP. XV. Why one Mortal Sin is punished with Eternal Torment.
NOne wonders to hear one say, a magnificent City was burnt to the ground by
neglecting to have care of one spark of fire. We know by experience the
activity of fire, and its unsatiable appetite, it has a devouring stomach,
while competent matter is set before it, it feeds greedily, and by feeding
grows bigger: it spares nothing that is fitly disposed for its palate, it
swallows up Houses, Cities and Kingdoms: it makes no distinction betwixt
friends and foes, it lays all wast, it consumes all: it has inflamed whole
towns, and we believe it will bring the world into conflagration. What Jaws,
what Panch may I say it has, whose hunger so much provision of sustenance is
not able to assuage? We do not therefore wonder that by one spark entire Cities
become desolate, but that the flames were no sooner extinguished.

In like manner, we do not gainsay any one that affirms our life to be but a
moment; and indeed compared to Eternity it scarcely deserves to be called a
moment. Now if you say further, Eternity depends on this moment, I shall not
contradict you, because I know, an eternal reward is acquired with temporal
pains; for in case the labor were eternal, the recompense could not be
perpetual. Neither shall I contest with any who avoucheth, everlasting joy may
^e obtained in the twinkling of an eye; since this blessing is not due to our
deserts but to the merits of Christ.

This then is that which holds us in admiration; that eternal punishment is
frequently incurred in a short time, in a moments space with one sole thought.
Actions virtuously performed deserve an endless Crown, by reason of our
Saviors merits, which are of infinite value: But how our sins should be of
infinite malice, and consequently merit infinite pain, this passes our
understanding, this argument of Divinity we are not capable of. For what malice
I pray, lurks under the sweetness of a filthy Lust, in which one freely lingers
for an hour, or part of an hour, or a minutes space, which may not for all
eternity be sufficiently expiated, even in flames eternal? This it is we
mervail at, this altogether transcends our capacity.

Something in answer to this difficulty has formerly been alleged; yet in
regard the matter is weighty, and hard to be understood, we shall enlarge our
selves in the declaration of it, and unfold this Riddle, Why a sin committed in
a moment is punished with eternal torment? where by the way we shall discover
the efficient cause of this doleful Eternity.

SECT. 1.
IN Christian Religion several mysteries are contained, which humane reason is
not able to comprehend: Of this nature we particularize five.

The mystery of the blessed Trinity; the Incarnation of Christ; the miracle of
the Holy Eucharist; the resurrection of the dead, and eternity of torment. Now
for as much as these points are hard to believe, therefore Divine Providence
has in a singular manner confirmed them by Scriptures, Councils and Miracles.
Our talk in this place is to discourse of pains eternal, and why God, whose
nature is to have mercy would have them eternal.

Divines in this point have gone different ways to answer the difficulty. Some
say, the Damned always sin, therefore they are always punished. What
injustice therefore is it for him to groan under pain, who persevers in doing
injury?

This answer is not amiss: For not only the damned sin perpetually in Hell, but
even here, while they lived amongst us, they found out a certain kind of
eternity to sin in; which is the matter we are to weigh with maturity.

Who ever heaps sin upon sin till death, sins during his eternity (let us call
it so): Therefore in Gods eternity he is most justly punished. Both truly and
elegantly said St Gregory: It is manifest and certain beyond control, Lib. 4.
Dial. 44.
that neither the blessed have an end of their joys, nor the damned of their
sufferings. It is an Oracle of truth: And they shall go into punishment
everlasting: but the just into life everlasting. Matt. 25
Since therefore Christ is true in his promises, he cannot be otherwise in his
threats. If you demand, how can it be just to punish a fault without end, which
had a speedy end when it was a doing? The blessed Bishop answers: This might
well be objected, if the severe Judge weighed only deeds, and not the hearts of
men: for the wicked therefore had an end in sinning, because they had an end in
living; since they were resolved, if it had been in their power, to have lived
always, that they might always have sinned. It is apparent, they desire to
live perpetually in sin; who while they live, never give over sinning.
Therefore it appertains to the great justice of the judge, that they never want
pain, who in this life would never be without fault.

Here I would by all means have this observed: This circumstance goes along
with sin, Not only to have sinned, but also to desire to sin yet more: justly
is this desire punished with hell: because God does not only look upon sins
committed, but likewise the eagerness and longing to commit more: as will
appear by this example.

Imagine a man of thirty years old is adjudged to hell, because he did not
leave off sining: had he lived fifty, sixty, seventy years, he had continued so
long his sinful course: Nay if he had lived a hundred, a thousand years, he had
still held on sining: Yea, if his life had been without end, so likewise had
been his sins. Seeing then his desire to sin was so great, as to be even
eternal in desire, deservedly is his punishment eternal. Therefore as St.
Gregory inculcates; Let them never be without pain, who in this life would
never be without fault.

SECT. 2.
MOreover the damned do not expiate faults committed; they do not lay aside
that malice, which begun with them during life: for they have not so much grace
of God as to repent. That which follows is most dreadful, and unexplicable:
The damned are so deprived of divine grace, that for eternity none of them will
ever say: Have mercy on me O God: none of them shall ever have that grace. In
which particular they resemble much the Devils, from whom no torments what ever
shall be of force to squeez these words: We have sinned spare us. Hence one may
rightly affirm: In Hell are only Devils, that is, most obstinate and desperate
enemies of God; such as are not the devils alone, but likewise all the damned.

And in this point the wicked man during life, and the damned in torments, are
both a like; neither of them being able with their own forces to recall their
soul from sin. In this case help from God is necessary: which he never denies
while we live, albeit we lose his Grace a thousand times: but withal he gives
us this admonition; Look to thy self, lo, now I pardon this fault, which I
shall not always do. I forewarn thee, and covenant with thee; while thy Soul
is in the body, the gates of mercy stand open for thee; enter in: but so soon
as the soul is gone out of the body, these gates shall be close shut.

This proceeding of God is most just: For if the damned, while he lived, had
asked pardon, ten, twenty, thirty thousand times, he might have obtained it.
But when death has once bereaved us of life, it is in vain to hope for any
more pardon, help or grace.

God made this agreement with us, and added a thousand admonitions, that we
should not reject grace when it was offered, nor mercy while we might find it.
But we resolved to embrace neither, Grace is vanished, Mercy neglected, we had a
mind to be miserable, we were determined to perish: Therefore if we perish, we
may thank our selves, we cut our own throats, and refused to be friends of God,
and so by our own choice we never shall be.

Furthermore, wicked actions are directly opposite to good: to those
everlasting pain is due, to these eternal recompense. For according to that
Maxim of Philosophy, the same rule holds in contraries. The perfection of
beatitude is to be happy without end: Then the accomplishment of torments in
Hell is to be miserable for eternity. Christ closes all his divine Sermons with
this sentence: Matt. c. 25.
And these shall go into punishment everlasting: but the just into life
everlasting. For so St. Matt. testifies: And it came to pass, chapter 26.
when Jesus had ended all these words. Behold, our Lord concludes his
exhortations with this clause, of reward and pain everlasting: he is equally
just and merciful; whence he has decreed to his friends joy, and to his
enemies torment in the highest degree.

SECT. 3.
THese things I must confess, are spoken with much congruity. But do we yet
dive to the bottom of the matter in debate? For my own particular I embrace
with reverence that wise principle of St. Austin: He is become worthy of
eternal ill, Lib. 21 de civit. de^. c. 21
who destroyed in himself that good, which might have been eternal. This is the
very cause of everlasting torment, the infinite malice of every mortal sin. For
being an infinite goodness is offended, the offense discovers infinite malice
which was bold to violate the supreme Good with such temerity.

Sr. Thomas the Prince of Divines avoucheth, that Sin is nothing else but an
ill humane act. To every mortal sin he ascribes a twofold malice: The one, an
act differing from the rule of reason: The other, an injury done to God, by
contemning him. Now this malice is no other then a voluntary aversion from God,
which deserves infinite pain, because it refuses an infinite good. Certainly
every mortal sin carries with it a contempt of God, as will appear by this
example.

There is a Law enacted under pain of death in a City of Italy: Let none wear
Sword nor Daggar. He that knows this Law, and yet will carry Sword and Daggar;
either contemns the Magistrate, or the Prince who made it. God in like manner
has published to the world: Let none Steal, none Lie, none commit Adultery,
etc. Nevertheless, what ever the Law say, this man Steals in the sight of God,
that Lies, and the other commits Adultery. Is not this to contemn God? He that
violates Caesar's edict, sins against Caesar: and he that despises Divine Laws,
despises God. This is manifest out of Holy Writ: The soul that shall sin, Lev.
6.1.
and contemning the Lord, shall deny unto his Neighbor the thing delivered to
his custody. So in St. Austins opinion: Sin is, contemning an unchangeable
Good, to adhere to things subject to change.

Hence comes to light that infinite malice of sin: For by how much the Majesty
offended is greater, by so much is the offense more grievous. To affront a
Noble man is grievous; to offer an abuse to a Lord is more grievous; and more
yet to injure an Earl: but much more a Prince, and most of all a King or
Emperor. These degrees are observed amongst men to lay open the nature of
injuries offered. What injury is it then to contemn God, who is a Lawgiver of
infinite Majesty?

Whence it comes to pass, that the infinite malice of one mortal sin, though in
an unclean thought only, wittingly consented to, cannot be Cancelled by any
humane actions what ever. For if into one Scale of Divine justice all the
merits of the most glorious Virgin Mother, and all other Blessed were cast; and
into the other side of the Balance were put one only mortal sin, this would
outweigh them all, so as for this they would never be able to make due
satisfaction. It is altogether dreadful to express, that all holy actions of
all the just are counterpoysed by one mortal sin. This notwithstanding he will
cease to admire, who knows how to frame a right estimate of God and his immense
Majesty. It is an unspeakable temerity for a creature to contemn its Creator.
St. Mark testifies: chapter 3.
He shall be guilty of an eternal sin.

SECT. 4.
SO great therefore, and infinite is the malice of one mortal sin, that all
acts of virtue joined together cannot counterballance it, unless the Sovereign
judge be pleased graciously to pardon it. In which work Gods inexplicable
liberallity appears, who pardons one man's sin a thousand, and a thousand times;
but under this condition, that he sin no more, or if he do, that he do true
penance before he dye: which the sinner often times disters and dies indebted;
whereby he is guilty of an eternal sin.

Admirable to the purpose speaks St Austin: When any one is put to death for
some heinous crime, do the laws esteem that short space of his execution a
sufficient punishment, or rather his removeal for ever from the company of the
living? For as the Laws of this City cannot recall to life one that is killed:
no more can he that is condemned to the second death be recalled to eternal
life. If a Magistrate take away from an offender a life, which he gave not; may
not God with more reason do as much?

Seeing therefore the malice of a mortal sin is infinite, it deserves also
infinite punishment: which forasmuch as it cannot be inflicted by way of
intension (as Schools teach) it is requisite it be done by extension: that is,
what sharpness of torment was not able to do, let length of time recompense. He
will give fire, and worms into their flesh, Judith c. 16 ver. 21.
that they may be burnt, and may feel for ever.

While we consider these things, methinks we should be so disposed, as they
are, who being guilty of frequent robberies, cannot behold others executed for
the same fault, as they deserve to be without sighing. It falls out sometimes
that a person of good repute passes by the Gallows, and secretly sobs within
himself, while he ruminates these particulars in his mind: Lo, these poor
wretches which totter in the air, as a scorn to others, and to us an object of
sadness, even after death pay for faults committed in their life. And what
crimes they were hanged for? some of them perchance, if all their theivery were
put together, have not stolen above ten or twelve shillings: Whereas thou who
have purloined some thousands of crowns, walks at thy liberty, clothed in Silk
and Satin; and art honorably treated by all, having perhaps been instrumental
in their death, which thy self deserved a hundred times more then they; who
filcht away trifles, and hang for them; thou having carried away bags of Gold,
and yet go scot-free. Take heed: the Gods (said the Ancients) tread upon
Wool with a slow pace, but in the end they recompense their slowness with
sharpness of revenge.

In this manner must we employ our thoughts, when we meditate on hell: Alas!
how many mortal sins have I committed, and yet feel no smart of burning? How
many fry in those flames of Hell, and must fry for ever, who are guilty of far
fewer crimes then I, and perhaps had committed but one deadly sin? The Sun of
Gods bounty yet shines upon me; they, whose sins were neither so many nor
grievous, as mine, are buried in eternal darkness. Take heed: Gods vengeance
creeps on with a slow, but sure pace. Thou stands upon a tickle point, and do
thou not tremble? a small matter will throw thee down; albeit thou have kept
footing long, yet a moment serves to turn up thy heels: and then whither will thou fall? An Abisse and Chaos of flames will bid thee welcome. Take heed: If
thou stir up a finger, thou fallest; one small Feavour, an Apoplexy, or
Palsy; one slender prick with a Rapier, or Pistol-bullet will send thee
packing into Eternity. If when thou fallest, thou be a friend of God, his
Angels will bear thee up: If otherwise, the Devils will snatch thee away, and
hell fire will give thee entertainment.

St. Ignatius was of opinion that perchance many were condemned to Hell for one
sole mortal sin, either of Perjury, desire of Revenge, some Lacivious thought,
or some other way in thought, word or deed.

We may here seriously reflect, that many of the damned were men as well as we,
and amongst those many Christians, who by Sacraments and Sermons, by pious
books and wholesome admonitions were induced to a virtuous life, which perhaps
for some time they continued, even in great familiarity with God: but by
degrees growing tepid and remiss, they fell into mortal sin, and so by Gods
just judgment were condemned to eternal flames.

O mortals, Set your hearts (cries out the Prophet Aggaeus) upon your ways. c.
1. ve. 5


SECT. 5.
SIgismund the Emperor, as Aeneus Silvius relates, demanded of Theorick Bishop
of Colen, a man of great Authority with Princes; By what means may that
happiness be obtained, which will make a man truly happy? to whom Theodorick
replied: It is in vain to seek for that amongst men. The Emperor urged again:
Which is the best way then to that Heavenly Beatitude? To whom the Bishop said:
There is neither a more certain nor safe way, then an upright intention in all
our works. How, said the Emperor, must we enter into this way? Theodvrick
answered: It is not difficult, so we be such when we are in health, as we
promised to be, when we were sick. In this as well as the rest he answered
prudently.

Here indeed is no true felicity, which we may seek for, but not find. Great
inconstancy waits upon all our actions; all things totter, nothing is stable:
all pleasure is base, when compared to a blessed Eternity. The ready way to
Caelestial delights, is indeed a pure intention in all our actions: which we
then set footing on, when we perform our promises, undertaken either in eminent
dangers violent diseases, or the Sacrament of Confession; and make that shine
in our actions, which seemed specious in our expressions.

O how various and changeable are men's resolutions! Ecclesiasticus exclaims:
chapter 34
He that is washed from the dead, and touches him again, what does his washing
profit? He touches the dead after washing, who itterates sin after repentance.
Esaias admonishes: Wash you be clean. chapter 1.16.
We wash us, but keep not our selves long clean. After washing he cares not for
cleanness, that after penance leads not an upright life. chapter 7.
Ecclesiasticus calls upon us again: Bind not together double sins, for neither
in one shall thou be free from punishment. ver. 15.
Iterate not a word in thy speech. To iterate a word in ones speech, is after
sorrow to commit that for which thou must greive a new. Which St. Gregory
confirms in these words: He that mourns for his sins, Tom. 3. p. 3.
and does not forsake them; goes with a sad heart, but refuses to humble it.
Therefore, says he, such as bewail their faults, and do not leave them, are to
be warned that they weep in vain to cleanse themselves, who by wicked life
defile their souls again; since they therefore wash themselves with tears, that
they may return clean to their former filthiness. Hence it is written: A dog
returning to his vomit. How often I pray, Joan. c. 5.
does Christ our Lord call upon us: Behold thou art made whole: sin no more,
lest some worse thing chance to thee. We give ear to, and after a short time
slight this admonition. Therefore St. Bernard delivers his mind in plain
terms: Lib. de anima c. 4.
He is a dissembler, and no true penitent, that still does that for which he
did penance. If therefore thou desire to become truly penitent, leave off sin,
and offend no more. So bewail faults committed, that thou commit no more for
which thou must renew thy forrow. For that penance is fruitless, which is
stained with subsequent offenses.

SECT. 6.
WE are not ignorant of this truth, yea when the execution of our duty is
required from us, we make fair promises, and perform nothing. Ah! how often and
seriously do we engage to do great matters, but in effect pass no farther then
to a bare engagement; we fall out with our former bad courses, we profess
perpetual enmity with unchaste familiarity, and still wallow in the same puddle
of impurity; we frequently purpose amendment, and that's even all: we are big
with mighty resolutions, and when the time comes bring forth a little Mouse,
that is, a small tepid and customary work.

Valerius tells us of a Mare which in that vast Army prepared by Xerxes, Lib. 1.
instead of a Colt brought forth an Hare; to presage the event that mighty
preparation was like to have: for he who had covered the Sea with Ships, and
the Land with Soldiers, like a fearful Hare returned back into his own
Kingdom.

Such as these are our endeavors: In one day we resolve to become Saints, we
undertake Heroic Enterprises, we broach new purposes tending to eminent
sanctity, and promise to rectify out misdemeanors: but our resolutions fall to
the ground, our undertakings are blasted in the budd, our purposes are
frustrate of their effect, and what we promised to amend works no further with
us, but either to leave us as it found us, or else to let it pass from bad to
worse: thus our generous Horse is Sire to a Hare, and high swollen Mountains are
delivered of a Mouse. It must not be so hereafter; we must stand our ground,
and what we reasonably determined, we must press forward to execution. Men's
days are short, Job. 14.4.
and the slender thread of our life is quickly broken. Our life is not unlike
the Spiders Web, whose Artifice appears in the thinness of the threads, which
being laid cross each other, as if they were neatly interwoven, complete a
circular net with maskes handsomely knit together, thereby to ensnare little
flies, that serve to make a Feast for the Artist, as a just recompense of his
labors. This I say, is a representation of our life, which yet some utterly
dislike should be spun out with so small a thread, and are angry with the Poets
for measuring our years by the length of the Distaffe. Nevertheless King David
confirms our similitude: Psalm. 89.
Our years shall be considered as a Spider. Well then may the course of our
life resemble the slender building of the Spiders Web. Man's days are short, and
we go on forward in a path by which we do not return.

Mean while we draw near to eternity; none of us is far distant from that
period, whereto we must be brought early, or late. Who can tell, how many steps
he is off from Eternity? To day perchance, or to morrow it will entertain thee
with large embracements. Wherefore then do we loyter? why do we trifle in a
business of such consequence? Let every one save his Soul. He is wise indeed,
that does not prefer a minutes pleasure before a blessed Eternity.

CHAP. XVI. The incredible blindness of mankind, and dreadful stupidity, as
well in committing sins, as in considering the Eternity of Torment due to them.
SECT. 1.
What ever we deliver by word, or writing, whether we inculcate the
Predictions of the Prophets, or the menaces or Oracles of Christ, or the
writings of the Apostles, our endeavors for the most part take small effect:
we talk to the deaf, we call upon those that hear not, promises and threats
are commonly rejected with contempt. Yea although that most fearful noise of
Eternity, eternity eternity sound in our ears, we are but little moved
therewith.

How often have we heard this Proclamation? We are the children of Holy ones,
Job chapter 2.
and look for that life, which God will give to them, that never change their
Faith from him. Another life will succeed this, an eternal and ever blessed
life, replenisht with never ending and perpetual delight. Have patience
therefore yet a while: 2. Cor. chapter 4.
Our momentary and light tribulation works an eternal weight of glory in us.
We shall one day remember with joy, what we now have difficulty to endure.
Whatsoever sufferings therefore occur, Coll. 1.11.
bear them, In all Patience and longanimity, with joy giving thanks to God.

These and many other particulars are much inculcated to little purpose,
whereunto scarce any other answer is returned, Es. c. 28.
but that of the Jews: Command, recommand; command recommand, expect,
re-expect; expect, re-expect: What ever befalls us hereafter, we will glut our
Eyes and Hands with things present, pleasure draws us too and fro, in which it is
hard to observe a mean. Our appetite must be satisfied, though it cost us never
so dear. God is good and merciful, who will easily pardon such as offend him.

With these charms they strive to stop your mouth: but, O miserable, and blind
mortals! do you not know these pleasures, you thirst after, are forbidden? does
not your own Conscience Preach this Doctrine to you? does not reason dissuade
you? do not Gods Laws command the contrary? Tell me, I pray, do you not believe
all the pleasure this world affords, how lasting soever it be, lasts but a
moment, withers in a trice, and ends in eternal sorrow? All Eternity of this
world compared to true Eternity is but a minute, a point, and less then
nothing. But do you consider, or give credit to these things? If you will be
known by the name of Christians, you must both think on and believe them. If
you acknowledge man's condition to be such, that we are unmindful of eternal,
and eagerly pursue things present; which is the cause why you have so many
scars, are so grievously wounded, and drowned in the sink of Vice. I shall own
your Confession as good, in case it be accompanied with amendment of life.

SECT. 2.
GIve me leave to propose yet another question: Do you believe these Vices
which are so familiar with you, are punished eternally by God? We do believe it,
say they. Why then are you both so forgetful and bold, as to tread under foot
so confidently the laws of God? insomuch as neither fear of chastisement, nor
dread of hell, nor horror of everlasting fire, nor love of Heaven, are able to
restrain you from sin. From want of this fear proceeds your debaucht life, your
impatience in adversity, your forgetfulness of Hell in prosperity, and that
multitude of vices which ensnare you. Indeed Eternity has no place in your
thoughts, which though you believe, you do not consider it with attention.
Jeremy chapter 12.
There is none that considers in the heart.

Eternity is frequently in our mouth, seldom in our heart. Admonitions
concerning Eternity knock at our Ears, but are not admitted to enter. Scarce
any one weighs attentively the Secrets of eternity. Now and then perchance we
have some thoughts of those endless windings of eternity, but they quickly
vanish: we sometimes read what others have written of eternity, but we soon
forget it: we hear in Sermons of that bottomless Gulf of Eternity, but even
that too, stays not long with us: a crowd of other thoughts stifle in our
minds those wholesome considerations. So eternity ere it be well entered into
our souls, is overwhelmed with pernicio^^ desires: whence all the blandishments
of our former impurities creep into our hearts, and nestle there, as before.
Thus our Faith which we boast of, is a drowsy or indeed a dead faith.

Michael Mercatus the elder (as Baronius relates from persons of undoubted
credit) entered into a league of intimate friendship with Marsilius Ficinus,
Tom. 5. anno 411.
a man of an excellent capacity; this tie was faster knit together by their
joint applycation to the study of Philosophy. Both of them were well read in
Plato. Whence it came to pass, that they engaged in a dispute amongst
themselves, what was the state of man after death? whither his soul went? what
semblance belonged to matters in the next world? All which they resolved first
to deduce but of Plato's principles, and afterward to establish according to
the tenets of Christianity. When they had long debated the business, they came
at length to this agreement, that they should shake hands and promise each
other, that whether dyed first, should (if God were so pleased) faithfully
inform the surviver how the case stood in the next life. This was their
covenant, to which they mutually consented and confirmed it by Oath. In process
of time they were so parted, as that they settled their habitation in different
Cities. Which done, Michael Mercatus being early one morning busiy at his study
of Philosophy, he heard a horseman in the next street posting amain toward his
Gates, and Marsilius his voice calling aloud: He means things touching the
immortality of the soul
O Michael, Michael, those things are true they are true indeed, they are most
true. Michael acquainted with the voice of his familier friend left his books,
ran to the window, looked forth, and saw Marsilius his back, riding on a white
horse, and now almost out of sight at a turning: whom he pursued with a nimble
voice, and called Marsilius, Marsilius: but the rider in white admitting no
delay, was presently out of sight. Mercatus astonished with this unexpected
apparition, was solicitous to know, what was become of his Marsilius. After a
while he understood Marsilius was dead at Florence that very hour, wherein he
both heard and saw him at his own house. From that time forward Mercatus,
though otherwise a man of an upright life, and approved integrity, took his
leave of Philosophy and resolved to adhere more exactly to the principles of a
better Philosophy taught Christian Religion. Whereupon being dead to himself
and the world, be bestowed the remainder of his life upon things to come, and
meditated every day upon eternity.

SECT. 3.
AN attentive meditation on eternity, is the beginning of a better life. Virtue
is commended but coldly where love of eternal life is wanting. The road is
smooth and easy to hell, when the mind is not daily employed with the
consideration of a blessed, or damned eternity.

These things we both know and believe, and yet we loyter, and neglect our
chiefest good. It Is true, you may hear some say; O Eternity! But in the interim
they cheerfully lay fast hold on a full cup, and carouse so long, till the
liquor damm at the top of their throat Now and then with a deep sigh we breath
out Eternity, and in the mean while our heart swimms in impure and lacivious
thoughts; it digests secret lust, and by hidden contrivances steals away it
self from God. We run in quest after the treasures of Heaven, but cease not to
smile upon money, which is the scum of the earth, and privately offer sacrifice
to Mammon. We make a show, as if we were afraid of flames eternal, and yet hold
on to kindle in our own bosoms the coals of wrath and envy. We greedily expect
everlasting repose, but still continue our sloathful courses; as if we meant to
make a business of idleness, and when industry is required to falter in the
very onset.

O we men, who do not offer violence to Heaven! But rather, O we blind men, who
choose rather to err in the broad and smooth way, then to go right in the
rough and narrow!

Christ and his Saints call upon us: Strive to enter by the narrow gate, Luke.
chapter 13.
strive, strive, Because many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able, Make
have, run, we must cope with difficulties, if we will overcome. Strive. But God
knows, we neither run, nor hasten our pace, nor strive at all: we yawn and
gape, and like unto Camels and Lions go slowly after, step by step. And God
grant we go after, and do not rather stand still!

Our resolutions and purposes are like to the feeble endeavors of one Sick:
who now and then raises himself up, crawls off his bed, and attempting to go,
points his foot to the ground, and strives to walk; but by and by for want of
strength falls upon his bed again: his Thighs and Legs are far too weak to
bear the weight of his body: he would fain take a turn but is not able. Not
much unlike are our endeavors; we design great matters, we attempt many
things, we resolve to become Saints, we seem to have a will to do gallantly.
But these attempts are frivelous without strength, we want alacrity of spirit,
we languish in all our actions. Whence we willingly slide back into our former
vices, which we only intermitted for a time; but did not quite abandon. Thus we
fall down again upon our bed, which we were about to leave, and are overwhelmed
with our old Lethargy.

We read over the Legends of Saints, and extol them; but follow them not, nor
imitate them at all. We honor virtue with specious titles, but express it not
in our actions: we gape after a blessed Eternity but shun with all wariness the
troublesome way which leads us to it.

After Prayers are ended, and the Sermon is past, we pack home, sit down to
table, and within a short space renew our old customs. It is our fashion, to go
to Church, to hear a Sermon, to fetch now and then a sigh, which may manifest
we are fallen out with our sins, and are angry with our selves for sining. But
how long I pray is this fashion in request? Almost in the turning of your hand
all our former Sanctity is joyfully buried in oblivion. We do something it is
true; but that with extreme tepidity: and so what we do is either worth
nothing, or very imperfect.

Whence it falls out, that after six hundred Sermons we are no better, then
before: we swear as we did, we are as impatient as ever, Lust, Envy and wrath
have as much power over us, as formerly. The wings of our Pride are nothing
clipped, we are big swollen with the same avarice, and gluttony domineers as it was
wont to do: our old sloth still keeps us under, we defile our Souls with our
accustomed stains, and wear without changing the ragged clothes of our bad
habits.

O strange blindness of mankind, which with an Ocean of tears may not be
sufficiently deplored! the Pulpit in every Church rings with Eternity,
Eternity, Eternity: and yet we are drawn away with pleasures present, such a
desire we have of our own Perdition.

SECT. 4.
MUch after the same manner as we hear Sermons and neglect them, which come in
at one ear, and pass out at the other; so we run over spiritual books, from
which we draw no profit, but presently forget what we read: Out of sight out of
mind. Inculcate Eternity as often as you will, we are resolved to spin out the
thread we have begun: we approve of good things, but follow worser; we put on
Piety, and quickly throw it off again; as if we were still minded to stick in
the same mud.

O Christians Look up, Lu. 2.21
and lift up your heads and hearts: because your redemption is at hand: Fix
your eyes and hearts in Heaven. Do all things fall out cross and trouble you?
it will not always be so, Heaven promises you something better, which a
little patience will put you in possession of. Do matters go well on with you,
does all succeed to your mind? Put no confidence in that success, nothing is
permanent in this world: all things ebb and flow in their several seasons.
Eternity still remains the same, it is only Eternity which admits no change.

These things we deliver by word and writing, these things we represent unto
you with variety of Pictures. But who gives them leave to take impression in
his heart? Who understands these points aright? Who groundedly strives to
believe them? O therefore once again blind mortals, who then act most
carelessly, when the great business of Eternity is in agitation, when our
eternal welfare lies at stake. Conc. 3. Dom. 2. advent.


Lewis of Granada, famous for Learning and Religion, gives an account of one
who appeared again after death to a friend of his in this life, and discovered
unto him this stupendous blindness of mankind. Two intimate friends, quoth he,
there were; you may call one of them Theseus, the other Pirithous, which were
almost as one Soul in two Bodies. Both of them lead an upright life; both loved
each other so tenderly, and were so agreed amongst themselves, as that they
desired nothing more then to die together. But Death crossed their agreement, and
dissolved their amity, by dispatching one out of this life before the other.
However all their familiarity could not be extinct by death: For not long after
they were parted, he that was dead appeared to his surviveing friend, both in
habit and countenance composed to sadness, as if he meant he should ask him
some question. At first the living man was almost dead with fear, to see his
friend so unexpectedly present in so doleful a posture: But after a while
taking courage, he demanded, if his portion were among the blessed, or how
matters stood with him? In answer to which demands the dead man fetching a deep
sigh, repeared thrice in a distinct but mournful tone, these words: No one
beleives no one beleives, no one beleives. The other with trembling asked
again, what that was, which no one beleives? No one, said the dead man,
beleives how exactly God calls men to an account, how rigorously he judges, how
severely he punnishes. After which words he disappeared, leaving the other
surprised with horror, and ruminating with himself in silence the whole
passage.

SECT. 5.
O words most true, No one beleives, now accurate every way are the judgments
of God, and how severe his punishments! these particulars are frequently
delivered in Sermons, that of St. John is often inculcated: Do penance: for
now the Ax is put to the root of the trees. Matt. c. 3.
And no one beleives. In books and loose Papers frequent mention is made of
eternal mourning, and pains eternal: And yet no one beleives. Joys
everlasting, delights without end, perpetual pleasures of Paradise are much
treated of, and no one beleives. We are often told, we must use violence in the
conquest of Heaven, and no one (God wot) no one beleives; or so few, that
Christ has said: Matt. 7.
And few there are that find it.

Our Faith wherewith we believe Heaven, is a drowsy and dull Faith: whence it
comes, that Heroic acts, and generous attempts are so seldom heard of. From
the same root also sprung that Religious Oracle: Tho. de Kempis Lib. 3. chapter 3.
The world promises temporal and small things, and is served with great
diligence: Christ promises most high and eternal things, and the hearts of men
are nothing moved with it. A thing of small value is sought after greedily: for
a penny sometimes there is foul contention: for a vain thing and slight
promise, men cease not to toil day and night: Who is so vigorous and active in
persuit of Heaven? How many are not sensible of their watching all night, when
they are Gameing, Dancing or Carousing? Who watches so cheerfully for the
service of Christ, for Heaven, for everlasting reward? We may repeat a thousand
times: And no one beleives. Now where Faith is lively, and apprehends the
immense joys of Heaven, as well as the endless torments in Hell, there is a
new course of life, and a special reformation of our manners: We thirst not
after base and fading delights, we esteem labor for God at a high rate, as
also suffering sweet and pleasing.

Francis Borgia Duke of Gandia being brought low by a hot Feavour, learned this
lesson, that in humane affairs there was nothing permanent, nothing perpetual.
Another time when this Fever was so rageing, that his marrow seemed to boil
within the bones, this pious thought possessed his mind: What flames scorch them,
who for their crimes sustain eternal torments? This thought was of singular use
to him all the rest of his life. A thought indeed most profitable, whether we
be oppressed with Sickness, or environed with other calamities: since, what is
burdensome to the body; serves to instruct the Soul.

He walks through pleasant fields to Prison, Sermon. de primordiis and novissimis
nostrss.
who goes on through prosperity in this life to perdition. And truly it is a
dangerous vanity to wish long life, without thinking which way to live better.
Hearken what St. Bernard whispers in your ear: Consider whence thou came, and
blush; consider where thou art, and sigh; consider whither thou go and
tremble. Affected blindness, which involves many, will excuse none. We were
warned long ago, the gate is narrow, and the way streit, which leads to life.

The ready way to Hell is by Luxury and sensual pleasure: If thou once begin to
walk this path, thy journey will be so quickly over had, as if thou did not
go, but run, and fly thither. This made that Learned and Holy man, Sir Thomas
More affirm what he left written in these verses: He that the ready way to Hell
would know'
Let him in Baths, in Wine, and Venus flow.


These things have been so often inculcated unto us, that we almost loath to
hear them any more: Yea and what is yet worst of all, we value more a merry
moment of brutish delight, then the chaste fruition of eternal joys: Whence we
make it appear we have an earnest desire of our own destruction. Wherefore we
are constrained again and again to say, And no one beleives.

CHAP. XVII. An Abridgement and Conclusion of what was treated before.
It Is certain no man's tongue is able, though after an unpolisht strain to set
forth the pains of Hell, much less to declare them eaxactly, or in their proper
colors. Admonitions in this matter pass from the lips to the ears, but for the
most part touch not the Soul to the quick.

Exceeding great is the difference between a real and painted fire, which
nevertheless appear sometimes much alike: but our pains when compared with
those of the damned, Good Lord! how unlike are they? since betwixt a thing
finite and infinite there is no proportion.

It Is likewise certain, which many Christians say, they do not seriously believe
the guilty are punished in Hell, otherwise they would certainly lead another
life. The saying of our lord points out this truth: The Son of man coming, Lu^
shall he find, trow you, Faith in the earth? It may be as truly affirmed of
others, that either never, or seldom do they think on the pains of Hell; and
when they do lend a thought to this matter, they do not stay upon, nor
attentively consider, or imprint these sad passages in their imagination: but
if it chance they fix their cogitations upon this subject, that wholesome flame
is quickly extinguished with a world of cares, and worldly business; and so
both Deaf and Dumb they go down into Hell: For all that go thither are Deaf and
Dumb, like that Citizen of Jerusalem, who murdered Lazarus, and who then begun
to open his eyes, when he was arrived at his journeys end. But now to sum up
what we treated at large, in those ninefold torments of that doleful eternity;
we judge it fit to renew the memory of each one in particular.

The first Torment is Darkness.
THe Royal Prophet says: Psalm. 18
Day unto day utters word: and night unto night shows knowledge. Who is
able now to persuade the wicked, that they go astray and commit wickedness? The
best of their time they spend in Toys and Fooleries, which yet they will not
be persuaded till they meet with that darksome and eternal night in Hell, Night
unto night shows knowledge. Even as the day of everlasting happiness will
manifest to the blessed, how seasonably they employed their days in works of
Piety; so that dreadful night will discover night eternal, which the impious
spend in their impieties, and must ere long be buried in perpetual darkness.

O night! O darkness! wherein the curr of Conscience barks, the favor of men
sleeps, all pleasure is exiled, no glitter of Gold nor Silver dazles the eyes,
Friends are silent, Physicians are absent, Shades terrify, Flames environ,
Eternity holds fast what she has gotten. O night! O darkness!

Please to look upon two wealthy Merchants sitting up till late in the night at
the Chess-play: Lo here is the Table, whereon stands the King and Queen, two
Bishops, two Knights, two Rooks and eight Pawns on a side, which doubled make
up an Army of two and thirty men; and so each man has sixteen in Battle Array.
Upon the board is placed a burning Taper to give light to the Combat: the
sport goes merrily on, the Gamesters grow warm with study, and in fine almost
all their Gold is laid down to make good the stake. One of them after a long
contest, wins the game, and carries away the Goal: leaving the loser to fret
and chafe, who utters his discontent in this manner: O unhappy Fortune! O base
Villains! How shall I recover my Gold again? In this humor he goes home,
venting his spleen with furious complaints, he disquiets his whole Family,
miscals his Servants, and turns all topsy turvy: Thus he wastes the night, and
after the loss of his money, scarcely retains his Wits.

This Chest-table decyphers man's life, which does not want the light of reason;
the different Chest-men represent the diversity of States and Qualities amongst
mortals: Some are Kings and Queens, some Peers and Nobles, some Country and
City Peasants, who for Dignities and Riches are much unequal amongst
themselves. He that is skilful carries away the Victory, and leaves the
ignorant in the Lurch. Afterward ensues a perpetual night, a night enveloped
in horrid darkness and eternal despair. They shall not see light for ever. O
dismal night! O disconsolate darkness.

The second Torment is Weeping.
THe Angel as an Herald from Heaven, Apo. 18.
long since denounced: As much as she has glorified her self, and has been in
delecacies; so much give her torment and mourning. Hell is a place allotted for
lamentation: where they weep without shedding a tear, or diminishing their
grief with weeping.

O mortals, why do we bewail the loss of money, the death of friends, or the
troublesomness of the times? These Tears are in vain: these accidents hurt
none, but such as hurt themselves by their own crimes. Luke 23.
Weep not upon me said our Savior, but weep upon your selves. It Is a matter
worthy of lamentation, to be cast for ever from the Face of God; this no Sea of
Tears may sufficiently bewail.

If you consider all the Prophets, and their Predictions; they commonly
denounce great miseries, they foretell great calamities. But by and by they turn
over the leaf, and seem to say, all damages are repaired, all things are in a
good condition. Hence are those words of comfort: The Hills shall flow with
Milk and Honey. And these likewise: The threshing of your Harvest shall reach
unto Vintage, Lev. 26.
and the Vintage shall reach unto sowing time: and you shall eat the bread to
your fill. Thus storms and fair weather succeed each other: The reason is
manifest. There is no wound in this world so uncurable, whereunto God cannot
lay a Plaster; no evil so great, which may not have a remedy. Tobias was poor
and blind, but continuing in patience was cured with a fishes Gall; Naaman was
a Leaper, but was wealthy and healed with the water of Jordan. Thessaly abounds
with Poison, but is not destitute of Antidotes; The Philippine Islands bring
forth no Vines, but Palms which store them with a liquor more precious then
Wine: Italy is bare of Woods, but enjoyes a milder Winter, and great variety of
fruits.

So God substituted Christ instead of Adam, the Blessed Virgin for Eve grace
was provided to take away sin, obedience satisfied for transgression, and life
is a comfort against death. No sore can here be found without a cure, no malady
without a remedy. But in that doleful Eternity all calamities want releif;
there be many Ulcers, but no salve; there is the worst of evils, and that
eternal, without the least mitigation.

M. Marcellus, at the taking of that flourishing City of Siracusa, wept for
compassion. The Damned may weep tears of blood, when they behold themselves in
thraldom for all Eternity: this this were just cause of such tears, if they
were available. There shall be weeping without the least mixture of consolation.

The third Torment is Hunger
THe wicked here feasted too magnificently at dinner, wherefore they must now
sit down with a short supper. they did not restrain their immoderate appetite
to meat and drink, whereupon they became guilty of many sins by Gluttony, as of
Drunkenness, and all that train of vices which attend it. They did not eat to
live, but live to eat: their mind lived amongst their dishes, since they
regulated their lives by the rules of Cookery. Of these St. Tom. 10 sermon. 63
Austin speaks plainly: Seeing they should eat to live, they think they should
live to eat: but every wise man blames such Gluttons, Drunkards, and
Gurmandisers, and especially Holy Writ reproves them, whose belly is their God.
These people come not to meat for want of food, but to please their Palate: and
so become slaves to meat and drink. What men are these, who place their
happiness in their Table, as Beasts do in their Manger? They did eat, drink,
and vomit; but now they hunger, thirst, and suffer for their Gluttony, without
the least mitigation of either hunger or thirst. The Famine of Samaria, or
saguntum would be esteemed as dainties in hell, where their famine is more
cruel and rageing: where a drop of water is as eagerly begged, as justly
denied. Thus gluttony is chastised, thus a small delight in eating is punished
with pains everlasting.

Albidius, a Prodigal young man, after he had consumed his inheritance in
gluttony, returned home in despair. Whom Cato espying, said: O what a Religious
yongster are you, that with such liberality offer sacrifice to Protervia! It
was the custom in sacrificing to Protervia, that what was not wasted in
feasting, should be devoured by Vulcan or consumed by fire.

So many as are condemned to Hell, have indeed sacrificed to folly, by
lavishing most shamefully their Patrimony, by contemning the Law of God, and
riotously glutting themselves with Feasting. Wherefore now both they and their
habitations burn, and must burn eternally.

Of whose miserable condition thus speaks St. ^pra
Austin: There is no voice but groaning, no rest but fire without ceasing:
there is no refreshment in that flame but continual burning of perpetual fire.
They shall never see light, nor want darkness: they shall have no remembrance
of good, who are possessed with forgetfulness of God. Their food is their
torment, their abode is not Abraham's bosom, but Satan's Den. Amend thy life,
while it is in thy power; call upon God, ere it be too late: mourn, while
mourning is available, and do not differ to do true penance.

The fourth Torment is Stench.
TO the end the whole man may be chastised with all sorts of pain, the nostrils
shall be filled with most pestilent stink. Poverty and needy persons are
exceeding noisome to some men's smelling: others, when they meet with Perfumes,
wish with Catullus they were all nose. O that these nicelings would consider,
what kind of odours are burning in Hell!

What wonder I pray, if that loathsome prison be replenisht with stink? it is a
stable for Kids and Goats: for so they are called by the Sovereign Judge: Matt.
25
He shall set the sheep at his right hand, but the Goats at his left. These
creatures have a scent neither of Fish nor Flowers: they are fitter for a sty,
or Augias Stable, and as Goats and Swine are banished from the delights of
Heaven. Apo. 21.
Into that seat of the blessed, shall not enter any polluted thing, nor that
does abomination. That herd of Goats shall then be of more loathsome scent, the
more immoderately they have here sought after Perfumes.

Some of your odoriferous smells are incentives to Gluttony, some to Lust: and
certainly an eager desire of them is an argument of incontinency. But to make
short, this kind of allurements, which are perceived by the ears, eyes, and
nostrils, are either marks of Levity or Lasciviousness. To become a slave to
sensual delight above measure, is no less then vanity, or impurity.

Perfumes and precious Ointments have been prejudicial and destructive to many.
Muleasses King of Tuny's faught against his Son Amida for the recovery of his
Kingdom, but being worsted in the encounter, and seeking by flight to save
himself, all besmeared with blood and dust was discovered by his persumes and
brought into Captivity: where his son with a hot penknife cut out both the
Apples of his Eyes and blinded him.

A young Gallant richly anointed, went to render thanks to Vespatian the
Emperor for a curtesy he had lately done him. But the Emperor being sensible
of the sweet scent he breathed, began to be angry, and frowning on him spoke
sharply, saying: I would rather thou had stunk of Garlic. Thus Caesar
recalled his grant, and the Gallant after a sound check was cashiered of his
pretended Honor.

C. Plotinus Plancus being sent into banishment, and for fear of death lying
privately at Salernum, was betrayed by his costly odours; and so lost his life,
and furnished his adversaries with an excuse for their cruel proceeding. So true
it is, that perfumes are disgraceful and dangerous.

Here by the way we may please to observe, that many things which we believe to
be mere trifles, are looked upon by God with a rigorous eye. chapter 3.24
Therefore as Esaias foretold. For sweet savor there shall be stink. Forget not
I pray this admonition of the Prophet Micheas; I will show thee O man, what is
good, chapter 6.8.
And what our Lord requires of thee: verily to do judgment, and to love
mercy, and to walk solicitous with thy God.

The fifth Torment is fire.
OF this fire admirably speaks Isidorus Pelusiota: Epist. 47
You may be pleased to take notice, my friend, that none can lie hid from that
All-seeing and watchful eye, no, not in the most secret retreat if you do any
thing amiss: For all things are naked and open to him, though they seem to be
never so private, and out of sight. Wherefore such as sin, and do not true
penance, shall be plunged in certain perpetual floods, boiling with dreadful
fire; whose streams are no other then flames prepared for torment. Let us
therefore fear the Majesty of God.

This fire alas! may not with any revolution of years, nor as St. Gregory
Nazianzen speaks, with any numberless number of ages be extinguished. What way
soever you turn, all is Fire, Pitch, Brimstone, Anger, and Wrath of our Lord.
Where you may note amongst our fires a main difference; that of the Thunderbolt
being more active, then our usual fire; and that eternal, devouring fire of
hell more powerful then either. Now let me demand with Esaias: c. 33.14
Which of you can dwell with devouring fire? which of you shall dwell with
everlasting heats?

What fiery Salt-Sea, though it be hot night and day, yet in the year it has
its intermission from heat several days, when it remains quiet and free from
burning, In Hell after an hundred, a thousand, yea ten thousand years are past,
Tom. 9. trac. 5. de met.
not one day nor minute of respite will be allowed. He, says St. Austin, who
has, a sound consideration, and beleives what God has revealed, fears more
eternal fire, then the Sword of any Tyrant, though never so barbarous: He
dreads more perpetual death, then any death here whatever.

How many hours then, how many months or years must those Traitors to God
abide in that fire? Neither hours days, nor years may be numbered: the hours
shall be eternal, the days and month eternal, the years and fire shall be
eternal. Why will God reject for ever? Psa. 76.
He will reject for ever: The triumpher in Israel will not spare, 1. Kings
15.29.
and he will not be turned with repentance. He that is afraid of these things
(says St. Bernard) bewares of them, he that sleights them slips into them. The
like advice is instilled by Climacus: Let the memory of eternal fire sleep with
thee every night. Grad. 7.


The sixth Torment is the Worm of Conscience.
A Guilty Conscience though but for a day, good Lord! what a punishment is it?
What then will it be when it lasts for ever? The conscience of the damned is
thoroughly wounded, which makes it ever afflicted, always in despair without
comfort. Pathetically writes St. Lib. 5. de Isid. chapter 12.
Bernard of this point: Amongst so great a multitude of spectators, no ones eye
will be more troublesome, then every ones to himself. There is no sight either
in Heaven or Earth, which the dark some conscience would rather avoid, but
cannot. Darkness is not covered from its self; it beholds it self, that can
discover nothing else. The works of darkness follow them, they can hide
themselves no where from darkness, no not in darkness it self. This is the worm
that dies not, the remembrance of things past; which being once cast into, or
rather bred in the soul by sin, sticks so fast, that henceforth it can never be
plucked away. It does not cease to gnaw the conscience, wherewith being fed, as
with inconsumptive food, it preserves its life perpetually. Here the truth of
those words will experimentally appear: I will reprove thee, and set it against
thy face.

In Hell are no Clocks, Psalm. 49
nor Stars to guide Clocks by, no Almanacks, nor Kalendars; no means there to
know any difference of times. Ecclesiastes affirms; Neither work, nor reason,
nor wisdom, nor knowledge shall be in Hell, chapter 9. ver. 10.
whither thou do hasten. Here only the Clock of Conscience is heard, but much
out of order.

It is irksome to one that is sick, and cannot sleep, to hear no Clock, nor to
be able to know how the time passes. Hence one quarter seems as long as an
hour, and an hour as long as a whole night: and yet after six or seven hours
are gone, the little birds with chirping melody, welcome in the morning; the
Sun by degrees rises out of his daily tomb, the feverish heat remits, and a
gentle slumber seises on the temples: all things that by approaching night grew
worse, by this time are become more mild: Anon some will come in to ask how the
sick man does, and will not only cheer him up with comfortable words, but also
with other necessaries. Nothing of all these O my God! is to be found in Hell;
no Day, no Sun, no Dew, no Morning, no Birds, but Devils, no refreshment, not
so much as a drop of water: there is perpetual darkness, everlasting dolours,
and butchery of Conscience without end.

Amongst a hundred thousand men you shall scarce find one, who seriously
endeavors to dive into these matters, or frequently ruminates them in his
mind. Our life would be far otherwise, our manners would be reformed, if our
thoughts were other then they use to be. Whence it comes, that our Conscience
which was struck deaf with vices, receives its hearing in torments; so much
more sharply now is it afflicted and desperate, by how much ere while it was
lulled a sleep in a drowsy security. St. Austins assertion is true: In Hell
there shall be penance, but too late. Their worm shall never dye.

The seventh Torment is the company and place.
A convenient house with ill neighbors, is a great inconvenience: but an
inconvenient house with most wicked neighbors, is the worst of inconveniences.
This kind of habitation is in Hell: Psalm. 48.
Their Sepulchers are their house for ever. The Damned shall burn as if they
were shut up in Sepulchers: which are houses very incommodious, but they are
debarred from hiering any other. Besides their neighbors are the worst
imaginable, such as would make even Heaven infamous and hareful, a crowd of
damned men and Devils. O what neighbors are these! Take our lords sentence of
them: It were good for those men, if they never had bin born: It were good for
those spirits if they never had been created. Look upon damned men: As sheep
they are put in Hell: Psa. 48.
death shall feed upon them. But how are they now become sheep? were they not
while they lived, Tigers Swine, Vultures, Wolves, Lions? They were indeed, but
the vengeance of God has made them sheep, and so tamed them, that they cannot
withstand any punishment inflicted on them: Death shall feed upon them. For as
sheep feed upon grass, without plucking up the roots; and clip it so, as they
leave the root entire, to spring again, that it may be cropped again; so does
death feed upon those captives in hell: It bereaves them not of life, that they
may be kept alive to be perpetually slaughtered. This is the second death,
which ever lives; whereof St. Austin makes this discourse: Lib. 91. de civit.
chapter 28.
The misery of those which do not belong to this City, shall be perpetual,
which is called the second death: because the soul there cannot be said to
live, as being estranged from the life of God; nor the body, which shall groan
under the weight of eternal torments. Wherefore this second death will be worse
then death, because it can never have and end by death. There pain continues,
that it may afflict; and nature is maintained in being, that it may be sensible
of affliction: both which are preserved without decaying, least punishment
should decay.

Here I am almost in a mind to imitate Solon, who carried a mournful Citizen to
the top of an high Tower, whence he commanded him to look over all the
buildings of the City underneath, saying: think with your self how much grief
has heretofore been in these houses, how much is at this present, and will be
hereafter, and then cease to bewail the misery of mortals, as if they were your
own. The like in some measure may I say: Behold O mortals, and consider that
dreadful den of sorrow in hell; O how much wailing is contained in those
Caverns of Eternity! what a mass of calamities will be there after infinite
ages are past! Cease therefore to deplore your flea-bitings, as if they were
unsupportable evils. Here indeed is a receptacle of all miseries; a forge of
lamentation. Who ever thou be, which travellest yet upon the way; take heed
thou so order thy journey, that this place of torments serve thee not for a
perpetual Inn.

The Eighth Torment is Despair.
THis world we live in is replenisht with many afflictions, yet in process of
time all of them meet with an end. Such as are oppressed with poverty, I see find
an end of it: such as are aspersed with slanders, are cleared of them in the
end: such as are sick, are in the end delivered of their malady. On this side I
behold stripes, racks, and other engines prepared to torture: on that,
bloodthirsty enemies, proud Citizens, gripeing Landlords; but I likewise behold
the stroke of death brings all those to nothing, and frees these from barbarous
usage.

But in those fiery Gulfs where Devils abide, I contemplate many horrid and
unexplicable torments; yet I cannot espy any end of them, no, there is no end
at all to be found. Death is the best invention of nature, death ends all, it
relieves some, by others it is desired, and deserves better of none, then of
those to whom it comes before it be sent for. Death sets slaves at liberty,
even against their masters will, death unchains Captives, and looses Prisoners:
death is a present remedy against all injuries of this life. But alas! there is
none of this in hell. I take a view of all their lurking holes, yet can espy no
death at all: unless it be that living death; which incessantly renews its own
pangs. As in hell there is no end of sorrow, so is there none of dying. The
Damned themselves as Dionisius notes, cast up their own reckoning: Corth. in
speculo amatorum mundi.
After ten thousand years are gone, an hundred thousand more will come; and
after them as many millions as there are Sands in the Sea, or stars in the
Firmament. And when those long revolutions of ages are over, as if we had
suffered nothing at all, we shall begin to suffer a new: so without ceasing,
end, or measure the wheel of our torments will be perpetually rolled about.

Hence will ensue most piercing despair, to the most cruel torture both of
Memory, Understanding and Will. What ever their memory represents unto them,
will afflict them; what ever their understanding thinks on, will redound to
their torment; their very will will be astonished at its own obstinacy, for it
can never will what God wills; and so shall ever find within it self a torture
of its own malice. How dreadful a thing is it to know for certain, they shall
have God for their eternal foe, they shall never escape his severe hand, they
shall for ever be trampled under his feet! Hence will arise in them a continual
and most desperate fury, and an implacable hatred of God. Job. 20.
All grief will rush in upon them. All evil will be thrown upon their guilty
heads.

O ye wretched new inhabitants of the night, your delights are gone, and to
speak with St John Apostle; Apo. 18.
The Apples of the desire of your Soul are departed from you and all fat and
goodly things are perished from you. Now only despair is left, all hope is
quite vanished away. You shall call upon death, and it will not come: you are
now entered that Dungeon, whence no death will ever set you free. You have now
nothing left you but only despair. You may remember how greedily like Bears,
you sought after the honey of pleasure: the honey is past, but the Bees sting
remains with you, and will do for eternity: so as now you have nothing left but
despair. This it was you looked for, after an hundred, a thousand admonitions
to the contrary: you have found what you looked for, keep it with you. The
worst of evils is despair

The ninth Torment is Eternity.
LEt all Angels make use of their tongues, and they shall never sufficiently
declare that eternity of torments in Hell, For what I pray is Hell? An extreme,
an everlasting torment without intermission. The eight foregoing pains, albeit
most grievous, yet would they be very tolerable, if they were but to be
endured for many thousands of years. But in regard they are eternal, out alas!
they are unexplicable, and thereby become more unsufferable, although they must
be for ever suffered. Adam ^asbant Dom. 1. quadra.
I consider, says an ancient Divine, a thousand years, I consider a thousand
thousand, I consider so many thousand years as torments, or Minutes have passed
from the worlds Creation to its consummation, and yet I have nothing of
eternity. They shall labor for ever, and shall live yet unto the end.

This eternity of pains is a singular torment: Psalm. 48.
For the damned do not only endure their present torture, but since they are
certain of its perpetual continuance, they undergo in a manner the immense and
inestimable burden of Eternity over and over; yea they suffer now, what they
must for all eternity endure.

For this reason many Saints condemned themselves to austerity of life, while
they lived, that they might escape that eternity of pains. The meditation of
eternity intoxicates like new Wine. Most Saints have done through the
consideration of eternity, what others might censure, as mad pranks of men in
drink. Some perchance might say of them: That these are full of new Wine. Acts
2.
They were so indeed, but it was of that wine which they drew out of the Cellar
of eternity. How many of them retired into the desert, how many rolled their
bodies on brambles and thorns, how many leaped into Frozen Lakes, how many
tumbled their naked bodies in Snow, how many had the courage to jump into
flames of fire, that they might eschew sin, the seminary of a doleful eternity?
It was the joint desire of them all: Let rottenness enter in my bones, Hab. c. 3
and swarm under me, that I may rest in the day of tribulation. And to say the
truth, it is better to dye a thousand times, it is better to be slaughtered a
thousand and a thousand times more, then to become a prey to eternal death. He
must either be a brute or a stone, whom Eternity does not reclaim from his bad
courses.

Some years ago in Flanders, Bretrandus son to Cornelius, was a young man so
violent troublesome, vicious and addicted to quarrelling that all the City over
he was called, The King of Turmoyls; besides he was much given to drinking
matches, Gameing and dancing. One night next before Ash Wednesday, while he was
Feasting, Dancing and Reveling, God touched him to the quick with a glimpse of
eternity, whereat he withdrew himself from company under pretense to take fresh
air. By and by his comerades look after him, and find him pensive, and absorpt
with other thoughts. They besought him courteously he would cast away care and
return to the dancing; or if he would rather to engage in carousing some new
healths, he had now taken fresh air enough. Notwithstanding his thoughts are
now so far embarked in the consideration of Death, Judgment and Eternity; that
albeit in the beginning they conceived he was but in jest, yet so soon as they
perceived he was in good earnest, and heard him discourse with much resolution,
they were exceedingly amazed. In fine he concluded his discourse with these
words: I am determined my companions, henceforth to become another man, to
abstain from these toys, to reform my misdemeanors, and to live like a
Christian. And truly if I be wise hereafter I must let pass no occasion, that
may conduce to save my soul. In my opinion it is not too late to do well;
though I am very sorry I began no sooner, being I am now fully convinced, these
fleeting pleasures are attended by an entire eternity. This is my resolution.
As for you I wish you may look well to your own security.

After he had ended his speech, he took his leave of them, and left them
astonished with this sudden change; amongst whom some were persuaded to lead a
better life: and all that knew the man's violent disposition were struck with
admiration. About that time it fell out opportunely, Eleutherius Pontanus
Menenas a Priest of the Society of Jesus, came into those parts, and being
acquainted with Betrandus, was entertained at his house. Of whose arrival when
Betrandus had notice, he cast himself at his feet, Annals Soc. 1601. 2. Janua.
Lovarij in Belgia.
and made earnest suit to be admitted into the Society. After some time of
trial, he obtained his desire, and was admitted for a Lay-brother. In which
course of life he happily spent four and thirty years. He excelled in his care
of the Sick, and was so observant of religious discipline, that he carried an
hourglass about with him, to measure out his time of Prayer, when it was
accidentally interrupted with serving the sick. To this pass was Betrandus
brought by meditation of eternity.

To know that a wretched eternity depends on every mortal sin, and yet to sin
grievously is an argument of extreme madness. Eternal fire is an Epitome of all
chastisements.

All which is excellently coucht in anoration by Sr. Lib. de anima c. 3.
Bernard: What grief (says he) what sorrow, what lamentation will then be,
when the wicked shall be separated from the Society of Saints, and from the
sight of God; and being delivered over into the power of Devils, shall go with
them into fire everlasting, and there must continue for ever in perpetual sobs
and mourning? For being exiled from the blessed Country of Paradise, they shall
be eternally tormented in hell, they shall never behold the face of God, they
shall never enjoy any ease, but shall for thousand thousands of years be there
punished, without ever being delivered thence. Where neither the torturer is at
any time weary, nor the tortured ever dies. Because the fire in that place so
consumes, as it still keeps them alive: So are their pains inflicted, as that
they always seem new. Every one according to the quality of his fault, shall
abide pain in hell proportionable: and such as are equal in fault, shall be
equally punished with their fellows in equal guilt. Nothing else shall be heard
there, but Weeping and wailing, sighing and howling, mourning and gnashing of
teeth: nothing shall be seen there, but worms, ghastly Visages of Tormentors,
and ugly Monsters of Devils. Those cruel Worms shall pinch their very heart
strings: whence will proceed pain, trembling, sighing, amazement, and horrid
fear. The miserable wretches shall fry in eternal flames for Eternity, and
longer. In body they shall be tormented by fire, and in spirit by the worm of
Conscience. There shall be pain intolerable, horrible fear, and stink
incomparable, death both of soul and body, without hope either of pardon or
mercy. And yet shall they so dye as that they shall always live; and so live;
as that they shall ever dye. Thus the soul of a sinner is either in hell
tormented for sins, or for good works placed in Paradise. Now therefore let us
choose one of the two, either to be for ever tormented with the wicked, or to
rejoice with Saints perpetually. For good and evil, life and death are set
before us, that we may stretch forth our hand to which we choose. If pains do
not terrify us, at least let rewards invite us.

These things we are tought by Faith, which yet (as we declared before) we
either permit to degenerate into drowsness and sloth, or wholly to perish.

Peter Barocius, Lib. 2. de ratione been moriendi.
Bishop of Padua, recounts, how a certain man, famous for learning appeared
after death to one of his intimate friends, and spoke to him in this manner: At
the hour of Death in matters of Faith I was shamefully deceived by the Devil,
In which condition death found me, carried me away, and presented me to the
judge: by whom I was commanded to depart into flames. Which though they be
excessive, yet should I deem them tolerable, if after a thousand thousand
years they were to have an end. But they are eternal, and so sharp, as the like
was never seen in this world. Accursed be that knowledge, which threw me
headlong into so great misery. After he had spoken thus he disappeared, but his
surviveing friend astonished at the relation, and especially struck with his
friends eternal damnation, consulted with his best friends what advice were
most profitable for him in this case. He became a new man, and dyed holily.

The Conclusion.
THerefore St. Psalm. 68.
Austin discoursed well: Who (says he) would not drink off a cup of temporal
tribulation for fear of hell fire? And who would not despise the sweetness of
worldly pleasure, out of love to the delights of everlasting life? a greater
fear makes us contemn smaller matters, and a greater longing after Eternity
makes us loath all temporal things.

As much (says St. Chrysostom) as a grain of Sand, Tom. 4. hom. 11 in ep. ad
titum.
or a drop comes short of the immense abiss; so far does this present life
differ from eternal and never ending treasures. The things we have, we do not
truly possess, we only make use of them, and that improperly too. It Is virtue
alone which will bear us company in our journey hence. It Is virtue alone which
has admittance into everlasting life. Let us then at length open our eyes and
quite extinguish all appetite to worldly wealth, that all our desire may be
placed on eternal.

But alas! how great want of consideration is to be found amongst men, how
great blindness! we wrangle for a half penny, and make a laughter and jest on it
to lose Heaven. Thus we are infected with the ordinary contagion of madness,
and take pleasure to perish for company. Do thou not blush (says St.
Chrysostom) to be so wedded to things present? When will thou part with thy
youth toys, and lay a side thy wonted folly? What ever is here troublesome, is
of small continuance; what is delightful there, is everlasting. Remove
therefore thy mind from transitory and fading goods, and settle it on better
and eternal: eagerly thirst after Heaven, that thou may enjoy delights to
come. Is not reward of force to invite thee? at least let fear of torment keep
thee in awe.

Those punishments therefore (says Valerianus) ought to have the first place
in our thoughts, where man lives while the pain lasts; where neither pains are
wanting to the body, nor the body to pains. To the like intent writes St.
Chrysostom: If the Ninivites had not been afraid of destruction, Tom. 2. in
epist. 1. ad These.
they had bin destroyed. If in the time of Noe they had feared the deluge, they
had not been drowned. If the Sodomites had dreaded the fire, they had not been
burned. It is a great misery to contemn menaces. Nothing is so profitable as
frequently to treat of hell: speak of it every day, that you may never fall
into it. A soul solicitous to escape hell, cannot easily commit sin. None of
those, who have a lively remembrance of hell will fall into it: as none who
slight hell, will escape it.

A certain man (as John Moscus relates) came to Alexander, Prat. spur. c. 141.
a venerable person, who governed the Monastery of Abbot Gerasimus, and said
unto him: Father, I have a design to flit from my old habitation, because the
unpleasant situation of it is irksome to me. To whom the good old man spoke in
this manner: Son this is a manifest sign, you never consider with attention
either the joys of heaven, or the pains of hell: for if you did seriously
weigh these things in your mind, believe me you would find no fault with your
old habitation.

This was an Oracle of truth: for who ever meditates attentively on heaven or
hell, either is not sensible of difficulty, though never so great; or if he be,
he makes his benefit of it, and is most ready to undergo greater hardships, so
he may avoid eternal pains.

Of this temper was Abbot Olympius (as Clymacus testifies) who being asked how
he could abide to live in such a Cave, how he could endure such excessive
heats, or pass so many days amongst whole swarms of gnats and flies? he
returned this answer: I suffer these things willingly, that I may be freed from
future torments: I am content to be bitten with gnats, because I am afraid of
the worm that never dies: heat is welcome to me, in regard I stand in fear of
fire everlasting: for those sufferings pass away with time, and will quickly
have an end, but these are without end and continue for eternity.

Wherefore these things deserve our daily consideration, and ought to be
ruminated when our thoughts are most active. As Physic is taken by way of
prevention, even when the body is well in health: so likewise must our soul be
prepared with these considerations to withstand vice. I confess these thoughts
are somewhat bitter, but they are wholesome too: they do not become familiar
upon a sudden, but by degrees; time, place and practice will nourish, and
bring them to maturity. All idleness is a sworn enemy unto them, which as it is
pernicious to virtue so it opens an easy passage to let in all kind of vices.

Go too then, c. 27. ver. 4.
who ever thou be, and provide in time for thy own salvation. Give ear to the
Prophesy of Ecclesiasticus If thou hold not thy self instantly in the fear of
our Lord, thy house shall quickly be subverted. It is now in thy choice whether
thou will reign or perish.

A soft bed seldom makes a Soldier more valiant: remember that beatitude is a
daughter of labor and virtue. Let none (says St. Tom. 10 ser. 60. de tem.
Austin) he ashamed to do penance, who was not ashamed to commit sin: but let
him strive without delay to renew himself by good works: that he may be owned
for a child by his father, least being excluded from the Wedding feast, and
shut out from eternal bliss he have his hands and feet bound, and be cast into
exterior darkness. Excellently said Turtullian, The ceasing from sin is the
root of pardon, the meditation of hell is the beginning of salvation. seeing
hell abounds with all evil, it wants chiefly that good which is the best amidst
evils* an end of Torment.

An End of this Treatise: But where art thou, O end of eternal Torments?

