A Friendly-Debate Between SATAN and SHERLOCK: Containing A Discovery of the
unsoundness of Mr. William Sherlocks Principles, In a late Book Entitled A
Discourse concerning the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, etc.

By this only Medium, That they afford the Devil the same grounds for his hope
of Salvation, that they do Mankind; and so subvert the Gospel, and transform
Christianity into Mahumetanism.

By an hearty Enemy of Mahumetanism.

In Socinismo, qui subtilior Mahumetismus non immerito vocatur, pandit os suum
ipsa vorago, ipsum Barathrum irreligionis. Arrowsmith. Tact. Sacr. l. 2. c. 1.
Sect. 14.

Eos [sc. Socinianes] non modo Christianorum, sed nec haereticorum nomine
dignor. Christianitatem nomine retinent, re destruunt, Itaque hos a
Mahumetistis nos long separo, qui ^e ipsi quidam Jesu maledicunt. Grotius in
Epist. ad Wallaeum. Wall. opera in fol. p. 399.

Printed in the Year. 1676.

TO THE READER.
A Sufficient (though a short) account of the design of these Sheets has been
already given in the Title Page; yet the Author conceives himself obliged to
make an Apology for three things, which he presumes an intelligent Reader may
fault in them.

1. That they come out so late, when many Persons of ability have foiled the
Adversary; and when he has mollified the harshness of many expressions here
repeated, in a second Discourse. To the former he answers, That none has dealt
with Mr. Sherlock upon the medium here suggested; and that the World had had
these Sheets sooner, if this medium they contain, had come sooner in his
thoughts. To the latter, that he finds not in Mr. Sherlocks second Discourse,
any retractation of his unscund Tenets, though he seems upon second thoughts
not so well pleased with his own Phraseology, as giving cause to every Man
whose addition is Christian, to suspect, that under a pretense of rectifying
mistakes, he designed to expose all Religion (which not without cause he
intimated his fear of, Pref. p. 3. of his first Discourse).

2. It may be blamed that Mr Sherlocks Principles are represented under this
form of a Dialogue; and with so odious a choice of a Dialogist: For the form it
self, the Author might suppose the examples which some of Mr Sh's. persuasion
have set him, a sufficient justification. Mr Hoard in a book Entitled, Gods
Love to Mankind, has framed a Conference between Tempted and Minister, to show
how incapable the Tempted are of true comfort, or Ministers to give it, upon
the Church of England's Principles, in the Quinquarticular Controversy. And
this perhaps occasioned a most learned Father of the Church of England's
accurate Discourse against the whole Book. And since, an Anonimous Author
published in Latin a Dialogue, called Fur praedestinatus, Elect Thief. between
a Calvinist Minister, and a Thief condemned to be hanged, with a design to
expose the Doctrine of the Protestant Churches in the Five Points; which gave
an Alarm to a learned Son of the Church of England, and made him take Arms in
its defense and vindication. And since them, one bearing the name of the
Irish-Saint, has published Two parts of a Friendly-Debate. And since him (to
trouble the Reader with no more Examples) another has Printed, A Discourse
between Two intimate Friends. Both which last, drive on the same design with
the two first, but more covertly, upon pretense of lashing the Non-Conformists
only (whom yet the Church of England has more than once acknowledged for
Conformists in Doctrine). The Author of this Dialogue will not deny, (what he
supposes any intelligent Reader may except against the use of them) that
Dialogues give an advantage to their Compiler to put what words he pleases into
his Adversaries mouth, to the prejudice of his own Cause. And whether the
Compilers of the Dialogues abovementioned, have not therefore made choice of
this, rather than another form of Discourse? And whether they have not
sufficiently improved it to that end, he had rather others, than himself should
say? As for himself, he can alledg, that the medium he has pitched upon, has
almost necessitated him to appear in this Garb: And whether he has made a
virtue (or a vice) of necessity, he is very well contented the Reader should be
judge (as indeed he will be, be the Author pleased or displeased): And that he
may judge aright he is desired to observe, that what is Printed in a different
Character, with the number of a Page, is Mr. Sherlocks own words: The rest
(except now and then a little merriment, or chiding) contains Consequences, and
Explications of his Principles, so easy and uninforced in the Authors own
judgment, that he does hereby boldly offer himself to be tried by his Country.
If fair words would win belief, he might borrow Mr. Sherlocks (which are fresh
in memory) I have represented his Opinions in his own words, and am not
conscious to my self, that I have put any other sense upon his words than he
intended; and I cannot see what reason any Man has to take it ill, that I
repeat that which he himself thought fit to publish, Pref. p. 3. But so many
have said of him, Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam, What do you tell me of
words, when I see contrary deeds. That the Author is afraid lest his own
sincerity should be suspected, eo nomine, because he affects to profess it in
Mr. Sherlocks words: However he has run the venture for once, being assured
that the words are innocent enough, how guilty soever of abusing them Mr
Sherlock may have been. The only thing that the Author of this Dialogue
conceives a less observant Reader may have just cause to dislike, is, that Mr.
Sh. is brought in as ex professo, designing to give the Devil hopes of
Salvation; which yet he no where does throughout his whole Biok. But for that,
the Author is willing to be quit or cast, as Mr. Sherlocks own Practice and
Apology for it, shall give their verdict. His Practice is this, That he brings
in the Learned men against whom he Writes, as renouncing Christ's mediation,
and trusting to the goodness of his Nature; as setting up a new Religion, which
has no Covenant, and no Promise, p. 23. and as quitting Christ's Promise and
his Covenant, to rely and roll upon his Person, p. 24. The Apology is this,
This is so very absurd at first sight, that I know no Man will own in it so
many words, nor do I charge any Man with it; but I say, this is the natural
Interpretation of trusting in the Person of Christ, in his Blood, and Merits,
and All Sufficiency, and of relying and rolling the Soul on Christ for
Salvation, and the like Phrases of a late date, in which some men place the
whole Mystery of the Gospel, p. 24. mutatis mutandis; the Author accepts it for
his Apology, that to give the Devil as fair hopes of Salvation as Mankind, is
so very absurd, that he knows Mr. Sherlock will not own it in so many words,
nor does the Author charge him with it; but he says, This is the natural
Interpretation of Gods loving all his creatures, according to the capacity of
their Natures, and of Gods fetching the Reason of his Love to them, from their
holiness (and that imperfect too); and of making the creatures ground of hope
of pardon and acceptance, to be not an offered Savior, or a Promise, but Gods
gracious Nature, which obliges him to receive a penitent sinner, and to reward
all his good actions, which are sincerely (though not perfectly) good; and the
like Doctrines of a late date, which Mr. Sherlock puts in the place of the
whole mystery of the Gospel, till Christ's Incarnation (as the Dialogue will
more particularly inform the Reader). And what is this (by the by) to retort
Mr. Sherlocks unjust charge upon his Antagonists, most justly upon himself, but
to renounce Christ's Mediation, and trust to the goodness of his Nature [as God]
and to set up a new Religion, which has no Covenant, and no Promise?

As for the choice (odious enough) of a Dialogist to hold Mr. Sherlock in
Discours^: The Author could not avoid it, in regard of the Medium he insists
upon. For who can be imagined a fitter Person to debate the Point with him,
whether there be any ground of hope for the Devils Salvation, than the person
concerned, Satan himself?

3. The last thing that some Readers may fault is, That this Dialogue detracts
from the Devils abilities of managing a Controversy: For he is commonly
introduced as acquiescing in Mr. Sherlocks grounds, which are liable enough to
exception. To that the Author replies, that there is a Fitness and a Necessity
of representing the Devil as a mean Disputant. A Fitness, There being nothing
so dishonorable to himself, which the Devil will not submit to, to attain his
mischievous end, the involving mankind, into the same irreparable misery with
himself (as daily experience assures us): Satan may be presumed to be well
enough contented to seem overcome by Mr. Sherlocks argumentation, That sinful
men may be induced to lean upon an house which will not stand, to take up
strong hopes upon weak grounds, which will certainly fail them when they most
need them. A Necessity, in regard of the deficiency of Mr. Sherlocks Book (to
which the Dialogue is confined) which affords not answers to multitudes of
exceptions (which might have been put into Satan's mouth) against the Principles
therein contained.

And perhaps some Readers may find a fourth fault, that the Author brings in
Satan as playing upon Mr Sherlock. But has not Mr Sherlock taken the same
liberty with his Antagonists? Yes, and made an Apology for it. The Author is
content to do so too, and to undergo the censure of a Fool, Qui maluit culpam
excusare, quum non committere, i. e. who had rather commit a fault, and get a
pardon by an Apology; than to be innocent, and so stand in need of neither: And
one Apology will serve us both (only changing the persons). Where he pretends
to argue gravely, I have examined his Arguments with all possible gravity and
solemnity; where he plainly toys and trifles, I have so far complied with his
humor, as to smile sometimes, though as modestly, as any Man can desire. Pref.
p. 3. But the Reader has been too long detained in the Porch, he may now with
the Authors good leave go into the House it self, if he thinks there is any
thing within that is worth the seeing.

A Friendly-Debate BETWEEN SATAN and SHERLOCK.
SHerlock, Well met Satan, I am sorry to see you look so sad; pray, What Is the
matter?


Satan, Sure, Sir, you cannot be ignorant of the cause of my sadness. Alas! I
am a miserable creature, and see no hope of mending my condition.


Sherlock, I had thought you had understood your self better, then to be so
causelessly dejected. The light of nature, and works of Creation and Providence
assure us, that God is so good, that he designs and desires the happiness of
all his creatures according to the capacity of their Natures, p. 42. Either
therefore thou art none of his Creatures, or thy Nature incapable of happiness,
or God designs and desires thy happiness, as well as of other of his Creatures.


Satan, What assurance the light of Nature and works of Creation and Providence
gives you, I know not: But to me it gives none of Gods pardoning Mercy to
sinners. I have heard That the Love of God to sinners, and his pardoning Mercy,
eould never have entered into the heart of Man or Angels, but by Christ. And the
Scripture (which I believe against my will) seems to countenance the assertion;
for this love is called a mystery hid in God, and made known to Gentiles, and
to Principalities and powers: That is, to Angels.


Sherlock, What! I perceive you have been an hearer at some Conventicle; one J.
O. tells us so indeed; but I say, He is a confident Man to tell us so, when the
experience of the whole World confutes him: For whatever becomes of his new
Theories, both Jews and Heathens (who understood nothing at all of what Christ
was to do in order to our recovery) did believe God to be gracious and merciful
to sinners. -- And these natural Notions the Heathens had of God, and all these
discoveries God had made of himself in the works of Creation and Providence,
did assure them, that God is very good, and it is not possible to understand
what goodness is without pardoning Grace, p. 44. You remember that passage I
suppose, for I doubt not but you read our Books, as well as hear the Fanatics
Preachments.


Satan, I am willing to resign up my self to your conduct, seeing your design
is so favorable to my interest; or otherwise I might start a small objection,
against the last clause of your Discourse, That it seems then, that if Angels
and Men had never sinned, it had not been possible for either of them to
understand what the goodness of God is. But to let that pass, I have read in
your Bibles, that God will be gracious to whom he will be gracious, and will
show mercy on whom he will show mercy. It seems to me then by these passages,
that notwithstanding the graciousness of Gods Nature, he uses a Sovereignty in
the exercise of Grace; and is not induced thereto by any reason out of himself.


Sherlock, I confess the Calvinists make strange work with such passages: But I
am of opinion, that it is a strange notion of an Independent being, that he
must have no other reason for what he does, but his own arbitrary will; which
is so far from being a perfection, that it destroys all other perfections of
his Nature, p. 402. The excellency of Christ's Love consists in this, that he
loves for no Reason, in their sense, who make him love the Person of a
Believer, without considering any other Qualification, than that he is such an
Individual Person. Now I confess this is a wonderful Love: But wherein the
excellency of a consists, I cannot see. I am sure we account that Man a fool,
who loves at this rate; and how that should come to be the perfection of the
Love of God, which is a reproach to Men, is above my apprehension, p. 399.


Satan, But I pray Sir, tell me then what other Reason but his own arbitrary
Will, God could have for showing mercy to sinners?


Sherlock, The holiness of a Creature, is the Reason why God determines his
Love to any particular person, p. 401.


Satan, If I be not much mistaken, I have heard some such passages read in some
or other of your Churches Second Lessons, That God has chosen men before the
foundation of the World, that they should be holy; and that Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that it should be holy, and without blemish;
which seems to make the holiness of a Creature the effect, not the cause of
Gods Love. But I have told you, I am resolved at this time to be a Learner, and
oportet discentem credere, The Scholar must believe his Master, is a Rule among
Teachers -- It may be Paul was mistaken, for I have heard some say, that he was
an hotheaded Fellow; and now here is no body but our selves, you will excuse my
freedom in telling you, that as far as I have been able to observe, none of
your Club care much for him. For their greatest trouble in dealing with the
Fanatics, is to rid their hands well of the Allegations out of him. But to our
business, supposing your Doctrine true, I am an unholy Creature, I cannot deny
it, and therefore God has no Reason for the determination of his love to me.


Sherlock, If you be unholy, then you must make your self holy.


Satan, I, but I doubt that is past my skill: There is a spiritual impotency and
inability in a sinner to do any good thing.


Sherlock, Who told you so, Sir Satan? John Calvin, I dare say, or John Owen:
but I hope you have more wit than to believe them.


Satan, No indeed, I was told so by St. Austin, and many a great man of your
Church, Fathers and Sons. But before them all, by your Arch-Adversary St. Paul,
who says that sinners are dead in trespasses and sins; and that they are
created to good-works, and become new creatures, and born again, when converted.


Sherlock, When they talk of our spiritual impotency and inability to do any
good thing, they prove it wonderfully from our being dead in trespasses and
sins, and therefore as a dead man can contribute nothing to his own
resurrection, no more can we toward our conversion: which is true of natural
death, but will be hard to prove of a moral death, which consists in the
prevalency of vicious habits contracted by long custom (which was the case of
the Heathens, whom the Apostle there speaks of, (and is your case too, Sir
Satan) which do so enslave the will) that it is very difficult, though not
impossible for such persons to return to the love and practice of virtue. The
other Argument is of the like nature, that we are said to be created to good
works, and to become new creatures, and therefore can contribute no more to it
(viz. our Conversion) than we did to our first creation: and that we are born
again, which signifies that we are wholly passive in it: which were true
indeed, if our being created to goodworks did signify the manner and method of
our conversion, and not the nature of the new creature, which is the true
meaning of it, that as in the first Creation we were created after the Image of
God, so we are renewed after his Image in the second; which is therefore
expressly called in other places the renewing and renovation of our minds, p.
109, 110, The fruitfulness of Gods love with respect to the methods of his
Grace and Providence, does not consist in producing what he loves, by an
omnipotent and irresistible power (for then sin and death could never have
entered into the world) but he governs and does good to his creatures in such
ways as are most suitable to their natures. He governs reasenable Creatures by
principles of Reason, as he does the Material world by the necessary laws of
matter, and bruit creatures by the instincts and propensities of nature, p.
212. This I am sure is a new discovery, (whatever you say of St. Austin, and
the great men of our Church) that it is impossible for us to do any thing that
is good, but we must be acted like Machines, by an external force, by the
irresistibl power of the Grace and spirit of God, p. 50.


Satan. I have heard your long Discourse with a great deal of patience; and
your meaning as well as I can take it up, is, that conversion is an effect of
moral suasion, (a term of art which many of your good friends much delight to
use, and I listened to hear it out of your mouth) so that if I do but attend to
what God has revealed of the excellency and necessity of Holiness, (...) ut
puto Deus fio, I shall be holy all on a sudden. But I am not very apt to
believe this, because my mind has been a great while illuminated with such
Revelations, and yet I do not find my Will moved by them. As for what you
object against sinners being wholly passive in the work of Conversion, if you
had to do with a Phanatick he would press you with this Argument; If the Image
of God was received by the will in the first creation, without its own
contribution to the production of it, why may not that Image be restored to it
without the wills cooperation to the restitution? But because I perceive you
have a kindness for me, I will not personate any of that foolish troublesome
sort of people, who can ask more Questions than a wise man can answer.

Well Sir, let us go on; but suppose I should make my self holy, yet if I be
not perfectly such, I am never the near to obtain my end, Gods favor and
acceptance. For I well remember there is a passage in the Bible, That God is of
purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look on iniquity, that is with
approbation, (as I have heard Preachers expound it,) and you your self tell me
that Gods natural love to holiness, is the reason why he loves holy men, p.
401. And by the like reason sure holy Angels; whence I infer (for I have picked
up a little Logic as well as Divinity in the Schools) that perfect holinevs in
the creature must be the reason of Gods natural love to it, for that only is
agreeable to his holy nature.


Sherlock, Nay, there you are out in your inference; for the only way to obtain
the pardon of our sins, is to repent of them, and forsake them, p. 54. God is
as ready to pardon the worst of men, (and why not the worst of Angels) when
they return to their duty, as a kind father is to receive an humble and
penitent prodigal, p. 43. So that though God loves perfect holiness best, yet
he loves imperfect so well, as to pardon the defects, and accept it.


Satan, But God has made me no promise of forgiveness, if I should repent and
forsake my sins, and therefore I have no ground for faith or hope. And if I
might credit St. Paul (which I should be apt to do, but for fear of displeasing
you my good friend, who have put me in better hope of happiness than ever I had
since I lost my place in heaven) sinners that are without promise, are without
hope, and consequently without faith (for hope is an effect of faith). So that
methinks your plaster is not as broad as my sore.


Sherlock. I perceive that either you have not read my Book, or you have not
well minded some passages in it, which answer your Objection. Therein I affirm,
that there is a natural faith [and so proportionably a natural hope] i. e. a
belief of the principles of the natural Religion, which is founded upon natural
demonstration, or moral Arguments, as that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him, which was the faith of Abel and Enoch, whereby
they pleased God: For there being no mention made of the faith of Abel and
Enoch in the Old Testament, the Apostle proves that they were true Believers,
because they had this Testimony, That they pleased God: now it is impossible to
be sincerely religious, or to do any acceptable service to God, without the
belief of his Being and Providence, and care of good men. These are the first
Principles of all Religion, and God required no more of those good men, who had
no other particular Revelations of his will, page 252, 253. And again --


Satan. Hold a little, I pray good Mr. Sherlock. I have greater things to mind,
yet I cannot but gratify my curiosity in pausing a little upon your new Genus
of Faith, that it is a belief. The Schools are wont to make it an assent. But
like enough they are mistaken (as in an hundred things more.) And your ratio
formalis of Faith is wholly new, that it is natural demonstration, and moral
arguments; so that (as I understand you) one and the same habit is Science,
Opinion and Faith. I perceive your Philosophy as well as Divinity is quite
different from theirs. But I forget my self, let those new notions be true or
false, I will take them upon trust from you for once. I will recollect the sum
of your discourse, That if I have no promise of Gods rewarding my repentance,
and forsaking of my sin, no more had Abel and Enoch, and yet for all that they
pleased God. And that the Principles of Natural Religion being common to me and
mankind as rational Creatures, a promise of rewarding my good actions, though
they be not so good as they should be, if they be as good as I can afford them)
is included in the very notion of Gods goodness. Is not this it?


Sherlock. Right; now you have hit the nail on the head. And to confirm you in
your apprehension, I will go on where we left. The light of Nature, and the
works of Creation and Providence assure us, that God is so holy, that he has a
natural love for all good men, and will not fail to reward them, p. 42. And had
Christ never appeared in the world, yet we had reason to believe that God is
thus good, and holy and merciful. -- The appearance of Christ did not first
discover the nature of God to us, but -- confirms us in the belief of what we
had learnt before from Nature, p. 34.


Satan. Sir, Your Discourse is very solid, and has but one small fault, a
Contradiction to what you say elsewhere. These men who talk of the Person and
personal excellencies of Christ frequently without any sense, and generally
without any just ground from Scripture or reason, are very clamorous, and alarm
the world with strange jealousies and fears, as if there were a party of men
started up, who design to make Christ useless, and to reduce Religion to its
first natural state, which knew no Priest, nor Sacrifice, nor Mediator. A
design which I profess I am wholly a stranger to, as I believe all those are
who are so much charged with it; the foundation of my hope is that which is the
foundation of the Christian Religion, the Sacrifice and Intercession of our
Lord Jesus Christ, p. 13, 14. Pray let me ask you without offense (and I will
speak softly that J. O. and that Fraternity may not overhear) Is not this to
make Christ useless, and to reduce Religion to its first natural state, when
you make no other duty necessary to happiness, than what the light of Nature
suggests; and no other ground needful to the hopes of it, than the goodness of
God, which had been known as fully (as now it is) if Christ had never appeared
in the world? This is the sum of your Discourse. I am very careful not to do
you wrong in misrepresenting your sense.


Sherlock. Satan, you are grown so old, that I think you begin to dote. If you
had read on, you might have understood my mind to the full. But I doubt not, it
will appear in the sequel, what the ground of these calumnies are, viz. That we
are charged with making Christ useless, only because we dare not make his Laws
and Religion so, p. 15.


Satan. Methinks you are very short with me. I have been always accounted a
knave, but never was counted a fool before now. But as much a fool as I am, I
am sure I did you a kindness in reading no further, for that addition makes you
more liable to that censure you would avoid: For it is plain enough you make
Christ's Laws and Religion useless, if Natures Laws and Religion will conduct a
man safe to the same place, viz. Heaven, which Christ directs him to, (for
Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora, is a rule I learned among
the fresh men, that chop Logic in the Universities) and consequently Christ is
made useless, because you dare make his Laws and Religion so. And elsewhere you
say, We have no reason to expect any thing from the person of Christ, which is
not contained in his Covenant, much less which contradicts it, for that would
be in effect to renounce his mediation, and to trust to the goodnsss of his
nature. And let any man judge, whether this be not to set up a new Religion,
which has no Covenant and no Promise, p. 23.


Sherlock. I think I have little to do to stand and hear you prate. Farewell.


Satan. Good Mr. Sherlock be not so hot. Pray let me find that what you want in
Grace, you have in Virtue. Do not run away in a Pet, before you have finished
your design. You must not suppose I oppose you ex animo, but argumentandi
gratia; and to give you an opportunity of showing your dexterity in loosning
the knots I tie.


Sherlock. You might have told me so at first then, and then you might have
escaped an hard censure. I will go on. Your great Objection was, That the
Gentiles who were without promise, were eo nomine in that very respect without
hope. To that I answer, When God chose the posterity of Abraham to be his
peculiar people he did not design to exclude the rest of the world from his
care and providence and all possible means of salvation, as the Apostle argues
in Romans 3.29, Is he the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles?
yes of the Gentiles also? Which argument if it have any force in it, must prove
Gods respect to the Gentiles before the preaching of the Gospel, as well as
since, because it is founded on that natural relation God owns to all mankind,
as their merciful Creator and Governor, which gives the Gentiles as well as
the Jews an interest in his care and providence. This plainly evinces, that all
these particular favors, which God bestowed on Israel, were not owing to any
partial fondness and respect to that people, but the design of all was to
encourage the whole world to worship the God of Israel, who gave so many
demonstrations of his Power and Providence, p. 27.


Satan. If I understand you aright, your meaning is, that the Gentiles before
the preaching of the Gospel, as well as since, had all possible means of
Salvation, and as much ground for hope of it as the Jews, because God was their
common merciful Creator and Governor. And therefore loved them all alike. And
hence you would direct me to conclude (as well I may, if the premises be true)
that God being the common merciful Creator and Governor of Angels and Men,
therefore I have all possble means of Salvation, and sufficient ground to hope
for it as well as men. If this be not the force of your Argument, I will
forgive your hard censure, and think I begin to dote indeed. But methinks the
premises are liable to exception. I might ask you, Sir, where were any Jews and
Gentiles before the preaching of the Gospel? for I always apprehended that the
Gospel was preached to Adam and Eve before they did operam dare ad liberos
procreandos, before they had any conjugall Society (you see as old as I am, I
have not forgotten all my Latin) in those words, I will put enmity between thee
and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and
thou shall bruise his heel.


Sherlock. I have obviated this Objection in my reply to a like instance of the
promise made to Abraham; In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed. To which my answer is, Christ was indeed the material object of
Abraham's Faith, that is, he believed that promise which God made of sending
Christ into the World. But Abraham's Faith was not a Faith in Christ; no Man
could believe in Christ, till he came, that is, could not believe any thing
upon his Authority, which is the true notion of believing in him. p. 247.


Satan, The application I find easy; That the promise made to Adam, was of
Christ that should be a Savior Four thousand years after; not that should be a
Savior to himself, and Wife, and their immediate Seed. They were to be saved
by a belief (not in Christ, but) of the Principles of the Natural Religion,
founded upon Natural Demonstration, or moral Arguments, as that God is, and
that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, which was the faith of
Abel and Enoch, whereby they pleased God (as you told me before).


Sherlock, You have represented my Opinion in my own words; and I like that
very well.


Satan, I thought I would please you if I could, and put you in a good humor
against I make some more objections. And but that you start so many Hares at
once, that I am afraid by running after all, to lose all; I could please you
better, by putting you in mind, that as to these Words of God to Eve, a very
good Friend of yours, Valentinus Smalcius, whom a Learned Calvinist calls,
insignis illefidei Socinianae hyperaspistes, the Champion of socinianism, does
boldly affirm, Christum minime respexisse, nec aliquid in se promissionis
Evangelicae continuisse; They had no respect to Christ, nor did they contain in
them any Gospel promise Refut. These. Frantzii, p. 94. But I will go on; The
Calvinists will object against your Logic in the Text now cited, Romans 3.29.
and tell you, that not the Relation which God as a Creator stands in to Jews
and Gentiles, but as a Covenanter with Abraham on the behalf of both, is given
as the Reason why both should be justified by Faith, and not one only.


Sherlock. This Objection --


Satan. Hold Sir, never give your self the trouble of answering it: It was a
disparagement to Domitian, to employ himself in catching and killing Flies. And
in my mind you did discreetly in not answering E. P. H. H. and that Pert Man
that called you Dirty-Fellow in the Title of his Book; for so Anti-sozzo
signifies (whether you know it or no). And it had not been amiss, if you had
let J. O. and R. F. alone too; for none of them all were your match: The most
that can be said of them is, never was any Brazen Serpent half so subtle, p.
113.


Sherlock. I am not of your opinion, That I had better have let all my
Antagonists alone; for then they would have said, that I did not answer them,
because I could not.


Satan. You have little to do sure, to mind what they say. To end this Chat,
pray ease me of this Objection against Gods loving all his Creatures alike,
That I find God hates me, and therefore will never love me, for his hatred is
(like himself) immutable.


Sherlock. To the Fanatics fancy, that when God once loves them he will never
hate them, because his love is (like himself) immutable, I have answered:
Herein the immutability and unchangeableness of Gods love consists, not that he
always loves the same person, but that he always loves for the same reason; for
it is no perfection to be so sixth in our kindness, that where we love once, we
will always love, whatever reason there may be to alter our affection: for by
this means we may love undeserving objects, which is the greatest degeneracy of
love; but the perfection of love consists in loving deserving objects, and in
loving upon honorable reasons; and the immutability of love consists in loving
always for the same reason, which is the only foundation of virtuous
immutability, page 404, 405. Thou art not so dull, but thou can apply all
this to thy satisfaction.


Satan. I apprehend your meaning well enough, that there is par ratio (as your
Schoolterm is) of Gods love and hatred. And therefore therein the immutability
of Gods hatred consists, not that he always hates the same person, but that he
always hates for the same reason. For it is no perfection to be so fixed in our
unkindness, that where we hate once we will always hate, whatever reason there
may be to alter our affections; for by this means we may hate undeserving
Objects, which is the greatest degeneracy of hatred, etc. In short, your
meaning is, that God hates me for this reason, because I am bad, but he would
love me if I were good, and I should then as well deserve his love, as I do now
his hatred.


Sherlock. I see you have not your name (...), knowing, for naught, you have
wit enough if you will but make a good use of it.


Satan. I am beholding to you Sir, for your good word. And I promise you I will
not be wanting to my own interest. The notion you have last given me does me a
great kindness. For I have been hitherto so simple (though you are pleased to
commend my wit) as to think that Love and Hatred when ascribed to God, in the
Calvinists notion, which you decry, did import an eternal Decree or Will of
God, to show or deny mercy to his Creatures, and so were immutable: but now I
understand that they signify variable affections (as in the Creatures) which
as the Weathercock, shifts its corner with the wnd, alter with the persons
upon whom they are placed. And I am now rid of a fear, which the mention of
Elect-Angels in the Scripture did often put me into. I see nothing to the
contrary but I may in good time be one of that denomination. If I can but bring
down my stout stomach, to ask God forgiveness, and repent of so long continued
disloyalty, and take a new Oath of Allegiance, I understand I need not doubt
the issue, God will love me, as much as now he hates me.


Sherlock. It Is a great matter to be freed from prejudice or prepossession of
judgment. You have often heard Calvinists preach, and been dabling in their
writings: and have found them confident enough in their assertions, and (as I
gather from your words) been mislead into a conceit, (which they put into your
head) that because it could not be known how just and severe God is, but by
punishing sin, nor how good and gracious God is, but by pardoning it, therefore
God decrees that men shall sin, that he may make some of them vessels of his
wrath, and others the vessels of his mercy.


Satan. I must confess, The sound and clink of words and phrases (which you say
is all the Calvinists understand by keeping a form of sound words, p. 102.) did
so fill my ears, that I could hear nothing else. And because they were
Scripture-words and phrases, they kept me in some awe, that I durst not
absolutely conclude them a sound without sense.


Sherlock. I, but nature would teach us, that so good a God had much rather be
glorious in the happiness and perfection, and obedience of his creatures, than
in their sin and misery, p. 51, 52. For vindictive justice, and pardoning mercy
are but secondary Attributes of the Divine Nature, and therefore God cannot
primarily design the glorifying of them; for that cannot be without primarily
designing the sin and misery of his creatures, which would be inconsistent with
the goodness and holiness of his nature, p. 52, 53.


Satan. I know your meaning very well, that there is in God an Antecedent will,
whereby he wills some things in the first place, and directly; and a
Consequent will, whereby he wills other things in the second place, or by
consequence: thus whatsoever is good in it self, as the repentance and
salvation of a sinner, God wills by his Antecedent will; but whatsoever in it
self is not evil, but evil to the reasonable Creature which must suffer it, as
death, damnation, God wills only by his Consequent Will. The Objections of
the Calvinists shall not give me any trouble, That God wills that which never
comes to pass, and which he knows will not, when he wills it by that Antecedent
Will. This is enough for my comfort, that my repentance and salvation being
things good in themselves, God wills them in the first place, and directly; my
damnation he wills but in the second place, and by consequence. God is so good,
that he had much rather be glorious in my happiness, (who am one of his
Creatures, though I have lost it through my own default), than in my misery.
And though Saint Paul seems to be of another mind, yet I will remember, that
These men fetch all their mysterious Divinity out of some obscure passages of
St. Paul's Epistles, notwithstanding what St. Peter told us of St. Paul's
Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.16, and make them the foundation of their faith, p. 242.
Sir, I have given you a great trouble; I have but two or three Objections more.
If God loves all his Creatures alike, because he is their common Creator, then
there is no need of a Savior, the want of which was always my greatest
discouragement; I have often heard that the Son of God took not upon him the
nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, and that neglect of our nature, made
my case desperate in my own apprehension.


Sherlock. To this I answer two things:

1. That the only knowledge necessary to the purposes of Religion is such a
knowledge of Gods nature and will, as is sufficient to direct our actions, and
encourage our obedience, p. 33. Various ways God attempted for the recovery of
mankind, but with little success; at last God sent his own Son our Lord Jesus
Christ into the world to be the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, to seek and
to save that which was lost, p. 89. God has now committed unto Christ all the
secret purposes of his Counsel concerning the salvation of mankind, which were
concealed from ages, p. 30.


Satan. I perceive you speak cautiously to prevent scandal; but I undrstand you
not, unless you mean that the knowledge of a Savior was concealed from the
world till Christ came in the flesh, (which was not till the World was about
four thousand years old) and the reason of that concealment was, because the
knowledge of God in Christ, was not absolutely necessary to the purposes of
Religion (whereof eternal Salvation is not the least considerable.) And if the
knowledge of a Savior, be not absolutely necessary, then not a Savior himself;
for he gives salvation, by giving the knowledge of Salvation; and it is Eternal
life to know Jesus Christ (if Christ himself or his Prophets deserve any
credit.) And now we are under the Rose, I will tell you truly, that I believe
all your talk of a Savior is but a Copy of your Countenance. For if the World
was saved for so long time without a Savior, why may it not for the remainder
of its duration, be it more or less? And this I confess is no small Cordial to
my dying hopes. But let me ask you one Question, If a Savior be of no greater
moment in the purposes of Religion, why does the Scripture call the
contrivement of man's Salvation by a Savior, the wisdom of God? I had thought
the reason had been, because there was no other means of Salvation but this,
which he alone did and could find out.


Sherlock. You are grossly mistaken. For if justice be so natural to God, that
nothing can satisfy him but the death of his Son, the Redemption of the World
by Christ may discover his justice or goodness, but not his wisdom; for wisdom
consists in the choice of the best and fittest means to attain an end, when
there are more ways than one of doing it; p. 48. I grant indeed that no doubt
but the Gospel of Christ makes great and glorious discoveries of the wisdom of
God, Ib. and I have told you wherein before, In that he sent his own son, etc.
when he had attempted various ways before with little success for the recovery
of mankind, p. 89.


Satan. I pray proceed to your second head.


Sherlock. That supposing a Savior of absolute necessity to your salvation,
you need not absolutely despair of one: When we consider that this Heavenly
Ambassador and Mediator, is no less than the eternal Son of God, by whom the
Worlds were made, we may reasanably conclude, that he came upon no less design
than of universal goodness: for he can have no temptation to partiality, as
being equally concerned in the happiness of all men; and we cannot imagine why
he should lay a narrower design of love in the Redemption, than in the Creation
of Mankind; that when in the first he designed all men for happiness, in this
new and second Creation he should design and intend the happiness only of some
few, p. 82, 83.


Satan. I see the force of your Argumentation, That the eternal Son of God
being my Creator, as well as man's, I may reasonably conclude he came upon no
less design than of universal goodness to me as well as men. For seeing he
designed me for happiness, as well as mankind in the first Creation, why should
he design their happiness only, and not mine in the new and second Creation?
For he as our common Creator can have no temptation to partiality, as being
equally concerned in the happiness of all his reasonable Creatures, Angels and
Men. The smaller Exceptions against this Argumentation must give way to a
greater. That you told me before, that none could believe in Christ till he
came, p. 247. Now I understand not why they could not, if he was the eternal
Son of God, by whom the World was made. For then he was pre-existent; and being
God, they that lived before he came in the flesh, wanted not the Ratio Formalis
of Divine Faith, the Authorety of God revealing. But I presume you mean, that
Christ was from eternity decreed to be the Son of God in time, non Deus natus,
sed factitius not God by nature but deputation, as you know who says, and who
added in a scoff, mirum quod non substituisset, fictitius. I wonder he did not
say an imaginary God, Pride. Lect. 18.) And that the World made by him was non
quem videmus, sed quem expectamus, not the world which we see, but a settlement
of the Gospel Dispensation. And now I think on it, it comes much to one for my
comfort, seeing he was sent by our common Creator, who can have no temptation
to partiality, in sending Christ for men only, and not for Angels, as being
equally concerned in all our happiness. To dismiss this; There is one obvious
Objection against my inference, of your own suggestion, The Son of God was made
a man as we are, which argues a good will and kindness to humane nature, p. 81,
82. But I think, I can answer it my self, that the Son of Gods admitting an
innumerable company of my fellow-Angels to attend upon him as Mediator, argues
a good will and kindness to Angelical nature. There is another too, which I
will not now put you to answer (having given you so great a trouble already)
but will consider of it by my self. The Objection is this, that it is no
partiality for the Son of God, though he has taken the nature common to
mankind, to save as few as he please, for partiality or respect of persons has
no place in granting largesses, or bestowing donatives. And if so, it is no
partiality to save mankind, and leave me to the ruin I have brought upon my
self. It is the Calvinists answer to your great Argument for universal
Redemption, and it leaves some scruple upon my mind. Upon the whole of your
discourse, I perceive I slipped my time (for want of due information) of
regaining the love of God without a Savior, for that I might have done any
time before he came in the flesh; for no man (nor Angel) could believe in
Christ till he came: But that time is gone and past, and cannot be recalled. I
must now for my comfort consider what he has done, and suffered, and how the
benefit of both may redound to me. First then I consider, that his active
righteousness must be imputed to me so far as it is a conformity to that law of
Nature which is common to me and mankind.


Sherlock. This makes Christ suitable to the wants of a sinner indeed, that he
ha^^ a righteousness for him which God infinitely prefers before any homespun
righteousness of his own. This is a very comfortable notion for bad men, and
such as I would not part with for all the world, did I resolve to live
wickedly, and yet intend to get to heaven, p. 234.


Satan. What Sir, do you jeer?


Sherlock. I tell you, that Abraham and all the good men of old, never heard of
the righteousness of Christ imputed to us, p. 256.


Satan, No, I see St. Paul is a man of no credit with you. He says that Abraham
had a righteousness without works imputed to him. That could not be his own
righteousness, for that were contradictio in adjecto, to say he had a
righteousness of his own, without works of his own (as your Schools say)
(righteousness resulting from the conformity of works to a Law.) It must
therefore be the righteousness of another, and who that other should be, but
Christ, I cannot tell; but I would be glad to learn.


Sherlock, The great dispute in the Epistle to the Romans is, whether we must
be justified by the Law of Moses, or by the faith of Christ, i. e. whether the
observation of all the external rites and ceremonies of the Law, and an
external conformity of our actions to the moral precepts of it, will justify a
man before God, or that fincere and universal obedience which the Law requires,
p. 245.


Satan. One would think that it had been unquestionable, that Abrahaus could
not have had whereof to glory, if he had been justified by an external
conformity to the Ceremonial and Moral precepts of the Law. But I perceive one
may live and learn. But though there is no need of a Savior, as to any active
righteousness of his to be imputed to sinners; yet I presume there is need of
one to die as a surety in their stead and place.


Sherlock, When Christ died for us, he died not as a surely, p. 290. The
Socinians have no reason to be afraid of such Adversaries, who have no better
way to defend the satisfaction of Christ, than by the notion of suretiship, p.
291.


Satan, It Is well J. O. that parlous man is not within hearing. What? will you
acknowledge the Socinians stand on the vantage ground, when Christians defend
the satisfaction of Christ by the notion of suretiship? I am apt to think they
cannot defend it by any other notion, the sum whereof is (as I warrant you J.
O. T. J. and all the letters of the Alphabet will tell you) that Christ put
himself into the stead of sinners to suffer what they should have suffered;
upon which God makes over Christ's satisfaction to them. And they will take for
their warrant that place, where Christ is called (...), The suerty of the
Covenant.


Sherlock, I confess I do not like to be called a Socinian, because that name
does male audire, some ill in the Church of England. And I reckon my self
therefore much beholden to my two Brethren, whereof one tacitly by an
Imprimatur, and the other by express words, vindicated me from the imputation
of Heresy, and particularly of being tainted with Cracovian Divinity. But let
J. O. T. J. and who will besides please themselves with their own notion of
suertiship; I say, To be a surety of the Covenant signifies no more than to
confirm and ratify this Covenant, and to undertake for the performance of it,
that all the promises of the Covenant shall be made good upon such terms and
conditions as are annexed to them, p. 289.


Satan, Then it seems Christ is but Gods surety to man; that he will be as
gsood as his word: but I should think that notion of suretiship were out of
doors, by the grounds you laid down a while since. For if the light of nature
assures sinners, that God is so good that he has a natural love for all good
men, and will not fail to reward them, though he never made them a promise, p.
42, 43. Methinks it may assure them too, that God is so faithful that he will
not break his promise when he has made it. And it may seem, that as to the
confirmation of the Covenant of God with man (whatever your sentiments are of
Christ's Godhead) Christ needed not to have been God, for whatever assurance
can be gathered from the undertakers being God, is afforded us in the promisers
being so. And in fine, Christ is no surety at all; and so we need not dispute
about our interest in him: for as far as I can perceive by your principles,
that sinners might have been saved, if he had never died for them; and they may
be damned, though he has. And now I am prevented in my enquiry how the benefit
of what Christ has done and suffered, might redound to me. I had thought to
have asked what Faith is requisite to the participation of the benefits of
Christ's righteousness; and what Union results from that Faith whereby his
righteousness, and its effects become a sinners.


Sherlock, You mistake the matter, you may enquire, and I will satisfy you
about the nature of Faith, and the Union thence resulting. For as hasty as you
are in your censure of my making Christ useless (which I should take very
hainously, but that I think you do but personate the Fan's): I will tell you,
The death of Christ upon the cross, assures us what the merit is, and what the
portion of sin shall be; that all sinners deserve to die, and shall certainly
have their deserts, without a sincere repentance and reformation of their
lives: for to expiate sin by death can signify no less than this, that death
is the proper recompense of sin. p. 92.


Satan, A goodly end of Christ's death, would J. O. say, were he within hearing,
which has been and may be otherwise obtained. The light of nature, [or natural
notions of Gods justice] and works of Providence [Gods judgments upon the
wicked] would assure men of the merit of sin, and what the portion of sin
should be, without sincere repentance and reformation [and with it too] as well
as assure them (which you have often told me) of Gods readiness to pardon upon
repentance and reformation.

Again, J. O. would say, that the death of Christ would not assure us, that
death is the recompense of sin; unless Christ's death was the punishment of sin,
which if it was, it must be of man's sin (for he had none of his own) and then
Christ died as a surety in the sinners stead (a notion which J. O. embraces,
and W. S. rejects), and so you have brought your hogs to a fair market indeed.


Sherlock, In verbo sacerdotis, on the word of a Priest, I think you are turned
Fanatic.


Satan, You have granted one use of Christ's death [which will serve my turn] as
for the other, I presume it was Lapsus linguae, a slip of your tongue; but the
hopes you give me with one hand, you take away with the other, when you tell
me, The Sacrifice of his death extends no farther than the example of his life;
he was made manifest to destroy sin, and in him was no sin, p. 93. It seems
then that Christ died only for those in whom was no sin at all. And then I am
too sure Christ died not for me: but one comfort then is, that neither died he
for any body else.


Sherlock, I explain my meaning well enough, when I say, that Considering how
holy our Priest and Sacrifice was, we cannot reasonably conceive that he died,
or that he interceded for incorrigible sinners, p. 93,


Satan, All that I can gather from thence for explication, is, that we cannot
reasonably conceive that he died for any sinners, unless he were a sinner
himself, (though not incorrigible) for otherwise the Sacrifice of his death
would extend farther then the example of his life. He that was no sinner, would
die for them that were sinners. To leave this to further consideration, pray
tell me what use you assign to Christ's active obedience?


Sherlock, Though the pardon of our sins, and our justification, be attributed
to the blood of Christ, yet I could never persuade my self, that this wholly
excludes the perfect obedience and righteousness of his life, p. 330.


Satan, Very good; now J. O. and you are very good friends, for he could never
persuade himself so neither.


Sherlock, It Is not good manners to interrupt me; J.O. and I are far enough
from being good friends: For the Aqostle tell us, That we are accepted in the
Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.


Satan, That very plaee J. O. brings for his own justification, in being always
of your persuasion in this point.


Sherlock, You are very unmannerly methinks.


Satan, Excuse me Sir, I am afraid you should forget your self, and say as J.
O. says, unawares.


Sherlock, Never fear that, but hear me out. And I think no man will deny that
God was very highly pleased with the perfect obedience of our Saviors life, p.
330, 331.


Satan. No, I dare say, not Socinus himself. Enough, enough, I see what you
would be at. Christ by his obedience satisfecit voluntati divinae non
justitiae, i. e. satisfied Gods will, not his justice. I am past doubt now that
J.O. and W.S. are not like to be very good friends in haste.


Sherlock. Verbum sat sapienti, A word is enough to the wise. Now to answer
your Queries, which too hastily you concluded you were prevented in. I will
tell you what Faith is not requisite to the participation of the benefits of
Christ's Righteousness. There is not a plainer Argument how apt men are to
pervert the Scriptures, to reconcile them to their own prejudices and
preconceived Opinions, than to observe what work they make with Abraham's Faith;
as if that Faith which was imputed to him for righteousness, were a fiducial
reliance and recumbency on Christ for salvation, upon which the righteousness
of Christ apprehended by Faith was imputed to him, p. 247.


Satan. If Abraham's Faith was not a fiducial reliance and recumbency on Christ
for Salvation, then to be sure, nor any of his Childrens. For they walk in his
steps, and imitate his Example. But pray, what Faith is requisite to make
Christ our Savior, seeing a Savior you will have him to be? I care not if I
hear you out.


Sherlock. Our Faith in Christ must signify such a steadfast belief of all
those revelations which Christ both made to the World, as governs our lives and
actions, p. 255.


Satan. Then I perceive I am one half of a Believer already; for I steadfastly
believe all those Revelations which Christ has made to the World: and I am not
without hopes of being the other half in good time, of having my life and
actions governed by my Belief.


Sherlock. You have no cause of despair: for besides (what I have told you
already, that God produces not what he loves, by an Omnipotent Power, but does
good to his Creatures in such a way as is suitable to their natures),
Righteousness is called a gift, because it is not owing solely to humane
endeavors, but is wrought in us by supernatural means, by those powerful
arguments and motives, and divine assistances which God in infinite love and
goodness has afforded the world by Jesus Christ, p. 335.


Satan. I understand you right well, That Righteousness [or the good government
of life and actions] is called Gods gift, because he gives one half, (but
hardly the better half would a Fanatic say), the arguments and motives which
are very powerful [in genere morali] to induce the world to make it
self-righteous; and them you call divine assistances, because God assists the
World by them, that is, by those Arguments and Motives persuades men to use the
power they have; for to give them any power they wanted, were for God to
produce what he loves by an Omnipotent Power [in genere Physico.]


Sherlock. There Is no need of any Omnipotent Power in the Fanatic sense; For
that righteousness which Go^ ^equires under the Gospel, must be an inward
principle of love and obedience, which changes our natures, and transforms us
into the Image of God, as much as if we were born again, and made new
creatures, p. 265.


Satan. You mean, Sir, that a steadfast Belief of Gods revelations, does excite
that love and obedience, which changes our natures, etc. and so makes a new
Birth needless; but Mr. Sherlock, some cavelling Fanatic would b^ so perverse
(I dare say) were you discoursing with him, as to tell you, that our natures
are changed before they can put forth a Belief steadfast enough to excite love
and obedience: And as they will be fooling with Scripture-metaphors (though you
have corrected them for it, p. 281.) they would tell you, that the Child's
motion does not give it life, but its life gives it motion.


Sherlock. And as for that union that you mentioned between Christ and
Believers, the Fanatics commonly explain it by first a Legal union, such as is
between the surety and debtor, p. 281. some insist most upon the notion of a
Surety, others of a Mediator, which come much to one, but yet have some
peculiar absurdities belonging to each of them, p. 287. As first for the notion
of a Surety --


Satan. You need not tire your self with the repetition of them: I can easily
guess at them, the imparity between Christ's being a Surety, and sureties among
men. As to that you know the Rule, Similitudo non currit quatuor pedibus,
Similitudes do not hold in every thing. It will be thought enough, that they
agree in the main, that as the Debtor and Surety are so far one person in the
eye of humane law, that the payment of the Surety is the Debtors discharge; so
Christ and a Believer are so far one person in the eye of the Divine Law, that
Christ's undergoing the punishment of the Law, discharges the Believer from it;
and Christ's active obedience to the Law, disobliges the Believer from obeying
it to that end (for which it was originally intended, and) for which Christ
obeyed it, viz. that it might be the material and meritorious cause of our
justification.


Sherlock. Let us now try whether the notion of a Mediator can do any better
service, than the notion of a Surety, p. 296. The notion of a Mediator includes
no such thing as the fulfilling of all righteousness for them, whom one is
Mediator to, p. 296, 297.


Satan. Sir, Your Antagonists answer will be the same in effect, that though a
Mediator is one who interposes between two differing parties, and his Office is
not to perform the conditions himself (as you well observe) p. 297, yet the
difference between God and man could not be accommodated (you will be told) by
this Mediator, but by performing the conditions himself. For the reason why God
would not enter into a Covenant with sinners without the intervention of a
sacrifice, p. 297, was, because his Law being broken, till the penalty due to
that breach was undergone; and his honor thereby vindicated, he could not
right his Mercy, without wronging his Justice.


Sherlock. I have done with the Legal Union. There is secondly, a Mystical
Union, by virtue of which they imagine that we receive Grace from Christ's
person, just as we do water out of a Conduit, p. 197, 204. Whereas a Mediator
as Mediator, ought not to be considered as the Fountain, but as the Minister of
Grace, p. 209.


Satan. I have always understood, that they mean no more by their Mystical
Union, than an union Analogical to natural union, such as that of Vine and
Branches, Head and Members, by virtue of which they suppose they are passive in
receiving grace from Christ, as the Branches in receiving sap from the Root,
and the Members spirits from the Head. But this I perceive is an imagination
without ground in your opinion. And your reason against it confirms me more in
my suspicion, that you do but verba dare, deceive, when you say, The Union of
the Divine and Humane Nature in Christ did excellently qualify him for the
office of a Mediator, p. 205, 206. For if Christ as a Mediator be not the
fountain of Grace, secundum naturam divinam, i. e. as God he may pass from a
Mediator, though he were (...), a mere man; then he might persuade men to be
gracious by powerful motives (though he could not bestow grace upon them) which
is all you intend by Christ's being a minister of Grace. The Fanatics indeed,
silly souls as they are, think, that Christ's Obedience was the meritorious
cause of Grace, and his Spirit the efficient or fountain of it: but you
instruct them better, that Christ by his blood purchased only a Covenant of
Salvation, to them that have grace (come by it as they can.) But pray, Sir,
what Union do you allow of, any, or none?


Sherlock. The Union between Christ and the Christian Church, is but a
Political Union, that is, such an Union as is between a King and his Subjects,
p. 156.


Satan. Then am I united already, (which is more than ever I knew before: for
Christ is Head of Principalities and Powers, and they are his subjects, de
jure, I am sure.)


Sherlock. Hold there, our union to Christ consists in our belief of his
Revelations, Ib.


Satan. Then still my claim is good; for I believe all his Revelations; (and
were I sure none but friends were within hearing, I would say, that is more than
you do.)


Sherlock. You are a jeering Companion and a little too hasty; our union to
Christ consists also in our obedience to his Laws, and subjection to his
Authority, p. 156.


Satan. Now I am half gone. But yet I live in hopes, that the powerful motives
you have talked so much of, may be powerful enough to move me to that obedience
and subjection I owe to Christ's Laws and Authority, seeing I already believe
all his Revelations. I will not give you much longer trouble, I have but one
scruple more. I perceive by your last discourse, That God required not such a
sacrifice as the death of Christ for the expiation of our sins, because he
could not do otherwise, p. 46. This I would have made plain. For it sticks much
with me, that I am a debtor to Divine Justice, and therefore I do not
understand how God can be good to me, till that debt be paid, and Justice
satisfied. For if he should, it seems to me that God should raise one of his
Attributes upon the ruin of another, and so do himself a prejudice, to do me a
kindness. Your charity I believe is such that you wish me well, as you do all
mankind. Answer but this one Objection, and I am satisfied.


Sherlock. That God is so just and righteous, that he cannot pardon sin without
satisfaction to his justice, is indeed such a notion of justice, as is
perfectly new, which neither Scripture nor nature acquaints us with; for all
mankind have accounted it an act of goodness (without the least suspicion of
injustice in it) to remit injuries and offenses without exacting any
punishment; and that he is so far from being just that he is cruel and savage,
who will remit no offense till he has satisfied his revenge. That part of
justice which consists in punishing of offenders, was always looked on as an
iustrument of Government, and therefore the exacting or remitting punishment,
was referred to the wisdom of Governors, who might spare or punish as they saw
reason for it, without being unjust in either, p. 45, 46. And this is so
rational, that thou can not but subscribe to the judgment of all mankind. And
but that I think you propose this scruple only to try what answer I can make; I
should wonder one of so pregnant wit should talk so like a fool.


Satan. I doubt Sir, you have not consulted all mankind, I have heard other
doctrine constantly taught in the Assemblies of Christians (who sure are part
of mankind) where I have been a constant and attentive hearer, and I cannot but
believe and tremble.


Sherlock. I doubt, Sir Satan, your ears have not been matches. It may be you
have heard such doctrine in Conventicles: There is one John Owen that has
given us a fast of the gift he exercises in such Assembles, in a late Book,
Entitled, Communion with God the Father, etc. that tells us, what ever
discoveries were made of the patience and lenity of God to us, yet if it were
not withal revealed that the other Properties of God, as his Justice and
Revenge for Sin, had their actings assigned them to the full, there could be
little consolation gathered from the former, p. 95. But what say I to this?
That is, J. O. would not believe God himself though he should make never so
many promises of being good and gracious to sinners, unless he were sure, that
he had first satisfied his reveng. The sum of which is, That God is all love
and patience when he has taken his fill of revenge, as others use to say, That
the Devil is good when he is pleased p. 47. Excuse me that I make use of your
name.


Satan. I willingly excuse your making use of my name; for seeing I have failed
in my ambition of being like God, I am well enough content, you should make God
like me.


Sherlock. Elsewhere the same J.O. says, That in Christ the very nature of God
is discovered to be love and kindness. But I think I pay him off. Hearken and
you shall have my Comment with his Text to a tittle. An happy change, this from
all Justice to all Love! but how comes this to pass? why the account of that is
very plain; because the Justice of God has glutted it self with revenge on
sin, in the death of Christ and so henceforward we may be sure he will be very
kind, as a revengeful man is when his passion is over, p. 46.


Satan. But what is the matter then that sinners (which I know by woeful
experience my self) are haunted with continual fears of Gods Justice. Those
fears seem to be the effects of the natural notions of God's Justice, which we
carry about with us.


Sherlock. The workings of the Law, the amazing terrors of Gods wrath, the
raging despair of damned spirits, are the working of an heated fancy, and
Religious distraction, p. 95. These must needs be the effect of ignorance, not
of an acquaintance with Christ, which suggests so many
encouraging-considerations to return to God, as to a merciful and compassionate
Father, and not to tremble at his presence as a severe and inexorable Judge. Ib.


Satan. O been factum! O well done my white Boy: O Lepidum caput! now your work
is done, you have obliged me for ever. For now I undeastand, that my fears are
but melancholy and hypochondraical (such as timorous persons are subject to
when left in the dark). There is nothing in Gods nature can give me cause of
fear, (at least, if I do but return to God) but there is enough in it to give
me cause of hope. And though I have no acquaintance with Christ, my
acquaintance with God will serve my turn. For Christ discovers nothing more of
Gods gracious nature to sinners, than we knew before by the light of nature (as
I well remember you instructed me awhile since.) In short, it seems there is a
naturalness of mercy in God, but not of justice.


Sherlock. No, no; of the naturalness of Gods Justice, that he could not pardon
sin without satisfaction, I make this the import, That he is so just, that he
has not one dram of goodness in him, till his rage and vengeance be satisfied,
which is a glorious kind of Justice I confess, p. 59.


Satan. I perceive you are a merry Gentleman; and so are all of your Club. And
I hope hereafter I shall be merry too, and be fit to make one of you. I am sure
I had almost pored out my eyes with seeking for these Gospel mysteries in the
Gospel, and could never find them, p. 40. (To borrow your significant words,
with your good leave) but now I understand that I looked for them where they
were not. I should have learned to argue from the nature of God, and his works
of Providence, and the nature of mankind [and Angels.] though the Eanaticks
call such arguings carnal reason, p. 79. There is nothing now remains (besides
thanks for your pains), but to sum up the heads of Argument upon which my hopes
of salvation (as well as man's are built.) And if I should misrepresent any of
them, you will please to correct my mistakes.

1. That God is so good, that he designs and desires the happiness of all his
Creatures, according to the capacity of their natures [and therefore mine.]

2. That Gods will in that design is not arbitrary, having no reason but it
self: For such a will would destroy all the perfections of Gods nature.

3. That holiness in the Creature, is the reason of the determination of his
love to any particular person.

4. That this holiness is not an effect of an Omnipotent Power, but of powerful
motives and arguments, [and so by the use of my free will, I may be holy if I
will.]

5. That though this holiness be not perfect, yet God will accept it, if
sincere.

6. This acceptance of my sincere holiness, I have reason to believe and hope
for, though I have no promise. For

7. Gods gracious nature obliges him to reward all sincerely, (though
imperfectly) good actions. God is merciful to all, whose Creator he is, and
affords them all possible means of Salvation, without a Savior, or any
knowledge of one. And accordingly,

8. De facto, Abel and Enoch, and Abraham, were saved without a Faith in
Christ. And needs they must, because no man could believe in Christ till he
came. And

9. Though God hates me now, yet he may love me hereafter. For Gods love and
hatred are not immutable, nor does the immutability of them consist in loving
or hating always the same person, but for the same reason, because they are
either good or bad. And (which may confirm me)

10. God never designed the glory of mercy and justice in saving some, and not
others, in the permission of his Creatures sins.

11. Though a Savior was brought into the world after it was about Four
thousand years old; yet he was not of absolute necessity, for the only knowledge
absolutely necessary to the purposes of Religion (whereof Salvation is not the
least) is such a knowledge of Gods nature and will, as is sufficient to direct
our actions, and encourage our obedience And hence,

12. The wisdom of God was not discovered in sending a Savior, if there were
no other way of redeeming the World. For wisdom consists in the choice of the
best and fittest means to attain an end, when there are more ways than one of
doing it.

13. This Savior being the Eternal Son of God, we may reasonably conclude he
came upon no less design than of universal goodness; for he can have no
temptation to partiality, as being equally concerned in the happiness of all
men; and we cannot imagine why he should lay a narrower design of love in the
redemption, than in the Creation of mankind, etc. [all which fits my case; the
Eternal Son of God being my Creator, has no temptation to partiality, being
equally concerned in my happiness and man's, as we are his rational Creatures.]

14. That a Savior is of no great use now he is come. For he comes neither to
fulfill the Law for sinners, nor to die in their stead, but only to confirm Gods
promise of saving them that repent and forsake their sins; which promise was
needless, Gods nature obliging him to save sinners upon those terms, before any
promise; and the light of nature discovering that obligation; nor was the
confirming of it needful: For the light of nature would teach us that God will
not break his promise. [And so if it should happen that the Savior was not
intended for me, yet I might be saved, as Abel and Enoch were, without one.]
And I gather from hence, that you make the blood of Christ no more satisfactory
than the blood of Bulls and Goats were under the Law; but that God was pleased
with both upon the same reason; because the shedding of his and their blood,
was an act of obedience to his will, not a satisfaction to his Justice. And so
you have subverted the Gospel, (which stood in the way of my hopes of
Salvation) for which I con you hearty thanks. And hence I collect,

15. That whoever was or shall be justified, were and shall be justified
without any righteousness at all. For righteousness importing a relation
resulting from the conformity of dispositions and actions to their Rule,
sincerity is no righteousness at all (supposing the righteousness of Christ not
so far imputed as to take away its defects) unless the Law as a Rule requires
no more conformity to it self, than the Gospel as a Covenant accepts; which
cannot be, because then no deviations from the Law are sinful, where there is
sincerity.

16. A Savior is the less needful, because Gods Justice is not natural, though
his mercy is. And the fears of sinful men [and so of Angels] of Gods Justice,
are but the workings of heated fancy, and religious distraction.

17. If a Savior be of use, the way to come by an interest in him, is not a
fiducial reliance or recumbence on Christ. For that Abraham had not, [and so
nor his children] but a believing his Revelations, [which the Church of England
somewhere in her Homilies acknowledges I do. and the chief of them, The
Articles of Faith] and governing our lives by them [which I hope to do
hereafter.] So that Abraham's Faith and a Believers now, are of a different
kind; but your faith and mine are of one kind, we both believe Gods Revelations
upon Christ's Authority, though I hope your belief governs your life and actions
better than mine has done hitherto.

18. The Union made by Faith, is not mystical, i. e. analogical to a natural
Union between Vine and Branches, etc. nor therefore are we passive in the
reception of Grace, to believe and live accordingly. For a Mediator as such is
no fountain of Grace, but only a Minister of Grace, i. e. one that by powerful
motives persuades us to be gracious (come by grace as we may) [and so it is not
impossible but I may get grace, though I be not united to Christ] but the Union
made by Faith is Political, consisting in a belief of Christ's Revelations
[which I have already] and government of our actions [which I am in hopes of in
time, for Christ is the Minister of this Grace, by proposing powerful arguments
to it] Is not all this right?


Sherlock, Very right. I admire your tenacious memory and ingenuity in so
artificial a connection of a rambling discourse, and in your easy and natural
inferences from my grounds.


Satan. I wonder at your freedom in owning all my Consequences, (though I think
verily they are deduced evidently enough from your grounds, because you have
subscribed the Articles of the Church of England, and the Church of England
somewhere says, They are to be had accursed that presume to say, that every man
shall be saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent
to frame his life according to that Law, and THE LIGHT OF NATVRE. For holy
Scripture does set out to us only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must be
saved, [Art. 18.] Which directly contradicts one of the main grounds you laid
down for my hopes. And again she says, The Old Testament is not contrary to the
New. For both in the Old and New Testament everlasting life is offered to
mankind by Christ, who is the only Mediator between God and man, being both God
and man, [Art. 7.] And this thwarts another of your principal Positions. And
out of the Articles and Homilies I could produce passages that are
diametrically opposite to every Position of yours, which I have ^epeated, and
you approved.


Sherlock. Do not trouble your head about ^econciling my Positions with the
Church of Englands, as long as I have an Imprimatur.


Satan. Excuse me Sir, I was afraid your ^indness to me should prove an
unkindness to ^our self, and bring you under Church-cen^ure. If your grounds be
true (as I see no ^ause to doubt) I am sure I have cause to bless ^ou, though
the Church of England curses ^ou [in her 18th. Article] and to wish that ^^at
curse being causeless, may never come upon you, in a suspension ab officio and
beneficio. ^ong may you enjoy St. George Buttolph Lane, ^^d St. Buttolph
Billingsgate; in the latter of which you may be sufficiently instructed in the
eighth Liberal Art, which the vulgar call Scolding, but the learned Raillery. I
know you can bear a jest.

And now Sir, I heartily thank you for your great pains, and truly Catholic
charity, which exceeds any Prophets, Apostles, and even the Church of England's
it self.


Sherlock. I wish the profit may be greater to you, than the pains have been to
me. Farewell.


Postscript to the READER.
THe Author of these Sheets conceives he cannot excogitate a fitter close than
Mr. Sherlock 's to his second Section, with no other alteration than the
substitution of two words, Gods nature, instead of Christ's person and of God
instead of Christ.

Thus Reader, I have given the^ an entire scheme of a new Religion, resulting
from an acquaintance with [Gods nature] in all its fundamental Principles and
Practices; here is every jot and tittle of reason it is founded on, or pretends
to, and the most obvious and easy connection of one part with another, whereby
thou may easily judge of the whole fabric and contrivance; and I think there
needs no more to expose it to the scorn of every considering man, who cannot
but discover how inconsistent the Religion of [Gods nature] and of his Gospel
are: this is that knowledge of [God] these men [Mr. S. and his Club] glory in,
as containing greater mysteries, and more soul-saving truths, than are revealed
in the Gospel, p. 75. And the Author thinks fit to add, that he presumes that
no considering man will doubt whether this new Religion deserves that character
which the learned Dr. Arrowsmith gives of it; and the men that are of that
Religion, deserve that sharp censure which the learned Grotius gives of them,
in the passages quoted in the Title Page, (which for the sake of the unlearned
Reader it may not be amiss to translate. In Socinianism, which not undeservedly
is called a more refined Mahometanism, Hell and Irreligion open their mouths
wide. So Arrowsmith. The Socinians I think unworthy not only of the name of
Christians, but even of Heretics. They retain the name of Christianity, but
they destroy the thing that bears that name. Therefore I judge they differ very
little from Mahometans, who themselves do not speak evil of Jesus. So Grotius.
The only thing that may seem wanting to brand the Sherlockians with the name of
Socinians, and so of more refined Mahometans, is an explicit denial of the
Godhead of Christ; which whether they be not in a good forwardness for, let the
Reader judge by that passage, No man could believe in Christ till he came, that
is, could not believe any thing upon his Authority, p. 247. It is a Question
which for his own credits sake, Mr. Sherlock were bound (one would think) to
answer, why no man could believe any thing upon Christ's Authority, till he
came? The only reason his Antagonists can imagine is, because Christ had no
Authority before he came. And if that be it, the falsehood of that ground is
evident enough (as otherwise so) by the light of Psalm. 110.1. and Mat. 23.43,
44, 45, compared, where David called [and so accounted] Christ his Lord, before
he came; and consequently supposes him to have Authority to exact belief. And
from that false ground, that Christ had no Authority before he came, [supposing
it yet to be true] this inference is fair, that he was not preexistent, and so
nor God before he came. And thence another, that he had no such Authority when
he come, as Mr. Sherlock denies him before he came, that is no primary and
immediate Divine Authority, but only secondary and mediate, that is, the
Authority of a Prophet, the belief of whom is resolved into the Authority of
him that sent him as its proper ground. And how finely does this notion suit
with the account which the Socinians give of the reason of the denomination of
the Son of God, and God, given by Christ to himself. His verbis (viz. Joh.
10.35, 36.) apertissime indicat Christus, quod nullam aliam ob causam majorem,
seipsum Dei Filium, ac proinde Deum asseruerit, nisi quod a Patre
sanctificatus, and in mundum missus fuerit, Cat. Racov. cap. de Cog. Dei. That
is, In these words, viz. Joh. 10.35, 36. Christ does plainly declare, that for
no other greater reason does he affirm that he is the Son of God, and therefore
God, then because he was sanctified of the Father, and sent into the world. And
least Mr. Sherlock (or any on his behalf) should complain of wrong done him,
and not know of whom to demand satisfaction, the Author has thought meet to
alter his first resolution of concealing his Name, and with the discovery of it
to give this account of himself, that he is one who has subscribed the 36
Articles of the Doctrine of the Church of England, and does hereby profess the
continuance of his approbation of them as Orthodox, and consonant to the
Scripture; and withal that he is not so void of candor, but that if Mr. S.
convince him that he has wrested any of his words, or made any illogical
deductions from his Principles, he will not fail to give public satisfaction
in what form Mr. S. himself shall prescribe, which (he conceives) is as much as
any reasonable man can require, or any honest man need to promise.

THO. DANSON. Sometime Fell. of Magd. Coll. Oxon.


