Guilielmus Drummond de Havthornden
Hos Gloria Reddit Honores
R Gaywood fecit: 1654



THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND, From the year 1423. until the year 1542. CONTAINING
The LIVES and REIGNS OF JAMES The I. the II. the III. the IV. the V.

With several Memorials of State, During the Reigns of James VI. and Charles I.

By WILLIAM DRUMMOND of Hauthornden.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, for Rich. Tomlins and himself, and are to be
sold at their houses near Py-Corner.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
TO Speak in Commendation of History in general, were so many ways
superfluous, that we shall rather leave it to the experience of sober and
inquisitive minds, than injure the High Elogiums given of both the greatest and
wisest Ancients and Moderns, by a disadvantagious Repetition of them. And for
to say any thing concerning the Country, which was the Scene of the actions
here represented, we conceive it needless and improper, in regard we are
immured by one Sea, breath one air, speak one Tongue, and now closed together
by an happy Coalition under one Government.

The proper work therefore is to offer what can be said of the History and the
Author, and so dismiss the Reader to the Entertainment of the Book it self. For
his manner of Writing, though he treat of things that are rather many than
great, and trouble some than glorious, yet he has brought so much of the main
together, as it may be modestly said, none of that Nation has done before him:
And for his way of handling it, he has sufficiently made it appear, how
conversant he was with the Writings of Venerable Antiquity, and how generously
he has emulated them by an happy imitation; for the purity of his Language is
much above that Dialect he writ in; his Descriptions lively and full, his
Narrations clear and pertinent* his Orations Eloquent, and fit for the persons
that sp^ak (for that since Livys time was never accounted Crime in an
Historian) and his Reflections solid and mature; so that it cannot be e^spected
that these leaves can be turned over without a^ much pleasure as profit,
especially frequently meeting with so many Glories and Trophies of our
Ancestors; yet because either of these may a little abate, in respect the
beginning seem^ a little abrupt and precipitious (the Author possibly dying
before ^e could prepare an Apparatus or Introduction, we have taken the pains,
out of other Records of that Nation, to draw a brief Representation of some
passages necessary to be foreknown.

The direct Royal Line of Scotland failing in Alexander III. (Son of the II. of
that name) who when he a few years before had lost both his wife, and all his
hopeful and numerous issue, nothing remaining of it, saving a Girl to his
Daughter, brought to Hungonan King of Norway. The Nobility hereupon meet at
Scone, and put the Kingdom into the hands of six Persons. Edward of England
sends to demand the Daughter Grandchild in marriage, as next Heir of the Crown.
This was agreed unto, Ambassadors sent for her, but the death of the Lady
frustrated all that Negotiation. The death of this Margarite (so was she
called) was the firebrand that set England on fire, and had almost destroyed
Scotland; For two Competitors declared themselves both powerful, and of great
Estates in Scotland, and strongly supported with Foreign Confederacies; for John
Baliol had engaged the English Interest, and Robert Bruce the French: But to be
a little clearer we must look back; The line thus failing they were forced to
run back to the line of David Earl of Huntington Brother to King William; this
David by his Wife Maud Daughter to the Earl of Chester, had three Daughters,
Marg^^^t married to Allan of Galloway, the second to Robert Bruce surnamed the
Noble, the third to Henry Hastings Earl of Huntington, who made no claim. Now
thus it stood, Dornagil (the wife of Baliol) claimed it as grandchild by the
Eldest Daughter, and Bruce as great Grandchild by the second, saying, It was
not fit that Daughters should inherit when there were Sons to represent the
Ancestor; Baliol he was nearer, as being in the second degree, and the other
but in the third: The Controversy growing high and boisterous, and the Power
and Interests of both parties at home being equally formidable and dangerous,
they resolved to refer it to King Edward, who coming to Berwick and calling
Lawyers to his Assistance, pretends all Equity, but raised up eight other petty
Competitors, the better to weakon the claim of the other two, and so handled
the business whilst the Lawyers were slowly consulting, that ( Bruce having
refused to accept the Crown in Homage and Tribute from England) he declared
(upon his acceptance of those conditions) JOHN BALIOL to be King, who was
Crowned at Stone. But soon after an appeal being made against him to King
Edward by Macduff Earl of Fife, and he refusing to ri^e from the Seat where he
sat to answer, but being enforced by the King so to do, became so aliened in
his affections from the English, that a new quarrel breaking out between the
French and the English, and both by their Ambassadors Courting the Scottish
Amity, it was resolved to adhere to the French, and renounce the Homage to
England, as obtained by Fra^d and Force, Edward enraged at this (having
obtained a Truce for some few Months with the French) assails Berwick by Sea,
but with some loss, which enflames him the more, summons Baliol, who refuses,
pro^ers it to Bruce, takes Berwick by Stratagem, enters Scotland, masters the
Country, takes Edinburgh and Sterlin, and forces Baliol to a surrender at
Forfar, and sends him Prisoner to London* whither himself returns, having made
most of the Nobility do Homage, and left the Earl of Surrey his Deputy. Baliol
soon after is sent into France, leaving his Son Edward as Hostage for his
fidelity. Edward sets ^ail for France, the Scots rise and make some little
Incursions into the Borders; But about this time Si^ William Wallas arose, who
to his Honor did so Heroically de^end his Country in her weakest condition,
as made it easily appear, if he had had as happy a fortune to advance, as he
had a miserable to relieve, he might have been remembered for as great a man as
ever was in any age, for having upon a quarrel slain a young English Gentleman,
and enforced to lurk in the Hills for the safety of his life, he became inured
(...) ^uch hardness, that awaking his natural Courage, he (...) the Head of all
the Malcontents, and filled both the Kingdoms with his Reputation and Terror,
and behaving himself according to expectation, gleaned up to a tumultuary Army,
and (the Nobility being either sloathful or cowardly) commanded as Baliols
Viceroy; Thus after some little skirmishes, he reduced all beyond the Forth,
took Dundee, Aberdeen, and other places, when there arrived rumor of an
English Army, which he was not willing to dispute with, but upon his own Terms,
Edward that had fortified all the Considerable places, and kept the chiefest of
the Nobles as Honorable Pri^oners in England, had withdrawn his Army, as
thinking all secure, sends the Lord Henry Per^^y with strong assistance to join
with his Officers there (for he had heard of the Reputation of Wallas) who
endeavoring to pass the Forth, the Bridge breaking, received a considerable
loss, which gave Wallas time to reduce the rest of the Country; Wallas then
enters England, and for some time ravages, and returns without opposition; and
this Fame of his, brought upon him the Envy of the Noblemen, and brought,
Edward with an Army hastily gathered together at Stainmore, from whence after
looking upon one another they departed without a Blow; from whence Wallas came
to be rumoured as affecting the Royalty, and brought him such envy among the
Brucos and Cumins, that they were resolved by any means to ruin him, as
disdaining that the fortune of the Kingdom should rely on so mean a person. But
the English entering Scotland again with a great Army, and finding the S^ots
disposed under three Leaders (who among themselves disputed Priority of
Command) marched up to them, where they found the Cumins (who commanded one
Brigade) depart without opposition; The Stuarts (who had another) being all cut
to pieces, and Wallas (who had the third) forced to retire to the River Caroon.
Thus lost Wallas his title and formal Army, whilst with a Predatory Army he
never left to infest the English, whilst Edward regained the lost places; but
the Scots having in vain endeavored Truce or Mediation, were resolved to put
all upon the Die; and made a general insurrection, to oppose which King Edward
sent Ralph Conyers, with a considerable Army to reduce the revolted places, and
make an end of the War, but they, by a Triple Victory, were routed at Rossin
the 10. of March 1302. 1302.
Edward stung with this, makes an other Entry, in which Wallas perpetually
infested him, and again reduces the Country, all swearing allegiance at Saint
Andrews, but Wallas, who returned into the High-Lands. E^^ard changing the
Laws, carrying away all Records, and (...) with all the Marks of any absolute
Conqueror, and among other Monuments the Stone called Jacobs Stone, in which
our Kings have been since usually Crowned. But there kindled another flame, for
Robert Bruce, son of the other, and John Cumin, Cosen German of John Baliol,
surnamed the Red, wearied by the delays and unperformed promises of the King,
though Competitors, overcame their mutual jealousies, and closd together, on
condition that Bruce should have the Kingdom, and Cumin all Bruces lands; which
agreement notwithstanding, Cumin was after said to have communicated to Eaward;
Bruce has notice, and, by shooing his horses backward, escapes, and arriving
at his Castle at Lake Laban, meets with Cumins Letters advising to cut him off,
upon which he hastens to S. Iohnstons, and after exprobating his infidelity
leaves him, in the Franciscan Monastery, stabbed as dead, and after stabbed him
outright, 1305.
with his brother Robert. About the same time Wallas was betrayed about
Glasgow, carried up to London, hanged, drawn, and quartered, and his limbs hung
up in the most eminent places.

And here (to digress a little) from these cruel carnages, might naturally
arise some pretty questions, as, Where allegiance and obedience begins and
determins? who are properly Rebels, or Lawful Enemies? how far the faith of a
Nation, or particular men, are concluded in the Oath of their Prince to a
Foreiner? and what Limits Conquerours ought to observe to Subjects, not
naturally born so? and how far they, never compacting, are obliged in the
General Compact? But these being matters proper for the Civilians, and such as
cannot be included in the shortness of a Preface, or Rigor of an Epitome, we
shall dismiss at this Time without any further disquisition. Only at the
present we will raise one Note from this Example of unfortunate Courage, How
apt great minds are, even out of false appearances of good of their Country
(the most powerful charm upon the bravest spirits) to rush upon the most
violent and dangerous efforts, though it may be their Country, by a great deal
of devastation and blood, be made a loser by it; and some Territories are so
seated, that it is the more happy for them to be under the shade and protection
of a greater and more powerful, than be left naked to their own wants, and
devastation of prevailing neighbors, under the Notion of preserving an
imaginary, Ancient, and Notional Liberty, which once launch^ into will prove no
other than a willingness to shackles, and an obstacle, and an obstinacy to the
advancement of the Commodities of life.

And again, let us observe what a strange Antiperistasis oppresion and Calamity
will make in any people, how inconsiderable heads, meeting with an humor of
jealousy, discontent and despair, swell into enormity, and become terrible to,
nay oftentimes affront* ^^gitimate force, where as Nations wantoning in their
deligh(...)nd pleasures (like strong bodies without Exercise) forget, and
weaken themselves, whilst their strength insensibly transpires and vanishes in
the warmth of their fruitions.

But it is high time now to return unto Cumins) to be Crowned King at Scone,
1306.
notwithstanding his Endeavors at first to strengthen himself, by the enmity
of the Cumins, and timorousness of his own Followers, was routed by Edwards
Lieutenants, and forced to the Hills, and for a long time lurkt in great
misery, to the great ruin and slaughter of his Family and party; but making
together some little force, took Carrick and Inn^rness, by surprisal, and by
this means augmented his Train, and withstood the daring of Cumin Earl of
Bughan, who withstood him with a Considerable strength of English and Scottish
forces, and though a Treaty were desired, would not comply, growing numerous by
the accession of other considerable persons. Edward the I, dying in an intended
expedition thither, left it to Edward II. his Son, who hearing some troubles in
France, sailed thither, and left behind him an Army, which notwithstanding
Robert* though sick and forced to be held on horseback, defeated; this engaged
Edward to another Immemorable Expedition, and gave Robert time to take in the
Remaining strengths; 1310.
but the next year, and within two years after, recovered the most
considerable, and Edinburgh it self, and a little after, by means of his
Brother Edward, Sterlin upon Conditions. Edward thereupon enters with a great
Army, and many foreign auxiliaries; But had a great defeat at Bannocks-burn,
which occasioned the loss of Berwick, and Bruces confirmation in Parliament,
the declaring of Edward (his Brother) to be heir, in case of Roberts want of
Issue Male, as also making of him King of Ireland, at the request of some of
the I^ish, and though they furnished him with some forces for that attempt, yet
in the Expedition he and all his followers were cut to pieces. Some few years
after were spent in light skirmishes and incursions, and Thomas Randolph
obtained the battle called the White, and quieted the English. Robert, this
time of Repose, convened the Nobles, intending to determine the rig^^ of
inheritances, which many men had unjustly usurped in the times of Rapine and
License; This brooded a Conspiracy, which ^eing detected, a meeting was
appointed at Perth, where, by the Conviction of their own Papers, many were
executed, some pardoned; but none drew more pity from the Beholders than David
Brechin, the Kings Sisters Son, whose acquaintance, not concurrence, with the
Plot was only Criminal. From whence we may consider, That to be a Traitor, is
not actually to engage in Treason, but to conceal it is to foment it: for if in
private Friendships it is infidelity not to reveal a danger to a friend, it
holds stronger as to the Magistrate, who is not only our Common Friend, but our
Parent and Tutor; since the seeds of all Treasons (like them of Vegetables,
lurking qui^tly, and arising fruitfully) being cunningly manured, do, by the
Cooperation of bad influ^nces, grow up into poisons, and threaten destruction,
where as the Sovereign Power, enlivening and peiroing all, cherishes the more
Noble things, and only discovers the imperfection of the meaner.

In the mean time a Legate coming from Rome, armed with all the Thunderbolts
of that See (whose force, even that age had wit enough to discern) to threaten
them into a peace with England, but missing of his Errand, the Scots followed
him with an Army, and marched as far as Stainmore. The K. of England, in
revenge, raises an Army so potent and powerful, that it might be supposed they
came for absolute victory, not uncertain hazard. Robert therefore (like a wise
Captain) considering that it was Stratagem not force that must preserve him
safe from so great a storm, caused all the Cattle to be carried into the avious
retreats of the Hills, lest they might be serviceable to the Enemy, who,
confident of their strength, peirced Scotland, and endeavored to draw him and
his Forces out of their Holes: But having wasted all about (sparing only
Churches) and wanting Victuals, were forced to retire. Bruce, knowing this
disorderly retreat, pursues them as far as York, and, by a great defeat, was
Master of their Baggage, and some Considerable Prisoners; the great occasion of
which was imputed to Sir Andrew Barcley, Earl of Carlisle, who was therefore
degraded. This begat two Embassyes, one to the Papacy, for a Reconciliation to
it, and the other to France, for a Renovation of the old League, both which
were obtained with equal easiness, with this addition to the latter, That the
King of France should be Umpire in controversies concerning the Crown of
Scotland. About these times (says Excellent Buchanan) the Family of the
Hamiltons (since so great in Scotland, and pernicious to England) took their
rise, one of them upon a Quarrel and murder of an English Gentleman flying to
Robert for Protection, who gave him lands, which retain the name to this day;
the Spensers (upon whose account this quarrel arose) were soon after
discomposed, and ruined, and Edward himself dethroned, and (as is said)
murdered at Pontfract Castle, by means of his wife, and Edward his Son
succeeded, the III. of that name; Bruce in the mean time, composing himself to
the cares of Peace, by Act of Parliament settles the Inheritance of the Kingdom
upon his Son (though a Child) and in case of his decease, to Robert Stuart his
Grandchild by his Daughter, and for preventing any pretenses of Baliol (being
then old and miserable in France) a full release of all his Claim, 1320.
but the active young Edward filling them with the terror of a new Bruce,
repaired the defects of his age, and travels, by substituting Thomas* Randolph
his Viceroy, whom, with James Douglas, he sent with a flying Army of Horse,
into England, the better to elude the prevailing force they were to expect, and
it happened accordingly, for after tedious Marches, and hardships on both
sides, they parted without a stroke, saving only that Douglas with two hundred
Horse, beat up the Quarters of the English Camp, and cut (as is said) two Ropes
of the Kings Tent, and made a good Retreat; this begat a Truce for three years,
and afterward (1328.) a dishonorable Concession in a Parliament at Southampton
of all the Scottish privileges, and independencyes of that Crown (for which some
after smarted) with the Concession of some Counties, and Rendition of
Monuments, the Scots paying thirty thousand Marks: Bruce finding himself wasted
by age and toil, left the Tuition of the Nonage of his Son to Randolph and
Douglas, retiring himself to the Abbey of Kilross, confirming the Settlement of
the Kingdom upon his Son David (then 8 years old) and Stuart, as he had done
before, leaving these three Counsels behind him (Illustrious Spirits that have
long moved in great Orbs, being best measured, when they are falling below
their Horizon.) 1. Not to let any man solely command the Aebneae. 2. Never to
put all their Strength at one hazard with the English. 3. Never to make long
Truces with them. The first being to be feared by their power at Sea. The
second for the Fertility, Power and Numbers of the English. The third, to
prevent the Enervation of a long Peace. Thus he dyed, leaving Charge with
Douglas to convey his heart to the Holy Land (whither himself had designed an
Expedition) but Douglas, assisting them of Arragon against the Sara^ens, was
there cut to pieces: Thus ended the reign of Robert Bruce. 1330.
A Prince, that mounting the Throne over the Carcasses of his nearest kindred,
encountering with the greatest difficulties and calamities of a Country oppressed
by powerful and martial Enemies, bravely struggled with the disadvantages, and
left behind him the Character of a great Captain, and a prudent Prince, and
such an one as whose Reputation relies upon his single virtue, unless you will
say he had the assistance of the heads and hands of his Counselors and
Captains, yet even in the choosing of One, and the obeying the Other, it must be
confessed he was a man excellently squared out for Government, and a man the most
fit to arrest our Conquests in that Nation.

Yet, by the way, we shall take up one Remark, How much the fortune and
reputation of any people, depends upon the Conduct of their Supreme Governor;
and we cannot have better instance, than by reflecting upon the preceding
History. Edward I. (worthily called Coeur de Lion) brought them in their
greatest power upon their knees; His Son (an effeminate and weak Prince,
enchanted with Flatteries, and lost in Sof^ness) could not preserve an acquired
Dominion, but lost it with ignom^ny; His Son, for a time (which we must call
his pupillage of War, he did such wonders afterward) was unsuccessful, and all
this through the Opposition, Courage and Conduct of one unfortunate person; And
indeed, upon survay of all Histories, we shall find, that the ability and
excellency of the Prince has been the most powerful ascendent of the Genius of
a Nation, and that the Governing mind of the World, when ever it determines any
to glorious actions, raises up such Leaders, as by their wisdom, and example,
may lead them to the performance of its own secret determinations.

And again, How infectious the example of a bad or weak Prince, which, like an
unhappy contagion, perverts and infects the manners of a people, and so much
the more easily seduces them, by how much the mind of man is inclinable to
understand better things, and pursue the worse, and most people are more easily
emasculated into Vice, than tutured into Virtue.

This Prince being gone to his long home, Rome to make the business more
solemn. 1331.
The first thing memorable in his reign was the suppression of a sort of
Thieves, by Randolph, who (if you will believe the Scottish Story) was soon
after poisned by a Monk, yet bore it so, as he eluded another invasion, though
he dyed soon after in the year 1331. the Government devolving to the Earl of
Mar, in which he was scarce warm, when news was brought that Edward Baliol was
seen in the Fryth with a Formidable Fleet; And it was upon this occasion,
Lawrence Twine, a Fugitive Englishman, that had planted himself in Scotland,
being for his lewd life excommunicated, slew the Bishop of Final, and used such
inducements to Edward (Son of John Baliol, formerly King) by the minority of
the King, the raging discontents of the People and Exiles, the want of the
Regents, Randolph and Dowglass, that he, knowing Edward prepared great Forces
against Scotland, persuaded him to imbarque in the Enterprise, and he made so
good a Party, that he landed (...) Kingkorn, and defeated Alexander Seatoun,
who made some opposition* and marching to Perth, did, by a secret passage over
the River, rout the Enemy, slay the most considerable Commande^, and take the
Town, taking Prisoners also many of the best quality, so that growing numerous,
by the accession of such as had a mind to share in his good and unexpected
Fortune, 1332.
he in the year 1332. caused himself to be Crowned King at Scone, by the name
of Bruce not resting here, send him to Philip of France with his wife, and
choose Andrew Murray, his Cosen, Regent, and making a party, after three
Months siege, recovered Perth, Baliol in the mean time was at Annandale,
receiving the voluntary submission of the Country, among whom (so high was the
Reputation of his Acquests) that Alexander Bruce, L. of Carid and Galloway,
forsook his Kinsman, and submitted to the Conqueror, who, by this means,
became so besotted with a contempt of the Enemy, and so neglected Discipline;
which being known to the Viceroy, he sent a party of Horse under Archibald
Douglas, and others, who beat up his quarters, and routed them, himself
escaping half naked, 1332.
and his most considerable Friends slain. The Nobility hereupon flocking to the
Party of the Bruces, they consult, and resolve, that Baliol acts but the King
of England's Designs, fortify Berwick and the Borders, and standing in this
posture of Defense, fent to K. Philip and David, to give them account of
things. Nor were the English unwilling to take the Advantage of the Discord, he
therefore protects Baliol, and under pretense of demanding Berwick, which was
denied, brings an Army against Scotland, besieges Berwick by Land and Sea,
which to divert, Archibald Douglas, newly appointed Viceroy, makes an attempt
upon the English, but was routed with great loss, 1333.
in the year 1333. Which occasioned the Rendition of the Town; Edward hereupon
withdrawing into England, leaves the reducement of Scotland to the care of
Baliol and Edward Talbot, who gained it all except some few Strengths; Baliol
(though disturbed with a controversy about the Lands of John Moubray) surveys
the Country, fortifies the Castle of Rothsay, narrowly pursues Robert Stuart
(after King) who in a small bark escaped to the Garrison of Dumbarton, and
after lays siege to the Castle in the Lake Leven, which he left to the
Management of Sir John Sterlin and others, but Sterlin going to a Fair at
Dunfermling, the besieged let the Lake into his Trenches, and raised the siege.
The English came in again with an Army, swept all, carried Baliol home with
them, and left Cumin Earl of Athol, Lieutenant of Scotland, who wasted all the
Lands of the Stuarts. By this Robert Stuart unexpectedly breaks out, and being
followed by the Cambells, takes the Castle of Botan, and having access of many
considerable persons, is made Viceroy, and forces Cumin to his party, and
dispersing the War, called a Parliament at Perth, where nothing could be done
by reason of the dissension of Cumin and Douglas. But the English enter with a
great Army, and (though their Auxiliary Guelders were routed) take Perth, but
their Fleet being harrast at Sea, were forced to retreat, and the rather in
design of a French War; but some of the Nobles still standing out, the English
landing in Murray reduced all, and, leaving Baliol, return. Next year the
English besieged Dunbar, 1337.
and sent in two Parties under Talbot and Monford, which though they were both
routed, yet the siege continued* but the English having received loss by the
valor of Robert Stuart, after six months stay, being called into France,
raised their siege; Murray in the mean time dying, Stuart was created Viceroy
till the Return of David, and having the first year by the means of W. Douglas,
gained some petty Victories, 1339.
did the next besiege Perth, which after four Months stay was reduced, and a
little after Sterlin, and (by Stratagem) the Castle of Edinburgh; Alexander
making a happy Expedition into Northumberland, and taking Roxburgh, and the
Scots regaining all their ground, except Berwick. In the year 1342. David,
after 9. years stay, returns, and after quieting of some dissentions, resolves
an expedition into England, though dissuaded by his Council, by reason of want
of Victuals, making John Randolph General, himself going incognito, and for two
Months together depopulated Northumberland, but after, declaring himself
General, made a second Expedition, which met little opposition by reason of the
diversion of the English strength in France, a third to as little purpose. A
Peace for two years was treated of, which David would not accept, without the
consent of Philip. of France, who having a great defeat given him by Edward,
excited him, by all means, to an invasion, which his friendship persuaded him
to (though things at home were not in Order) and having Marched so far as the
County of Durham, had his Army routed, and was there taken Prisoner; The
English limits being enlarged as far as Cockburn, and all Scotland, in a
manner, depopulated by the Plague and deadly fewds, yet by the encouragement of
John Son of Philip the French King, some were still making Incursions, and an
unsuccessful attempt on Berwick. By this time John of France was Prisoner to
Edward, whom the Scots courted as full of Honor and Victory, for the delivery
of their own, who (by the Mediation of the Pope) for a great sum of Money, was
redeemed, and set free, after eleven years Captivity, and at his Rerurn
punished some of those who had deserted him at Durham, and endeavored to
remove the succession of the Crown, from Robert Stuart, to whom he was some
years after reconciled. The last five years of his reign were spent in
appeasing domestic fewds, and are notable for a great inundation and plague;
but things quieting in the year 1363. he retired into a Monastery, and declared
(in case of his decease) Edward, or his Son, for their King. This, whether it
was caused by some former Oath, or from weariness of War, or design of quiet to
Both Nations, which being universally disliked by the Estates it was like to
breed a dissension, which his wisdom closed up. All was now quiet but the
Highlanders, whom he appeased by their mutual discords; when Fate in the 47.
year of his age, the 39. of his Reign, came to Eternal Rest, 1370.
in the Castle of Edinburgh, in the year 1370.

By this King and his competitor Baliol (who went out in the snuff) we may in
part measure the interests and advantages of Princes; the one by the assistance
of a Potent Neighbor did unexpected things, yet failed in Conduct and
Management; the other, wanting neither spirit nor vigilance, became a Captive
and ineffectuall Prince; which may give us occasion to observe, That though
Travel do best enrich the mind with variety of observation, yet it is not so
successful in Princes; for their Minds not being exempted from humane
weakness, may draw in tinctures and prejudices not consisting with the humors
of them they are to govern, and by knowing abroad grow strangers at home,
neglecting to study the humor of the People they ore set over; the disquisition
of which is certainly the greatest Mystery and Chain of Government: The People
being an unruly Beast, easily led, impossible to be forced, and the Magic that
so powerfully forces them, no other than a piercing, discerning, flattering, or
eluding their Humor.

This was David's Fundamental fault, which, like Error in the first concoction,
multiplied it self through the rest of his Reign. He was bred a Stranger, knew
not the disposition of his people, met with troublesome Times, and a Formidable
Enemy, and therefore he may very well be charged with three oversights; First,
after three, not unfortunate, incursions into England, then employed by France,
not to rest there with his proportion of glory and prey: But secondly, By the
allurement of the French King, and that upon a score of Friendship; whereas
Friendships of Princes and Private Men are different, the one being particular,
the other diffusive and concerning Millions; besides, that Princes are to
consider the interest of their States, not their private inclinations. And for
the third, To make an invasion, when he left so high discontents in a turbulent
people behind, besides those of his own, that by force, obligation or interest
were devoted to a victorious Enemy, and assured of his own Country, was very
imprudential, both in going to find out an Enemy, whose force he knew not, and
leaving behind him Subjects, whose malice and force he understood not.

But no more to disturb his ashes; Had he had another Country, another Enemy,
another Education, and other Circumstances of Time, he might have been as
glorious as any of his Predecessors, it is the more probable (though the Change
of Time does often heighten and aggravate the Vices of Princes) there is
nothing either Cruel or Vicious recorded of him. So that even in the severest
sense we may dismiss him with this Character, That he rather was unhappy than
sloathful in his Government.

This man's eyes being for ever closed, the Nobility appointed a meeting for the
accepting of Douglas by marrying his Daughter to the Earls Son. His first two
years were spent in making incursions upon the English; the Kings wife dying in
the next year, he mary's Elizabeth Moor his own Concubine, the better to
legitimate the children he had by her, and them he honored with Titles, and
declared his Successors; two years after an attempt is made on Berwick, but in
vain, and Talbots Expedition frustrated, but a Truce for three years was
concluded; which being expired, little quarrels awoke again, and occasioned the
Duke of Lancaster to be sent thither with a great Army and Navy, though not
with the same fortune at Sea as at Land, which occasioned the return of the
Duke, who was pursued by some small depredations of William Douglas, though his
Son of the same name, and some others, during a Treaty, made an inroad as far
as Newcastle. Robert having assistance from France, is forced to retire,
especially upon the news of Richards (Grandchild and Successor to Edward the
third,) marching with a great Army, faced the Scots with an unbloody bravery.
The Scots designing to besiege Roxburgh, but quarrelling with the French, it
came to nothing; which occasioned so much dissension, that it arrived at this
pass, That the French should pay for their plunder and be dismissed, their
general remaining as hostage for their satisfaction; whilst William Douglas
(who had married the Kings Daughter) makes an expedition into Ireland, plunders
Kerlingford, and knowing his Father to be employed against the English, hastens
to his assistance. The attempt was in affront of Richard then struggling with
Domestic difficulties; But they of Scotland being unable to live without War
and Rapine, they were resolved to make a business of it, and because the King,
and his eldest Son were infirm, came to choose (privately) the second for their
Leader; but this being discovered by the English, they altered their
Resolution, and resolved to divide themselves, one by the way of Berwick, the
other of Carlisle, the former party led by Douglas gave a defeat to the Lord
Percy, with the loss of his Life (the other not having the like Success) who
impatiently fighting before the coming up of the Bishop of Durham's Forces,
lost his own and endangered the others. This happened in the year 1388. at
Otterb^rn in Northumberland. The King being spent with age, makes Robert his
second Son his Viceroy, (his eldest being unactive) who to affront Peircey,
that seemed to lessen the loss, led in an Army, but after facing returned with
some little depredation. Soon after a Peace was mediated between the French and
English, in which Robert, without consent of a Parliament, would not be
comprised; But his doubts were all resolved by death in the year 1390. when he
had lived 74. years, and reigned 19. being followed to the grave with such acts
of Barbarisin, as have been frequent in that place.

He is a Prince we find little said of, as to his person, and possibly best to
be considered in the Negative; We find many things done by his Captains, not by
him; which notwithstanding we may rather attribute to the stirring and violent
humor of that age, than either his age, want of Genius, or love of quiet; yet
herein appears somewhat of his Character, that meeting with turbulent times,
and a martial people, he met not with any Insurrections, and was a gainer; and
though he did it by other hands, we must suppose that their Motions were
directed by his Brain, that communicated Motion and Spirits unto them, since
the Minds of Kings, like the first Mover, turn all about, yet are not perceived
to move, and it was no humane wit said their hearts were unscruitable.

The same year his Eldest Son John was called to succeed, who thinking that
name ominous to Kings (and there wanted not examples) as of him of England, and
him of France, and fancying somewhat of the felicity of the two former Roberts,
was crowned King by the name of

This man being unactive, the weight of the Government rested upon his Brother
Robert. The first seven years of his Reign past in a calm with England, by
reason of two Truces, but not without some fierce fewds among his Subjects, one
whereof was very memorable between Thomas Dunbar Earl of Murray, and James
Lindsay Earl of Crawford, and was most high, insomuch that seeing the
difficulty of reducing them, he resolved to make this proposition to them, That
300. of each side, should try it by dint of Sword before the King, the
conquered to be pardoned, and the Conqueror advanced; This being agreed on, a
place was appointed on the Northside of St. Iohnstons, but when they came to
join battle, there was one of one side missing, whom when his party could not
supply, and none would relinguish the other, a Tradesman stepped out, and for
half a French Crown, and promise of maintenance for his life, filled up the
company. The fight was furious, but none behaved himself more furiously than
the Mercinary Champion, who they say was the greatest cause of the Victory, for
of his side there remained ten grievously wounded, the other party had but one
left, who not being wounded, yet being unable to sustain the shock of the
other, threw himself into the Tey and escaped. By this means the fiercest of
two Clanns being cut off, the remainder, being headless, 1398.
were quiet. Two years after the King in Parliament made his two Sons Dukes, a
title then first brought into Scotland. Next year Richard the second of England
being forced to resign, Henry the fourth succeeded, in the beginning of whose
reign, though the Truce was not ended, the seeds of War began to bloom out, and
upon this occasion, George Earl of March had betroathed Elizabeth his Daughter
to David the Kings eldest Son: Archibald Earl of Douglas, not brooking this,
gets a vote of Parliament for revocation of this marriage, and by the power of
Robert, the Kings Brother, made a marriage between Mary his Daughter, and David,
and, giving a greater sum, got it confirmed in Parliament. The Earl of March,
nettled at this, demands redress, but being not heard, leaves the Court, and
with his Family and Friends goes into England, to the Lord Peircey, an utter
Enemy of the Dowglasses, wastes March, and especially depradating the lands of
the Dowglasses. The Scots declare the Earl of March, an enemy, and send to
demand him up of the English, who deny to surrender him. This made Hot-spur
Peircey and March, make several incursions into Scotland, till at last they
were repulsed at Linton-Bridge by the Dowglasses. 1400.
This was about the year four hundred, at which time War was denounced, and the
English entered with a great Army, took Haddington and Lies, and laid siege to
Edinburgh Castle, David the Kings Son being within it, which the new Governor,
ambitiously delaying to relieve, the English, satisfied with the terror they
brought, retired again. After which March did not cease his little incursions;
which to be revenged of, Douglas divided his forces into two Squadrons, the
first to Halyburton, who returned from Barmborough, with some prey; the second
and greater to Patrick Hepburn, who unwarily roving with his prey, was set on
by the English, and with all the youth of Lothian, put to the Sword. To revenge
this, Douglas gets together 10000. men, and passing beyond Newcastle, met with
young Peircey, etc. who at Homildon, a little village in Northumberland, in the
year 1401* gave him and his Party such a considerable defeat, as Scotland had
not received the like for a long time. This put Peircey in hopes to reduce all
beyond the Fryth, but the troubles at home withdrew him from that design. By
this Annabel the Queen dying, David her Son, who by her means had been
restrained, broke out into his natural disorders, and committed all kind of
Rapine and Luxury. Complaint being brought to his Father, he commits him to his
Brother the Governor (whose secret design being to root out the offspring) the
business was so ordered, as that the young man was shut up in Falkland Castle,
to be starved, which yet was for a while delayed, one woman thrusting in some
thin Oaten Cakes at a chink, and another giving him milk out of her papps
through a Trunck. But both these being discovered, the youth being forced to
tear his own members, dyed of a multiplied death; which murder being whispered
to the King, and the King enquiring after it, was so abused by the false
representations of his Brother, that grief and imprecations was all the Relief
he had left him, as being now retired sickly to Bote-Castle, and unable to
punish him. The King being solicitous of James his younger Son, is resolved by
the example of the good usage of David, to send him to Charles the sixth of
France, and having taken Shipping at the Basse, as he past by the Promontory of
Flamborough, whether forced by tempest, or that he was Seasick, he was forced
to land, taken by the English, and detained, notwithstanding the allegation of
a Truce of eight years, and his Fathers Letters. And though it came to the
Privy Council to be debated, yet his detention was carried in the Affirmative.
This advantage he had by his Captivity, that he was well and carefully
educated; but the News so struck his Father, that he had almost presently dyed,
but being carried into his Chamber, with voluntary abstinence and sorrow he
shortened his life, three days longer, viz. to the first of April 1406.

^e was a man of a goodly and a comely personage, one rather sit for the
tranquillity of a private life, than the agitations of Royalty, and indeed such
an one whose Reigns do little else but fill up Chronologies with the number of
their years.

Upon this the Parliament confirm Robert for Governor, a man of parts able
enough for that employment, but a man of such a violent and inveterate
ambition, as would sacrifise any thing to make it fuel to it self. Soon after
March and Douglas were reconciled.

In the year 1411. Donald the Islander, Lord of the Budae, enters Ross, as his
pretended inheritance, with ten thousand men, and easily reduced it, and
flushed by this, goes to Murrey, which being strengthless, he easily mastered,
and passed spoiling into Bogy, and approached Aberdeen. To stop this ^orrent,
Al^xander Earl of Mar, followed by most of the Nobility, met him at Harley, a
Village beyond Tey, where they joined in so bloody a Battle, and lost ^o many
Noble and Considerable Persons, that though Night parted them, neither could
pretend to the Victory. To this year does the University of Saint Andrews ow
its rise. The next ten years nothing was done between the Scotch and English;
Henry the V. succeeding his Father, and being wholly intent for France, there
was little to do between the two Nations, unless some small incursions. 1419.
In the year 1419. auxiliaries were sent into France, and employed in Turain*
but they making merry in the Easter-Holidaies, the Duke of Clarence, being
informed thereof, marches with a party to them; but notwithstanding finding a
stout repulse, was himself, with many of his Soldiers, slain. Whilst this
happens in France, in the year 1420. Robert the Governor dies, and Mordack his
Son, a Sot, was put in his place, which he was so fit for, that he could not
govern his three Sons, which was the cause of the Fathers and their ruins.
This Domestic Change called home the Forces employed in France, but things
being settled, others went in their places. Henry of England, hearing of the
Death of Clarence, made John Duke of BEDFORD his Viceroy, himself intending to
follow, and carry JAMES of Scotland along with him, the better either to winn
or suspend the hearts of the Scots; but it was in vain, for they said they
would not obey a man, that had not his own Liberty. Much action past afterward
between them and the English, but we hasten to close with the Author.

MORDACK, as it has been said, being Governor, having neglected all
Discipline at home, suffered his Sons to come to that petulancy, that they were
not only offensive to all the people, but with all disobedient to their Father,
who having a brave Faulcon, which his Son WALTER had often begged, but in vain,
he snatched it out of his Fathers hand, and wrung off her neck, which his
Father being angry at, Well, says he, Since I cannot govern thee, I will bring
one shall govern us both: And from that day he ceased not to further the
Redemption of the KING, which was after Ordered at an Assembly at Perth, and an
honorable Embassy sent into England, With which this Author begins his
History, and we conclude this petty Labor.

The succeeding part, which is to continue where he leaves, is expected to be
worthily performed by Mr. Saunderson, and the precedent by the ingenious and
learned Mr. Christopher Irwin.

But because we have made a part of promise to say somewhat of the Author, who
has left himself the memory of an ingenious man, by the things we have of his;
and for that it is but too common ingratitude, to leave us better acquainted
with the thoughts of men, than with their persons and qualities, many excellent
Spirits leaving only their Spiritual parts behind them, and little of their
Corporal but their names, we shall set down in brief what we understand
concerning him.

WILLIAM DRUMMOND was the Son of Sir JOHN DRUMMOND, and was born in the year
1585. and was brought up in Edinburgh, where having past through his course of
Philosophy, he took the Degree of Master of Arts, and in the year 1606. went
into FRANCE, to study the Laws, as a way to raise him to preferment at Court.
But his wit being of a greater delicacy, could not engage on the toyls and
difficulties of that study, as being wholly inclined to ease and retirement,
and a prosecution of the easier and softer entertainments of the Muses. In this
humor (for he was especially addicted to POETRY, having for that p^rpose
sufficiently mastered the GREEK, LATIN, FRENCH, SPANISH, and ITALIAN Tongues,
as may appear by all his things of that nature) lived retiredly with his
Brother-in-Law, till he was five and forty years of age, at which time he
unexspectedly married MARGARITE LOGANE, a younger Daughter of the House of
RESTELRIG.

He was not more retired in his Person than careless of his Fame, (all his
Poems being printed in loose sheets, and only addressed to his Friends.) Yet
though he retreated from all the World, yet he was still found out, for all
Learned, and men of Quality, gave him his due respect. As for his own
Contrymen, the Earl of STERLIN, LEOCHEM, and Doctor JOHNSON, Besides, though
he were little in ENGLAND, yet DANIEL, DRAYTON, and JOHNSON visit him by their
Letters, and testified their esteem of him. All that we have of him is this
Book, and his Poems, of which when they are to be published, you all have have
better information. In this manner be continued a harmless, and a virtuous
life, till in the year 1649. he was summoned to pay his great debt to Nature,
having left a little before his death, a quantity of books to the Library of
Edinburgh.

Having premised thus much to satisfy the Reader, as worthy to be foreknown,
though I have had little encouragement for my pains, I shall cease being
ingenious in another man's book, and attend the restitution of that without
which my self cannot subsist.

From my Chamber Ian. 24. 1654/5.
JAMES: I KING OF Scotes. Ano^: 1424.
R Gaywood fecit:


THE HISTORY OF THE Reign of James the first, KING of SCOTLAND.
THE Nobles of Scotland being wearied with the form of their present
Government; for though they had a King, they enjoyed not the happiness of his
sway, by his restraint afar off, under the power of a Stranger; some of them
were poss^ssed with hopes by the change of the Head, to find a change in the
Body of the State, and a flow of their ebbing Fortunes; the Churchmen and the
Ge^try having ever continued loyal and well-affected to the Lawful Heir of the
Crown; the Commons, men delighting in Novations, and ordinarily preferring
uncertainties, things unseen and to come, to what for the time they did hold
and enjoy; the Governor of the Kingdom also himself, i^ritated by the
misdemeanour of his Children, and forecasting the danger he might be plunged
into, if the States should purchase the recovery of their King, he not
complying to their Design: all unanimously and together determine without
longer prolongings to work the delivery of their Native Prince JAMES forth of
England where he had been detained eighteen years as a Prisoner.

They who were chosen and got Commission to negotiate his Liberty were
Archembald Earl of Dowglass, Son to Archem^ald Duke of Turrain, William Hay
Constable of the Realm, Alexander Irwin of Drumm Knight, Henry Lightoun Bishop
of Aberde^n, Alexander Cornwall Arch-Dean of Lothian.

These coming to London were graciously received by the State, and severally
entertained by King James* and so many friends as either his Alliance or
Virtues had acquired. After some few days stay desiring to have audience in
Counsel they were admitted, where Bishop Lightoun is said to have spoken to
this effect.

The respect and reverence which the Nation of the Scots carries toward all
(...) is all where known, but most that love and loyal^y which they have to the
sacred Persons of their own native Princes: for as Monarchy is the most ancient
form of Government, so have they ever esteemed it the best, it being more easy
to find one instructed and trained up in heroical virtues, than to find many.
And how well soever Governors and Vicegerents rule the Commonwealth, yet is
that Government but as the light of the Moon or stars in absence of the Sun,
and but representations of shadows for real Bodies. This has moved the three
estates of that Kingdom to direct us here unto you.

Our King these many years has been kept from us, upon just or unjust Grounds
we will not argue, that providence which has appointed every thing to its own
end, has done this for the best, both to you and us, and we are now to treat
with you for his Delivery. Beseec^ing you to remember that his Father of sacred
memory recommended him out of that general duty which one Prince owes to a^
other, to your Kings Protection* in hope of Sanctuary, and in request of aid
and comfort against secret, and therefore the more d^ngerous, Enemies. And to
confess the Truth, hitherto he has been more assured amongst you, than if he
had remained in his own Country, your favors being many ways extended
toward him: having in all liberal Sciences and virtues bro^ght him up. That
his abode with you seems rather to have been a remaining in an Academy, than
in any Captivity, and thus he had been lost if he had not been lost. Besides,
though we have the happiness to claim his Birth and Stemm, ye have the claim of
his Succession and Education, He ^eing now matched with the Royal Blood of
England in Marriage. Thus his Liberty which we entreat for, is a benefit to
your selves* and those Princes which shall claim the descent of his offspring.
For if it should fall forth (as what may not by the variable changes of
Kingdoms come to pass?) that this Prince by Usurpers and Rebels were
disgarnished of his own Crown, they are your Swords which should brandish, to
set him on his Royal throne. We expect that as ye have many w^ies rendered him
yours, ye will not refuse to engage Him yet more by his Liberty, which ^e must
acknowledge wholly and freely to receive from you: and by benefits and and love
to overcome a King, is more than by force of Arms. And since he was not your
Pri^oner by chance of War (having never raised Arms against you) but by way of
Protection detained here, and entertained, so ye will, respecting your ancient
honor and Generosity, send him freely back to his own; yet if it be so that ye
will have acknowledgem^nt, for what ye have bestowed on his education, the
distress of the present estate of his Subjects and Crown considered, We will
not stand upon tri^les of Money for the Redemption of a Prince above all price.

The Lords of the Council were diverse ways inclined to this Embassy, some
thought it not fit to dismiss him. For his remaining in England seemed the more
to assure the kingdom of Scotland unto them; having the King and his children
in their custody what dared they not enterprise, or not bring to pass? Or if
Scotland should plot any thing by way of Rebellion, the King having his party
within the Realm, by the assistance of the English would keep under the other
Factions; and thus the Estate by both being made weak, it would be a fair
breach for a Conquest, and the annexing that Kingdom to the Crown of England.

That he knew too much of the Estate and affairs of England to be sent away to
a Nation ever their Enemies. That being at liberty and amongst his own* he
might resent the injury of his long restraint.

Others of the Council thought it best to dismiss hi^, They had learned by
experience that the keeping of the King of Scots hindered no wai^s the Scots
from assisting the French, yea rather that it did exasperate their choler, and
make them in Revenge addict themselves wholly to the French: the Governor no
ways keeping to the English, and siding the French, upon whom to be revenged
they could find no surer way than to set at liberty the King, whose return of
necessity must needs change the face of the State, and trouble him. As for the
conquest of the Crown of Scotland, it was not at that time of such moment for
England, they having the most part of France in their Subjection, which was as
much, if not more, as they could hold, then it would prove a more harmless and
sure purchase to make Scotland theirs, by the Succession of Lady Ia^e^ of
Sommerset, than by war, the event whereof is ever doubtful and beyond any
assurance of Man. The Liberty of the King of Scots might prevent the increasing
strength of the Kings Enemies in France, and s^cure the Peace and tranquillity
of the Common wealth at home: King James being all English by education* If he
proved not of their Party, yet he must prove neutral to both the Kingdoms.

Henry the sixth, then King of England, being of under-age was governed by his
three Uncles of his Fathers side, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, who was made
Protector of his Person and Realm, John Duke of Bedford, who was established
Regent of France, and Thomas Duke of Excester. But Henry Beaufoord Cardinal,
Bishop of Winchester and Chancellor of England, a man eminent in Blood and
Riches, Uncle to the Lady Jane, in effect governed all. These gave way, rather
then approved that the King of Scots should be set at liberty and sent home.
And though they would have dismissed him freely, in respect of the Dowry of his
Queen, which was not delivered, having use of present moneys for the
maintenance of the Wars in France, and the more to cover the injustice of his
Captivity, they thought it expedient to set a Ransom upon him.

The Commissioners having met, it was declared, that for a sufficient sum of
moneys their King might return and enjoy his own Liberty; the one half to be
paid in hand, able Hostages remaining in England till the other half was fully
discharged. The Ransom agreed upon was four hundred thousand Merks, but by the
power of the Cardinal the third was discharged, for which he was long after
accused before the King by the Duke of Gloucester.

The Governor and Estate of Scotland, having known the sum laid upon them for
the Liberty of the King, though the hasty acquiring of it was grievous unto
them, preferring Glory and things necessary to matters of money* immediately
dispatched so much as could be gathered, together with a great many young
Noblemen of the Kingdom to remain Hostages for the rest; who (after the English
Writers) were David son to the Earl of Athole, Alexander Earl of Crawford, the
Lord Gordon, John de Lyndesay, Patrick* Son and Heir to Sir John Lion, David de
Ogleby, Sir William de Ruthen, Miles Graham, David Mowbray and William
Oliphant. These were honorably received entertained and kept. The Kings Father
in Law, the Earl of Somerset, the Cardinal his Brother, accompanied their N^ece
to the Borders, and there taking their leave returned back. The King with the
rest of their Train, received with many Troops of Nobles and Gentlemen, who
swarmed from all parts of the Kingdom to give him a dutiful welcome into his
Native soil, and themselves the contentment of beholding one they had so long
de^ired and expected, with loud acclamations and applauses of the Commons as he
held his Progress* on the Passion Week in Lent came to Edinburgh.

During his abode there, he assembled many of the Estates, listened to their
Petitions, prepared for the approaching Parliament, which had been summoned
before his coming. The Solemni^i^s of Easter finished, the King came with his
Queen to Perth, and from thence in the beginning of the month of May to Scone,
where the year 1424. by Mordock the Governor, Duke of Albany and Earl of Fife
(to whom that charge by custom of the Kingdom did appertain) and Henry Bishop
of S. Andrews self and his Queen, being according to the computation of the old
Scottish History, the hundredth and one King of Scotland.

At which time Sigismond, son to Charles the fourth, was Emperor of the West.
An. Dom. 1424.
John the seventh, the son of Andronicus of the East; Amurach the second, Great
Turk; Alphonsus the fifth, King of Spain; Charl^ the seventh, King of France;
Henry the sixth, King of England; and with Martine the fifth, many claimed the
Chair of St. Peter.

The ends in calling the Parliament were the Coronation of the King, to make
the People see a Princes authority was come where they had but lately a
Governors; the establishing a Peace amongst the Subjects, and taking away all
Factions, the exacting a Subsidy for the relief of the Hostages in England. To
this last, the Nobles held strong hand, by reason many of their Sons were
engaged. Here a general Tax was condescended up. on through the whole Realm, as
twelve pennies of the pound to be paid of all Lands, as well Spiritual as
Temporal, and four pennies of every Cow, Ox, Horse, for the space of two years
together. When the Commons had taken it grievously that the Subsidy, granted
by the States of the Kingdom in Parliament, was exacted mostly of them; after
the first Collection, the King pitying their poverty, remitted what was
unpayed, and until the Marriage of his Daughter, thereafter never exacted any
Subsidy of his Subjects. For he would gently strain milk, and not wring blood
from the breast of his Country, rendering the disposure thereof, chaste,
sincere and pure for expenses necessary and profitable, not for profusions,
which neither afford contentment nor reputation; for money is both the nerves
which give motion and veins, which entertain life in a State. Amongst others
whom the King honored, Alexander, second Son to Duke Mordock, was dubbed
Knight.

The Parliament dissolving, the King came from Perth to Edinburgh, where having
assembled all the present Officers, and such who had born Authority in the
State during the time of Duke Robert, and Duke Mordock, especially those whose
charg^ concerned the Rents of the Crown, he understood by their accounts, that
the most part of all the Rents, Revenues and Land^ pertaining to the Crown,
were wasted, alienated and put away, or then by the Governors bestowed on their
friends and followers, the Customs of Towns and Buroughs only excepted. ^his a
little incensed his indig^ation, yet did (...) ^mother and put a fair
countenance on his passion, s^eming to slight what he most cared for: occasion
thereafter no sooner served when he began to countenance and give way to
Promoters and Informers (necessary though dangerous Instruments of State, which
many good Princes have been content to maintain, and such who were not bad
never denied to hear, but using them no longer then they were necessary for
their ends) to rip up secr^t and hidden c^imes, wrongs suffered, or committed
during the time of his detension in England. He received the complaints of the
Churchmen, Country Gentlemen, Merchants against all those who had either
wronged them or the State, and would have the causes of all Accusers to be
heard and examined: Here many to obtain the favor of the Prince, accused
others.

Upon pregnant accusations Walter Stuart one of the Sons of Duke Mordock was
Arrested and sent to the Bass, to be close kept; so was Malcolm Fleming of
Cammernauld and Thomas Foyd of Kilmarnock committed to Ward in Dalkieth. Not
long after (the Nobili^y interceding) Malcolm and Thomas, goods being restored
which they had taken wrongfully, and Fin^^ laid upon them for their Offense,
promising to satisfy all whom they had wronged, were pardoned all faults, and
then set at Liberty.

The King by listening to Promoters, came to the knowledge of many great
insolences committed by sundry of his Nobles: which as it bred hatred in him,
so fear in them, and both appeared to study a Novation; They for their own
safety, He to vindicate Justice and his Authority. The Duke had highly resented
the committing of his Son, as had his Father in Law the Earl of Lennox. The
Malcontents being many, if they could have swayed in one body as they came to
be of one mind* threatened no small matter. The King from the intelligence of
close Meetings, secret Leagues, some Plots of his Nobles* began to forecast an
apparent storm in the State, and danger to his own Person, whereupon (being
both courageous and wise) ^e proclaims again a Parliament at Perth, where the
three Estates being assembled in his Throne of Majesty, he spoke in this manner;

I have learned from my tender years that Royalty consisteh not so much in a
Chair of State, as in such actions which do well become a Prince. What mine
have been since my coming Home and Government among you, I take first God, and
then your s^lves for witn^sses. I^ all of them be not agreeable to you all, and
if any rigorous dealing be used against some, Let him who is touched lay aside
his particular, and look to the settling of Justice in the State, and public
Good of the whole Kingdom, and he shall find his sufferings tolerable, perhaps
nec^ssary, and according to the time deserved. I have endeavored to take away
all Discords, abolish Factions, Suppress Oppression, as no Foreign Power has
attempted ought against you hitherto, so that ye should not endeavor ought one
against another, nor any thing against the weal public and Sovereignty. Slow
have I been in punishing injuries done to my self, but can hardly pardon such
as are done to the Commonwealth, for this have I called this Parliament, let
rapine and out^rage no more be heard of, but every man recall himself to a civil
and regular form of life, especially you (my Nobles) think virtue and civility
true Nobility, that to be accounted noblest which is best, and that a man's own
worth begets true glory. By these and the obedience to their Princes, your
ancestor acquired what ye now enjoy, there is no stronger means to keep the
goods acquired from a Prince, than the same by which they were first purchased,
which is still obeying. Though by leagues, Factions, and the confounding of all
true Policy and Order of Government, Man may imagine he can shun the
Judicatories of Man, let none how great soever, conceive he can save his wrongs
unpunished from the Almighty hand of God. Ye must not hereafter count
Authority, honesty and virtue idle names, nor reckon that right which ye may
winn or hold by dint of Sword. For me, I will behave my self in my proceedings
as I must answer to God, and for you my Subjects do so ye shall an^swer to God
first, and after to your Prince whom God has set over you.

No man's Greatness shall appall me in doing right, nor the meaness of any make
him so contemptible that I shall not give ear to his grievance; for I will
strive to do justice on Oppressors, and support the innocent to my uttermost.

Here he easily found the power which the Presence of a Prince has over
Subjects; for having confirmed the minds of the Parliament, a mutual oath
passed between him and his Subjects; The King swore if any made war against
Scotland, or went about to overthrow the ancient Laws of the Kingdom, to resist
and invade him with all his power; The Estates swore if any by open Rebellion
should revolt or conspire against the King, or be found to be the Authors of
Factions and Novations, they should assist and side the King with all their
forces, after what manner he should command. A Solemn Act was made that none of
the Subjects should bind up a league together.

The King the more to assure the Clergy unto him, swore to defend the liberties
of the Church, making an Act that all Church lands unjustly detained from them,
during the time of his Captivity should be restored unto them.

The Body of the Estate holding good for the King, Mordech Duke of Albany with
his Sons Walter and Alexander were presently arrested and committed: as were
likewise D^ncan Earl of Lennox, and Ro^^rt Graham (a Man that dared give
attempt upon those things which no honest man ever could think) they were sent
to Faulkland, but the Duke to Carlaverock. Archembald Earl of Dowglass* with
William Earl of A^guss the Kings Sisters son, George Earl of March, Walter
Oguyl^uy were committed, but after set at liberty. Adam Hepburn of Haylles,
Thomas Hay of Yeaster, with others were sent to the Castle of St. Andrews. That
same day the Duke was committed, the King seized on his Castles of Fa^lkland in
F^fe, and Down in Monteeth, out of which he removed the Duchess to Tantallon
in Lothian. James the youngest Son of the Duke, whom former carriage and
harmless behavior had exempted from all suspicion of Treache^y after the
committing of his Father and Friends, whether of ^ youthful insolency, or
d^sperate rage, resolving to do and suffer all extremities, or that he was
contemned, accompanied with a number of outlaws, and Mountainers on the
Holy^rood Day called the invention of the Cross, came to the Town of
Dumbartoun, set it on fire, surprised there John Stuart of Dondonald surnamed
the Red, Uncle to the King, slew him with thirty others; after which cruelty
advising with fear and despair he fled into Ireland where he dyed. The Wife of
Walter Stuart his Brother, with her two sons Andrew and Alexander, with Arthur
a base born, hasted with him, where they remained till the reign of King James
the third.

The barbarous fierceness of James highly incensed the King against his Father
and race* diverted the cu^^^nt of his Clem^ncy; for when he thought by ^entle
incare (...) to h^ve restrained their malice, now he finds that that deaf
Tyran^ the Law can only secure himself and bring rest to his Subjects Whereupon
the year following he calls a Parliament at Ster^^^g, where the esta^es
assembling, the Duke with his two Sons and Father-in^law the Earl of Lennox
(accusations being engrossed* and arti^^es exhibited against them out of the
^cts of former times, of what had been done unjustly, cru^lly or amiss during
the Kings captivity) were presented, arraigned, and condemned: Walter Earl of
Athole being Judge, to whom were adjoined many noble men and Barons.

That same day on which their fatal sentence was pronounced* the two young men
Walter Stuart and Alexander Sons to the Duke, were taken forth to the Hill
which arises against the Castle of Sterling, and had their heads cut off. The
day following Mordoch Duke of Albanie late Governor, with Duncane Lennox Earl
of Lennox was beheaded.

The deaths of these Noblemen, were so far from breeding any distaste in the
common People, that out of their depraved disposition and envy against their
betters, they flowted at their fall, reproached their insolencyes, delighted in
their execution: and as much without reason railed on them when they were dead,
as they had flattered them being alive.

Whether by the wisdom of the King it has fallen out, who caused abolish the
Indictment (being against persons so near unto him in blood) or bluntness of
those times, which thought such clear evidences needed no Records, the
particulars of the Attaindor of these great men are swallowed up in dark
oblivion.

Moved at the Imprisonment of his Son, did Mordoch with Lennox (hating him whom
they had wronged) attempt against the Kings person, and that same very Treason
which afterward had success, was it then between the plot, and the execution
surprised, and in the very head cut off* The Earl of Athol, a man whose desires
were both extremly wicked unbounded, was a great actor in this Tragedy.

Did the King, standing in fear of their extraordinary greatness, bend his eyes
upon the disposition of the Offenders, squaring their actions by the rule of
their intentions, and weighing what, not how far they did offend? for Princes
quickly free themselves from their very shadows in matter of jealousy of
State. And they have great reason to prevent such crimes which cannot be
punished when they are committed, nor should they expect to amend a mischief
when the Criminals are become Masters of their Judges.

People believe not that any conjure against a Prince, till they find the
Treason to have taken effect, and distrust the Plot till they see him dead. But
the Death of such who are suspected to be the Authors of disorders in a
Commonwealth, spares an infinite number of lives, and much civil blood when
they are first surprised, neither are too strict circumstances of Law to be
observed when a small delay may abolish all observing of order and Laws.

The Duke to raise his own reputation to the disadvantage of the King with all
secrecy of his intentions, had procured himself a vast Authority with the
Nobles, by a semblance of liberality wasting the Patrimony of the Crown, as
remitting Treasons, restoring again Lands annexed to the Crown. He had studied
so conciliate to him the minds of the Commons, that the desire of a King did
not much touch them, using such moderation in his proceedings that his
Government seemed unto many not only tolerable but desirable.

He had essayed to draw the Earl of Dowglass, and had drawn the Earl of March,
to enter into a League with him, and these Noblemen then in the Castle of St.
Andrews, divided the Nobility and made them break their Allegiance to the King.
Upon which attempt it seems that that Act of this Kings second Parliament was
made. That no Subjects should l^ague themselves together.

The King esteemed all that Government of Robert and Mordock to be an (...) of
the Crown, and feared the like thereafter.

His Son James had burnt Dumbarton, and treacherously killed the Kings Uncle,
which was not done without his knowledge, it not C^unsel.

Though he relieved the King of his Captivity, he suffered him to remain very
long a Prisoner; n^i^her did he practice his deliverance till he perceived the
whole States of the Kingdom resolved to call him Home, and was compelled by the
injuries of his own Children.

To exasperate new injuries by old rancours, his Father Robert spurred by
Ambition, had famished to death the Kings Brother David in the Castle of
Faulkland, to escape whose Tyranny, the King yet a child was committed to the
protection of stranger Princes. What ever the particulars of their accusations
have been, it is above the possi^i^ity of any Governor, or Man in eminent place
and authority so to carry himself, but a discontented Prince, if he will set
him to a trial, shall bring some one or other of his actions to whi^l him
within compass of Justice. Thus the imprecation of Robert the third took effect
upon the race of Robert the Governor; for after the death of the Duke of
Rot^esay* he is said to have cursed him most deadly, praying as he had slain
his Brothers Son, and filled their house with blood, so God would punish him*
his Stock and P^sterity. There is no^ any wickedn^ss, which bears not its
punishment and repentance at the last, if we can have ^a^ience to attend the
last act of those T^agedies played on this Theater of the World. By the
Attaindor of the Duke, the (...) of Fi^e* Monteith, and Lennox were div^lved to
the Crown* The C^stle of Inch^Merin in Loch-Lommond which h^d a while been kept
good for James* who fl^d into Ireland, by John Montgomery and Humphrey
Cunningham was brought to the obedience of the King.

When the Lords and Gentlemen who were in Prisons, attending the King^
pleasure, understood what necessary justice had been executed upon the Duke and
his Sons, they were g^i^vo^sly perplexed; yet the King, like a wise Physician,
would take no more blood then might take away the disease and all further
causes of Faction. For within twelve months thereafter he set them all at
Liberty* and received them in his wonted favor, upon promise of their loyal
demeanor, and dutiful obedience in time to come. But being thus freely
discharged, the conce it was taken that Mordocks head and his sons, with
Lennoxes was only the aim, and that they were used but as a Countenance of
State to dazl^ the eyes of the People.

The Wars continuing between the English and the French, the one to keep what
he was in possession of the other to reobtain what he had lost: Charles the
seventh, a wise and victorious Prince, knowing the friendship of Sc^tland to be
of no small importance to any that would fight against the English, the flower
and strength of the Scottish Soldiers which had followed the French Wars being
then blasted and spent, sends John Stu^rt of Darnley, Marshal of a Garrison
of Ho^semen, with the Earl of Dowglass (as the French write) then Marshal of
France, to Scotland, to have a fresh supply of Men of Arms, and Renauld of
Charteres Archbishop of Rheymes, (who there had Crowned his Master, and was
Chancellor of France) to renew the ancient League between the French and
Scots. But the main business about which the Archbishop came, was the
trafficking of a Marriage between Lewis the Daulphine, though then very young,
with Margaret Daughter to King James. This Match the ^nglish had either
neglected or contemned, which afterward ^hey sued for. The renewing of the old
League and Amity between the two Nations was easily condescended unto, it being
but a witness to the world of their mutual kindness. The chief Articles of
which were;

The War or Injury, moved or done by the English men to one of the said
Nations, to be as Common-wrong to both.

If the English men make War on the French Nation, then the Scots at the costs
and charges of the French King, shall minister to them succors.

Likewise if the Scots be molested by the English Wars, the French Nation
having their charges allowed, shall be to them Ayders and Assisters.

That none of both Nations shall either contract or make Peace with the Realm
of England, without the consent and agreement of the other.

The Marriage being found commodious for both Nations, was likewise with great
contentment agreed upon, and concluded; fresh recruits of Soldiers were
Ievied, and dispatched with the Ambassador to France.

The South and Champion parts of Scotland brought under obedience, and a
peaceful Government, the King will have the remotest Countries of his Kingdom,
even those blocked up and ba^icadoed by the snowy Clifts of Grantsben, to
acknowledge his Justice. The wildeness of the soil had made the Inhabi^ants
there more fierce then Fierceness it self, and let them out to all unlawful
Riots and Rapines. To restrain their insolent humors and bring them within
compass of Civility in the year 1426. he caused repair the Castle of Innerness,
which is situated in the uttermost borders of Murray, and by their incursions
which had been turned desolate, hither some years after comes he in person
and keeps open Court, that being near the evil he might have the better means
to provide for and consider it. But he seemed to have arrived in some Territory
of the Scythians, having known and found things which none did nor dared relate
unto him* for he had learned that not many miles of, th^re were men some of
which had one thousand, some two thousand Robbers at their call, who were
accustomed to drive preys from the more civil Neighbors and Borders, pilling
and spoiling, poluting and ravishing without any difference of right or wrong,
holy or profane, but only following their ravenous and insolent humors. On
the qui^ter sort they set Tribute, others they compel to Minister to them
sustenance and necessa^ies: The God, Prince, Law which they obey are their
barbarous Ch^iftains, amongst which he is thought the best who d^oth most
transcend in Villainy.

The King seemed to give small faith to these relations, entertaining kindly and
feasting from all parts* all such who daig^^^d to see him, mostly those who
were the Chiefs and (...) of the Families in these bounds, by whose (...) did
guard came freely to Court, an^ (...) guilty by fair promises and hopes of the
Kings cl^^nency (...) themselves. Others, though most re^ractory and unwilling
at first, that they might not seem out of the fashion of their Companions, and
appear suspect, resorted thither* Thi^king these Offices might be interpreted
to proceed of good will and obedience, which were done of emulation. Forty of
these Leaders and Chiefs, meeting at once and being togethe^ within the
enclosure of the Castle Walls, were surprised and committed to close Prisons.
Some days after. two whose wickedness was thoroughly known, Alexander Mack-Rore
or Mackrarey and John Mackearture were hanged. James Cambell for the murder of
John of the Isles (renownd amongst (...) own) was beheaded. The rest upon hope
of further Try^^^ were committed to Prisons, of which for example and (...) to
others many were executed, the remains in peaceful m^nner sent home, the King
having graciously exhorted them to a life according to the Law of God and Man.

Alexander of the Isles Earl of Ross, being taken in this (...) was brought by
the King to Perth, where he was acc^sed of oppression, and many barbarous
cruelties were proved against him: yet such was the Kings clemency, he was only
some few days commitied, and after lovely advice at the Council ^Table, rather
to obey his Prince than render himself Chief^tain of Thievish Troops, he was
freely dismissed, but benefits oblige not ignoble Minds, and mercy shown to a
fierce and obstinate nature disgraceth the beauty of the clemency of a Prince;
for no sooner was he returned to his own Territories where interpreting
imprisonment a dishonor and sh^me to a Man of his Power and Qual^ties, and
telling a promise made b^ one imprisoned by the Judgment of Lawyers themselves
was noth^ng worth, he gathered together a Rabble of Outlaws and Mountainers,
came toward the Town of I^nerness, which peaceable he entered and was
courteously received, having before dispersed his men among the Fenns and Hills
toward the West, they, so soon as Night had brough^ the inhabitants to rest,
spoiled them and set their houses on fire. And because the Castle was the place
in which he had been surprised, he besieged it with a thousand ^ewd fellows
practiced in daily depredations and Robbe^ies.

At the noise of this Cruelty the Gentlemen of the Neighboring Shires from all
quarters assemble themselves for the defense of their Friends, the King li^teth
sp^^dy pr^par^tions at the approach of which the Clans, Wha^t^nes and Camerones
with other Thieving Troops disp^rsed themselves and fled into their lurking
holes. Alexander aban^oned of their forces wi^h so many as he could keep
togethe^ fl^d into Lockquhabarre, from thence passed to the Isl^s (...) to go
to Ir^land, but things answered not his expectation, for by his Spy fining
that he was waylaid, and that numbers of people, (a prize being set upon his
head) in all places labour^d to surprise him: when he had long continued
desolate, and a vagabond, at last he began to intercede with his Friends at
Court for Mercy to him from the King. Sundry tempt the Kings Clemency, but he
will not promise nor assure them of any fav^^r before Alexander in person as
Supplyant render himself and his estate to his disposure. Thus finding no
escape, and destitute of all help he was imboldned to come p^ivately to
Edinbrough; there on Easter day wrapped in a mourning Garment, and concealed in
the dragg of the multitude, the King being in the Church of the Holy-rood at
divine Service* he fell prostrate at his knees, b^seeching him for grace, which
at the request of the Queen and other Assisters he obtained. His life and
private estate was granted him, but that he should do no more harm, and be
reduced to a more modest behavior, William Dowglass earl of Anguss was
appointed to take him in custody, and that within the Castle of Tantallon! his
Mother Euphem Daughter to Walter Lesty sometime earl of Ross a Mannish
implacable woman, who had solicited and raised her Son to all that mischief,
was committed to the Isle to S. Colm.

Donald Balloch, Cousin germain to Alexander Lord of the Isles, a man of a
h^ughty mind, resenting the Kings proceeding against his cousin raised a great
number of Outlaws and Robbers, and invaded Lochquhaber, omitting no cruelty,
which enraged Savages use to commit. Alexander Stuart, Earl of Mar, and Alane
Earl of Caithness, with such numbers of People as they could in haste raise,
came to defend the Country against the incursions of these Highland men, and
rencountred them at Inverlochty, where by an overweening opinion of Victory,
which easily deceives young Soldiers, Imagining they went to fight with
untrained, raw Thieves, who would never abide their march, and misregard of
martial Discipline, Allan was slain* and Alexander Earl of Mar discomfited,
and Balloch insolent of his Victory, with a great Booty returned to the Isl^s.
The King at the Rumor of this disaster in all celerity with a great Army came
to Dunstaffage, intending from that to pass to the Isles, which when the Clans
and other chief men understood, turning their defense into submission, they
came in haste to Dunstaffage, and humbly begged pardon: laying the fault of the
whole Rebellion on Balloch, and some adventuring Thieves, many of which Balloch
had pressed to that mischief against their minds: the King finding extreme
rigor at that time a cure unseasonable, taking their oath of fidelity, and
that they should pursue Bolloch and his followers accepted them in his favor,
only transporting some of the most factious along with him. They in few days,
to seem worthy of the Kings mercy, surprised a great number of them, three
hundred of which died all on Gibbets; and punishment had taken away a much
greater number, had he not considered that there is no man so miserable, who is
not a member of the State.

The King, Lest hope of Impunity might cherish Rebellion, resolves to find
Balloch, and hearing he lurked in Ireland in the (...) of one named Odo, he
sends to have him delivered; Odo either out of fear of the Kings displeasure,
or hope of rewar^s, seizes on him; and suspecting if he sent him alive, he
might by power or stratagem slight his Convoy, chopped off his head, and sent
it to King James, then remaining at Sterling.

The Clans, Whattons, and Camerons, spairing the Magistra^es sword, yet
executing Justice by mutual slaughters one of an other, had rendered the North
very peaceable of that scum of Thieves: some Chieftains were shut up in fast
Prisons, among which two most eminent in all mischiefs, hating mortally others,
and hated of all good men, Angus Duff of StrathN(...)* and Angus Murrey, these
the King out of Policy of State let out and set at liberty, of purpose that
they might be thrust forward into a greater danger. Returning to their wild
countries, Duff nothing respecting the Kings clemency, accompanied with many
Thieves and Robbers, drives a great prey of cattle and other spoils from the
Confines of Murrey and Caithness* which to recover, Angus Murrey, that he might
attempt something worthy of his life and liberty, follows with a great power
of like Soldiers; having now Authority to justify his revenge on a guilty
enemy, he overtaketh Duff near unto Strath-Naverne; There strongly is it
fought, neither of the parties being inferior to other in number, cruelty, or
despair. This conflict continued so fierce and eagar, that of both sides there
remained scarce twelve persons alive, and those so wounded that Justice had not
whom to pursue. An overthrow delightful and commodious for the peace and quiet
of all the honest and virtuous Subjects of these Countries.

These many executions nothing appalled one Mac-Donald* born in Ross, a Thief
flesht in all murders, mischievous without mercy, equally greedy of blood and
spoil, who by Robberies had acquired great riches. Amongst other cruelties, he
is said to have naild horse shoes to the soles of a Widow, because in her grief
she had sworn in haste to report his wickedness to the King. Being brought to
Perth by men of his own qualities, with twelve of his Associates, the King
caused them in like manner to be shod as they served the woman; and when three
days, for a spectacle to the people, they had been hurryed along the Town, his
Companions were Gibbeted, and he made shorter by the head.

Gross enormities cut a way, factions repressed, the King makes a Progress
throughout all the parts of his Realm, doing Justice upon all sorts of
Malefactors; neither did Pardons granted by the late Governor avail, it being
alleged, that they expired by his death; and though small faults might have
been passed by such remissions, yet horrible and crying crimes were not within
the compass of such authority. Whilst he thus continues in the administration
of Justice, the favorable eye of Providence looks upon him, and in the year
1430. in the month of October* Queen Jane is delivered of two sons at
Holy-Road-House, Alexander and James; the one deceased in his infancy, the
other succeeded to his Father and was King. To highten the joy of his people,
and diffuse it universally, many prisoners are set at liberty, amongst which
were Archibald Earl of Dowglass, Sir Gilbert Kennedie* the Kings Sister sons;
the Earl had been kept in Loc^leavin* the other in Sterling. They had been
committed rather upon suspicion of the times, then men; having spoken too
freely against the present Government; Alexander Earl of Ross was also set at
liberty. And that the King intended a real and sincere reconciliation, the Earl
of Dowglass was made Parent to his Children at the Font; at this solemnity
fifty Knights were Dubbed, the first of which was William Douglas, son to the
Earl, who after succe^ded to his Father in the Earldom of Douglas.

A sweet calm diffu^ing it self through every corner of the Realm, the King
imagining the rest of his Reign to be but the enjoying of a Crown, sets his
thoughts wholly to the works of Peace. Many unreasonable Customs (which were
become to the vulgar, Laws) had many years continued in his Kingdom; these he
will either have abolished or amended; To this effect, he selecteth persons
commended for wisdom, gravity and uprightness of life through his Realm, to pry
into all abuses, here and determine of all sorts, of quarrels and suits, if any
were brought unto them, where of the ordinary Judges, either for fear dared
not, or power of stronger could not, or for ^atred or favor would not give any
perfect Judgment. To them he gave full Authority to make Inquisition of the
breach of poenal Statutes; some hereby were punished by Fines, others in their
Lives; he took away the deceit which had been occasioned by variety of
measures; for this end certain Iron measures were appointed to be made, unto
which the rest should be conform and like; before his Reign not only in every
Town and Shire, but in every Manor and House different measures were current,
which abuse he abolished by Parliament.

The roughness of the times, and perpetual wars and troubles of his Ancestors
had near taken away the Arts and Handycrafts, and turned the Sciences
contemptible, especially since the Reign of Alexander third. The Commons by the
manifold changes and miseries of the Age affecting Barbarity, the Nobles making
Arms their whole study and care; to the further advancement of the
Commonwealth, and that his Subjects might have occasion to avoid sloth and
idleness, the King from the Neighbor Continent, and from England drew unto him
the best Artizans and Manufactors, whom either large privileges or moneys
could entice and oblige. Of which such a fair number came* and were so
graciously received, that they forgot their Native Countries, and here made
their perpetual abode. And what till this day Scotland enjoys of them, owe
all their beginning to these Times. Schools of learning were sounded, to which
great Liberties and privileges were granted, the King well knowing, that what
ever is excellent in any Estate, from them had beinning and feed, and that
there is no better means to sweeten and same the wild nature of Men the^ to
busy their spirits with peaceful and sedentary Exercises; rude and untrained
minds being inclinable of themselves to tumult and sedition. To make a
necessity of learning, he made an Act that none of the Nobility should succeed
to their Ancestors Heritage, except they had some taste of the Civil Law or
practice of the Country-Customs, but this after was by them abolished.

Many famous men in all Sciences from the Noblest Universities of Christendom
came hither, as to the Sanctuary of the M^ses, where often the King himself in
person graced their Lessons, and when great matters did not withdraw him, was
Umpire to their harmless Conflicts. Being himself religious, he advanced Men
learned and of good life to eminent places in the Church, and that the best
deservers might be discerned he distinguished the learned in degrees, Making a
Law that none should enjoy the room of a Cannon in any Cathedral Church, unless
he were Batchelour in Divinity, or at the least of the Cannon Law. Though he
challenged King David and named him a grievous Saint to the Crown, for
dilapidating so much R^nt in extraordinary Donations to the Church, yet with
great cost and magnificence ^he founded the Convent of Charters in Perth, and
bestowed fair Revenues upon it: The excellent skill which he had in Music and
delight in Poesy made him affect Quiristers, and he was the first that erected
in his own Chapels, and the Cathedral Churches of Scotland, Organs, being not
much known before his Reign to the Nation.

Peace has its own dangers no less than Wars, yea often such estat^s as have
increased their Dominions, and become mighty by wars, have found their ruin in
a luxurious peace: Men by a v^luptuous life becoming less sensible of tiue
honor. The Court, and by that example the Country, was become too soft and
delicate, superfluous in all delights and pleasures. Masks, Banqueting,
gorgeous app^rel* revelli^g were not only licensed, but studied and admired:
Nothing did please what was not strange and far brought, Charity began to be
restrained, public magnificence falling in private Riot. What was wount to
entertain whole families, and a train of go^dly men, was now spent in dr^ssing
of some little rooms, and the womannish decking of the persons of some few
Hermophrodites.

To these the wife King had while given way, knowing that delicate soft times
were more easy to be governed, and a people given to mild arts, and a sweet
condition of life, than rough and barbarous, so they turned not altogether
womanized: and that it was an easy matter to bring them back again to their
old posture. At these abuses some of the feverer sort of the Clergy began to
caip, yet could they not challenge the Prince, who in the entertainment ofr his
own person, scarce exceeded the degree of any private Man, yea was often under
the Pomp and Majesty of a King: But the blemish of all this excess was laid on
the English, who by the Queen (their Country woman) with new guises daily
resorted hither, and turned new-fangle the Court. The King not only listened to
their plaints, but called a Parliament to satisfy their humors. Here Henry
Wardlaw Bishop of S. Andrews, highly aggravating the abuses and superfluities
of Court and Country, all disorders were pried intio, and Sta^u^es made
against them. They abolished r^ots of all sorts of Pearl (many Riv^rs in
Scotland affording them not only for use but for excess) only women were
permitted to wear a sunall Carkanet of them about their Necks; costly Furs and
Ermins were wholly forbidden, together with abuse of Gold and Silver lace.
Penalti^s were not only imposed upon the transgr^ssours, but on workmen which
should make of fell them: exc^ssive expense in banqueting was restrained, and
dainties banished from the Tables of Epicures, with Jeasters and Buffones. In
this year 1430. the first of June was a terrible Eclipse of the Sun at 3 of the
clock afternoon, the day turning black for the space of an half hour, as though
it had been Night; therefore it was after called or the Commons, The BLACK HOUR.

The as and greatest matter which busied the Kings thoughts, was, the
increasing of his Revenues, and bringing back the D^measn of the Crown: a work
no less dangerous than deep and diffi^il, and which at last procured him
greatest hatred. For till then smothered malice did never burst forth in open
flames. And though this diligence of the king concerned much the public weal,
yet such as were interessed by rendering what they had long possessed (though
without all reason) esteemed themselves highly wronged. The Pat^imony of the
Crown had been wasted and given away by the two Governors, to keep themselves
popular, and ^hun the envy of a factious Nobility; Thus the King had neither in
magnificence to maintain himself, nor bestow upon his friends or strangers.

He had advisedly perused all evidences and charters belonging to the Crown;
hereupon he recalls all such Lands as had been either alienated from it, or
wrongfully usurped

Together what was wont to beidly given away, as forfeitures, escheats, and
wards, were restrained to the Crown and kept to the King himself.

There remained upon considerations of increasing the Demesns of the Crown, the
Lands of the Earl of March, whose Father had rebelled against the Kings Father
Robert; though faults be personal, and not hereditary and the heirs of ancient
houses hold little of their last possessours, but of their Predecessors, those
the King seized on. The Earl proved by good evidences and writings brought
forth, his Father had been pardoned for that fault by the Regents of the
Kingdom; he was answered again, that it was not in the Regents power to pardon
an offense against the State, and that it was expressly provided by the Laws in
crimes of lose majesty that children should undergo punishment for their
Fathers transgressions, to the end that being thus heirs to their Fathers
ra^hness, as they are to their Goods and Lands, they should not at any time
with vast ambition in the haughty Pride of their own power, plot or practice to
shake and tear the Public Peace of the Prince and Country.

Thus was the remission by the Parliament declared void, and Earl George
himself committed to the Castle at Edenbrough. William Earl of Anguss Warden of
the Middle March, William Chreigh^oun Chancellor, Sir Adam Hepburn of Hailles
immediately received the Castle of Dumber, the keeping of which was given to
Sir Adam Hepburn.

The King not long after set Earl George at Liberty, and to save him from the
like dangers which were wont to befall his Predecessors (to fly into England
for every small cross and light displeasure at Court) he bestowed on him, as it
were in exchange, for these lands in the Marss, the Earldom of B^chan in the
North, with a yearly pension to be paid out of the Earl-dome of March, setting
the Tay and the Forth betwixt him and his too kind friends of England. Buchan
had fallen to the King by the decease of John who was Son to Robert the second
and Earl of Buchan, He was slain at Vernueill in France, with the Marshall
Duglass and left no lawful children after him to succeed. The Earldome of
Mar was incorporate also to the Demesne Royal by the decease of Alexander
Stuart Earl of Mar, who was natural Son to Alexander Stuart who was the Son
of Robert the second. He was Man of singular prowess, and in his youth followed
the wars under Philip Duke of Burgundy; he married Jane Daughter to the Earl
of Holland, and had greatly obliged his Country by transporting Stallions and
Mares hither out of Hungary, the Stood of which continued long after to his
Commendation and the commodity of the Kingdom.

The Earldom of Strathern was appropriated also to the Crown by the Decease of
David Stuart Earl of Strathern, Uncl^ to the King, who having but one only
Daughter (who was married to Patrick Graham a younger Brother of the Lord
Grahams) the Earldom being ^ailed to the Masculine Line was divolved again to
the Crown. Thus did King James succeed to three Brothers who were Sons to
Robert the second.

All Good men with these proceedings of the King were well pleased; for i^
Princes could keep their own, and that which justly bel^ngeth unto them, they
could not be urged to draw such extraordinary Subsidies from the blood, sweat,
and tears of their people, yet was this the Shelf on which this Prince
perished: for, many who were accustomed to be Copartners of such off-fallings,
began to storm and repine at his actions, but none was so implacable as Robert
Graham, Uncle and Tutor to Miles Graham, the son of Eupheme, daughter to David
Earl of Strathern. For plotting mischief, he began to rail, speak in high
terms, associate himself with others of his own mind. Notwithstanding that the
King Anno 1428. in September had bestowed on ^is Nephew the Lands and Earldom
of Monteeth in compensation of that of Strathern, to which he pretended right,
it being an appenage of the Crown.

About this time Ambassadors came into Scotland from Eri^us the King of
Denmark, requiring of King James the payment of a yearly Tribute, which was due
to him as King of Norway for the Western Isles, according to the Covenant and
Agreement made by Alexander the third* King of Scotland, and his Predecessor
Magnus, the son of Acho, then King of Norway; the Ambassador was honorably
received, and Sir William Creighton Chancellor, directed to go with him to
Denmark, who there renewed the old League between the Realms, settled
questionable matters, and confirmed a perfect amity and steadfast Peace

Ambassadors came also from Charles the French King, not only to confirm the
old Amity between Scotland and France, but for a better assurance thereof, to
have Margaret eldest Daughter to King James (already betrothed to Lewis the
Daulphin, who now was thirteen years of Age) delivered to them and convoyed to
France. The English foreknowing this Alliance, had before sent the Lord Scrope
with other Associates to Him in Embassage, to have the old League between the
French and the Scots dissolved, and to join the Kings Daughter in Marriage with
Henry the sixth their King; promising if the King would thereunto agree* and
join in League with them, that the Town and Castle of Berwick should be
delivered to the Power of the Scots, with all the Lands lyand between Tweed and
the Redcross, which when William the Conqueror granted Cumberland to the
Scots, marched England and Scotland, and is now a fragment of a Cross in
Richmond-Shire, near the Spittle on Sta^moore about which is nothing but a
wild desert.

Having Audience, the Lord Scrope spoke before the Counsel to this purpose:

[ I am directed hither by my Master and his Council, about a Business which
concerns the Honor and profit of the two Kingdoms above any other which can
be projected; and it is the establishing of a perpetual Peace and Concord
between them, and happily (when it shall please the higher Providence) their
uniting in one Body, under one Prince, one day. How vain the attempting of this
heretofore by Arms has proved, the world can but too well bear witness; the
many proofs of eithers valor against themselves having been but a lavish
effusion of humane Blood; the fairest way, easiest means to make enmities cease
and these ancient Quarrels, was begun Sir, in your person, by the happy
Marriage of the Daughter of John Duke of Sommerset, brother to King Henry the
fourth, and Son to the Duke of Lancaster; and prosperously has continued these
years past: Now that Peace may be lasting, and the affections and minds of the
two Nations soldered together, our Request is, that this Alliance may be again
renewed, by the Marriage of your eldest Daughter with our young King, a most
fitting and equal match. And in seeking of her, we crave but our own; She is
descended of our Royal Stem, and if again she be ingrafted in that stock out of
which she sprang, it is but natural. And you (my Lords) where can ye find a
Match more Honorable for both Nations? Where can ye find a better and more
profitable Friendship then ours? Are we not a people in habiting one Island,
have we not both one Language, are we not of like Habit and Fashion, of like
quality and condition of life, guarded and separated from the other World by
the great depths of the Ocean? What evil Customs have come into your Country by
your last Alliance with us? Nay what Civility, Policy, and laudable Fashions
(to the confusion of Barbarity) have not followed hereupon? By this the Glory
of both Realms will increase, either being sufficient not only to furnish
necessaries, but even all lawful and moderate contentments of life to support
others. Besides that, an assurance of Defense, Strength and Power to invade,
ease in undergoing public Charges will hereby follow.

We are not ignorant that your Lady is designed for France; but how long (alas)
will ye continue prodigal of your blood for the French? What have ye advantaged
your selves by your Alliance with France, save that they engage your bodies in
their Wars, and by conferring upon you unprofitable titles of honor, take from
you what is truly real? ye are reserved a Postern-gate, by which they may enter
England, diverting our Forces, and transporting the Stage of the War upon our
Borders. Learn to forget your French, or i^ ye be so enamoured with France,
Love her after our manner; Come take a share, be partakers of our Victories.
Are not our Forces being joined, sufficient to overcome, nay bring in chains
hither that King of Bruges, and make our selves Masters of his Continent?
France, never did so much good to Scotland in twenty years, as Scotland has
had loss by England for the love and cause of France in one. Are not your
wounds at Vernueil and Cravant yet bleeding, and all for the French? It has
been your valor, and not the French which heretofore empeached our conquest
and progress in France: were it not for your swords, we had made ere now the
loftiest tops of the Alps or Pyrenees bear our Trophies. Ye say ye reverence,
and cannot break your old league and confederation with that Kingdom (happy
Leagues, but woe to the keepers of them!) unhappy Scotland, and too too honest;
and the more unhappy for that thy honesty is the great cause of thy mishaps.
How long shall that old league (counted amongst the Fables of the Ancient
^alladines) make you waste your lives, goods, fortunes, and lose your better
Friends? The Genius of this Isle seems to cry unto us her Nurselings to stay
our cruel hands, no longer to be her desolation, and the wrack one of another;
not to pass over and neglect these fair occasions of mutual Alliances, which
will not only effectuate Truces and Leagues amongst our selves, but at last
bring a perpetual Peace and Union; for by interchange of Marriages (being
united) this Isle shall continue stronger by entertaining Peace and Amity, then
by all these Giant walls, Rampires of Mountains, and that huge ditch of Seas,
by which Nature has environed and fortified her. Now that ye may know how
dearly we esteem your Friendship and Alliance, whereas others go to take from
you, we will give you Roxburgh, Berwick, and all the lands between Tweed and
Redcross. If shadows prevail and prove stronger with you then essential reason,
and that ye disesteem our offer, losing this good occasion; we as Neighbors
and Friends entreat you, that ye do not uphold the French, now in the Sunset
of their Fortunes, and at their weakest; that ye would not shoulder this
falling Wall; but that ye would live quiet within your selves, keeping your own
in a Neutrality; receiving both sides, French and English in the way of
Friendship, neither side in the way of Faction.]

The French Ambassador spoke to this purpose. It seems strange to me that it
should be questioned and fall within the Circle of deliberation whether old,
ever true and assured Friends; or old, never trusted, and only Enemies, should
in an honorable suit be preferred: whether ye should stand to a Nation which
in your greatest calamities never abandoned you, or embrace and be carried away
with one which has ever sought your overthrow. The English sue for your
alliance and friendship, but it is to make you leave your old (...) and turn
the instruments of their ruin, and at last (...) yoke of bondage upon your
selves. The French sue for your (...) and alliance, both to support themselves
and hold servitude from (...) were not your friendship with France, their
power, policy and number had long ere these days over-turned your Realm; or
had France but shown her self an indifferent Arbitress, of the blows between
Scotland and England, ye had scarce till now kept your Name, less your
Liberties; can ye prove so ungrateful as not to supply them who supported you?
Can ye prove so unconstant, after so many glorious wounds received in the
defense of France, as cowardly to turn your backs upon her in her greatest
need, defacing all the Traces of your former fame and glory? with what
countenances could ye look upon those Scots, which at Vernueill and Cravant in
the Bed of honor left their Lives, if unrevenged ye should adhere and join
your selves to their Enemies and Killers? Now though ye would forsake the
French, at this time entangled in many difficulties, not regarding their well
being, nor be solicitous of their standing: at least be careful of your own.

It cannot subsist with your well and safety, to suffer a bordering Nation,
always at enmity with you, to arise to that height and power by such an
addition as is the Kingdom of France: so soon as a State has a Neighbor
strong enough and able to subdue it, it is no more to be esteemed a free
Estate. The English are already become so potent that no less than united
forces of Neighbor Kingdoms will serve to stop the current of their fortune.
Neglect not the certain love of the French, your often tried and ancient
friends for the uncertain friendship and within a little time, forgotton
Alliances of the English your late reconciled Enemies.

But it may be, after mutual marriages have one day joined your two Kingdoms in
one, they will seek no preheminency over your State, nor make thrall your
Kingdom, but be knit up with you in a perfect union: Do not small brooks lose
their Names when they commix their Streams with mighty Rivers, and are not
Rivers ingolfed when they mingle their waters with the Seas? Ye enjoy now a
kind of mixed Government (my Lords) not living under absolute Sovereignty; your
King proceeds with you more by Prayers and requests than by Precepts and
Commandments, and is rather your Head than Sovereign, as ruling a Nation not
conquered: But when ye shall be joined in a Body with that Kingdom which is
absolutely royal and purely Monarchical, having long suffered the Laws of a
Conqueror, ye shall find a change and a terrible transformation. The free
mannaging of your own affairs shall be taken from you; Laws, Magistracies,
Honors shall depend on them, the wealth of your Kingdom shall be transferred
to theirs; which to obey and prostrate your selves unto, if ye be found
stubborn, ye shall suffer as a Nation conquered, be redacted in a Province,
have Deputies and Governors set over you, Garrisons in your strongest holds
and Castles, and by a Calm of Peace and Union receive more fearful blows than
ye could have suffered by any Tempest of war; The miseries of a most lamentable
Servitude. What courtesy can ye exsp^ct at their hands, who contrary to all
divine and human Laws detained your King eighteen years prisoner, and besides
an exorbitant Ransom (as if he had been taken in a lawful war) did not without
Hostages send him home? We of France did never forsake you in your extremities,
and we expect ye will assist us with all your power. They are in suit of your
Daughter, but it is long after she was assured unto us; in claiming her we
claim but our own, this time past ye have only had the custody and education of
her, yet if they be so ambitious of your Alliance, God has blessed you with
more than this. But it is not that which they sue for, it is to make you
disclaim your Friends, hate those which love you, and love them which hate you:
and they are working upon you as upon a rude unpolisht people. They offer to
render you B^rwick and Roxbrough, these gifts of Enemies are to be feared; they
know it is in their own power to re-obtain them when they please.

As for that point wherein they would have you indifferent Spectators of the
blows, and that it shall be profitable for you not to meddle with this War,
ye are too near engaged; neither is there any thing can be more damm^geable
unto you; for, if ye be not of the party, ye may assure your selves that your
Country shall remain a Prey and Reward to the Conqueror, with content and
applause of the vanquished, who is not bound to succor those who refused to
assist and help him in his necessities. Prove firm and constant to us your
first Confederates, combine your forces with ours, and by the assistance of
that supreme providence who pittieth at last the oppressed, we have fair
certainties and true hopes to cut so much work abroad to the English, that they
shall do little or no harm to you at Home.

The King and Nobles though it seemed more profitable for the present time to
follow the English (weighing their offers) yet held it more advantageous and
sure for coming times, to follow the French, for if the English should make
conquest of France, the conquest of Scotland would scarce be one Months work
to their power? and for matter of alliance, God knows how little Princes regard
it, when occasion is offered to enlarge their power and Dominion. Thereupon
they declare they will not break the ancient League and Peace they have kept
with France.

The English Ambassadors denied of their suit, went from Pray^rs and Requests
to threatenings and menacings, and having friendship refused, denounced war. If
the King gave his Daughter to the French, that they, if they could, would
hinder her passage by Sea, having already a Fleet prepared to this effect, and
thus went away the English Ambassadors.

The King was so far from being moved by these threatenings, that imm^diate^^ he
made ready his Ships, and knowing more affairs to be brought to a good end and
finished by the opportunity occasions than force and power, with an able
Company of Mariners and Soldiers sets his Daughter to Sea.

The English fleet had waited upon her, but (Providence so appointing) she
escaped them, and they encountered a fleet of Spaniards keeping their course
toward the Netherlands. Them they beset with fourscore Vessels, commanding the
Ladies and all of their Company to be delivered unto them; when they would not
accept of friendly answers, they fall to handy blows, till in end by loss of
men and some Ships they understood their error: The Lady Margaret thus without
danger by the Western Seas arrived at Rochell, having for her convoy a whole
Colony of Gentle-women (the Histories say an hundred and forty went with her)
all of noble parentage, of which train were her five Sisters: from Rochel she
held her progress to Tours, there with an extraordinary Pomp, and magnificence
the 24. of June, Anno 1436. was she married to the Daulphin Lewis.

The King to defray the charges raised by transporting and marriage of his
Daughter (the French seeking with her small or no Dowry (these times preferring
parentage and beauty before Gold or riches) all that was craved being a supply
of Men of Arms for their Support against the English laid a Subsidy on his
Subjects, the one half of which being levied, and the people grudging and
repining at the exacting of the other half, (it being taken from men who lived
hardly in a barren soil) He caused render a part of it again and discharged the
remainder.

At this time by Sea and land the English in revenge of the refusal of the
offers of their Ambassadors began to use all Hostility against the Scots.
Henry Piercy of Northumberland invadeth the Country with four thousand men;
whether of his own Bravery, abhorring ease and idleness, or that he had a
Commission so to do, is uncertain, with him came Sir Henry Clyddesdale, Sir
John Ogle, Richard Peircy, and many men of choice and worth, the frontier
Garrisons invade all places near unto them. To resist these incursions William
Dowglass Earl of Anguss gets charge, a man resembling his Ancestors in all
virtues either of War or Peace, and the most eminent of his time: with him went
Adam Hepburne of Hails, Alexander Elphinstoun of Elphinstoun in Lothion, and
Alexander Ramsey of Dalhowsie, of all being four thousand strong. These
covetous of glory, besides the ancient quarrel of the two Nations, having the
particular emulations of the Names and Valor of their Ancestors to be spurs
unto them, make speedy journeys to have a proof of their virtue and courage.
The Lists of their meeting was Popperden, a place not far from Bramstoun,
Rhodam, Roseden, Eglinghame, all cheared with the stream of a small Brook,
named Brammish, which arising out of the Cheviot, loses its name in the ^ill,
as the Till after many windings disgorgeth it self in the Tweed. Adam Hepburn
and Alexander Elphinstoun led the Vanguard of the Scots; Sir Richard Piercy,
Sir John Ogle of the English; Alexander Ramsey and Henry Cliddisdail kept the
Rears; the two Generals road about the Armies, remembering them of their ancient
valor, the wrongs received, the justness of the Quarrel, the glory of the
Victory, the shame of the overthrow. No sooner were they come within distance
of joining when the sound of the Drums and Trumpets was out-noysed by the
shouts of the Assailants, who furiously ren-countred. The Guns being about this
time found out, were here first practiced between the Scots and the English in
an open field. When the fight with equal order had been long maintained on both
sides, now the Scots, then the English yielding ground, many of the Commanders
at length began to fall, most of the English. Then was the Piercy constrained
to be at once Commander and Soldier, but ere he could be heard some Companies
had turned their backs, among the thickest throngs of which breaking in, he
found so great disorder, that neither by Authority, Entreaty or Force he was
able to stay their flying. Thus distracted between the two courses of honor
and shame, he is hurried far from the place of Fight: And Victory declared her
self altogether for the Scots; which was not so great in the execution, as in
the death and captivity of some brave men. Of the Scots two hundred Gentlemen
and common Soldiers were slain, amongst which was Alexander Elphinstoun,
maintaining the Battle with his sword, voice and wounds, and two other Knights.
Of the English died, Sir Henry Cliddisdail, Sir John Ogle, Sir Richard Piercy,
with fifteen hundred Gentlemen and Common Soldiers, of which forty were
Knights, four hundred were taken Prisoners.

The King irritated by the way-laying of his Daughter, the invading of his
Borders, and encouraged not a little by this little smile of Fortun at
Popperden, it being more sure to prevent then repel dangers, and with the same
Policies to defend by which the Enemies offend, resolves by open wars to
invade England. He was also stirred unto this by his intelligence from his
friends in France, who had brought greater matters to pass then in so short a
time could have been expected; for concealed envy and old malice, bursting out
between Richard Duke of York, and Edmund Duke of Sommerset, Philip Duke of
Burgundy being entered in friendship with King Charles, the English began to be
daily losers, and were put out of Paris and many Towns of France. To this
effect King James having raised an Army comes to Roxburgh (a Place fatal to
his) and there besieges the Castle of Marchmond, which is Roxburgh, it was
valiantly defended by Sir Ralph Gray: but when he was come so near the end of
his labors that they within the Castle were driven to terms of Agreement and
conditions for giving up the Fort the Queen in great haste comes to the Camp,
representing to her Husband a Conspiracy, the greatness of the peril of which,
if it were not sp^edily prevented, should endanger his Estate, Person and Race.
Whether she had any inckling of the Conspiracy indeed, or contrived this to
divert his Forces from the Assault, and further harm of the English her Friends
and Countrymen, it is uncertain. The King who found his imagination wounded
upon this point, after many doubtful resolutions and conflicts in his thoughts,
raises the Siege, disbandeth the Army, and accompanied with some chosen Bands
of his most assured Fri^nds returns back, to provide for his own safety. A
strange resolution, to disband an Army for a tale of Treason, where could there
be greater safety for a King then in an Army? Yet have Conspiracies been often
in Camps, and in his own Time, Richard Earl of Cambridge, brother to Edward
Duke of York, Henry Lord Scroope, with Sir Thomas Gray, Knight, at the
instigation of the Daulphine of France, for a great sum of money conspired to
murder Henry the Fifth, King of England, in the midst of his Armies, if they
had not been surprised. The King feared all, because he had not yet heard the
names of any, but most the Army, by reason of the Nobility, many of which, who
liked not the present form of Government, were irritated against Him. Were the
Conspiracy a Rebellion, and in general by them all, they were ready in Arms to
maintain their factions, and if upon suspicion the King should attach any
(being secretly joined in a league) He could hardly have meddled with their
persons, without a Civil War, which in regard of his Engagement with England he
endeavored to spare; perplexed, pensive, sad, he comes to Perth, stays in
the Covent of the Dominicans, named the Blackfriars (a place not far from the
Town Wall) endeavoring so secretly as was possible to find out the
Conspiracy. But his close practicing was not unknown to the Conspirators, as
that there was more peril to resolve then execute a Treason, a distance of time
between the Plot and execution discovering and overthrowing the enterprise:
Hereupon they determine to hazard on the mischief, before trial or remedy could
be thought upon.

The Conspirators were Robert Graham, Uncle and Tutor to Miles Graham, Robert
Stuart* Nephew to Walter Earl of Athole, and one of the Kings sworn Domestics:
But he who gave motion to all, was the Earl of Athole himself, the Kings
Fathers Brother, whose quarrel was no less then a pretended title and claim to
the Crown; which he formed and alleged thus. His Brother David and he were
procreated by King Robert the second on his first wife Eupheme Ross daughter to
the Earl of Ross, and therefore ought and should have been preferred to the
succession of the Crown, before King John (named Robert) and all the Race of
Elizabeth Moor, who was but his second wife, and next them but Heirs to King
Robert the second.

They were the eldest sons of King Robert after he was King, John and Robert
being born when he was but in a private State, and Earl of Strathern; for it
would appear, that as a Son born after his Father has lost his Kingdom, is not
esteemed for the Son of a King, so neither he that is born before the Father be
a King. These reasons he thought sufficient, the King taken away, to set him in
the room of State. But considered not how sacred the name of King is to the
Scots Nation; how a Crown once worn quite takes away what defects soever: and
that it was not easy to divest a King in present possession of a Crown, who
had his right from his Father and Grandfather, with the Authority of a
Parliament, approving his Descent, and secluding all other; less came it in his
thought, that those children are legitimate, and lawful which cannot be thrust
back and rejected, without troubling the common Peace of the Country, and
opening Gates to Foreign Invasions, Domestical disturbances, and all
disorders, with an unsettled course of Succession: the Common error making the
Right or Law.

Athole animated by the Oracle of a Sooth-sayer of his Highland Country, who
had assured him he should be crowned in a Solemn Assembly before his Death,
never gave over his hopes of obtaining the Crown: and being inferior and weak
in power and faction to the other Brothers, to compass his designs he betaketh
himself to treacherous devices. It was not in his power to ruin so many at
once; for mischief required there should be distance between so many bloody
Acts, therefore be lays his course for the taking away of his kindred one by
another at leisure; he sows jealousies, entertaineth discords; maintains
factions amongst them; by his counsel David Duke of Rothesay, the Kings eldest
Brother, was famished in the Tower of Falkland, neither had James (then a
child) escaped his treachery, if far off in England he had not been preserved:
He persuaded the Earl of Fi^e, that, making out of the way the King his
brother, he should put the Crown on his own head: He trafficked the return of
King James, and he being come, he plotted the overthrow of Duke Mordock, by ^it
instrument for such a business, proving the Crimes laid against him in the
Attaindor, he himself sat Judge against him and his Children. Thus stirring one
of the Kinsemen against another, he so enfeebled the Race of Elizabeth Moore,
that of a numerous offspring there only remained James and his Son (a child
not yet six years of Age) upon whose Sepulchers building his designs, with a
small alteration of the State, he thought it an easy step to the Crown.

Robert Graham had been long imprisoned, at last released; but being a man
implacable once offended, and cruel, whom neither benefits could oblige, nor
dangers make wife, and enemy to Peace, Factious and Ambitious alike, by many
wicked Plots afterward, and Crimes against the Laws of the Country, driven to
an Out-lawry, and to live as banished, he had ever a male-talent against the
King since the adjudging of the Earldom of Strathern from his Nephew Miles.

Robert Stuart was very familiar with the King, and his access to his Chamber
and Person advanced the Enterprise: being a riotous young Man, gaping after
great matters, neither respecting Faith nor Fame, and daring attempt any thing
for the accomplishing of his own foolish hopes, and his Grandfathers ayms and
ambition. These having associated unto them the most audacious, whom either
fear of punishment for their misdeeds, or hopes of preferment by a change of
the Government, would plunge into any enterprise, in the Month of February, so
secretly as was possible, assembled together, where the Earl spoke to this
sense unto them.

These engagements which every one of you have to another, and which I have to
every one of you, founded on the strongest grounds of consanguinity,
friendship, interest of committed and received wrongs, move me freely here to
reveal my secret drifts, and discover the depths of my hidden purposes and
counsels.

The strange Tragedies which in the State and Government have been acted, since
the coming of this English man to the Crown, are to none of you unknown:
Mordock with his children has been beheaded, the Earl of Lennox his Father in
Law had that same end, the Nobility repine at the Government of their King, the
King is in jealousy of his Nobles, the Commons are in way of Rebellion* These
all have been the effects of my far-mining Policies. And hitherto they have
fallen forth as fortunately, as they were ingeniously plotted. For, what more
ingenious and cunning Stratagem could be projected, to decline the rank growth
of these Vsurp^rs, then to take them away by handles made of their own Timber?
And if there was any wrong in such proceedings, in small matters wrong must be
done, that justice and equity may be performed in great. My fear was (and yet
is) that the taking down of the Scaffold of Mordock should be the putting up of
ours: Crowns suffer no corrivals, the world knows, and he himself is conscious
to it, that the right and title of the Crown, by descent of blood from Robert
the second my Father, was in the person of David my Brother, and is justly
claimed now by me and our Nephew. As for an Act of Parliament confirming the
right of that other Race, and for oaths of Allegiance, no Parliamentary
Authority can take away Justice, and the Law of God: neither is an oath to be
observed when as it tends to the Suppression of truth and right; and though
for a time such Acts and oaths have prevailed, our designs having good Success
we shall have a Parliament approving our right, abolishing their pretensions,
and declaring them Usurpers. This one man and a child taken away (if we can
give the blow) the Kingdom must obey the Lawful Successor; against whom what
Subject will revolt, or who dare take arms? and here is more ^ear than danger.
But think there were, the only r^medie of emminent dangers is new dangers. It
was simplicity in him to think by small ben^fits that old injuries are
abolished and forgot, and that I should take patiently the title of Earl, when
I should have been King my self; by his tyrannizing justice, if he be not hated
he is not beloved, but become terrible to his people, who now through their
poverty and ^rievances affect a novation, and obey him not out of any
affection, but through necessity and fear, and now he also fears that some do
that to him which he has deserved.

Let us resolve his doubts, our ends are honor and revenge, our wills against
him all alike and one. The Heavens seem to conspire with us, having brought him
to disband his Army, and render himself in the wished place of our attempts;
and let us rather follow them and fortune, which favors great actions, than
virtue that preaches cowardly Patience; Remembering how fair glosses of valor
for the most part have been cast on the ^oulest deeds, and the might
Families have from them derived their honors, shame seldom or never following
Victory, however it be achieved and purchased. That Sovereignty at the first
was but a violent usurpation of the stronger over the weaker. How great
Enterprises must begin with danger, but end with rewards, that death should
rather be prevented than expected, and that it is more honorable to die than
prolong a life in misery, wandering in the scorn of other men's pride be resolute
in our Plot, put the enterprise in execution, have is the spirit of actions of
danger, the worst that can befall us is, since we cannot subsist he being
alive, that he be taken away whilst we run a hazard of death, which happens
to all men alike, with only the difference of Fame or Oblivion with the
Posterity, which arises of an evil action, as well of a good* if the action
and attempt be great, but let us not spend the time of execution in
deliberation.

Not long after when they had ponderated and digested the Design, Graham and
Stuart with their accomplices guided by Resolution, and guarded by the darkness
of the Night, came to the Black Friars of Pearth, and having the way made open
unto them entered the Gallery before the Kings Chamber Door, where they
attended some of their confederates, who should have stolen away the Bar, by
which means they might enter the Chamber, but before their coming Fortune
casts the occasion in their hands.

For Walter Stratoun one of the Kings Cupbearers came forth of the Chamber, and
finding armed men rushing rudely to force their entry, terrifyed with the
boldness of the fact, with a high voice gave the Alarm of Treason to his
Master. While they are working his death, a Maid of honor of the Name of
Dowglass got to the door* and es^aied to shut it, but for that the Bar was now
away which should have made it fast, she thrust her arm in the place where it
should have passed, but that easily broken, the Conspiratours rush in to the
Chamber, and slaying all such of the waiters as made defense (amongst which was
Patrick Dumbar Brother to George sometime Earl of March they at last stroke
down the King; whom, whilst the Queen by interposing her body sought to save
(being hardly pulled from him) she received two wounds, and he with twenty
eight, most toward the heart, was left dead.

Thus was King James the first who had so superabundantly deserved well of the
Commonwealth, Ann. Dom. 1436.
murdered the 21. of February in the end of the year 1436 the 44. of his age
when he had reigned 13. years.

This King was for the proportion and shape of his body of a middle stature,
thick and square, rather somewhat mean than tall, not such as is counted for
dainty, but for gracefulness and Majesty. His hair was abourn, a color
between white and red. He was of so strong and vigorous a constitution, that he
was able to endure all extraordinary extremities both of travail and want, and
surpassed for agility and nimbleness in any exercise his companions. He was of
so sharp and pregnant a wit that there was nothing wherein the commendation of
wit consisted or any shadow of the liberal arts did appear, that he had not
applied his mind unto: seeming rather born to Letters than instructed. He wrote
Verses both Latin and English, of which many yet are extant: He exercised all
Instruments of Music, and equalled the best Professors thereof. He had
studied all Philosophy, but most that which concerns Government; in which what
a Master he was the order which he established in such a confusion as he found
in the State does witness; and many old Laws commodiously renewed and amended,
others for the public good established. He was a great observer of religious
forms: easy for access, fair in speech and countenance, in behavior kind,
using sleep and meat to live, not for voluptuousness. He had good command over
his Passions, his desires never being above his reason, nor his hopes inferior
to his desires. Though he was much obliged to the gifts of Nature, yet was he
more to his good education and training in England. Scarce had he passed the
nineth year of his age when he was committed to the Sea to shun the Treasons of
his Uncle, and was surprised at Flambrough-head in Holderness. Windsor Castle
kept him a Prisoner, but by Commandment of King Henry he was so carefully
instructed that no Prince could have been better bred in the Schools of Europe.
What his valor was, the wa^s of France bear witness: for accompanying the King
of England there, he laid siege to the Town of Direx, and with such violence
and valor (says the English History) assaulted it for the space of six weeks,
that with main strength he compelled it to be rendered to his hands, and gave it
to King Henry. That commendation which was given him by that same King of
England, being recorded by their writers, proved prophetically true of him. For
the King remembering him of his benefits received, and promising him greater,
with free liberty to return to his own Country, if he could cause the Scots
who were adherent to the Daulphin of France to return to their native soil and
leave him; To this he answered, He was a Prisoner, had no possession of his
Realm that he was neither sworn to his Subjects, nor they by any Oath of
Allegiance bound to him; and though he were bound to them, and they to follow
his commandment he would foresee whether it were to him honorable, and to his
Realm honest, to leave their Old Friend of France in his extrem necessity
without aid or comfo^t. With this answer, though the King was not content, when
James went out of his presence, he is recorded to have said, Happy shall they
be which shall be subjects to a King endued with such wisdom of so tender
years of age. His severity in Justice was traduced by some under terms of
cruelty, but considering the Disorders of his Country, by the fierce nature of
the People over whom he ruled, who by often Rebellions did not only exasperate
him to some severity, but even constrain him to keep them in aw his rigor was
rather an effect of necessity than of his natural disposition. No Prince did
more reverently entertain Peace at Home amongst his Subjects, nor more
wi^lingly conclude the same amongst Strangers. There is no Prince more cruel
than he, who by a facility and evil measured pity, suffers Robberies, Rapes,
Murders, and all sort of oppr^ssion and abuses to overturn his Country, by
which a whole State is interessed, when the strictest Justice touches but some
particular persons. By him abuses were reformed* defects repaired, sedition and
discord was put from the Nobles, equity and industry restored to the Country,
every man had a certainty of enjoying his own and security. Into all Men was
either infused a will to do well, or a necessity of so doing imposed upon them,
virtuous actions being honored, crimes punished. The mean man did respect the
great, not fear him; the great man did precede the mean, not contemn him;
favor was mastered by equity, Ambition by Virtue: for the excellent Prince by
doing well himself had taught his subjects so to do.

He was one of the worthiest of all the Kings of Scotland till his time, of the
former Kings it might have been said, The Nation made them Kings, but this King
made that People a Nation. He left behind him one Son and six Daughters, King
James the second, Margarite wife to Lewis the eleventh, King of France,
Elizabeth Duchess of Bretaigne, Jane first of Anguss, and then Countess of
Huntley, Elenora married to Sigismond, Archduke of Austria, Mary wife to the
Lord of Camphire, and Annabella; he was buried in the Charter House of Perth
which he had founded, where the Doublet in which he was slain was kept almost
to our Time as a Relict, and with execrations seen of the People, every man
thinking himself interested in his wrong.

The rumor of his Murder blazed abroad, it is incredible what weeping and
sorrow was through all the Country, for even by them to whom his Government
was not pleasant, he was deplored, and the act thought execrable. The Nobles of
their own accord and motion from all parts of the Kingdom assembled and came
to Edenbrough, and ere they consulted together (as if they had all one mind)
directed troops of armed men through all the quarters of the Kingdom, to
apprehend the Murderers and produce them to Justice. Such diligence was used
(grief and anger working in their minds) that within the space of forty days
all the Conspiratours were taken and put to shameful deaths. The common sort,
as Christopher Clawn or Cahown and others, that were of the Council in the
Conspiracy, having had art or part in the plot were hanged on Gibbets. The
chief Actors, that the Common wealth might publicly receive satisfaction, were
made spectacles of Justice by exquisite torments, the punishment of Athole was
continued three days: on the first he was stripped naked to his shirt, and by a
Crane fixed in a Cart, often hoised aloft, disjointed, and hanging shown to the
People, and thus dragged along the great Street of the Town; on the second day
he was mounted on a Pillar in the Market place, he was crowned with a Diadem of
burning Iron, with a Pla^hart bearing. The King of all Traitors, thus was his
Oracle accomplished; on the third he was laid naked along upon a Scaffold, his
Belly was ripped up, his heart and Bowels taken out and thrown in a fire
flickering before his eyes. Lastly, his head was cut off and fixed in the most
eminent place of the Town, his body sent in quarters to the most populous
Cities of the Kingdom to remain a Trophie of Justice.

His Nephew Robert Stuart was not altogether so rigorously handled, for that he
did but consent to others wickedness, being only hanged and quartered.

But for that it was notorious Robert Graham had embrued his hands in the Kings
blood, a Gallows being raised in a Cart he had his right hand nailed to it, and
as he was dragged along the Street, Executioners with burning Pincers, tearing
the most fleshy parts off his Carcass, being nip'd, torn and fl^y'd his heart
and entrails were thrown in a fire, his head exalted, and his Quarters sent
amongst the Towns, to satisfy the wrath and sorrow of the injured people; being
asked during his torture how he dared put hand in his Prince, he made answer,
that having Heaven and Hell at his choice, he dared leap out of Heaven and all
the contentments thereof, in the flaming bottomes of Hell, an answer worthy
such a Traitor.

A^neas Sylvius then Legate in Scotland for Pope Eugenius the fourth (after
Pope himself) having seen this sudden and terrible Revenge, being a witness of
the Execution, said he could not tell whether he should give them greater
commendations that revenged the Kings death, or brand them with sharper
condemnation that distained themselves with so heinous a Parricide.

James: King of Scotes Ano^. 1436

THE HISTORY OF THE Reign of James the second, KING of SCOTLAND.
SCarce were the tears dried for the loss of the Father when the three Estates
of the Kingdom meet, 1654.
and at Holyrood-House, set the Crown upon the head of the Son, then a child in
the sixth year of his age. The Government of the Realm is trusted to Sir
Alexander Levingstoun of Calendar; the custody of the Kings person with the
Castle of Edenbrough are given to the Chancellor Sir William Creightoun, Men for
that they had been ever faithful to the Father, without apparent vices, of no
capacity to succeed, nor entertaining aspiring thoughts for a Diadem, held
worthy of these charges and dignities. Good men may secure themselves from
Crimes but not from envy and calumnies; for men great in trust in public
affairs are ever assaulted by the ambition of those who apprehend they are less
in employment than they conceive they are in merit.

Archembald Earl of Dowglass grudging mightily that the State had bestowed
those honors upon men far inferior to him, as though by this the many merits
of his Ancestors had been forgotten, and his own service neglected; They being
ever accustomed in times of Peace to be nearest the Helm of the State, and when
any danger of war blazed, sent abroad to encounter it. In a confusion of those
thoughts being diversely tossed, he retireth to his own Castles, and after great
resolves proclaims that none of his Vassals or Tenants, especially within
Annandale and Dowglass-Dale (parts remote from the more Civil Towns of the
Kingdom) should acknowledge the present Government, or obey any precepts,
licenses, or proclamations whereunto the Governors or Chancelours hands were
set. If any question of Law or contention arose amongst his Friends, Vassals,
Tenants, He knew none fitter to be their Judge, sentence all their wrongs,
atone and take up their quarrels than himself. To discover to the world the
weakness of the two Rulers and how men never so well qualified, small in means,
and silly of power, were not for great places, he gives way for the the
increasing of evil: overseeing many disorders, of which he was the secret
cause, especially the insolences of vagabounding and ravaging Borderers. Men
of purpose sent forth to spoil and rifle the more quiet parts of the Country,
and to cut work to these strengthless Statesmen, as he named them. Thus as
overcome with sloth and pleasure, he passed some months amidst Country
contentments, expecting what effect time would bring forth of the equal
authority of those two Governors; for to fit minds equal in authority to so
even a temper that they should not have some motions of dissenting, he thought
impossible. Neither did this conjecture fail him, the event being the only
judge of opinions: for after this the Governor began to jar with the
Chancelour for engrossing wholly to himself from his Partner the person of the
King, as an honor which could not altogether be separate from his place, and
which would give the greater authority to his proceedings; urging, the
Chancelour in many other matters had usurped and taken upon him more than the
Parliament granted. The Chancelour was no better affected toward the
Governor; what the Governor commanded to be done, he one way or other
over-turned. The buildings of the one was by the other demolished: by common
and continual brawlings thus living in turmoil, neither of them was obeyed, the
Country usurped a licentious liberty, every man doing what he thought best for
his particular advantage and gain. The remote Villages of the Kingdom are left
a prey to the lawless multitude: where their authority is scorned, turn places
of robbery; where admitted, places of faction.

The Queen all this time, after her ordinary custom remained in the Castle of
Sterling. The divisions, partialities, jealousies of the Rulers, she takes in
an evil part, knowing usually they had a dangerous consequence. She had ever
found the Governor sincere and loyal in his proceedings; against his counsel
and will her Son was kept from her by the Chancellor whom the great ones hated
for possessing the King, for drawing to Offices of best trust and benefit his
own creatures, displacing such he suspected to favor his partner in Rule; and
the Commons loved him not, as managing every thing after his pleasure to their
damage and loss. Transported by diverse motions she at last resolves to change
the Game of State, and by a womanish conceit befool masculine Policy. To
effectuate her purpose the came to Edenbrough, and by many fair and passionate
speeches obtained of the Chancelour to enter the Castle and delight her self
some days with the company of her Son. Then to countenance her plot, she
gives out a pilgrimage intended by her to the white Kirk in Buchan: There will
she make offerings for the health of the King, and perform her other vows. The
honest States man, who thought it disloyalty to distrust a Queen, and a Mother,
whom years had made reverend; and impiety to hinder such religions intentions,
gives leave to her self with some Servants to remain in the Castle, and to
transport her household stuff and other necessaries after what manner she
pleased. In this time she perswardeth the King; wantonly set and delighting to
be obsequious to Her his Mother, to be handsomely couched in a Trunk, as if he
had been some fardel of her apparel, and convoyed by one of her trustiest
Servants upon a Sumpter horse to Leith: from whence he was put forward by water
to Sterling, there received by the Governor, and wel-comed with great joy and
laughter, at the manner of their so quaintly deceiving the grave Man.

By this advantage the Reins of Ru^^^ were now taken by the Governor; The
Queens Trick is approved, his own proceedings are strengthened and confirmed.
Proclamations are made against the Chancellor, and he charged to render the
Castle of Edenbrough to the King: which he refusing to do, by a great power
raised by the Governor of the Country, and the Queens, and his own followers,
he is be^ieged and blocked up within the Castle.

The Chancellor ready to fall in the danger, considering he had to do with too
strong a party, imploreth the assistance of the Earl of Dowglass: but the Earl
as a matter he had long expected and earnestly wished might fall forth,
refuses to assist any of them, saying it belonged not to the ancient Nobility
to succor these Mushrooms, whose ambition with no less could be ^atiate than
the Government of the whole Realm. This disdainful answer, procured a meeting
of the two Rulers, which concluded in the rendering of the Castle to the
Governor, and a promise of true friendship between them, that they might not
prove a sport to the envious Nobility. The Governor to show the roundness of
his intentions and his honesty, continues the Chancellor in his office; and
restores him to the keeping of the Castle of Edenbrough. After this agreement
the Earl of Dowglass left this world at Restalrigge the year 1439. leaving
behind him a Son born of the Earl of Crawfords daughter, named William, who
succeeded to his Fathers Honors and Ambition.

Malcolm Flamyne of Calmarnade, and Allan Lawder upon this young Earls oath of
Allegiance to the Crown of France, obtain to him from the French King the
Duchy of Tourrain, which his Father had enjoyed, and given to Archembald his
Grandfather slain at Vernueil. This foreign dignity with histitles at home made
the young Man very haughty* and to forget moderation, Disc^etion in youth
seldom attending great fortunes. He surpassed far the King in his followers
and Train, being accustomed to have hundreds of Horse men attending him; most
of which were Robbers and men living upon unlawful spoils all under his
protection: But however thus he seemed to set forth his greatness, this seemed
much to bewray a distrust, and that he rather traveled amongst a people which
hated him, than amongst his friends and men lovingly disposed.

James Stuart Son to the Lord of Lorne about this time married the Queen
Dowager, not so much out of love of her Person or Dowry, as of ambition, by her
means intending to reach the Government of the State, and get into his custody
the person of the King. And that it might rather seem the work of others out of
convenience, than any appetite of his own, he so insinuates himself with the
Earl of Dowglass, that the Earl essayed to lay the first groundwork of his
aims. The Governor who never wanted his own Spies near the Queen, at the first
inkling of this novation committed both him and his Brother William to in the
Castle of Sterlin. The Queen whether she followed her Husband, or was
restrained, uncertain, stayed with them, and now began to repent her of the
former courtesies done to the Governor; wishing her Son had yet remained in
the custody of the Chancelour, who, not so displeased at their imprisonment as
he appeared in outward show (delighting in the errors of his Partner) by
Alexander Earl of Huntley trafficked and wrought their Liberty. Thus
insinuating himself in the Queens favou^, he irritated her against the
Governor: whom yet outwardly he entertained with ceremonies of Friendship,
approving his Sagacity in preventing astorm in the State before it brakeforth
Here the Governor found how that same Key which can open a Treasure can shut it
up: for after this Queen prepared her Son for a change. The Governor carefully
ministering Justice at Pearth, the Chancellor one Morning comes to the Park
of Sterling where the King was hunting, by the providence of his Mother more
early raised for this sport, she be wailed the present estate of his Court,
that he was thralled to the covetousness and pleasure of others, living under
the power of a Man greedy of Rule: that a King of France is declared to be of
full years and Major the fourteenth of his age, that a Prince should transfer
his affection especially in tender years; that by an escape he might enjoy a
princely freedom, better know himself, and make his Rulers relish his
Authority; that three hours was sometimes of more importance than three days,
and one hour of more than all the three; that he should take hold of the
present occasion offered him. Prepared with such informations he is no sooner
accosted by the Chancellor, when approving his motions he posteth toward
Edenbrough with him: Received all the way as he went with many companies of the
Chancellours friends and attendants. The Governor finding the face of the
Court altered, by a King young in years and judgment, possessed by his Mother,
dissimulating his interest in a patient and calm manner comes to Edenbrough,
there after long conference and mediation of Friends in Saint Giles's Church,
he meets the Chancellor, and by the Bishop of Murrays and Aberdeens
diligence an agreement is between them concluded, which was that the King
should remain in the custody of the Chancellor, and the Governor should still
enjoy his charge. Amongst these divisions of the Rulers the Queen all this time
handsomely kept some authority, affecting and entertaining sometimes the one of
them sometimes the other, as by turns they governed the King and State.

The many and great disorders in the Country invited a Parliament: the
authority of Magistrates was despised, no justice was administered in many
places, few could keep their Goods, or be assured of their Lives, but by taking
themselves to the servitude of one Faction or other. Troubles a rose in the
West by the slaughter of Sir Allane Stuart Lord Darnley, killed by Sir Thomas
Boyd; and by the Revenge of his death taken by Alexander Stuart of Bolmet his
Brother upon the Boyd; the Highland Islanders invade the Territories adjacent
to them, spoil and burn the Lennox, where John Calhowen of Luss is mas^acr^d.
These cruelties and insolences against all justice and authority being
avouched such to be were, held fit to be remedied and courses laid down to
obviate them: but William Earl of Dowglass permitting wickedness, and wincking
at mischief, often approving them for lawful and good policy, whilst he neither
reformed them himself by his power, nor suffered the Rulers to proceed against
them by their authority; purchased to himself the name and reputation of a
lawless and strong oppressor. The three Estates assembled, complaints being
given up against Oppressors, most against him and his Followers, as the source
from which the miseries of the Country sprang, he appears not, nor any to
answer for him.

The Parliament determinateth to proceed by way of Rigor against him; but to
this the two Rulers oppose, persuading them that fair speeches and entreaties;
was a safer and easier way to draw unto them a young Man, mighty in riches and
power, arrogant by his many Followers and Vassals, then to give out a Sentence
against him before he were heard, and by threatenings stir his turbulent and
ambitious thoughts, which instead of making him calm, might turn his neutrality
in a perfect Rebellion: and his insolency, in madness and despair. Neither as
the present estate of the Country stood, could he without civil blood be
commanded and brought in, which by moderation might be effectuate; that verity
enjoyed not always that privilege to be spoken in every place and time; it was
good to keep up in silence matters concerning him, the speaking of which might
produce any dangerous effect. Upon this* Letters in their Name are sent unto
him, remembering him of the splendour and glory of his Ancestors, the place and
dignity he possessed by them in Parliament: that without his presence they
neither would nor could proceed in great matters. If he apprehended any cause
of let or stay by the offenses and disorders committed by his Attendants and
Followers, they would freely remit them, as accidents following the injury of
the times, and his yet tender years, his greatest fault being his giving way
out of rashness and negligence to the faults of others. That of himself they
had conceived such singular hopes of great towardness and all virtues, if he
would come and take a part with them, giving in his complaints and grievances,
he should not only have full satisfaction, but be honored with what place or
charge in the Government he liked best; by honoring them with his Presence he
should oblige not only his Country infinitely but particularly every one of
them to stand for him to the utmost of their powers and wishes.

This Letter wrought powerfully upon the Mind of the Earl, by nature and years
desirous of glory and preferment, and believing easily that which was plausible
to his hopes. His friends, who now began to promise to themselves new Heavens,
think upon great matters, and forecast to themselves by the change of their
Lords Fortune, a change of Offices in the State, persuade him likewise to come
to the Parliament; and they divulged the certainty of his Progress. The
Chancellor when he understood he was upon his way rode forth of Edinbrough to
meet him, and by many obsequious complements and friendly blandishments allured
and drew him to his Castle of Creighton which was in his way: where some days
he rested and was honorably entertained. Amongst many healthful admonitions by
way of counsel, he told him, that the greatness of a Subject consisted in due
obedience to his Prince, whom he should acknowledge to be his Lord and Master.

That by obedience he would vindicate the Name and Families of the Dowglasses,
not only from blame of Treason, but from all suspicion of Novations; that he
would endeavor to execute justice more strictly then he had done in times past,
not protect Oppressors against Laws and Equity, but suppress all insolences of
Thieves and Robbers, because cruelties and wrongs never stood secure before
either God or man. That the estates of ancient Houses were often maintained
more by reputation of things done, then any other foundation, which a little
disobedience to a Prince might shake, if not altogether ruin. That it was
fatal to all Princes in their under-age, and the beginnings of their Reigns, to
have troubles and seditions, and be tormented by some of their Subjects who
studied novelties; but when these Princes came to perfect years, they knew well
to chastise those who troubled the Government in their youth. That he would
hereafter rather content himself with mediocrity, then expose himself as a mark
to envy. That he would make a proof of his power, not in excess and riot or
pride of his ancient honors, but in bounty and religious charity toward his
Countrymen.

That he wished as his House had long continued, it might by following what he
had spoken unto him ever flourish. The Earl of a good inclination, if
Flatterers and wicked Company had been removed, took in good part his
advertisements and counsel, thinking he spoke as he thought, and (perhaps) so
he did, for he had not yet put on his double Visage, and promised to repair
what offenses by youth, negligence, rashness or other indiscretion had escaped
him: thus with his Brother David, the Chancellor accompanied him to Edinburgh.

He had not long there stayed, when the frequent meetings, many secret
conferences of the Governor and Chancellor at their several houses, which often
held the greatest part of the night, who were not wont to be so kind to
others, bred a great jealousy and suspicion in some of the Earls friends, that
some lurking mischief was a plotting to entrap him. That small trust should be
had in a reconciled enemy, and his many courtesies, and too exceeding favors
were to be suspected. Hereupon some freely counsel the Earl to return home, and
to leave off* private meetings with them. Others entreat him not to enter the
Castle of Edinburgh at all, or if he should, so dismiss his brother David, to
keep themselves scattered that they might not be enclosed in one Net, as upon
his Deathbed their Father had instructed and admonished them. For if any
violent course were intended against them, men would not dare to put in act
against one of them, which they would against both. David presaging some
strange accident to follow this sudden kindness of the Rulers was meditating an
escape. The Earl took this counsel in an evil part, saying, Great Families
never wanted turbulent friends, to whom common confusions served ordinarily for
steps to enlarge their States* when Peace sends the most part of them home to
live private men. And they cared not what blame were laid upon their Chiefs, so
it stood with their own commodity; that the p^etence of his departure would be
worse then the departure it self, and that he would be obnoxious to worse
surmises, and more miserable mistakings going away, then if he had never
appeared. That he preferred the approved trust of the Chancellor (whose Guest
he had been) to all the objections of dangers they could imagine; which
suspicions he requested them to suppress; for to suspect causl^sly, instead of
imagined wrong, returned a real injury, and being known would be a means to
breed new jars, and bre^k their begun Friendship. Thus blind-folded by
Destiny, and accompanied with some of his dearest Friends, amongst whom was
Sir Malcolm Flamin of Cammernald; in solemn pomp with his brother he entered
Edinburgh Castle the 24. of November: the remainder, who were thrust back, with
sad countenances and distrusting hearts, scattered themselves in the Town.

The Governor, that the envy might be divided and ^bared, and all seem to be
done by an universal consent, with a ceremonious welcome, and such as hate and
emulation could suffer to be tempered together, did meet him and guide him to
the king: at whose Table he was set to dine, which favors turned the heart of
the young Earl so soft and relenting, that he wished he had sooner come to
Court, and challenged himself of his mistrustful thoughts; but more his
suspicious friends, whose presence he could have desired to be witness against
themselves. The counsel given him at ^reighton Castle, by obsequiousness, he
resolves to thank: the kings benign aspect and courtesies of the Rulers had
advanced him to the highest degree of honor.

Amidst these entertainments (behold the instability of Fortune!) near the end
of the Banque^ the head of a Bull (a sign of present Death in these times) is
set down before him: At which sudden Spectacle he leapt from the Table in
horror and all ag^st; but this does little avail him, he has no power, for he
is ceased upon by armed Men, who rushing out of a cruel tyring House, led him
to the utter Court of the Castle, not regarding the plaints, cries, tears of
the young King, who pitifully mourned to see him manacled with cords: There
with his brother David, Sir Malcolm Flaming his constant friend and compartner
of all his Fortunes, he had his head and ambitious thoughts cut off. With this
great blow of State the Parliament brake up, leaving grief, terror,
astonishment in the hearts of all the people, who ever ^ated the Actors of this
Tragedy.

William Earl of Dowglass and David his brother taken away, the Baron of
Abercorn their Uncle succeeded to the Earldom, by reason of his stature and
corpulency named James the Gross: A man free of any Vice or heroical Virtue,
whose years we^e not many after his Fortune to be Earl. He was Father to seven
Sons, the eldest of which by a Dispensation from the Pope he married to
Beatrice, the only Sister of his Brothers Son William, named The Fair Maid of
Galloway, not so much in respect of her Beauty as her Fortunes; the Lands not
tailed in Galloway, Annandale, Balveny and Ormond falling from the Heirs male
to be her Portion. This Marriage was much blamed and cried out upon by the Earl
of Angus, Sir John Dowglass of Dalkeith, and other Gentlemen of that Name, not
as they gave out for the propinquity of blood, being between Cozen Germans, but
that so fair and easy a purchase was taken out of their arms. They had always
followed the king, and procured prohibitions of the Marriage; but these with
spur-haste advanced the celebration of it, and upon a Friday, which the common
People prognosticate to be ominous, and to have some sad event.

This Earl, ambitious, factious, popular, subtle, vindicative, prompt in the
execution of his enterprises, liberal and far from the dor-muse humor of his
Father, began to think neither himself nor his kindred in safety, if the deaths
of his Brothers and Cousins, wrought by the two Rulers remained unrevenged, and
therefore since openly without troubling the common peace of the Country he
could not, by secret and umbragious ways he labors to bring it to pass:
Procuring a far off a disobedience to their Decrees, and contempt of their
Authority, by men in a great distance from him in place, blood, friendship and
familiarity; who after any fashion grudged, repined, complained of the present
form of Government, or aggravated imaginary wrongs, are supported and protected
by him, his houses turned places of refuge to distressed Male^contents. One
John Gormack of Athole (not without suspicion that he wrought by the motion and
order of the Earl* and understood his Caball) essayed with a great number of
Out-lawes to hinder the execution of a Malefactor, and take him by main force
from the Sheriff of Pearth William Ruthen: but he perished in the enterprise.
Patrick Gilbreath in the Castle of Dumbartoun, for priority of command, kills
Robert Simple, and to save his person, or justify his homicide, flies to the
Earl of Dowglass, by whom he is protected, notwithstanding the many
informations given in against him at Court, and his citation to answer to
Justice.

The King whose nonage was now near expired, began to relish the Sweetness of
Government in his own Person, and became tired of the long and awful tutelage
of his jarring Rulers; and the Flower of his youth seeming framed for great
affairs, promised the fruit of a wise and happy reign; finding it difficult to
put men near daily unto him; long experienced and greedy of Rule, from high
Places, except by the entertaining a stronger and more powerful faction. He
sets his thoughts upon the Earl of Dowglass; small favors to him would be a
great umbrage to the ambition of his Tutors, bring them within the compass of
answering to what might be objected to them concerning their Service in the
State; he would not sue to the Earl, but as occasion served he gave many signs
and open speeches, that he had not altogether withdrawn his love and favor
from the ancient House of the Dowglasses, their passed faults being by them
acknowledged and recompensed with fidelity and obedience in times coming. The
Earl of Dowglass, whose towardness and liberality had acquired him many Friends
at Court, upon assured advertisement of his Princes good will toward him,
comes to Sterling, and is no sooner presented upon his knees before the King
in the Church, when with all demonstrations of benevolence he is received in
grace, pardoned, and not manies days after admitted to be of the Privy
Council. The King imparting to him his greatest affairs, shows he will follow
them by his advice and counsel, honors him with the plausible name of
Cousi^, and entertaineth such familiarity with him that all others give him the
place.

The promotion and credit which the Earl of Dowglass in a short time acquired
about the King, his faction daily increasing, moved the two Rulers (by their
moderation seeking to avoid disgrace) to leave the Court. After which they were
both removed from their offices, and their places and authority in Council with
their whole Friends and Followers. They are upbraided with disorders, both in
their private actions and the manner of their Government, and at last are
summoned to answer before the King to such things as they should be legally
accused of, The murmurs every where whispered amongst the people, warned and
certified them if they should appear and present themselves of some sad and
tragic act. Whereupon with protestations of their Innocence declining the
time, appealing to the King in his majority, and when he should be of full
years, from these Judges their mortal enemies than abusing absolute power* they
suspend their appearing, declaring withal their readiness in every thing to
obey the King.

This avails them nothing* for at a Parliament holden in Sterling, articles
being forged and urged against them, especially of Peculate, as sale of Crown
Lands, waste of the Kings Treasure, the laying of their hands upon the Kings
jewels, transporting Lands to themselves and their friends, distributing
Offices and places of the Crown and state (which should have been by the
Authority of the Council) as Hunters divide a Prey between themselves.
Dispensing with Riots, and taking the force and vigor from the Laws of the
Kingdom; thus as betraying the administration of the Realm into the hands of
worthless and corrupted men, they are denounced Rebels, their persons and
estates proscribed. Charge is given to Sir John Foster of Corstorphane and
others the Dowglasses adherents, to bring all their movables to the use of the
Exchequer, demolish their houses, invade their friends with fire and sword and
all that sided them. Thus the uncertain vicissitude of humane accidents
overturns often them who seem to be raised to the highest degree of honor. The
Castle of Barentoren is besieged, taken, thrown down, with other houses upon
the Governors and Chancellours Lands, their Farms and small Villages are
plundered and ransacked. In revenge of which the Rulers waste the Earl of
Dowglasses Territories, the Villages of Straw-Brock, Abercorn, Blackness are
burnt, with Corstorphane. The ravage begun, continues with daily loss to both
parties, and the overthrow of the Commonwealth.

The Earl wondreth (now having the Kings Authority) to find his enemies so
strong, and hold so long out against him* He suspecteth they have secret
support by some not well affected toward him. The most powerful and eminent
of which he guesseth to be James Kennedie Bishop of St. Andrews, and Cousin
germane to the King. He knew him jealous for his sudden favors at Court, and
that he had whispered amongst his Friends, that he feared the ambition of the
Earls unlimited heart was now exalted to such exorbitancy of height, that
becoming top-heavy it would fall by its own weight, and turn up the Root.

The Earl will have this Prelate less powerful to assist the Rulers, or do
harm unto him. To this effect he instigateth the Earl of Crawford his Allie,
and Alexander Ogleby of Inuerwharety, to invade the Bishops Lands, and rifle
his Vassals in Fife, without order or declaration of wrongs done by him. The
Bishop after the burning and spoiling of sundry of his Farms being weak by
power to resist their violence and repair his losses, took him to his Spiritual
Arms, and excommunicated the Earl of Crawford. Though he made small account of
this verbal Thunder, yet did not this injustice long escape the revenging hand
of God, who raise^h up ordinarily one Oppressor to execute his justice against
another.

Alexander Lyndesay, Son to the Earl of Crawford, pretended a title to the
Baylerie of Arbrothe, out of which he was kept by Alexander Ogleby, whose title
was equal to his, if not better. This enmity kindled to such a flame, that upon
either^side they assemble their friends in Arms: The Ogleby calls the Lord
Huntley, the Lindesay the Hamiltons to assist their Rights: frequent meetings
having been to calm matters, and reconcile them, and nothing agreed upon nor
concluded, they resolve at last to decide the cause by their swords. The Earl
of Craw^ord then remaining at Dundee, advertized of the present danger of his
friends, posteth in all haste to Arbroth, and comes at the very chock of the
skirmish, and when they were to enter the fight. Here intending by his wisdom
to take up the Quarrel, and presuming upon the respect due to his place and
person, he rashly rusheth forwards before his Companies to demand a parley of
Alxander Ogleby with his Son: but ere he could be known or was heard, he is
encountered by a common Soldier, who thrust him in the mouth with a Spear, and
prostrate him dead upon the ground. This sudden accident joined the Parties,
who fought with great courage and resolution: The Victory after much blood
inclined to the Master of Crawford. Alexander^Ogleby sore wounded, was taken
and brought to the Castle of Finelvin where he died; the Lord Huntley escaped
by the swiftness of his Horse. John Forbess of Pitsligow, Alexander Barkley of
Garteley, Robert Maxwell of Tillen, William Gordoun of Borrowfield, Sir John
Oliphant of Aberdaguy with others fell on the Oglebies side; 1445.
they fought the 24. of January 1445.

Now by attending opportunities to increase public disorders, turn the times
dangerous and troublesome and confound the State; the Earl of Dowglass kept
himself in the absolute Government; by umbragious ways he nourished
discontentments in all parts of the Country, amongst the Nobility, Gentry,
Commons of the Realm. Alexander Earl of Crawford put to death John Lynton of
Dundee; Robert Boyd of Duchal, and Alexander Lyle ^lew James Stuart of
Auchenmintee; Patrick Hepburn of Haills, surprised the Castle of Dumbar;
Archembald Dumbar, as if he would but change places with him, takes the Castle
of Haills* where he was besieged by the Earl of Dowglass, and with conditions
of safety rendered it. Sir William Creighton all this time kept the Castle of
Edinburgh, and when by entreaties nor power he could not be induced to render
it to the King, his Castle of Creighton is plundered, a garrison placed in it,
and the Castle of Edinburgh by the Earl of Dowglass is besieged and blocked up.
Nine months the Assailers lie about it: but it proves impregnable, and
without loss of many Subjects cannot be taken, about the end of which time,
men's courages waxing colder, conditions are offered and received; which were,
that the Chancellor should be restored to grace, place, and whatsoever h^d been
withheld from him by his enemies at Court, an abolition and abrogation of all
former discontentments should be granted, the besieged should pass out bag and
baggage free. At a Parliament holden at Perth, the Chancellor was purged by an
Assise of his Peers of what was laid against him, his lands and goods seized
upon by the King or Dowglasses are decreed to be restored, as well to his
followers as himself; he is established in his dignities and places of honor,
notwithstanding of all Edicts, Proclamation, Confiscation before, which were
declared null; all matters past put in oblivion, as not done. This considering
the credit of the Earl of Dowglass, was thought very strange; but James
Kennedie Bishop of St. Andrews, whose respect and authority was great with the
Churchmen, perfected this Masterpiece of State; and the Earl of Dowglass knew,
though the Chancellor was unbound, he had not yet escaped.

During these Garboyls in Scotland, Margaret Sister to King James, and wife to
the Daulphin of France, Lewis, died at Chalones in Champaigne; a virtuous and
worthy Lady, beloved of all France, but most of Charles the seventh her Father
in Law, who for her respect matched her three Sisters, who remained at his
Court honorably; H^lenora, with Sigismond Archduke of Austria; Elizabeth, to
the Duke of Bretaigne; Mary with the Earl of Camphire: She was buried in the
great Church of Chalones, but after when the Daulphine came to be King, he
caused transport and bury her in the Abbey Church of Laon in Poittow: Many
Elegies were published upon her death which are yet extant. Sir James Stuart,
the Black Knight, husband to the Queen, at this time died also: He had turned a
voluntary exile, to shun the dangers and envy of the Factions of the Country,
which he incurred by his free speeches against the misgovernment and miseries
of the time, and as he was bound ^owards Flanders* by the Flemings was taken
upon the Seas. The Queen outlived not long her Daughter and Husband; ^he was
buried the fifteenth of July in the Charter House of Perth, near her first
husband James, the year 1446. She brought forth to the black Knight of Lorn
three sons, John E^rl of Athole, James Earl of Buchane, Andrew Bishop of M^rray.

The Chancellor having recovered his honors and State to the disadvantage of
the Earl of Dowglass, though of good years and tired with the troubles of
public life, yet finds not any desired rest* A Marriage being designed for
the King with Mary daughter of the Duke of Guilders, by the instructions of
Charles the seventh the French Kings; but secretly by the procurement of the
Earl of Dowglass, the Chancellor, as a Man grave, great in pl^ce, and
experimented with the Bishop of Dunkel and Nicholas Otterburn, is sent over the
Seas in Embassy. This troublesome and unprofitable honor abroad is laid upon
him, that he might be separate from the King, and suspended from opposing to
the private designs of the Earl at home. This obstacle of his ambition removed
(which had neither moderation nor limits) the Earl may excluded such Officers
in State or Court who were not agreeable to him, and substitute others of his
Creation after his pleasure, he has now room and opportunity for his greatest
designs. His kindred are without pausing preferred to Offices of State, his
brothers to new honors; Archembald is made Earl of Murray, by the Marriage of
a Lady of the house of Dumbar* who was Heir of the Lands, and the Kings Ward:
George is created Earl of Ormond; John made Lord of Balvenie, and has his
Donation ratified in an Assembly of three Estates, who were convented at
Edinburgh for matters concerning the Marriage of the King, but in effect that
the Earl might pursue his old enemies. The Commissioners are chosen after his
pleasure, are prepared and instructed by him, prelimitated; and, to combine
power with craft, he enters in an offensive and defensive League with many
Noblemen, Barons, and Gentlemen of the Kingdom. All the wheels and vices of his
Clock being right set, Alexander Levingston, late Governor, Alexander his
eldest son, Robert Levingston Treasurer, David Levingston, James Dundes, Robert
Bruce of Clackmannan Knights, for Peculate and converting the Princes Treasure
to their private use, are forfeited, taken and committed to sundry Prisons in
December 1447. at which time they were brought to Edinburgh; Alexander the
Governor, James Dundas and Robert Bruce, after Fines laid upon them were
permitted back to Dumbarton; there to be kept Prisoners, during the Kings
pleasure. Alexander the Governors Son, a young man of great expectation, with
Robert Levingston Treasurer, and David Levingston, not so much by any crime
proved against them, as by the Divine Justice in punishing the severity of the
Governor for the execution of the Earl of Dowglass in the Castle of Edinburgh,
had their heads cut off; the people much deploring their misfortune. By this
blow the Earl of Dowglass thought he was more terribly avenged, then if he had
proved his power against the old man; having thus as it were killed him twice.
Though by this strict Justice he pretended the public weal, his end was to
govern all by his absolute Authority, and make the world see what credit he had
to help or harm when he pleased, admire his pompous attendance, his haughty
carrying of all business, and his power in State.

The Chancellor having perfected his Embassy, Mary daughter to Arnold Duke of
Guilders, born of the Duke of Borgundies Sister, a Lady young, beautiful, and
of a masculine constitution, arriveth in Scotland, and with great solemnity,
accompanied with many Strangers and the Nobility of the Kingdom is married to
the King in the Abbey Church of Holy-rood-house; As these Nuptial Rites were
finished, the Peace between Scotland and England expired, and the Borders of
both Kingdoms break, and mutually invade others. Amidst must robbery, spoil and
havoc upon either side, the Earl of Salisbury, Lieutenant and Warden, upon the
West depopulateth the bordering Villages, and burns the Town of Dumfreis; the
Earl of Northumberland spoiling the east, burns the Town of Dumbar: John
Dowglass, Lord of Balvenny, invadeth the English bounds, and burns the Town
of Anwich; the ravaging and depradations in a short time turning equal, the two
Kingdoms agree upon a suspension of Arms, and place and day to treat about a
general peace; at the last by an assembly of the States 1449. A Truce is
condescended unto for seven years. At this time Alexander Seatoun Lord Gordon,
is created Earl of Huntley and George Leslie Earl of Rothes.

This Tru^e was not long kept by any of the Nations, but, as it had been drawn
and plaistered up for the fashion, they conspire equally to break it. New
incursions are made, slight skirmishes began to wound either side and banish
peace, just arms were constrained at last to be opposed to injurious
oppressions. The Scots having made desolate some parts of Cumberland, an Army
under the leading of the Earl of Northumberland is raised, commanded by Magnus
Red-beard, whom the Scots by reason of the length of his beard named Magnus
with the red Main. A man trained from his youth in the Wars of France; who is
said to have required no more for his Service to the Crown of England, then
what he might by his own valor conquer of Scotland. The English march from the
West Borders, pass the River of Soloway and Annand, and encamp near the River
of Sark. the Earl of Dowglass declares his brother George Earl of Ormond
Lieutenant for the King against them: who with the power of the South and West
loses no time to encounter: the Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Piercy his
Son, Magnus Red-bread, Sir John Pennington, Sir Robert Harrington led the
English Battalions: The Earl of Ormond, Lord Maxwell, Lairds of Iohnston, and
Craiggy Wallace, the Scottish. Here occasion and place serving, is it valiantly
fought, the fortune of the day long doubtful: till Magnus. whose experience
and direction in War in those days was deemed unparall^ld, his courage here
turning into temerity, was beaten from his horse and slain. After his fall,
many turning their backs, the Earl of Northumberland himself with great danger
e^caped; more in the chase were lost then in the Battle; such who assayed to
pass the River, by the confusion and weight of their Arms were plunged in the
water; other who could not find the Foords, being taken, and brought to the
Castle of Lochmaben; amongst which were Sir John Pennington, Sir Robert
Harrington, the Lord Piercy, who by saving his Father engaged himself. Few
renowned amongst the scots were here lost, except Craiggy Wallace, a principal
actor, who governing himself by honor and courage, died of his wounds there
received not many days thereafter. The English to repair their loss raised an
Army, but by the daily supplies raised for France, and their projected Civil
Wars (the Duke of York, Earls of March, Warwick and Salisbury beginning to toss
the State) it was kept at home for their own use, and a truce was agreed upon
the concluded with Scotland for the space of three years, 1450.

This Victory obtained chiefly by the valor of the Dowglasses, advanced highly
their credit with the young King, and the Court sounded with nothing more then
their praises. But great Fortunes are as hard to bear as to acquire and
ordinarily prosperity carries us into insolences, without pondering the
consequence of our actions. William Colvill Knight, upon a private quarrel
having slain James Auchinleck a follower of the Earl of Dowglass, the Earl
revenged his death, not only with the slaughter of William, but with the
throwing down of his House, and spoil of all his Lands: which turned cold the
affections of many about the Court toward him, and made him terrible to all of
a contrary faction to his. After, whether tired with his working thoughts, or
to shun more hatred and envy, or to try what time would produce, amidst the
inward grudges and rancours of Court, or that he held his own Country too
narrow Lists for his glory, he leaves the Kingdom: substituting one of his
Brothers Procurator for his affairs, and in his absence to govern his estate,
accompanied with his Brother Mr. James (a Man learned, and brought up in Sorbon
Divinity, Expectant of the Bishopric of Dunkel, James Hamilton of Cadyow, the
Lords Grahame, Seatoun, Oliphant, Saltoun, and many Gentlemen, he arriveth in
Flanders, comes to France, passes the Alps, and it being the year of Iubilee
stays at Rome: where he was honorably recevied and welcomed. Envy never
leaves great actors; he had not been long absent from his Prince, when many
are suborned to give up complaints against the oppressions, riots, wrongs of
his Kindred, Servants and Vassals. The faults of his governing the King are
pryed into, every oversight and escape aggravated to the height. The King at
first was loath to lend an ear to misreports and calumnies of a man lately so
well deserving and dearly of him beloved: but overcome by importunity and urged
by the numbers of Complainers, he gave way that his Brother and Procurators
should make answer for wrongs suffered by the Complainers: after many citations
his brother not appearing is at last by force presented to the Council: when he
could not answer to such faults as were laid against the Earls Vassals and
Followers, nor acquit them of violent oppressions, he was only enjoined to
restore to the Complainers their loss, and restore all damages. Upon fair
promises of Restitution the King brings him off the danger, and obtains him
liberty to return home.

There, after long advisement with his other Brothers and some haughty Vassals,
they declare, old Rapines and Wrongs being joined to new, and recent with which
they were charged, the restitution was impossible, and like spilt water which
could not be recovered. Not satisfied with this Answer, the Council cites the
Earl of Dowglass upon some days to appear before them, and all his Vassals and
Followers with his Brothers to answer according to Law, to such Articles as
should be given in against them. The Earl was far off, and they considered it
consisted not with their weal to hazard their persons to the Arbitrament of
Judges, many of which had been obnoxious to their affronts. Thus for not
appearing they are denounced Rebels, and Warrants granted in invade and spoil
their Lands, as public enemies to Authority and the present Government. This
Decree is followed by open force; and to facilitate the execution of it, and to
take up the Earl of Dowglasses Rents, William Earl of Orkney comes to
Galloway, Dowglas-dale, Liddes-dale: But he found, Authority not seconded with
power against lusty Rebels, to produce weak effects: for he returned disobeyed,
contemned, and near spoiled and rifled by the Earls Tenants and Vassals.

The King to vindicate his Authority, since he could not prevail by reason,
with competent forces in person enters the same Ter^itories, takes all the
strong Fortresses and Castles where b^ came, demolisheth the Castle of
Dowglass, places a Garrison in Lochmabane, gives the custody of such places
he spared with the whole Goods and Movables appertaining to them, to the
Complainers and men interested in wrongs or blood, by the Rebels. The noise of
this unexpected backblow being heard at Rome, perplexed not a little the Earl
of Dowglass: Many of his train leave him, that where lately he represented a
Prince, he seemed now scarce a private Gentleman; he was ^ssured he lived under
a Sovereign who maughre all detractions, would hear his own defenses. Upon
which hopes he resolve^h to return, takes him to his Journey* and for his
greater haste and safe progress, he obtains a Pass through England, come to
the Borders of Scotland, his Brother James is directed to the Court, to
understand the Kings mind toward him, and if there were any possibility in
this ebb of favors to have access to him.

The King ingenuously promises to accept him, and performed it for all that
happened by the misdeameanor of his Friends in his absence, requesting that he
would but live peaceably according to the order of the State, without hating
that which his Prince loved, or improving that which he approved and
authorized; and that as himself and his Brothers were ever the most able and
readiest to repel the wrongs of Strangers, so they would endeavor to entertain
unity and concord in the Country it self, and purge their Lands of Thieves and
Robbers; if mischievous and wicked men were not punished, there would be no
surety nor safety for the good and virtuous. Past wrongs are pardoned, the
Garrisons removed from his Castles, and they are rendered unto him. Then to put
him in assurance of increasing favors, he is made Lieutenant General of the
Kingdom: a place great and requiring great action, being only to be bestowed
upon a Man active, great in power and friends.

The Earl of Dowglss, again afloat in the stream of his Sovereigns favors,
might have continued, if his miseries had not been decreed from above: soon
after he falls in new disgrace; whether upon a promise of return, or that he
was sent for, or that he would officiously give thanks for received courte^ies,
when he was in his way homewards, he passes privately to the Court of England,
and without his Masters knowledge or leave has many days serious conference
with the Nobility of that Kingdom, then many ways distressed by the Rebellion
of Kent, and the factions of the great Men. The pretended cause of his journey
was given out to be the repairing of his own and his Vassal lsosses, sustained
by the in-rodes of the English the time of his travels abroad, and the
redressing of other disorders on the West Borders; but his Enemies suggested he
intended to enter a League with some of the English to the disadvantage of his
Master, and trouble of his Country, by changing the form of Government, or the
Officers of State. King James took this meeting with the English in an evil
part; but after great intercession and many requests of the Queen and Noblemen
after he had submitted himself to his clemency, and acknowledged his errors,
received him. In this mean time he is discharged of all public employments;
his Offices of State are divided between the Earl of Orkney and the Lord
Creighton his reconciled Enemies.

Removed from public employments he gives himself to study private revenge,
and the whole secret Council turn distasteful unto him: especially Orkney and
Creighton, men perfectly abhorring his ambition, and who greatly feared his
dismeasured greatness.

Their suspected affronts and alleged wrongs toward him were increased daily
by tales of Sycophants. It was told the Earl that the Lord Creightoun in
conference with the King had said, it were expedient for the peace of the
Country, that the Earl of Dowglass with all his friends and followers were
rooted out, and their memory abolished; but if that were left undone, neither
should the King rule in due Majesty, nor the Subjects ever give him that
obedience which they ought. That wise Princes suffered houses to grow as men do
Spider-webs, not taking heed of them so long as they were small, but when
offensively increased, they swept them wholly away. Irritated by these and many
such like speeches, after much contempt of the Chancellor, one dawning, as he
was early coming form Edinburgh to his Castle of Creighton, the Earl who wanted
not his own intelligence amongst his followers (Hatred being an evil
Counselor) laid an ambush for him on the high way. But the clearness of the
morning discovering it, by swiftness of his horse he escapes; some of his
company being wounded and one of the Assailers slasin in the pursuit. Two days
after the Chancellor to repair his credit, accompanied with a number of his
Friends* and Followers, coming in great haste to Edinburgh, had unawared
surprised the Earl of Douglas, then attended but with a small number of his
friends if he had not speedily shifted himself form the danger. This contention
now bursting forth into open hostility, divided into Factions the whole
Kingdom; The Earl of Dowglass maintaining his by the long continued grandeur of
his House, the Chancellor standing by his Princes favor, and a long practice
of the affairs and course of the World; the Earl fearing the Authority of the
King might sway the Balance and make the party unequal, if he should be
brought to call to remembrance passed actions and attempts of his Predecessors,
finds nothing more expedient to curb his enemies, and strengthen his
proceedings, then to renew his old Confederation, and combine with him many
others. Hereupon the Earls of Crawford, Ross, Murray, Ormond, the Lord Balvenny
Knight of Cadyow, many Barons, Gentlemen with their Allies, Vassals, Servants
to a great number, subscribed and swore solemnly never to desert one another
during life; That injuries done to any one of them, should be done to them all,
and be a common quarrel; neither should they desist to their best abilities to
revenge them: That they should concur indifferently against whatsoever Persons
within or without the Realm, and spend their Lives, Lands, Goods Fortunes in
defense of their Debates and Differences whatsoever. This consederation and
Covenant again ^enued, turned the Earl imperious in his deportments,
presumptuous beyond all limits, and his followers and adherents insupportable
to their neighbors: The Lands of such who were not of their party, or refused
to think all their thoughts and second them in their enterprises, were
plundered; and and go^dness was a cause to make men suffer most pillage and
ransacking of their Goods, and other miserable calamities. At this time the
Thieves and Robbers of Liddes-dale and Annandal^ break into the Lands of John
Lord Herress, a Noble Man, who had continued constantly faithful to the King,
and drive with them a great booty of Cattle: Complaints being given to the Earl
of Douglass of the Depredations of his men, and finding no redress the Lord
Herress essayeth to drive the like prey ^n^^compence of the damage; but being
unequal in power, his fortune was to be taken by the Thieves, and brought as a
P^isoner to the Earl, who laid him fast in Irons; and notwithstanding of the
Kings Letters (full of Entreaties and Threatenings) without any formality of
Law, caused, Hang him as a Felon: The like mischief was practiced in other
places. After this contempt of Sovereignty, it was universally blazed that the
Earl of Dowglass, in respect of this new Covenant, the power of his Kinsmen and
Allies, the entertaining of such who were discontent and discountenanced at
Court, the love and favor of the men of Arms in Scotland (ever governed by some
of his Name) his riches, the honor of his Ancestors, had resolved to dissemble
no longer, but openly to play his game, (...) one day if he could set the Crown
upon his own head, being then able to raise an Army of Forty thousand warlike
persons, men ready to go with him, whither or against whom they cared not,
attending only the occasion and his Commandment.

The King who before but disdained the pride, after this League became jealous
of the Earl of Douglass (a League giving a Law to a King breaking all Bonds of
Sovereignty, and inviting people to look for a new Master) and though his
modesty and patience served only to turn the Earl more insolent, and his
boldness more active, yet in a foul game he bare a fair countenance; knowing
the last thing which a Sovereign Prince should do is to show himself
malecontent and offended with any of his Subjects; for instead of chastising
him, he would give him fairer means and greater power to do him harm: He would
not show a token of any prejudicial thought to the Earls proceedings, till he
had first heared himself.

Thus very calmly he desired him to come and speak with him at Sterlin, whiles
he (conscious of his own misdemeanor) except upon a public assurance under
the great Seal for his safe coming and return, refused to do: A safe conduct
obtained, about the Shrew-Tide, in the year 1452. he came to the Court then
remaining at Sterlin Castle, 1452.
accompanied with many of his Confederates, and a powerful Retinue: The King
with a gracious countenance, and all apparent respect received him, endeavoring
rather by kindness and humanity, then by rigor to reclaim him to his former
obedience. The day near spent, the Gates of the Castle shut, all removed,
except some of the Council and the Guards; the King taking the Earl friendly
apart, remembered him of favors received, wrongs forgotten, the duties, as a
Subject, he owed to his Prince, his capitulation before he would come and speak
with him; he taxed him with the exorbitant abuses and out rages of his
followers: Then he told him what Informations he had of a Covenant of mutual
defense and adherence betwixt him and some of his Nobles and Gentlemen, which
he would scarce believe: He prayed him to consider the murmuring, or rather
begun sedition of his people, his long patience in tolerating his proceedings,
his misbelief of evil reports toward him, until he had heard what he had to
say for himself and his innocence.

The Earl answered the Kings towardness in equal terms, trusting much to his
confederatiom; for his favors he should strive with all obsequiousness to
deserve them; That as he had the honor to command others who obeyed him; he
knew very well how to be commanded, and obey his Prince, and in what
disobedience consisted, that as none of his Subjects enjoyed more Lands and
Honors then himself, there should not one be found who more willingly would
engage all his Fortunes and person for the Honor of his Prince: That they who
laid snares for his life, being so near his Majesty, for the surety of his
person he could not come to Court, except upon a public assurance, and well
accompanied: For the wrongs committed by his Followers and Vassals, he would
give what satisfaction should be required; Concerning the Band of mutual
friendship betwixt him and some Noblemen, they would have adhered together
without any writing; they were driven thereunto for their own safety, not out
of mind to offer, but repel injuries: That he was infinitely obliged to his
goodness, in not condemning him before he was heard, and for that he had not
lent a credulous ear to his enemies mischievous devices.

The King replied, effects and not words make the affection and submission of a
subject known; and could there be any greater surety for him, then to rely on
the Laws of the Commonwealth and Country? especially (continued he) in a
Country where Laws, and not Faction rule, and where a man's own goodness is
able to preserve him: But such men as you are, raise these Factions, to the
subvertion of all Laws and Authority; and for Subjects to make an offensive and
defensive League against all persons, is to disclaim all Government, and do
what they please without controlment; commit Treason in the highest degree, and
make your own Swords and Power justify your proceedings, which, though ye
first use against mean persons, and conceal the progress of your actions (for
there are degrees in evil, and wicked men begin at that which seems the least
of evils, or not an evil at all at the first) your last aim is likely to be the
robbing upon the Crown: Consider (my Lord) ye are born under a Monarchy, which
admits no Sovereignty but it self, and it is natural to Princes to hold it
in highest esteem, and in no case to suffer it to be shaken by their Subjects:
Take your Prince for your best protection, and an innocent life; renounce that
Union and League with your Peers, which excepted, or commanded, or approved, or
permitted by your Prince, subsisteth not in Law nor in Reason, being forbidden
under great pains; and let it not be heard any longer, that ever such an unjust
Confederation was, and so wonted ^lemency shall be preferred before deserved
Justice; The Earl replied, The League being drawn up by the common consent of
many Lords, Barons and Gentlemen, and subscribed, it could not be cancelled nor
renounced but by their common consent; nor was it profitable for the King, nor
to him other ways to have it done: That being together, they might condescend
to the renouncing and cancelling of it. But (says the King) you to show good
example to the rest, shall first begin; Neither (living) shall any Traitor in
my presence disavow and disclaim my Authority, in what is within my possibility
of accomplishing. The Earl requests him to remember, he came to Court upon a
public assurance: A public assurance cannot so warrant any man, but that he
may fall by his own private misdemeanor, answered the King; withal, considering
a mean courage in a King to be an imputation, and that he did neither wrong
toward God nor his Fame, in revenging himself upon the enemies of the State;
The place, a strong Castle; his present power, all within being his Counselors
and Servants; the danger, if he should escape; the easiness of suppressing the
Rebellion, the head taken away: (The Earl continuing hot and stubborn, in
debating his points of the League, wrath banishing other Doubts and Interests)
his Dagger performed, what armed Justice scar^e dared attempt: The Kings blow
(the noise arising) was seconded by a number of his Servants, who rushing in
the Room left him dead, upon Shrewd-Eve, the 22. of February, 1452.

About the last Scene of this Tragedy, a pair of Spurs between two Platters (an
Emblem of speedy flight) as a part of the Kings Banquet, is directed to Sir
James Hamilton of Cadyow; This he communicates to the Lords and Gentlemen of
the Union, in which time the News of the Earls death is spread abroad: The
Lieguers finding themselves weak to carry so strong a place as the Castle, in
hot blood set on fire diverse quarters of the Town of Sterlin, make Proclamation
against the King and his Council, for violating the assur^nce granted to the
Earl: Infamous Libels are spread every where, and the safe Conduct of the King
and his Council bound to a wooden Truncheon at a Hor^es tail is trailed along
the streets: In the Marketplace, by the mouth of a Crier, to the sound of all
their hunting-horns, they declare the King, and those that abode with him,
Faith-breakers, perjured persons, enemies to all goodness and good men. James
the next brother of the House of Dowglass (a Churchman) being proclaimed Earl,
in rage and madness, committing all sort of Hostility; they overrun the Lands
and Possessions of those whom they suspected would side the King and not prove
of their party: John Lord of Dal^eith; their Kinsman, and of the Name of
Dowglass, they besiege in his Castle of Dalkeith, for that he hated their
proceedings; the Tenants and Vassals of the Earl of Anguss are plunder^d for
the same cause: The strength of the place raised the Siege of Dalkeith; and the
Earl of Auguss, by their many wrongs and insolences, remained more constant to
the King.

In this time the King writes to all the good Towns of the Realm, and
Churchmen, giving reasons for the taking away the Earl, imputing the fault to
the Earl himself, exhorting the people to make no stir for the just execution
of a Man born for the ruin of the Kingdom, and who voluntarily had
precipitated himself in his own mis-hap; offering all his power to keep the
Country in quietness, according to that Authority in which God has placed
him: This blow, as particular Interests made the hearts of men incline, and as
passions were various, was variously and in several manners taken: Some without
inquiring of circumstances, after what fashion or occasion soever done,
allowing it, thought the King had more clear and evident inducements for his
deed, then could fall within the Labyrinths of reasoning. The Majesty of a
Prince, hardly falls from an height to a midst, but easily is precipitated
from any midst, to the lowest degree and station; The King (said-they) has
obviated this fall, has set a foot again and raised his Authority threatened
with ruin; he has vindicated his liberty almost thra^ld, has assured the
Lives, Honors, Estates of many loyal Subjects which were endangered by not
adhearing to the league of the Earl, and keeping their Oath of Allegiance to
the King; he (if he please) now with Honor and Reputation may hold his
Parliaments, bring to pass his designs for the conservation of his Authority,
and the peace of his Subjects. Other blamed this Deed everywhere, and in every
circumstance: laying perjury and murder against him, and the breaking of the
public Faith and Assurance, the common Band of humane Society, the common
defense of all, and the ground of Justice.

To which it was answered, that the Earl was not taken away for his past
demerits and misdeservings, but for what he had recently committed in the Kings
own presence, having spoken to him with an insupportable irreverence; They
which have safe conduct, being obliged to shun all kinds of offense toward
him who gives it them, any enormity being sufficient to annull the benefit of
it.

More, for the breach of Faith, the Earl and his confederates were the more
perjured; and he the murderer of himself: they having violated that Natural
Oath to their King, which all Subjects owe to their Sovereigns, by drawing up a
League among his People, to the breaking of the ties of Sovereignty, giving by
this, occasion and just cause to the King to reward them after their demerits.
Most said the killing of the Earl was evil, but that it was a necessary evil.
That as Nature suffers not two Suns. so Reason of State suffers not that in
one Kingdom their be two Kings, but that of necessity the one must overthrow
the other; and matters going thus, he who gives the first blow has the
advantage. Thus did Men judge diversely, after their proper interests, of the
Deeds of others.

The Torrent of these disorders increasing, Laws are neglected, Towns,
Villages, Houses, the Highways are everywhere afflicted with Rapine, Fire and
Fury, and save needy boldness, nothing is safe and secure in any place.

The changing Multitude (like Madmen limning Pourtraicts with their won blood)
delight in their Proceedings and daily increase the number of the Rebels. In
this Insurrection the King is reduced to many extremities, and is said to have
thought upon an escape Sea to France, if he had not been diverted by James
Kennedie, Bishop of St. Andrews, who told him, that to leave the Kingdom was to
give all over to the insolency of his Rebels, and for fear of burning, to leap
into the fire it self. That besides the high and long continued title of a
King, which the best part of his Subjects yet reverenced, he had sufficient
Friends and Warlike men, who appearing in a Field with him would raise a just
fear in the hearts of those who so hainously dared disobey him. That God would
be present to revenge wronged Majesty, and turn their hopes in despair; That
the Common People were ever changing, and a little time would make them flow to
these from whom they did ebb; and all would return again, except such as were
guilty of other offenses, or such whose poverty made them fear a beggarly Peace
as their greatest punishment. That his chiefest and principal City stood good
for him, which example the other Towns would undoubtedly follow; that Rebellion
was like Thunder the noise of which (if observed duly) was often more terrible
then the blow, and dissolved ordinarily in tears of Repentance and fair
Weather: that here the prudence of Prince manifests it self, when he cannot
suppress and stop all the evils in his State, to suffer and tolerate the least,
and with leisure and time, abolish and extirpate the greater, and make virtue
of Rebellion.

The King, by the Bishops Counsel and Assistance, gathers an Army, but will
not try the hazard of a Battle, before those he had advertised and sent for,
should-joyn with these already about him, and his Forces from all the Quarters
of the Kingdom be united. In the North, the Earl of Huntley had raised a goodly
Company to come to his aid; but the Earl of Crawford, a Confederate of the Earl
of Dowglass, with a power of the men of Anguss, and all who would follow him,
guided by some French Commanders essayed to cut off his passage, and
rencountreth him at Breche^; the Battle is fought, and the victory inclined
where the Kings Standard was displayed by the Earl of Huntley. The equity of
the cause laid aside, the occasion of this Victory was ascribed to John Coloss
of Bonnymoon, who having one of the wings of the Army to guide, which confisted
of battel-axes, great swords, and long spears, and the best invasive weapons,
in the hottest of the skirmish gave ground, and left the middle Ward naked upon
his side: the reason of his revolt is reported, that the night before the
Battle, when every man was resolving with his affairs of the world, Bonnymoon
requested the Earl of Crawford, of whom he held his Lands Ward and relief,
since the next day he was resolved either to be victorious or die in the field,
to subscribe a Precept (himself falling) for entering his Son to his Lands. This
the Superior refusing, the Vassal out of a just indignation, when he should
have charged, retired, and his Company with him. Such thoughts possessed not
the Earl of Huntlies mind; he dealt not so sparingly with his friends in hope
of their good service: To the Forbesses, Oglebies, Leslies, Grants, Irwines, he
freely gave many of his own lands, which raised their courage to the height. In
requital of which, the King after bestowed upon him the Lands of Badyeeno^h and
Loch^ber. In the conflict the Earl of Huntley lost two Brothers; the Earl of
Crawford and Sir John Lindsay his brother, being left on the Field, fled to his
house of Phanheaven, where he was heard to say, He would be content to remain
seven years in Hell, to have in so timely a season done the King his Master
that Service the Earl of Huntley had performed, and carry that applause and
thanks he was to receive from him: This conflict happened upon the Ascension
day, the 18 day of May, 145^.

The King by the confluence and resort of many worthy Subjects unto him, having
time to breathe, and finding himself in a calm, keeps a Convention of the
States at Edinburgh; Ere the Earls of Douglass, Crawford, Ormond, Murray. the
Lord Balvenye, Sir James Hamilton, and others, are cited to answer according to
Law: They instead of appearing, in the Night, upon the Doors of the principal
Churches and other places eminent, fix many Placates and Libels, signed with
their hands; which bear, the Earl of Douglass nor his Followers will never obey
command nor charge in time coming, nor answer citation, for that the King is
not a just Master, but a Blood-sucker, a Murderer, a Transgressor of
Hospitality, a Surpriser of the Innocent and such who deserved no harm at his
hands: Not long after the King levied an Army, which by the approaching Winter
did little Service; and the Earl of Douglass, to save the Lands of Beatrice his
Brothers Widow, unseparated from the House, sought by a Dispensation from the
Pope to have her in Marriage, alleging her untouched of his Brother; which
being refused him, he kept her in place of his wife, the effect of his Sorbon
Divinity, and found hereby more Briars then Roses.

The Barl of Crawford placing two stricts of Seas betwixt him and the King,
spoileth the Lands of all those who forsook him at Brechen; and Arckembald Earl
of Murray, burns the Pile of Srath-Boggy, pertaining to the Earl of Huntley;
In revenge of which, the Earl of Huntley burnt and herried all the Lands of the
Earl of Murray beyond the Spey: The King too, in this madness of Mankind,
defaceth his own Country, pulling down the Houses of his Rebel-Subjects, and
wasting Annan-dale: This ravage and mutual overturning of all having continued
almost two whole years, the Faction of the Earl, far inferior to the Kings, now
weakened with such lasting Incursions, sundry of the chief men and heads
considering the least faults were the best, that it was better to strike fail
in time, then make a full Shipwreck of their persons, Honors, and the well of
the Kingdom and State, counsel the Earl, that Fervors growing colder, since it
could not be undone which was done, he would not set greater work on foot, but
proceeding with convenience, submit himself friendly to the King, who had as
much goodness as generosity, and sought and required nothing of his Subjects
but obedience; and having now prove how difficile it was to overcome them by
Arms, was (perhaps) as much tired as they, would pardon these faults which he
could not otherways amend. Necessity in Affairs of Princes, constraining them
to yield to many things in Government against their first Conclusions, and
resolve to grant that which they could not well hinder: That there were many
hours in the day, and the hearts of Princes were subject to change in them;
that he should not ^orsake the public weal of the Kingdom for his private
Considerations: That after this trouble of State, he might be more esteemed and
sought after by the King, as it is ordinarily practiced among Princes and great
men, who affect only that which is necessary unto them.

To these the Earl answered, That they had went too far forwards to think upon
any cowardly re^reat and coming back again; that the only virtue under a
Tyrant, was to die constantly; that other virtues did fight, but constancy
alone triumphed: That for himself, he would never trust his life to the mercy
of those who under color of friendship and banqueting, had first made away his
two Kinsmen, and after his own Brother; for if they being Innocents, were thus
handled, what might he expect who had been the occasion of such distraction in
the State? He that once had broken his faith, except by a surety, is unable
again (in Law) to contract and enter in Bond with any; Who will be surety
between a King and his Subjects? That Treaties, Agreements, Covenants, Bargains
of a Prince with Rebellious Subjects, engage him no farther, no longer then the
Term-time or day, which pleases him to accept, observe and keep them, as they
turn or may turn to his utility and advantage; that as in Nature there is no
regress found from privation to an habit, so neither in State men once
disgraced do return to their former Honors: That Princes mortally hated all
Subjects who had either attempted to overruled them by power, or had cast any
terror upon them; and howsoever by constraint they bear sail for a time, in the
end they were sure pay^masters: That there was nothing more contrary to a good
Agreement, then to appear to be too earnest and busy to seek to obtain it; he
would sue for none: That all his days he had loved sincerity* constancy and
fidelity, and could not unsay and recant what he had promised and practiced,
nor do against his heart: His friends and his own standing was by their Swords,
which should either advance their enterprises and turn them Victors, or they
would die Honorably like themselves and men, and not ignobly be murdered like
Beasts.

This free and dangerous resolution of the Earl moved many who heard, to
provide for their own safety, and resolve not to suffer long misery for other
men's folly, finding this war was not like to have any end, and that danger and
death would be the only reward of their Rebellion. Amongst others the Earl of
Crawford, after great adversity, when he could not move the Earl of Dowglass to
submit himself to the Kings clemency, with many tears and protestations of his
sincere love and counsel to him, left him; and some weeks after, as the King
was in progress in Anguss, in a sad penitential manner, accompanied with his
best friends, coming in his way with much humility and sorrow, He acknowledged
his fault, pleading rather for pity to his house, which had so long flourished,
then to his person. The King knowing his Example would be no small occasion to
weaken the power of the Earl of Dowglass, and that of all the Rebels he was the
greatest object of his Clemency, was content to receive him, but he would have
it done by the mediation of lames Kennedie, Bishop of St. Andrews, and the Lord
Creightoun, once his greatest Enemies, which he refused not to embrace. Thus
freely remitted with those who accompanied him, he returned to his own house of
Phanheaven, where within few months he died of a burning Ague.

The three Estates, after assembled at Edinburgh, where James Earl of Dowglass,
the Countess Beatrix, whom he kept by way of a pretended Marriage, Archembold
Dowglass, Earl of Murrey, George Earl of Ormond, John Dowglass, Lord of
Balveny, with others their adherents, friends and followers, are Attainted of
High Treason, and their Lands and Goods are Confiscate and discerned to be
seized on to the Kings use. The Earldom of Murrey is given to James Creighton,
who had married the eldest Daughter of the Earl of Murrey; but he perceiving he
could not possess it in peace, turned it back again to the King. At this time
George Creightoun was created Earl of Caithness; William Hay Constable Earl of
Arrole, Darly, Halles, Boyd, Lyle and Lorn, Lords of Parliament; the King
makes a rode into Galloway, reducing every strong hold and Castle of the
Country to his Power; Dowglass-dale he abandoned to the spoil of the Soldier.

Matters at home turning desperate, the Earl of Dowglass being brought to that
pass, that he knew not to what to wish or fear, James Hammilton of Cadyow is
sent to England to invite the ancient enemy of the kingdom to take a part of
her spoil, and help to trouble the King. But the English had greater business
amongst themselves then could permit them to Wedd the Quarrels of the Earl.
After Sir James Hamiltoun was returned with an excuse, and regret that some of
the English Lords could not supply their Confusion, but only by their Counsel,
he advised the Earl of Dowglass to trust to his own Power and Forces, which
were sufficient, measuring their Courage, and not counting their heads, to hold
good against the King. There was no humane affairs where men were not
necessitated to run some danger, nor any business taken in hand with such a
certainty, which by unknown causes, and even light ones, might not run a hazard
of some mishap; That he should study to embrace and accept of what was most
honorable and least dangerous: it was better once to try the worst then ever to
be in fear of it: it was fit for him to commit something to fortune, and wisdom
could counsel nothing but to shun the greatest evil. This lingering war would
not only tire, but overcome and vanquish them, when one fair day of battle,
either by death or victory would Crown their desires. Others advised him not to
hazard upon a Battle, except upon seen and approved advantage, and to time it
out a while; in this lingering war a Truce might be agreed upon, which ere long
might turn in a Peace, in which every thing passed might be forgotten and
pardoned; That Wars were managed more by occasions and times then by arms; That
the King could not be now but tired, since he had learned, that by essaying by
arms to overcome them he had gained nothing but trained up his Subjects, whom
he called Rebels, in all warlike Discipline, and had his Country spoiled and
the Policy defaced. Should they once enter in blood, all hopes were gone of any
conditions of peace.

At this time the King besieging the Castle of Abercorn, to relieve the
besieged, hither marches with all his Forces the Earl of Dowglass; being come
within view of the Kings Army, he observes their march slow, the countenances
of his Soldiers altered, much whispering, and their spirits in a manner
dejected. Countrymen were to fight against Countrymen, friends against
friends, and all against their Prince. Interpreting this rather to proceed from
their weariedness, then want of good will to enter the Lists, as well to
refresh and cherish them to be more prompt and lusty of courage the next
morning, as to take counsel what course to follow, and how to dispose of their
Game, he stays that afternoon and pitcheth his Tents. To men unfortunate
every thing turns an Enemy. Whether Sir James Hamilton gave way to this, or
not, uncertain; but after (it is said) that in a chase he told the Earl, he had
neglected the opportunity of Fight, and should never see so fair a day again,
in which he might have hazarded one Cast of a Dye for a whole Kingdom. But his
Fortune was now declined, and (perhaps) would never stand upright; that by
giving that night to his Soldiers to pause and deliberate on the matter, they
would (perchance) take the safest way, be more advised what to enterprise the
next morning, readily not fight at all, consisting of a number of bold young
Gentlemen, Volunteers, who for the most part out of bravery and compassion
followed him; That the Kings Army by his lingering and lying off was encouraged,
finding they were to cope with men who would adviseere they fought. After which
speeches he bad the Earl farewell: And now, knowing that the way lay open both
for Pardon and Favor to him that would first seek it, he in the night breaks
out with some friends, and having got over the fields betwixt the two Camps,
was brought sately to the King, who graciously received, and freely pardoned
him: The Army having understood the clandestin Revolt and escape of Sir James
Hamilton, disbanded, every man slipping away by secret passages to his own
habitation, that on the morrow there was nothing to be seen but the solitary
field upon which they had encamped: The King out of joy of this bloodless
Victory, caused Proclaim in all his chief Towns, That since Sovereign Authority
had no less splendour by the actions of Clemency, then by these of Justice; all
those who had followed the Earl of Douglass, and been of his party, rather by
misfortune and unadvised rashness, then any evil will against him, should be
freely pardoned: Those who would abandon the Earl and come to the Kings Camp,
whosoever they were, no Justice, no Law should trouble them, but they should be
received to mercy, and have all pardon: After this Proclamation, many submitted
themselves to the King and were pardoned; though Sir James Hamilton was
remitted, yet that under color of reconciliation worse mischief might not be
plotted, the King sent him, with the Earl of Orkney, to the Castle of Rossline
during his pleasure, and the taking in of the Castle of Abercorn; remembering
also it was some prejudice to a Prince to be obliged to any Rebel.

The Earl of Douglass gathering together the split pieces of his Shipwreck,
with his Brothers, and so many of his Confederates as would not forsake him,
flies to England; here with much Travel, by many promises of Rewards, great
hopes of spoil, gathering unto him a power of Outlaws, Felons, Bancker-outs,
and such as lived by Rapine, as well of his own Nation, as of the English, he
makes a Rode upon the West Borders of Scotland; some Villages being burnt,
many preys, much spoil driven into England; at last, he meets with the
valiant men who were appointed to defend the Marches, the Maxwells and Scots;
here in a furious skirmish his Companies are discomfited: Archibald Earl of
Murray's Brother is slain, and his head sent to the King; the Earl of Ormond is
taken Prisoner; himself with the Lord Balvenny with great difficulty escapes
in a Forest; when he sought to return again into England, he finds all
Passages stopped up, the ways laid for him, and beginning to feel much want,
he is constrained in a disguised habit to lurk meanly in the inmost parts of
Scotland, till he wandered toward the far High-lands, where finding Donald Earl
of Ross, Lord of the Isles, one of his League, a man cruel, arrogant,
unpolisht, after many discourses and long conference with him (being no less
eloquent then active) he possesses him with great hopes (after a division of
the Kingdom between them two) of an absolute power and Government of of all the
High-lands, besides the wealth and treasure which he would purchase by the
spoil: He requires only he would break upon the more civil Countries, bring
all the Firebrarnds he could to kindle and trouble them, and cut work for the
King, whilst he with new supplies, and a great Army to be raised in England,
should invade the Marches and bordering Countries: The Earl of Ross, who
thought nothing impossible to him, being to himself in these barbarous parts by
fantasy a King, and was used to vaunt of a long pedigree from Fergus,
relisbeth the profit and possibility of this Enterprise, swears to leave
nothing undone for the accomplishing of it; and parting with him upon mutual
assurance, entreats only celerity and swift performance of what they had
concluded.

Scarce was the Earl of Douglass in England, when the Earl of Ross, the two
pillars of his Designs being Injustice and Violence, supported by fair hopes
from, the South with his wild Mountainers and Islanders (like an inundation)
over-runneth the Neighbor bounds: Argile suffers the first effects of their
fury; the Isle of Arrain is taken, and the Castle made a Bon fire (as if they
were the sacrifice for the sins of the rest) the Bishop of the Isles saves
himself by flight, and takes Sanctuary; Lochquabar and Murryland are spoiled,
the Town of Innerness is set on fire, the Castle surprised, Murders,
Ravishings, Robberies, with what insolency the barbarous Canibals could commit,
are every where, and the sad image of death ravageth amongst the common people:
The Earl of Douglass now at his last shifts and efforts, leaves no shifts nor
helps unsought out; such who lived upon prey and spoil resort unto him; he
makes hot inincursions, and after a most hostile manner, which purchased him
the hatred of all his Contrymen, and turned those who were indifferent in
his quarrel, his professed enemies: This ravage continuing, Henry Earl of
Northumberland (after slain at Caxtoun-field) whom love of the valor of the
house of Douglass, and true commiseration, had brought to take arms with him,
invadeth one quarter of the Marsh, and the Earl of Dowglass turns toward
another: But whilst they are dispersed, and more eager and intentive to carry
away spoil, then to look to their own safety and military discipline, the Earl
of Auguss, with Sir James Hamilton of Cadyow, put them both (with number and
confusion overborn) to flight, slaying many, and taking more prisoners: After
this overthrow, during the Kings reign, the Earl of Douglass deliberating not
to oppose longer to necessity, but to be still till better times, never
attempted tempted to invade his Country.

Amidst these incursions, the Earl of Orm^nd at Edinburgh is beheaded: the
Countess of Dowglass, Beatrice (all hopes being lost of restoring her Husband)
despoiled of her Lands and fair Heritage, turned now a Monster of Fortune, the
blame of her unlawful Wedlock laid upon the Earl, consented to ^y her out of a
certain fear of her life, submits her felt to the Kings Clemency. The King*
who denied not mescy to any sought it of him, that the less guilty amongst the
seditious might withdraw themselves, and the obstinate remain the less powerful
and weak, receives her; and gives her in Marriage to his Brother John, Earl
of Athole, son to the Black Knight of Lorne, designing for her Dowry the
Lordship of Balveny.

By her example the Countess of Ross, abhorring the fierceness and cruelties
(as she gave out) of her barbarous Husband, but rather out of policy to be an
Agent for him, flies to the King, and has Revenues allowed her for the
maintenance of her Estate. Not long after the Earl of Ross himself, the
misadventure of his Confederates having taught him now some wisdom, having seen
the Kings clemency toward others equal to him to Treason and Rebellion, by
many humble supplications craved pardon, and begged peace. The King by his
great prudence, and the course of the affairs of his Kingdom, knew that it was
necessary sometimes to condescend to the imperfections and faults of some
Subjects and having compassion* apply and accomodate himself to that which
though according to the strictness of equity was not due, yet for the present
occasion and reason of State was convenient answered, he would neither
altogether pardon him, nor (...) eject him* there being many signs of his
wickendness, few of his changed mind; when honestly without fraud or guile, he
should erave a Pardon, and give satisfaction to those whom by blood and pillage
he had wronged and by some noble action deface the remembrance of his former
crimes, then should it be good time to receive him. Notwithstanding this should
not discourage him, but he should know he had a desire to make him relish the
effects of his bounty* so he himself would find the means and subject. In this
interim he wished him to keep the common peace of the Country, and not oppress
any of his Neighbors. About this time the University of Glasgow wa^ founded by
William Turnbul Bishop of that Sea; William Hay Earl of Arole, George Creighton
Earl of Caithness William Lord Creighton, died 1455. and the Bishop of St.
Andrews is made Chancellor.

The King partly having loosed, partly cut in pieces that Gordian knot of the
League of his Nobility, began to reobtain again the ancient Authority of the
Kings his Predecessors, giving and imposing Laws to his Subjects, according to
reason and greatest conveniences. Shortly progressing through the Quarters of
the kingdom, by the sound counsel and instructions of the Bishop of St.
Andrews, James Kennedy and William Saintclare Earl of Orknay, used such
clemency, that in a short time he reclaimed all his turb^lent subjects. In the
year 1455. he held a Parliament, where he ratifyed what was resolved upon to be
done for the peace and weal of his People, establishing many profitable Laws
for the posterity; after this time Ambassadors came from England and France
unto him.

Henry the sixth King of England, a soft facile Prince and more fit to obey then
command having restored in blood, and allowed the descent of Richard
Plantagenet Duke of York; the Duke under pretense and countenance of reforming
the State and removing of bad Counselors from the Court (the umbrage of all
Rebellions) by one Jack Cade an Irish, a bold man, and who had a Spirit which
did not correspond with his low condition, who f^igned himself to be a Cousin
of his, of the House of Mortimer, and other his Instruments, raised a
Rebellion; which began amongst the Kentish men and was after continued by his
confederacy with the Duke of Norfolk, Earls of Warwick, Salisbury, Devon, and
others; and notwithstanding he had sworn fealty to King Henry at Blackheath,
again openly took arms against him at St. Albans; where in pitched field Edmond
Duke of Somerset, his greatest Competitor, and who had been preferred to his
place in the Regency of France, was killed, the King wounded, taken and
committed in the Tower of London. At a Parliament after, the Duke is made
Protector of the kingdom: at another Parliament he makes claim for the Crown
as in his own Right, laying down thus his Title. The Son of Anne Mortimer,
Daughter and Heir to Roger Mortimer, Earl of March* Son and Heir of Philip, the
Daughter and sole Heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence, the ^hird Son of King Edward
the third, and elder Brother to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, is to be
preferred by very good right in Succession of the Crown, before the Children of
John of Gaunt the fourth Son of the said Edward the third; but Richard
Plantaginet, Duke of York, is come of Philip, the Daughter and sole Heir of
Lionel, third Son to King Edward the third, then to be preferred to the
Children of the fourth Son, who was John of Gaunt, and so to Henry the fourth
the Usurper his Son, to Henry stiling himself Henry the fifth his Son, and
Henry the sixth now wrongful calling himself King of England. This Parliament
chosen to the Duke of Yorks own mind, at first various, at last unanimously
enacted that Henry during his life should retain the name and honor of a King,
but that the Duke of York should be continued Protector of the Country, and be
declared Heir Apparent, and Successor of the Crown after the death of Henry;
Margarite the Queen, Daughter to Rheny King of Sicily, more courageous then her
Husband, disclaimeth the Parliamentary Authority, and this Agreement of her
King with the Duke of York, as a matter done to the prejudice of her Son, and
against the Laws of Nations, which admit not a forced Contract, and done by a
Prisoner.

The Crown of England hanging at this point, the Queen to her defense imploring
the aid and assistance of her best, greatest Friends and Allies, sends
Ambassadors to King James. These remembering the duties one King owes to
another against Rebels, and the Usurpers of their Crowns, the correspondency
and amity of King Henry with King James during his prosperity, expostulating
the cruelty of the Rebels against Edmond the late Duke of Somerset, Uncle to
King James, slain by them in defense of his Prince, promise in their Kings
Name, Queens and their Sons, with the approbation of the Noblemen of their
Party, to restore to the Kings of Scotland, the lands of Northumberland,
Cumberland and Bishopric of Durham, after the manner the Kings of Scotland in
former times had held these Territories of the Kings of England: so he would
raise an Army, and advance to their aid and supply.

The Duke of York sent hither also his Ambassadors, giving in many complaints
against King Henry; he had oppressed the people with taxations, and all kinds
of exactations; he had preferred to places of State and Government new men, by
whose Counsel, and his Queen, he governed only; he despised the old Nobility,
he had lost Normandy and Gascony, as France had been lost by him; England was
likely to run the same danger. They could not longer suffer his dull
sluggishness, and his Wifes exorbitant pride; he was courageless in War, and
base in peace. For the Duke of York, if Justice did not warrant his claim,
except his Descent were undisputable, and his Title without all exception, he
would not desire the possession nor succession of the Crown. King James should
remember, it was King Henry who entertained the late Dissentions and Civil
Discords of Scotland; he supported the banished Scots in England; and after
they had much enlarged their discourse with reasons of a just War against King
Henry, if King James will arise in arms against him, and assist them, They
promise to restore and render all the Forts and Places of importance taken in
the old Wars from the Kingdom of Scotland, to him and his Successors. King
James answered the English Ambassadors, that he was not ignorant of the State
of their Kingdom, neither to whom their Crown did appertain, but that he would
not take upon him to be umpire of their strife; for the raising an Army, he
would think upon it, though he had small assurance for the performance of their
promised conditions: he had long projected the recovering of the lost
Fortresses of Scotland, in their hands, and now he would try whom he might
trust. The Ambassadors dismissed, the King raised an Army, but left to the
Divination of the posterity, which of the Parties he was to side. The English
and French Writers affirm he was to aid King Henry, and revenge the death of
the Duke of Somerset his Mothers Brother, the Scottish to assist the Duke of
York, and that by a counterfeit Legate from the Pope after he had been upon his
March, he was moved to return. It seems persuaded by the French King (the
ancient Confederate of Scotland, and who for that end had sent his Ambassador)
to keep the English within their own Country, and disable them in their
Conquest of France, he intended upon the advantage of this Civil discord to
make a rode in England, as the French made an Algarad by Sea upon Kent.

The Kings Army being gathered, that it should not loyter in idleness,
attending greater intelligence from the event of the English Factions, having
passed the Tweed, invadeth the Town of Roxburgh, which with little travel is
taken and equalled with the Ground; the Castle a strong Fortress is besieged.
Whilst the King here passes the time, inviting it more by courtesies and
blandishments, then Ammunition and Warlike Engines to be rendered to him,
Commissioners come from the Duke of York, requiring him to leave his Siege, and
contain himself within his own kingdom, unless he would run the hazard to
engage himself in a War against the whole Body of the kingdom of England; they
give him thanks for his forwardness to their supply; all things succeeding
after their desires now, and as they could have wished, they request him to
return home; when their necessity required his aid, they would implore it, and
not prove forgetful for what he should do toward him. King James asked the
Commissioners, if the Duke of York and his Associates had sent any direction
concerning the keeping of their promises to him, when he should appear with an
Army; They assuring him they had no such Commission; I (answered the King)
before their Embassy came, had resolved to take in and throw down this Castle
builded upon my bounds, and being by no benefit obliged to any of your
Factions, will not for words leave off what I am about by arms to perform. The
Commissioners departing the King caused apply his Battery against the Castle,
which courageously defended it self, and holding good beyond expectation bred
an opinion that famine would be the only Engine to make it render.

The Kings Army daily at this Siege increased, and amongst all the Companies
none were more forward and prompt to discharge their duties in this Service,
then those of the late League with the Earl of Douglass; above others the Earl
of Ross, to testify his remembrance of the Kings clemency in his behalf, with
a great company of his Irish came to the Camp, men only fit for tumultuous
fights and spoil. Alexander Earl of Huntley coming, the King with the Earl of
Auguss would take a view of the Trenches, and as to welcome a man, whose
presence seemed to presage good Fortune, caused discharge a pale of Ordinance
together; but his coming to this place was as fatal, as at Sterlin prosperous;
For at this Salve, by the slices of an overcharged piece or wedge, the King,
his Thigh Bone broken, was stricken immediately dead, and the Earl of Auguss
was ^ore bruised: This mis^fortune happened the third of August, the 29, or as
others, the 30 of the Kings life, of his Reign 24. the year, 1460.

Who will take a fair view of this Prince, shall find him to have been endowed
with what conditions and qualities are to be desired or wished in a Monarch,
both for mind and body, of an excellent feature and pleasant aspect, a strong
vigorous complexion, given to all Knightly exercises: He is said to have had a
broad red spot upon one of his cheeks, from which by his Countrymen he was
named James with the fiery face, which would make Physiognomists conceive, he
was of an hot, active, violent disposition, and one who had more need of
restraint then encouragement in all difficulties; yet in his actions we find
him temperate, stayed, and of a well settled humor, proceeding upon sound
grounds, and after mature deliberation, being much given to follow the advice
and counsel of grave men about him; He was upright, sincere, affable,
courteous, loving to his Domestics, humane toward his Enemies, gracious and
benign to all men, a lover of Justice, liberal, but without oppression of his
loyal Subjects, wise, in adve^sity industrious and diligent, politic in
Affairs of State; having always raised up one Faction to relieve him from the
hazard and burden of another, and expose the Faction he most feared to the
nearest hazard: He was wisely diffident, and put on a judicial distrust* often
to be governed as occasions should vary, and could dissimulate according to the
fashions and changes of the time: He seems to have been indifferent in
keeping his Favorites, and that he could ever as well transfer his fancy, as he
had settled his affection; For like the Sun he would make a round, and not
always shine upon one Horizon.

The death of the two Earls of Douglass were fatal to him; and though he was
innocent of the first, the second chanced deservedly in his hand; Courageous
Princes are not to be provoked by any Subject how great soever: Confederations
and Leagues are fearful attempts against Sovereignty, and for the most part end
with the ruin of their Authors: The extirpation of the Earls of Douglass in
the person of James (a Church^man) proceeded rather from his own stubbornness,
then any male-talent the King had against him. In all Nations it is observed,
That there are some Families fatal to the ruin of their Common wealths, and
some persons fatal to the ruin of the Houses and Race of which they are
descended: Since in Kingdoms some have no compassion of their Prince, nor the
loss of his Honor, a Prince should not much regret their loss, nor the ruin of
their persons and Estates: His great clemency appeared in this, That the heads
taken away of that long Rebellion, he followed no particular revenge upon their
followers, not only granting pardons, but forgetting the offenses; knowing it
was better to heal and cure the faulty and sick members of a State, then to
abolish and cut them away; and more valor for a Prince to overcome his own
passions and just wrath, then to vanquish and subdue his proudest enemies; yet
was not his clemency a soft weakness, it being no less cruelty to forgive all
then to spare none, but an order and discretion in Justice, temperate with
severity toward some more then toward others, according to their demerits: He
was very sensible of the afflictions of such as were distressed, as witness the
Countesses of Douglas and Ross: His life having set in the Orient of his Age
and hopes, he deserves in the Records of Memory and Fame, a place amongst the
best but unfortunate Princes.

He had Issue of his Queen, James who succeeded, Alexander Duke of Albany, John
Earl of Mar, Margaret Countess of Arrain by the Boyd, and after Lady Hamilton,
Cecily. He was buried with all Funeral-pomp, within the Monastery of
Holyroodhouse at Edinburgh.

James. III. king of Scots Ano^. 1460:
R. G. fecit


THE HISTORY OF THE Reign of James the third, KING of SCOTLAND.
THE Queen having tidings of the disaster of her Husband, full of griefs and
cares with her Son, came to the Army at Roxburgh; and the public loss being
revealed (for till then it was whispered) with more then a masculine courage
caused give new and desperate assaults to the Castle; many Turrets being
shaken, some Gates broken, parcels of walls beaten down, the Mines ready in
diverse quarters to Spring, the besieged ignorant of the Assailars misfortune,
and by the dissension of their Contrymen from all hopes of relief, treat
upon a surrender; conditions being obtained peaceably to depart with their
lives and goods, the Fortress is given up: and shortly after, that it should
not be a Residence of oppression in following times, is demolished and equaled
with the ground.

Many of the three Estates being here assembled, the Times not suiting with
other Solemnities, at K^lso the Peers of the kingdom in a Military Pomp, set
the Crown upon the head of the King, then some seven years old, and give him
their Oath of Fidelity. At their coming to Edinburgh the education and
governance of him and the other Children is committed to the Queen their
Mother: the Credence of what could make for Peace at home, or War abroad, is
trusted to Andrew Stuart Lord Annandale, the Lord Cassils, Earl of Orknay* the
Lord Boyd Chancellor, the Lord Grahame, the Bishops of St. Andrews, Glasgow and
Dunkel; the Civil Wars increasing in England, the Governors of Scotland, under
color of preserving the bordering Countries, sent forth some Companies, which
upon occasions made Roads in Northumberland, and threw down all the Fortresses
out of which Incursions were wont to be made upon the Scottish bounds, most
especially the Castle of Wark: after which ravaging, the Winter recalled them
home.

The milder parts of the Kingdom reduced to order, Some turbulent Chiefs of the
Mountainers taking the occasion of the Nonage of the King, and of Rumors of
Dissentions amongst the Governors, essay to trouble the Peace of their far and
wild Countries: Allan Lord of Lorn, throws his eldest Brother in close
Prison, with intention to rob him of his Life and Estate; but he after is
surprised by the Earl of Argile; Donald of the Is^es takes the Castle of
Innerness; and placing there a Garrison, proclaims himself King of the Isles,
compelling the neighbor Towns and simpler sort of people to pay him Taxes. At
the Rumor of this insolency all wicked Outlaws resort unto him; by whose power
he invadeth the Castle of Blair in Athole, out of which the Earl the Kings
Uncle with his Lady (once Countess of Dowglass) fly and take Sanctuary in the
Church of St. Bride, where the Church about them set on fire, they were
irreligiously taken, and transported to the Island Ila. Whilst the Governors
were raising an Army, and advancing such forces as were in readiness against
the Actors of these mischiefs, they were ascertained that as these Savages were
lanching forth of that Island in their VVherries and small Vessels made of
boards and wicker, by a violent tempest from Heaven, the most part of them were
dashed against the rocks and drowned: and those who had escaped were stricken
with Pannick fears, and deprived of their right judgments and understandings,
an ordinary accident to men blinded with Superstition, and guilty of Murder
and Sacrilege; amidst which distractions, the Earl of Athole with his Lady was
safely returned to his own Castle.

MARGARET Queen of England, after the second overthrow and taking of her
Husband at Northampton with the Prince her Son, and the new Duke of Somerset,
having fled to the Bishopric of Durham (whilst Richard Duke of York was
establishing his Title and right to the Crown at London) raised in the North of
Scots and English, a strong Army which marched toward York; the Duke of York
leaving the King in the Custody of the Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of Warwick,
though he knew himself inferior in power and number to his enemies, by the
pride of his former Victories and overweening of his Soldiers valor, with
Edmund Earl of Rutland his younger Son, the Earl of Salisbury and others,
rencountreth her at Wak^field-Green, and here by his own rashness with his Son
young Rutland, he is killed.

The Earl of Salisbury is taken, and with other Prisoners beheaded at ^romfret
Ca^tle; their heads were fixed upon Poles about the Walls of the City of York;
that of the Dukes was mocked with a Paper Crown, and exposed to the barbarous
mirth of the beholders: The Queen encouraged by this Victory, desiring to
disannul all Act^ made lately in prejudice of her Husband, marches
courageously toward London; In which time Edward Earl of March, Son to the
late Duke of York, overthrew the Earls of Pembrook and Ormond, both of the
Queens Faction; at Mortimer-Cross, in her way to London, the Queen meeting the
Earl of Warwick and the Duke of Norfolk at St. Albans (who carried King Henry
her husband along with them) overthrew them, and recovered the person of her
King: It is observed, that Victory always fled from where this King was
present: The Citizens of London, at the approach of the Queens Army fearing
Hostility* shut their Gates against her, and armed for resistance: At this time
Edward Earl of March having joined his (...) Army with the remainder of the
Earl of Warwicks, entered in triumph the City of London, and with great applause
and acclamations of the people, was proclaimed King: Queen Margaret and her
Faction retiring to the North, wa^ so the hearts of that people, that they
gathered an Army able to stand for her defense, consisting of Threescore
thousand fighting men; Edward Earl of March, choosing rather to provoke then
expect his enemies* advanced toward them; the place of their meeting was
between Caxton and Tewton: In this fight the Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland, the Lords Beaumont and Dacres, Gray and Wells were slain, and
above Thirty six thousand English struck down; The Dukes of Somerset and
Excester fly to York to carry the News to the unfortunate King, leaving the
Victory to Edward who is again saluted King.

King Henry after this overthrow, perceiving how desperate his hopes were in
his own Country, with his Queen* his Son, and the remainder of his dispersed
friends, secured himself by flight into Scotland; James Kennedy Bishop of St.
Andrews, to whose person the Authority of the State was then reduced* received
him with magnificence and honor, and put him in hopes, by the assistance of
Scotland, to restore his fortune: King Henry, as well to reserve some Refuge
and Sanctuary for himself, as to win the heart, and insinua^e himself in the
favor of the people of Scotland, caused render the Town of Berwick to them,
which the English had violently possessed since the days of Edw. 1. For which
favor the Scottish Nobility vowed at all times to come to his supply, and
defend him to their uttermost; and that the friendship begun might continue
without all vacillation, the Queens of Scotland and England, both descended of
the French Race, began to treat of an Alliance, promising Edward Prince of
Wales should be married with the Lady Margaret, the King of Scotlands Sister,
none of them then having attained the years of marriage.

The miseries of King Henry increasing, suffered not these two Queens to stay
long together; Margaret with her Son Edward, to implore the aid of her friends,
makes a Voyage toward France to her Father Rhene King of Sicily, Naples and
Jerusalem, Duke of Anjou, a Prince large of Titles, short of Power: These who
had followed King Henry into Scotland, whilst he is left only intentive to
devotion in the Cloister of the Gray-Fryers at Edinburgh, return back again to
solicit their friends in England for a second rencounter. Upon the arrival of
Queen Margaret in France, the obtains of her cousin Lewis the eleventh, that
those who favored and assisted the Duke of York, were prohibited Traffic, and
commanded to remove out of the Frenh Dominions, and that Five hundred Soldiers
should come to her aid; a number so small and so unworthy the name of an Army,
that it was but a competent retinue for so great a Princess: with these she
came to the coast of Scotland, and from thence sailed to Tinmouth, where being
repulsed by the Inhabitants, and forced again to put to Sea, s^e was by a
furious Tempest driven to Berwick.

Here leaving the Prince her Son Edward, with the en^rease and supply of some
Scots, taking the King her husband with her, she advanced into the Bishopric
of Duresm, in her march through Northumberland, her Army increased to a great
number: The Duke of Somerset, Sir Ralph Percy, and diverse of King Henrys
well-wishers having resorted unto her; King Edward finding King Henry by the
fresh air of the North to have acquired new Spirits, prepares to oppose him,
and having sent down the Lord Mountague, brother to the Earl of Warwick, he
himself with greater Forces shortly followed: Mountague having through the
Shires where he went, and the Bishopric of Duresm, gathered a convenient Army,
marched directly against King Henry: In the mean time Henry ^eaufort Duke of
Somerset, the Lords Hungerford, Ross, Moulines, Sir Ralph Percy, present
themselves to hinder his further progress; They are overthrown, and King Henry
with great difficulty escapes to Berwick. At the news of this overthrow King
Edward being in his March toward Durham, finding the presence of his Person,
or Army needless, turned toward York, and gave the Earl of Warwick command to
take in all the Castles and Fortresses which as yet held good for King Henry in
the North.

Amongst the Garrisons placed in Northumberland by the Queen there was a
Garrison of the French in the Castle of Anwick, under the Command of Peter
Bruce, otherwise named le Seigneur de la Varoune Seneschal of Normandy, which
held long good against the English. This Peter Bruce was in great account with
Charles the seventh, father to Lewis but sent over with Queen Margaret to make
wrack upon apparent dangers; having escaped Tempests at Sea, he took the
Castles of Bambrough and Dunstanbrough, which he demolished. After he essayed
to keep the Castle of Anwick; but the Earl of Warwick, King Edward lying near
to Durham, there beleagured him: Whether this man came from the Race of the
Bruces of Scotland, or no, is uncertain; for the vulgar Writers in this detract
him, naming him Bryce and a Bretone, or that the Scots would give a proof of
their friendship to the Queen of England, and of their valor to the French;
whilst he is everywhere beset, and near past hope of relief, the Earl of
Anguss, then Warden of the Marshes, raised a Power of twenty three thousand
horse^men, remarkable for their Valor. These about the midst of the day coming
near the Castle of Anwick, and by their colors and arms being known a far to
Captain Bruce, he takes a resolution to sally out and meet them; the strongest
of the Scottish Horsemen rrceiving them, convoy them safely to their Borders;
some of the Besiegers would have fought in the pursuit, but the English General
gave him fair passage.

King Edward having taken all the Castles and Forts which in the North held out
against him, placing Garrisons in them, returned to London: as King Henry, void
both of counsel and courage, came back to Edinburgh. Here he had not long
stayed, when tired with the tediousness of his exile, the prolonging of a
wretched Life, being more grievous to him then death it self, and allured by
false hopes of his Friends, he resolves to hazard upon a return to his own
Kingdom; his Grown lost, all his Favorers and wel-wishers almost slaughtered,
he comes into England; then disguised, and by night journeys, shifting from
place to place, at last betrayed by some of his Servants, he is found out. It
is recorded a Son of Sir Edward Talbots apprehended him as he sat at Dinner at
Wadding Town Hall; and like a Common Malefactor, with his legs under the horse
belly, guarded him up toward London. By the way the Earl of Warwick met him,
who led him Prisoner to the Tower. Margaret his desolate Queen with her Son, is
driven once again to fly to their Father Rhene into France.

King Edward, his Competitors all dead or suppressed, finding a Cessation of
Arms expedient, and a breathing time from War, to settle and make sure his new
Government, as to other his neighbor Princes for peace, sends Ambassadors to
Scotland, to treat for a Truce for some years.

The Earl of Argile, Bishop of Glasgow, Abbot of Holyrood-house, Sir Alexander
Boyd, Sir William Cranstoun, being chosen to this effect Commissioners, come to
York* and the English Commissioners there attending them, a Truce for fifteen
years is agreed upon, and solemnly by both Kings after confirmed.

Mary Queen of Scotland, daughter to Arnold Duke of Gilders, and mother to King
James (the projected Marriage of her Daughter with Edward Prince of Wales, by
the miseries of King Henry and Queen Margarite her kinswoman proving desperate;
her son Alexander, either as he went to the Low Countries to see his
Grandfather, or returned from him, being by the English taken upon the Seas)
limited in credence of governing her children by the insolency of a proud
Nobility, her Reputation branded, after a long languishing with inward
discontentments, turned as it were recluse, and began to bid farewell to this
world. Her melancholy growing incureable, amidst her last Trances when her Son
had come to visit her, the is said to have spoken to him almost to this sense.

That Providence which brought me upon the Earth, and set a Crown on my head,
does now recall and remove me to a better Kingdom; and my happiness is not in
this a little, that I leave this life without change of that estate in which I
peaceably lived. Death now shows me as in a mirror, the frailty of all
worldly Pomp and glory, which before by the marble colors of false greatness
was overshadowed and covered from me. My Griefs have been many, few my
Contentments; The most eminent of which, was the hopes I conceived of you, and
my other children: And now may greatest regret is, that I leave you before I
could see my wishes accomplished toward you. My only care was to have you
brought up in all virtue, and goodness: But Heaven shall bestow that charge to
more prudent Governors: Always take these motherly directions from me, who can
leave you no better Legacy. Be earnest to observe these Commandments which are
prescribed unto you by Religion, for this supporteth the Scepters of Princes:
and a Religious King cannot but have obedient Subjects. What an unreasonable
thing is it, that a King will have a People to acknowledge him for their
Sovereign Prince upon Earth, and will not acknowledge God for his supreme Lord
in Heaven? A King who rebelleth against God, all subordinate Creatures will
rebel against him. Love my children, and laying aside the Port and Stateliness
of a King, receive them with the affection of a Brother. Endeavor to make your
Subjects obey you more out of Love then Fear: or make your self beloved and
feared both together, seeing love alone of it self is often cause of contempt,
and fear alone begets hatred. Remember ye Govern not the* soft effeminate
People of the South, but a sierce Warlike Nation of the North, which oftener use
to be entreated then commanded by their Princes. Be sparing to lay Subsidies on
them, which makes many Malcontents; and live upon your own, suffering others
to enjoy what is theirs: Beware of Flatterers, and exalting undeserving Persons
above your ancient Nobility. Suffer not your Prerogatives to come in Question;
but foreseeing the danger, rather give way to all that with reason is demanded
of you. Moderate your Passions; He shall never Govern a Kingdom, who cannot
govern himself, and bring his Affections within the Circle of Reason. It fears
me, Envy and Malice arm themselves against you, which to overcome, endeavor to
be Martial in your self; for a Prince that is not Martial in himself, shall
never be freed of Rebel on amongst his subjects: a strong arm should hold the
Balance of Justice: When dissension arises, be not a Loyterer and Sluggard,
but with all celerity suppress it in the infancy. Rebellion is like fire in a
City, which should be quenched, though with the pulling down of the neighbor
Houses: Others will instruct you in the art of Governing, with greater
curiosity and wisdom, but not with the like love and affection. I wish this
Counsel be engraven in your heart and conscience after my death, for a
perpetual testimony of my sincerity in your education. And if by the unjust
counsel of others, ye be brought to practice ought contrary to these
instructions, Remember ye cannot shun inevitable dangers both to your State and
Person. But now I am warned from above to deliver this grief^full Body to the
rest of a desired Grave.

After she had thus counseled and blessed her Son, not living many days, she
was buried with all Solmnities and Funeral-Rites at Edinburgh in the College
of the Trinity, which she her self had Founded in the year 1466. 1466.


The King as he increased in years, increasing in strength and ability for
exercises either of recreation or valor, by the Regents is given to a Brother
of the Lord Boyd to be bred in Knightly Prowess; a man singular for his
Education abroad and demeanor at home. The Kennedies were now aged, and become
tired to give such assiduous attendance at Court as they were wont, and the
times required. The Lord Boyd by the weakness of his Copartners governed the
State alone, as Sir Alexander his Brother did the young King To whose Natural
inclination he did so comply and conform himself, that he had the whole trust
of his affairs, and the King had no thoughts but his. So soon as the King began
to know himself, he turned impatient of being subject to the Laws of Minority,
that he himself should be restrained by that Authority which did derive from
him, to loath the Superintendency and Government of others, and to affect an
unseasonable Privilege to be at his own disposal and the governing himself.
Many things are done without the advice of the Governors, and occasion is
sought to be disburdened of their Authority. The Lord Boyd and his Brother in a
little time increasing in greatness, and having an intention to transfer the
Power of the State and Glory of the Court to their Family, fail not to find
opportunity to free the King from the severity and rigor of the Governors
Schooling, and to frame him an escape. Whilst the King remained at Linlithgow,
the Lord Hayls, Lord Sommervail, Sir Andrew Carre of Cesford, Sir Alexander
Boyd, agree upon a match of Hunting, and will have the King Umpire of the Game;
Early, the morning following, the Gentlemen who were upon the Plot failed not
in their Attendance. The King being a mile off the Town, and holding the way
toward Edinburgh, the Lord Kennedy, whose quarter then was to attend, and who
had leasurely followed, suspecting this Hunting to be a Game of State, the King
continuing his Progress, laying his hands upon the Reins of his Bridle,
requested him to turn again to Linlithgow, for that he perceived the time was
not convenient for him to go further, neither was heat a convenient match in
absence of his best deserving followers: Sir Alexander Boyd impatient that the
King should have been thus stayed, after injurious words stroke the Reverend
Governor with a Hunting-staff upon the head, and took the King along with him
to Edinburgh. At a frequent meeting of the States, the Kennedies urged to have
the King continue under Minority, the Boyds to take the Government in his own
Person; after long contestations, wisdom being overcome by boldness, the
Authority of the better party was forced to give place, and yield to the will
of the greater. Thus the Faction of the Boyds prevailed.

After this the Kennedies full of indignation, and breathing Revenge, leave the
Court; cares, grief and age about this time brought James Kennedie, Bishop of
St. Andrews to his Tomb, which in great magnificence he had raised in a Church
builded by himself in the City of St. Andrews: where also he founded a College
of Philosophy, and endued it with many Privileges, and sufficient Endowments
to entertain Professors. By the Death of this Prelate, venerable for his
Wisdom, singular for his Justice and the tranquillity following his Government,
and magnificent in all his actions, the Glory of the Court and Country suffered
a great Eclipse.

For, he taken away, the Boyds laying Foundations for their power and
greatness, began to turn all to their own advantage; The first mark of their
envy was Patrick Graham, the Brother of Bishop James Kennedie by the Mother,
who was Sister to' King James the first; after this man had been chosen Bishop
of St. Andrews, as the Custom then was, by the Chapter appointed for that
Election, he was barred from his Place, and violently repulsed by the Faction
at Court: To repair which indignity he made a journey to Rome; where, being a
Man noble by birth above others, for his Learning and many Virtues, in a little
time, by Pope Sixtus the fourth, he was re-established and confirmed in his
Place.

During his abode at Rome, the old Question concerning the liberty of the
Church of Scotland, began to be exagitated.

The Archbishop of York contested, that he was Metropolitan of Scotland, and
that the twelve Bishops of that Kingdom were subject to his Jurisdiction.
Patrick Graham remonstrated how the Archbishop of York, considering the usual
Wars between the two Kingdoms, was often unaccessable to the Churchmen of
Scotland, especially in Causes of appellation. The Pope, after the hearing of
both Parties, erected the Sea ofs St. Andrews to the dignity of an Archbishops
See; and Patrick Graham, not only was made Primate and Metropolitan of
Scotland, ordained to have the other Bishops under him, but for the space of
three years designed Legate for the Pope, with full power to Correct and
Restore the Ecclesiastical Discipline; and examine the Manners and Conversation
of the Clergy: Notwithstanding these favors of the Bishop of Rome, and the
worth and excellencies of the man himself he dared not return home to his own
Country before the declining of the Fortunes of the Boyds.

This Family seemed now in the Zenith and Vertical point of its greatness, no
imputation could be laid to the Boyds in the time of their Government, except
that they brought the young King by their private working, without the consent
and approbation of the other Regents, to Edinburgh, for the assuming the
Government in his Minority. In approbation of their innocence, and to warrant
them from this danger, the King in a Parliament declares publicly, that the
Boyds were not the Authors, nor Projectors of that business, but only the
Assisters of him and his followers, being not formal but instrumentary causes
of his coming to the Helm of the State himself: That they were so far from
being obnoxious to any blame or reproach for this deed, that they deserved
immortal thanks, and an honorable Guerdon in all time to come, having obeyed
him in that which was most just, honest and expedient for the well of the
Kingdom. Upon this Declaration of the King, the Lord Boyd required the present
action might be registrated amongst the Acts of Parliament, and he obtained
what was desired, but not with that success was hoped for.

In this Parliament, the other Regents are rid of their charge, the Lord Boyd
being made only Governor of the Kingdom, and the object of all men's respects:
having the whole power and authority to minister justice of all kinds to the
Subjects during the Kings nonage, and ^ill he had fully complete one and
twenty years, the defense of the Kings Person, of his brothers, the keeping of
the two Ladies his Sisters, are trusted unto him: He has all the Towns,
Castles, Fortresses, Seaports, Places of Importance at his Command. These
proceedings of the Parliament seemed to some very strange in advancing Men
already great enough, and bestowing upon them all offices of State, and adding
power to such who wanted only will to do mischief, except that they knew well
how to abase and pull them down again, making their fall the more sudden.
Robert Lord Boyd, having the Reins of Government in his hands, and the custody
of the Kings Sisters, dazelld with the golden Sun of honor, to lay more sure
the foundation of his greatness, joyneth in Marriage Thomas his eldest Son, a
youth of extraordinary endowments, both of mind and body, with Margaret the
Kings eldest Siste^; Not long before designed by her Mother to have been given
in Marriage to Edward Prince of Wales, and he is created Earl of Arran. The
Father knowing how easily the conversation of young persons breeds a liking,
had brought them up together, which turning in a love and delight of others
company, concluded last in marriage. This match though royal, great and rich,
instead of supporting the Fortunes of the Boyds much weakened them turning them
the objects of envy. The Nobles repined at it, and the common people (lighter
than the wind and more variable than the Rainbow) made it the subject of their
foolish discourses. Now (said they) the Boyds aspire to the Crown; for the King
with his Brothers removed, it appertains to them, a Kingdom being the Dowry
often of a Wife of the blood Royal. The Kennedies, and such who disliked the
present Government take the occasion of the coffeehouse of the Nobility, and
the rumors of the people, to shake the Kings mind toward the Governor, and
change the brawl of State. To this end they give way to great and universal
oppressions, most of which were hatched and occasioned by themselves. By these
in a short time the Commons turn licentious and dissolute, contemning all
Government, every man doing what seemed best in his own eyes, and the Gentry
divide in Factions: Such who wont to live upon Rapine and Theft return to their
wonted Trades: honest men are spoiled of their goods; the seditious and wicked
are maintained and defended against all Laws and Justice by their Parties. The
State thus troubled, and all order confounded, by sly and crafty men, who at
first pretended great friendship and interest toward the Boyds, the Kings
affection toward them is assailed, and resolutions tried. Many times having
been plausibly listened unto, at last, pulling off their masks, they lay
imputations against them. They remonstrate to him what great disparagement was
between the King of Scotlands eldest Sister and the Son of the Lord Boyd; that
by this match he was robbed of one of the fairest jewels of his Crown; the
Boyds should not have appropriated that to themselves of which they had only the
keeping; she should have been reserved for some neighbor Prince, by which
Alliance the state of the Kingdom, and the Person of the King might have been
in great safety. For, if the King should chance to be infested by some insolent
nobility, the name and power of a neighbor Prince were sufficient to keep him
safe on his Throne, which by this match was endangered. They suggested that the
Boydes builded their estimation in the air of popular applause, and endeavored
to endear themselves in the opinion of the multitude. A Prince is not a Lord of
that people that loves another better then him. Should the Boydes be accused
of peculate and robbing the King and the commonTreasure, the King might make a
prey of their unlawful conquest, and by their Attaindors reward the services of
many of his necessitated friends, it being acquired most height to which their
riches was increased should be feared; the faults of all the disorders of the
Common wealth are laid upon the Boydes, as the Authors of every breaking out
and sedition: that they might the more securely possess the places near the
King At this time complaints from all parts of the Kingdom, and by all sorts of
persons, incessantly being given unto him, advance the intentions of their
enemies, and the Kings mind naturally inclined to fears and superstition,
being long tossed and perplexed, began to turn away from the Boydes, and with
their power in some degrees brought lower and lessened (Preambles of Ruin) but
he would go leasurely to produce this effect and make one change bring forth
another.

The King increasing in years and youthful perturbations, is councelled for the
continuing of the Race and Succession, and the keeping hi^ Person without the
common disorders of the world, to think upon some match profitable for his
country, and honorable for himself. He is courted by many, and courteth others;
the Duke of Burgundy had offered him his daughter, as to other Princes his
friends and neighbors, but his mind was not to have her married at all during
his lifetime.

Andrew Stewart Lord Evandale, then Chancelour of the Kingdom, with the Bishops
of Glasgow and Orkenay, being sent Ambassadors to Christern King of Denmark for
an accommodation, and taking up some business concerning the Isles of Orkenay
and Schythland 1468. the quarrel was taken away by a marriage to be celebrated
between the King and Lady Margaret, King Christerns daughter; a Lady thought
worthy of his bed, in respect of the excellency of her beauty, her royal
descent and greatness of her birth. All matters being agreed upon, these Isles
engaged for her Dowry, there wanted only an honorable retinue and convoy to
bring home the Lady. To this negotiation, by the craft of some about the King,
and vanity of others who gloryed to see their friend promoted to such great
honor, Thomas Earl of Arran, as a man flourishing in fame and riches, and
able to maintain and discharge all magnificence, is deputed as the fittest
person. Thus by the ambition and unattentiveness of his friends, his worth was
made the Scaffold of his ruin; the lamentable condition of men of high desert.
In the beginning of the Harvest, accompained with some young Noblemen and
Gallants, most of which were his select friends and well-wishers, he ascends
his ships. Whilst as the King of Scotlands brother in law, he is some months
riotously entertained at the Danish Court, the rigor of that Northern climate,
by the congealing of the Ocean moored up his ships, and barred all return till
the following Spring. In this absence of a man so near unto the King, his
Father and Uncle, by age, sickness and their private affairs, not so
frequently haunting the Court as they were accustomed: the Kennedyes and they
of the contrary faction having shaken the Kings affection, and broken these
bands (his pleasures, idlenese, and vacancy from the public affairs of the
State) by which the Boydes thought they had kept him sure, move him, now a
litile delighting in action, to proceed to the consideration of such matters as
might be objected against the government of the Bodies. But that this might not
appear to be an act of Faction, but the universal consent of the Kingdom apart,
a Parliament was summoned to be holden in November at Edinburgh. Here Robert
Lord Boyd, with his brother Sir Alexander, are summoned to answer in Judgment
to such points as should be exhibited against them. At the appointed day the
Lord Boyd appeared, but accompanied with such multitude of the common people,
and numbers of his friends, vassals, and followers all in arms with such
ostentation and boasting, that the King and Courtiers were well pleased to
suffer them dissolve and scatter of their own free wills. At this insolency and
malapertness (yet to our own time an usual custom in Scotland) the King
conceived such indignation, that he raised a strong guard to attend justice and
his commandments, and laid secretly Forces to assist these if the Boydes should
oppose his laws by convocation of the Lieges. The Lord Boyd after private
intelligence of the Mines of the Court to blow him up, rather amazed then in
choler at the change of his Masters mind, fled into England; his brother Sir
Alexander arested by sickness, and relying upon his own integrity more then he
ought to have done, considering the malice of his enemies was brought before
the Parliament; his brother and he were challenged, that upon the tenth of July
1466. they laid hands upon the Kings Person* and against his purpose brought
him on the high way to the Castle of Calendar; and that by their private power
and consent, contrary to the established order of the State, and the other
Regents advice, they brought the King to Edinburgh; when Sir Alexander sought
to produce an act of Parliament for abolition or approbation of this deed as
good service, it was kept up, and he being condemned had his head cut off.
Their other accusations contained the topical faults of Favorites, that they
had enriched themselves out of the Kings Treasure, monopolized things belonging
to the Crown, diminished the Revenues thereof, removed worthy men from the
Counsel, placing such in their rooms as had dependency from them. Thomas Earl
of Arran employed in a public charge by the kingdom, absent, unheard, is
declared Robel with his father, and his movables escheated to the King: to his
original faults was added, that he dared marry the Kings sister without consent
of the States, the King being of nonage. At the noise of this thunder clap,
Robert Lord Boyd left this world at Anwick: No sooner had the Spring rendered
the Baltic Seas Navigable, when the Danish Lady with her Fleet Anchored in the
Forth: The Earl of Arran who was the Paranymphe and her convoy, in that
general gladness, by the persuasions of some of his friends, was preparing to
come on shore, and to submit himself to the Kings clemency; but his Lady who
had afar discerned his danger, coming aboard disguised, and giving him
particular information of the calamity of his house, the weakness of his
friends at Court, and the many snares envy and malice had laid to surprise him,
he hoisted ^ails, and with her, who would be partaker of all his misfortunes,
returned to Den^mark; from Denmark by Germany, he came to King Lovys in France,
who interposed his requests to King James for his regress and restoring; but
the Letters in his favor producing no effects, Charles Duke of Burgundy making
war against his Rebel Subjects, he was graciously received by him and
entertained as his Ally; his Lady remained at Antwerp, where she bore him two
children, James and Gracile.

1469.
Lady Margaret the 10. of July 1469. or after others 1470. makes her entry
into Edinburgh, and scarce having attained the sixteen year of her age, is
married to King James in the Abbey Church of Holy-rood house; and in the month
of November following by a convention of the three Estates was Crowned Queen.

The King in exorable in the behalf of the Earl of Arran, and breathing his
total Ruin, sends Letters to Antwerp, filled with promises and threatenings,
to move his sister to return to Scotland. These at the first prevailed nothing
with this Lady to make her forsake the husband of her youth; many letters, and
from several friends and well-wishers in several fashions and styles, coming to
her, at last she was brought to believe her presence would mollify the mind
of her enemies, and work her husband a re-establishment of his former favors
with the King her brother, and restore him to all his possessions and
dignities: Upon which hopes she comes to Scotland. But these hopes proved all
false; for in stead of having access to her brother, she is kept at Kilmarnock
the chief house of the Boydes, as in a free prison; and her husband is summoned
within threescore days to adhere to his wife under pain of Divorce: the
unfortunate Earl for fear of his head, not appearing, his marraige is declared
null; his wife is divorced from him, and is constrained by her brother to marry
James Lord Hamilton, to whom also the Earldom of Arran was given for Dowry.
Not long after her two children to Earl Thomas, James and Gracille are brought
to Scotland who in the proceeding of time proved little more fortunate then
their father; for James was slain by Hugh Montgomry of Eglinton, and Gracille
though first married to the Earl of Cassiles, and after to the Lord Forbess,
was barren. Some have recorded that the Earl Thomas, after this violent
bereaving him of his wife, dyed of displeasure at Antwerp, and had a Tomb
ra^sed over him with an honorable Inscription by Charles Duke of Burgundy;
others who hate the Boydes, tell he dyed not at Antwerp but at Florence, and
that he was killed by a Merchant of Florence out of jealousy of having abused
his wife.

Queen Maragret the third year after her marriage in the month of March brought
forth a son who was named James; and Christern King of Denmark to congratulate
the happy delivery of his daughter, and of expectation of a continued
succession to the Crown of Scotland of his Race, released all the right, title,
claim, which he or his successors might have to the Isles of Orken^y and
Scythland. The King calls after a Parliament at Edinburgh, wherein, though
the Reformation of abuses, as wearing of silk and other foraign triffles, the
building of Ships, and enacting Laws for the present time were pretended, a
liberal Subside was the greatest aim. His Exchequer being empty, and many of
his best friends turning necessitous and needy, John Lord of the Isles was
attainted for his own and his Father misdemeanour, the King raises forces to
pursue him; the Earl of Crawford being made Admiral, the Earl of Athole the
Kings Uncle Lieutenant of the Regiments by land, such means in a short time was
used by the Earl of Athole, that the Lord of the Isles submitted himself to
the Kings elemency, and in a convention of the States at Edinburgh, he resigned
all the right he had to the Earldom of Ross, the lands of Knap-den and
Kintyre, which the King annexed to the Crown.

Patrick Graham Archbishop of Saint Andrews, having at Rome understood the
fall of the Boydes returns to his own country; where first amongst his
friends, and the most peaceable sort of the Clergy, he divulgateth the Bull of
the Pope for his supremacy over the other Churchmen of the Kingdom, and his
power of their trial and promoting to benefices, and after caused proclaim it
at all public places. The laudable Elections anciently used about the Places
and Offices of Churchmen by the corruption of the times, being taken away, and
that Power altogether assumed by the King. The Courtiers, who were accustomed
to sell Benefices, and the Churchmen who were wont to buy them, reject the
Bull, and set themselves against him; by their traffic he is discharged to
take the Place or Ornaments of an Archbishop, or carry any other Cross or Cap
then what the former Bishops used to have. But here they set not up their rest,
William Schevez a man in those times admired for his skill in Astrology, and
promoted to be Arch-Dean of Saint Andrews, seconded by John Lock the Rector of
that University, a better Grammarian then Christian, excommunicates this
Archbishop for his presumption, and that he sought to bear rule over his
Brethren Bishops. When this censure had passed upon him, he is degraded and
shut up in Prison. William Schevez is after promoted to his place, and
consecrated upon the Passion Sunday in Lent at Holy-rood house, the King being
present: he likewise receives the title and faculty of Legate, and is
confirmed Primate of the Realm; notwithstanding the impediments objected to
Patrick Graham by the Churchmen concerning that same dignity and preheminencie;
So various and deceitful are the ways of Men.

The King being slow to action, and more inclined to a solitary form of life,
then to travel and business; his brothers being Princes of unquiet and restless
Spirits, to whom public like employments were recreations; and withal being
ambitious, prodigal desirous of Rule, and to be Governors of the people
themselves, and Kings in fact, how ever their elder brother was in title; they
set themselves altogether to study novations, and bring the King in contempt
with his subjects, and divert their minds and love toward him. To this effect
they had drawn by their towardness and familiarity, many of the young Nobles
and Gentlemen to follow them. The King was obnoxious to some public scandals,
for by his too great frugality, care to increase his Treasure, and study of
purchasing, by taxations, sale of Church Benefices, and too exact taking up of
fines, supervaluation of Wards; he had gotten the Name of covetous, and was not
small distaste amongst the Commons. Edward King of England that the Scots by the
instigation of the French, should not trouble his new and scarce settled
government, employing all his counsels and diligence to divide them amongst
themselves, wrought not alittle on the unquiet spirits of these young men. The
Duke of Albany having been taken upon the Seas by the English, was honorably
entertained by him, and with great hopes sent home; after which time King
Edward and he kept always private intelligence together. The Duke being
promoted to the keeping of the Castle of Dumbar and Town of Barwick; the King
of England, to insinuate himself in his affection, was wont to whisper unto
such who loved him, that if his brother kept not fair with England, he would
one day set him in his Place upon his Royal Throne.

At this time the King was served by men whom his opinion of their worth and
love toward him had advanced to places, and whose fortunes and estates wholly
depended upon his safety, and who were less apt to do him harm. His counsel was
likewise of men approved for their affection to him; and thus secluding great
men from his familiarity and affairs, he gave them cause of offense. His
brothers long masking their ambition under coffeehouse, stir the male
contents to complain against the Government, which ordinarily falls forth,
not because a people is not well governed, but because great ones would govern
themselves. These upbraided the King with inglorious sloth, and endeavor by
his dishonor to increase the credit of his Brothers. These spared not to speak
evil of him every where, and what they pleased of his Ministers and Favorits;
they said he neither used rule nor moderation in his proceedings, that his
counsel was base, and of men of no great account, who consulted only to humor
him; That a Mason swayed ^a Kingdom (this was Robert Cochranne, a man
courageous and bold* first known to the King by his valor in a single combat,
and after from an Architect or Surveyor of his buildings, preferred to be of
his counsel) a silly Wretch swayd the soul of a great King, and curbed it, as
it were interdicted or charmed to his pleasure. His contributions were the
rewards of Parasites, to whom fortune, not merit gave growth and augmentation;
that honors wept over such base men who had not deserved them; and the stately
frames of ancient houses upbraided with reproaches the slender merits of those
new-up-starts who enjoyed them; that he began to look downwards into every
sordid way of enriching himself: That his Privado^s abused him in every thing,
but in nothing more then in making him believe, what was plotting against them,
was against his Person and Authority; and that it was not them his brothers and
the Nobility sought to pull down but his Sovereignty.

His counselors, servants, and such who loved him, having long busied their
wits to save their Masters reputation, and that no shadow of weakness should
appear to the Common people, understanding by whom these rumors were first
spread abroad, and observing many of the Nobility and Gentry to favor the
proceedings of his brothers, not daring disclose themselves to the King what
their suspicions made them fear would come to pass, knowing him naturally
superstitious, an admirer and believer of Divinations, suborn an aged woman one
morning as he went a hunting to approach him, and tell, she had by Divination,
that he should beware of his nearest kinsemen; that from them his ruin was
likely to come. This was no sooner told when the woman was shifted, and some
who were upon the Plot began to comment the Prophecy of his brothers. A
Professor of Physic, for his skill in Divination brought from Germany, and
promoted to some Church-benefice, about that same time told the King, that in
Scotland a Lion should be devoured by his Whelps. William Schevez, then
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, by way of Astrological predictions, put him in a
fear of imminent dangers from his kindred, though truly he had his knowledge by
Geomancy and good informations upon earth, by the intelligence between the
Nobility and Churchmen.

Many such like aspersions being laid upon the King, the people cried out that
he had only for his fellow-companions Astrologers and Soothsayers, whom as
occasion served, he preserrd to Church-benefices and Bishoprics. Patrick
Graham* then Prisoner in Dumferling, a man desolate and forgotten, as if there
had not been such a man in the world, taking the opportunity of the rumors of
the time, sent a Letter to the King, which contained.

That the misery of his imprisonment, was not so greivious unto him as the sad
reports which he heard of his Majestyes estate; he was hardly brought to
believe them, but by his long detention and imprisonment, he was assured his
great enemy was in great credit with him. That he had brought the King very low
in making him jealous of his brothers by giving trust to his vain Divinations;
and no wonder these Arts bring forth dissentions, which have their precepts
from the father of lies and discord: to foment discord among brothers, was
reproachful to Religion, and outrageous to Policy, to seek to know things to
come by the Stars was great ignorance, that Oracles leave a man in a wilderness
of folly.

That there was no other difference betwixt Necromancy and Astrology, saving
that in one, men run voluntarily to the Devil, and in the other ignorantly.
Humanity attains not to the secrets above, and if it did, it is not wise enough
to divert the wisdom of heaven, which is not to be resisted, but submitted
unto; that never any had recourse to these Arts, but they had fatal ends; that
Almighty providence permitting that to befall them out of his justice of
necessity, which before the Oracle was sought, was scarce contingent; that he
should rest upon the Almightyes Providence, and then all things would succeed
well with him, whose favors would wast him out of the surges of uncertainties.

After this free opening of his mind, Patrick Graham was removed out of
Dumferling to the Castle of Lock^leven (a place renowned long after by the
imprisonment of Mary Queen of Scotland where in a short time he left the
miseryes of this world.

The people now thoroughly deceived and incensed against their King, the most
audacious of the Nobility had brought his brothers on the way of taking the
Government to themselves, their power being able to perform what their ambition
projected; and the murmuring of the people seeming to applaud any
Insurrections. The Earl of Mar, young and rash, purblind in foreseeing the
events of things, is stirred up to begin the Tragedy; some of the Nobility of
his faction being present, with more liberty then wisdom, he broke out in
meanacing and undecent speeches, as that his brother did wrong to his Majesty
in keeping near him, and being so familiar with such contemptible fellows, as
these of his Bedchamber and Officers; withal, railing against the Government of
the State and Court. The King passionately resenting his words, caused remove
him from his presence, and he persevering in his railing, was committed to the
Castle of Craigmillar, where surmising that he was in a Prison, his anger
turned into a rage, his rage kindled a Fever, and his Fever advanced to a
Frenzy: This sickness increasing, that he might be more near to the Court and
his friends, in the night he is tra^sported to the Cannons Gate in Edinburgh:
the King compassionate of his disease, sends his Physicians to attend him,
they, to restore his understanding which was molested, open some veins of his
head and arms, in which time whether b^ his own disorder and misgovernment in
his sickness, the bands being loosed which tied the lancing, or that they took
(...) great a quantity of blood from him, he fainted, and after sowning, dyed
unawares amongst the hands of his best friends and servants. These who hated
the King, gave out that he was taken away by his command, and some writers have
recorded the same; but no such faith should be given unto them* as to B. W. E.
who was living in that time, and whose records we have followed, who for his
place could not but know, and for his profession would not but deliver the very
truth; certain Witches and Sorcerers being taken and examined and convicted of
Sorcery at this time, and being suborned, they confessed that the Earl of
Mar had dealt with them in prejudice of the King, and to have him taken away
by incantation. For the Kings Image being framed in wax, and with many spells
and incantations baptized, and set unto a fire, they persuaded themselves the
Kings Person should fall away as that image consumed by the fire, and by the
death of the King, the brothers should reach the Government of the State; with
such vanities was the common people amused.

Alexander Duke of Albany imputing the death of his brother to the favorites of
the King, and avouching them to have been the occasioners of his distraction,
stirred the Nobility and People to revenge so foul a deed; but whilst he keeps
private meetings with them of his Faction in the Night to facilitate their
enterprise, betrayed by some of his followers, he is surprised, and imprisoned
in the Castle of Edinburgh. Out of which about the appointed time of his trial,
by the killing of his keeper he escaped, and in a Ship which to that effects
was hired, sailing to the castle of Dumbar, of which he had the keeping, he
passed to France. After the escape of the Duke of Albany, the Lord Evandale
Chancellor of the Kingdom, raising the power of the nearest Shires,
beleaguered, the Castle of Dumbar: the besieged unprovided of victuals, as men
expecting no such alterations, betake themselves in small Boats to the Sea,
and came safe toward the Coasts of England. The Castle having none to defend
it, is taken; some Gentlemen in persuit of the flying soldiers, by their own
rashness perished.

The Kings of Scotland and England tossed along with civil troubles, and
affecting peace with all their neighbors, by an equal and mutual consent of
thoughts send at one time Ambassadors to one another who first conclude a peace
between the two Nations; and that the Posterity might be partakers of this
accord, contract afterward an Alliance between the two Kings. It was agreed
that the Princess Cicilia youngest daughter to King Edward, should marry with
James Duke of Rothsay, when they came to years of discretion. A motion heard
with great acceptance; but it was thought by some familiar with King Edward and
in his most inward Counsels, that really he never intended this marriage* and
that this negotiation aimed only to temporize with Scotland, in case that
Lovys of France should stir up an invasion of England by the King of Scotland.
King Louys at this time had sent one Doctor Ireland a Sorbonist to move King
James to trouble the Kingdom of England, and to give over the projected
marriage; which when King Edward understood, knowing what a distance was
between things promised and performed, to oblige King James, and try him more
strongly to the bargain, that this marriage might have more sway, he caused for
the present maintenance of the Prince, and as it were a part of the Dowry of
Lady Cicilia, deliver certain sums of money to King James. Notwithstanding of
which benevolence the the witty Louys wrought so with the Scottish Nobility,
that King James sent Ambassadors to the King of England, entreating him not to
assist the Duke of Burgundy his brother in Law against King Louys, which if he
refused to do, the Nobility of Scotland who were now turned insolent, would
constrain him by reason of the ancient league between the French and the Scots
to assist the French.

The Duke of Albany during his abode in France, had married a daughter of the
Earl of Bullogine (she was his second wife, his first having been a daughter
of the Earl of Orkenay, a Lady of great parentage, and many friends) who
incessantly importuned King Louys to aid the Duke for the recovery of his
inheritance and places in the State of Scotland, out of which he was kept by
the evil Counselors of his brother. Louys minding to make good use of his
brother, and underhand increasing discords and jealousies between him and the
King of England, slighting his suites told him, he could not justify his
taking of Arms to settle a Subject in his inheritance; That Princes ought to
be wrought upon by persuasion; not violence, and he should not trouble a King
otherwise then by Prayers and Petitions, which he would be earnest to perform.
Upon this refusal the Duke of Albany (having burryed his Duchess) troubled
with new thoughts came to England. King Edward with accustomated courtesies
receiving him, gives him hopes of assistance, entering of in communication with
him how to divert the Kingdom of Scotland from the invasion of his Dominions
at the desire of the French, the Agents and traffickers of Louys lying still in
Scotland, and daily bribing and soliciting the Scots Nobility to necessitate
the English to stay at home. The Duke freely, and in the worst sense revealed
the weakness of his Kingdom, that his King was opinionative, and had nothing of
a Prince in him but the name: His ungoverned Spirit disdained to listen to the
temperate Counsel of sober men, obeying only his own judgment. Such who
governed under him, were mean persons and of no account, great only by his
favor, and endued with little virtue, who ruling as they listed, and excluding
all others, made use of his Authority for their own profit and advantage. The
Nobility were malcontents, and affected a change in the Government; which
might be easily brought to pass by the assistance of King Edward. If he would
help to raise some civil broyls and discention in the Nation it self, he
needed not to be in fear that they could or would trouble his Country by any
invasion: The King hearing the Duke manifest what he most affected, approving
his judgment, promised him all necessaries, and what he could desire to
accomplish the design: and he undertaketh by some fair way to traffic with the
Nobility of Scotland for an alteration of the present form of Government. After
a dangerous intelligence, the Lords of Scotland, who under the shadow of the
public good, but really out of their disdain and particular interests,
conspired against the King send the Duke word, the golden Age could not be
framed, nor Arms taken for the good of the Commonwealth, nor the State
altered, without the frequestring of those from the King who misgovern'd him.
And these could not be removed by that power which was amongst themselves,
without great danger and trouble, considering the Kings faction and the
malignant Party. If King Edward would agree to the raising of an Army in
England, in favor of the Duke of Albanie, and for restoring him to his Places
and inheritance, out of which he was most unjustly ejected: and other
pretenses, of which they should afford the occasions; which no way should do
harm to the Kingdom of Scotland disordered already, and laid waste, more by the
license of a Tyrant in peace, then it could have been by war; and at this time
bestow upon them favors, as they might one day hereafter challenge to receive
the like; The Nobility of Scotland should be ready with an other Army, not to
fight, but to seize upon the Kings Favorites, and Misgovernors of the State:
for which the English should have many thanks. That this Enterprise could not
but prove most successful, the hatred of the Commons considered against such
violent oppressions. The King was fallen into so low esteem, that assaulted by
the English, he would be constrained by the submission of his Crown to entreat
for safety. The King of England understanding this was to touch the finest
string of State and Dominion (for it is a matter of much consequence and main
importance, to defend the subjects of an other Prince; for under this Mask and
pretense of protecting the Liberties of a People, of assistance and aid, an
usurpation and oppression of all liberty might be hidden; and many have
established and settled themselves in those Kingdoms, which they came to
relieve from tyranny, and the oppression of their Rulers, keeping by force what
was granted to them at first by way of trust, and under the color of helping
usurped a Sovereignty) agrees easily to what was demanded and resolved upon.

The Lords of the Association to play more covertly their Game, and mask their
intentions (the Commons ever suffering and paying for the faults and errors of
the great ones) give way for the breaking loose of the Borderers. Fierce
incursions by the English are made upon Scotland, and by the Scots upon
England, some Villages on either side are burnt. The secrecy to this business,
which was inviolably observed, was of great importance, which is the principal
knot and try of great affairs. Rumors are spread that the Dukes of Gloucester
and Albany, with James late Earl of Dowglass, and Alexander Ierdan and Patrick
Halyburton, men proscribed, and upon whose heads a price was set, were at
Anwick with a powerful Army, and in their march toward Kelsoo. The King
wakened out of his Trances by the Alarms of his Nobility and clamours of the
people, made proclamations to all between sixty years and sixteen to meet him
at Edinburgh, and to be in readiness to oppose their old enemies of England now
come upon the Borders.

After many delays and much loytering an Army is assembled by the Nobility,
which consisted of and a number of C^rts charged with small Ordinance. New
incursions being blazed to have been made by the English, the King amidst these
Troops marched to Lawder. The Army was encamped, and all things Ordered the
best way the occasion could suffer them, little or nothing being left to
Fortune, if the English should invade, whom the Lords knew were not at all yet
gathered, and though gathered, and in a Body, and upon the Bord^rs, or nearer,
would never invade them.

The King at this time is m^rvellously perplexed, and become suspicious of the
intentions of his Nobility in this Army, in this confusion of thoughts, fell
upon two extremes. In his (...) conversation too familiar and inward with his
(...) Servants and favorites, which rendered them (...) believing the bare name
of King to be sufficient whilst weakness and simplicity had made him despised,
and them hated) and too retired, reserved and estranged from his Nobility,
which made them malicious.

This he did as his pensiveness conjectured, that his Nobles should not attempt
any thing to the prejudice of his royal Authority, independent of any Council.
But what he most feared came to pass; he resolved and dispatched all matters by
his Cabinet Counsel: where the Surveyor of his Buildings was better acquainted
with the affairs of the State than the gravest of his Nobility. This
preposterous course of favor made the great men of the Kingdom to fall
headlong upon their rest, though long projected attempt. After many private
conferences in their Pavilions, the Chiefs of the Insurrection, as the Earls of
Anguss, Lennox, Huntley, the Lords Gray, Lile and others, about midnight come
together in the Church of Lawder with many Barons and Gentlemen. Here every of
them urging the necessity of the times, and the dangers the Commonwealth was
like to fall into, requires speedy resolutions: and having before
premeditated, deliberated and concluded what to follow, they draw up a League
and confederation of mutual adherence in this order.

Forasmuch as the King suffers himself to be governed by mean persons and men
of no account, to the contempt of the Nobility, and his best Subjects, and to
the great loss of the Commons: The confederates considering the imminent
dangers of the Kingdom, shall endeavor to separate the Kings Majesty from
these naughty upstarts, who abuse his Name and Authority, and despise of all
good men; and have a care that the Commonwealth receive no damage. And in
this quarrel they shall all stand mutually every one to the defense of another.
The design agreed upon, and the confederacy sworn, the chiefs of them in Arms
enter the Kings Pavilion, where, after they had challenged him of many
misorders in his Government, contrary to his honor, the Laws and good of his
Kingdom, they took Sir William Roger, a man from a Musician, promoted to be a
Knight, James Homill, Robert Cochran, who of a Surveyor of his works was made
Earl of Mar, or as some mittigate that title, Intromittor and taker up of the
Rents of that Earldom, by whose devise (some Authors have alleged) copper
moneys had been coined, by which a dearth was brought amongst the Commons;
which (as others have recorded) was an unjust imputation, for that copper money
was coined in the Minority of the King, in the time of the Government of the
Boyds, with others. All these being convicted by the elamours of the Army, were
immediately hanged upon the Lidder. John Ramsey a youth of eighteen years of
age, by the entreaties, Prayers, embraces of the King was preserved. Thus they
the late objects of envy, were turned and become the objects of Pity and
Compassion. The body of the Commons and the Gentry of the Kingdom by this
notorious act at Lawder, being engaged, and being made Partakers of the Quarrel
of the discontented Noblemen, and for their own safety tied to second and
assist all their intentions, and to advance their ends: The King is conveyed to
Edinburgh, and shortly after he either enclosed himself in the Maiden Castle as
his lodging or, which is more probable, was there, by the contrary faction
committed as his Prison, the Earl of Athole and some other Lords being
appointed to attend him.

During this time the general humor of the kingdom being ripe for mischief,
Alexander Duke of Albany (every thing falling right as it was plotted)
prevailed so with King Edward that the Duke of Gloucester the King of Englands
Brother, with the title of Lieutenant general for him set forwards toward
Scotland. The Army consisted of two and twenty thousand and five hundred. In
his retinue went of the Nobility, Henry Earl of Northumberland, Thomas Lord
Stanley, with them was the Duke of Albany. The Earl of Dowglass came not, being
reserved for an after game. The Duke of Albany having been before Commander of
Berwick, and a Man who was still in his absence beloved of that Gar^ison,
diverted the Duke of Gloucester from Anwick where he had encamped in lune, to
assail the Town of Berwick. By his intelligence they enter the Town without
great opposition, and it is given up to their discretion. The Castle by the
Lord Haills the Captain, was made good against their assaults. The Duke of
Gloucester foreseeing that this Siege would spend much time, considering the
uncertainty of events, and being invited to march forward by the Lords of the
association of Scotland, committing the charge of assaili^^ the Castle to the
Lord Stanley, Sir John Elrington, and Sir W^lliam ^arr, with the body of the
Army marched directly to (...).

The Country lay open to their invasion; no Army taking the Field to oppose
them, they came in Scotland the twentieth day of August 1482. the Army encamped
at Restlerig, (...) Duke himself entered the Town of Edinburgh which at the
entreaty of the Duke of Albany, who was his Harbinger, he spared, receiving
such presents as the Citizens offered unto him. His entry seeming rather a
Triumph than hostile invasion. The King being shut up from him and immured in
the Castle, the Duke by a public writing at the Market Places gave out high
Demands; That King James should perform what he had covenanted with his Brother
King Edward; That he should give satisfaction for the damage done the English
during the last inroads of the Borders, which if he refused to accomplish. He
as Lieutenant to his Brother was to exact of him and take satisfaction of his
Country, denouncing him open war, and proclaiming him all Hostility. King
James for saken of his People, and wronged by his Lords, laying aside his
Passions, and taking to him more moderate and discreet thoughts, as a Man in
Prison, answered nothing to his Demands.

The Lords, who by their Kings misfortune had reckoned their felicity, having
obtained what they chiefly desired, to obviate the common and last danger, the
thraldom of their kingdom by these strangers whom they had drawn into the
Country for the recovery of their Liberties, assemble themselves together at
Hadington with some Companies, not to fight but to supplicate. They sent the
Lord Darnley and the elected Bishop of Murray to entreat a suspension of Arms,
and require a firm and lasting Peace for time to come: The beginning of the
war, and taking of Arms was for the safety of this the neighbor Country of
England, miserably thral'd by a licentious Prince: there was nothing more
unworthy of a King or Republic, than not to keep their promised Faith. The
English could have no color for executing their indignation further upon this
Country, which already by the rapine of their own Men was impoverished and
unmanu'd: Only now to be recovered by entertaining Peace with their Neighbors,
and amongst themselv^s. They require that the Marriage contracted between the
Prince of Rothesay and Lady Cicily King Edwards Daughter might be accomplished
when it should please the King of England, and the age of the two Princes might
suffer it. For any spoil taken in these last incursions, the interest
considered upon both sides, satisfaction should be given out of the public
contributions. The Duke of Gloucester as forgetting and seeming not to know the
grounds of their coming into the Country, and looking to nothing more then his
own fame and Glory, Answered, his coming into Scotland, was to right the honor
of his Country so often violated: and to restore the Duke of Albanie, unjustly
commanded to exile, to his own native soil, and the dignity of his Birth: as
concerning the Marriage of the Prince of Scotland with the Daughter of England,
He knew not how his Brothers resolution stood at the present; whereupon he
required repayment of the moneys lent to their King upon the first agreement:
and withal a delivery of the Castle of Barwick up into his hands: or if they
could not make the Castle to be rendered, they should give their oaths upon the
holy Evangelists that they should neither assist the besieged, nor harm the
Besiegers, till the Castle were either by force taken, or upon fair conditions
rendered.

The Lords having received this answer, yielded freely to all the Conditions,
except they found themselves perplexed in the rendering of Berwick: it being a
Town of old appertaining to the Crown of Scotland, though by force and violence
the English had a long time kept it, that did not take away their right and
title. After much contesting, agreeing to the surrender of Berwick, they
desired that the walls of the Town should be demolished, that it might not be a
place of Tyranny and incursion over their bordering Countries. No arguments
could prevail against the Duke of Gloucesters resolutions, and being stronger
in power he persever'd in his demans, and in ^ll likelihood this was agreeed
upon between the Duke of Albany and the confederate Lords, and the English,
before their entering Scotland. Thus the Castle and Town of Berwick returned to
the English the 24. of August 1482. after it had been delivered by Queen
Margarite to gain Sanctuary for her Husband King Henry (when expelled England)
and remained in the possession of the Scots twenty and one years.

They likewise appointed a day for restitution of all the moneys lent by King
Edward, and promised upon a full discussion to make satisfaction for all
damages done the English by any in-road of the Scottish Borders. For the Duke
of Albanies provision, whose safety was principally pretended in this
expedition, a general pardon was promised for him and all ^is followers;
Together with an abolition of all discontents; Whereby he had given unto him
the Castle of Dumbar, with the Earldoms of Mar and March; he should be
reinvested in all his former Dignities and Places, and by consent of the
Nobility of Scotland, he was proclaimed Lieutenant of the Kingdom.

The Peaceproclaimed, the Duke of Gloucester in all solemnity of greatness
returned toward London, being welcomed by the King with many demonstrations of
great joy. He to show how much he approved the conditions of this Peace, went
solemnly in procession from St. Stevens Chapel, now the Parliament House,
accompanied with the Queen his Sister, and a mighty retinue of the greatest
Lords into Westminster Hall. Where in presence of the Earl of Anguss, the Lord
Gray, and Sir James Liddale, Ambassadors extraordinary from Scotland, the
peace was ratifyed. At the return of the Scots Ambassadors to their Country,
King Edward sent an Herald with them, who in his Masters name gave over the
marriage contracted between the Lady Cicilia and the Prince of Rothsay, and
required the money which had been delivered upon hopes of consummation to his
King. The Citizens of Edinburgh had given their Bond for the redelivery, and a
day being granted to them for the payment, they at the appointed day entirely
delivered the sum. Some thought King Edward recalled this marriage of a
suspicion he conceived, that the Ambition of the Duke of Albany, and the hatred
of the Subjects against their King amidst the manifold distractions of the
Realm, might hazard the Succession of the Prince of Rothsay to the Crown. But
king Edward having gained what he had endeavored most to acquire, a division
amongst the Nobles of Scotland, and by this a Security from their assisting the
French, rejected the Match. Besides the Duke of Gloucester, who after his
coming in Scotland, was laying the foundations of the usurping the Crown of
England, his Brother once dead, thought the alliance of his Brothers Daughter
with a King of Scotland, too strong a Support to that Race, which he was to
declare Bastards, and a Rock upon which he was confident he should make a
fearful shipwreck. Neither his Brothers Daughter being married to a King of
such martial and turbulent Subjects as the people of Scotland, durst he ever
attempt the taking away of her Brothers: and King Edward in neglect of this
match committed a greater error of State than he did in his marrying the Lady
Elizabeth Gray, and forsaking the Lady Bona Daughter to the Duke of Savoy.

According to the Records of some Authors whilst the King is kept nine Months
in the Castle of Edinburgh, the Duke of Albany, the Lord Evandale Chancellor,
the Earl of Arguile, the Arch^bishop of St. Andrews, the Earl of Athole his
Uncle (who for the preservation of his person and honor of his Office accepted
the charge to attend him in that Fortress) governed the State.

The King (say the honest Records) had all honor which appertained to a
Prince, save that he could not come abroad, and none was permitted to speak
unto him, except in the audience of some one of his Lords Keepers; and that his
Chamber doors were shut before the setting of the Sun and long after the rising
opened. Proclamations are published in his name and Authority, and other public
writings. Such who only heard of him could not but take him to be a free and
absolute Prince, when near he was but a King in fantasy, and his Throne but a
Picture, the regal Authority being turned into a cloak to cover the Passions of
those who did govern.

The Duke of Albany daily importuned by the solicitations, Prayers and tears of
the Queen (a calm and temperate Lady) for her Husbands Liberty; finding himself
not so respected by the other Governors as his birth and merits did deserve;
being a man who delighted in nothing more than in changes and novations of
Court and State; after so many scorns and rebukes offered to his Brother, and
King, commiserating his long sufference, and believing that good turns would
make past offenses be forgotten, and recent benefits were sufficient to blot
away old injuries, withal remembrance of former discontents, whilst the other
Governors at Sterling, securely passed the time, posted in the night to
Edinburgh. Here a meeting being appointed of some of his friends and Vassals,
who knew nothing of his intentions, by the assistance of the Citizens of
Edinburgh (men entirely loving their King and devoted to him all the time of
the insurrection of his Nobles) who gave the first assault, (yet was it rather
their intelligence than force) the Castle is surprised, the King and all his
Servants set at liberty. This unexspected and noble act of the Duke of Albany,
having so fortunate a success, brought a mighty change on the Court and State.
The King is now again reinstall'd, and has this residence in his own Palace,
to which many Noblemen and Gentlemen, have frequent concourse; rejoicing to see
such evident tokens of love pass between the two Brothers, if their affection
could have continued. The Provost and Baylies of Edinburgh in recompense of
their service, were made Sheriffs within all the bounds of their own
Territories, and rewarded with other privileges contained in that patent, which
they call their golden Charter 1482. The Lords of the contrary faction, who
remained at Sterlin, by this new accident, betook themselves to new thoughts
and considerations, every man full of fears and repinings flying to his own
dwelling place, and conceaving a great hatred against the Duke of Albany. They
said he was inconstant, rash, mad, in setting at liberty the man who would
prove his Executioner, and one who would never forget any profer'd injury: that
if he perished before them, it was but his own just deserving and procurement.
The Duke contemning those reproaches, and answering their calumnies and evil
words with patience and good deeds, by the mediation of the Earl of Anguss,
Studied a reconciliation between the King and his discontented Lords. And his
endeavors had such good success, that in a short time after this Atonement;
some of them turned so familiar and inward with the King, that, like the Ivy,
they began to sap the wall by which they had been supported. They made the
wound of the Kings old jealousies ranckle again, and added poison to former
discontents; remembering him of the unnaturalness of his Brothers first
Rebellion, and assuring him that his ancient Ambition had yet more power of him
than his new fears of honesty and respect. That howsoever he showed outwardly
the arguments of a reconciled Brother, he loved yet to govern, and aimed at the
Crown. That he had wrought his liberty to bring a greater confusion in the
State than he had ever done before. The King, who ever had a watchful eye over
his reconciled Enemies, and who desired to be freed and fairly quited of them
all, gave way to their calumnies. And they after long deliberation resolve upon
a plot to bring the Duke within compass of law: and summoned him to answer upon
Treason. And this was the rendering of the Town of Berwick to the English: which
they undertook to prove was only by his intelligence, procuration and being in
company with the Duke of Gloucester, in that expedition. Though the Duke had an
absolute and general pardon and an aboli^ion for all was past, and the Kings
hand at it, they doubted not to null and make it void. All being done by a King
constrained by a powerful Army, and a close prisoner, which writing could not
oblige any private man far less a King: what he then bargained was upon
constraint and yielded unto upon hopes of saving his life, and an act exacted
by force. The Duke of Albany finding by the malice and detraction of a
malignant faction, his brothers countenance altered toward him: and danger the
requital of his late setting him at liberty, the established reconciliation
being shaken by suspicions and fancy of revenge, obeying necessity, fled to his
Castle of Dumbar, out of which he came to England to present to King Edward and
the Duke of Gloucester the consideration of his grievances.

In his absence he is convinced of many points of treason, besides the being
accessarie to the taking of Berwick by the English. As his dangerous and long
intelligence with the King of England: his sending of many Messengers at all
occasions unto him. That, without any safe conduct or pass from his Brother,
and not so much as acquainting him* he had left the Country, come into England
to devise conspiracies against his King and native Kingdom. The Lord Creighton
as his friend associate and complice, is forefeited with him, against whom
Informations were given, that often and diverse times, under the pretense of
hunting, secretly with the Duke at Albany, he road into England, and there
meeting with Commissioners sent by King Edward, he deliberated of matters
concerning novations and of the altring the state, That there he kept
appointments with James Earl of Dowglass, the often quenched firebrand of his
Country. That in spite of the Kings forces sent there to lie in Garrison, he
kept the Castle of Creighton. The greatest discontent the King conceived
against him was love to one of his Sisters, and some feminine jealousies. When
the Duke understood the proceedings against himself and the Lord Creighton, and
that for their contumacy and not appearing to answer and give in their answer,
they were convict of Treason, and their lands to be seized upon; He caused give
up the Castle of Dumbar, of which he was Lieutenant, to King Edward, who
immediately placed by Sea a Garrison in it.

About this time Edward King of England left this world 1483. and his brother
Richard Duke of Gloucester, did first take the name of Protector and Governor
of the Kingdom of England, and after his brothers Sons put in the Tower, and
their Mother the Queen taking Sanctuary, in the month of June possessed himself
of the Crown.

The Duke of Albany finding that Richard by his change of Fortune had not
changed his affection toward him, imploreth his aid in restoring him to his
own, and repairing not his wrongs alone, but a wrong done in his sufferings to
the King of England, since there was now an open breach of the Truce and Peace
so solemnly by him set down and confirmed by his Brother. If he could be
furnished but with a few number of choice men of reputation and power to pass
into Scotland, and take a trial of the Minds and good will of his f^iends and
confederates, he douted not at his entering the Country to find numbers who by
his presence would hazard upon the most desperate dangers.

Richard finding the man his Supplicant with whom he endeavored once an entire
frindship, and whose advancement in Authority he had most studied,
condescendeth that five hundred men and Horses should be chosen upon the
borders, with others who were ontlawes and necessitated sometime to make
incursions, and with James the old Earl of Dowglase, a man well known and
renowned in the West-borders, should make an in-road into Scotland.

The two and twenty day of July, the banished Champion having chosen a good
number of their borderers put forward toward Loch. Maben to surprise a Fair,
spoil a public Market, seize upon all the Buyers and Sellers, which here meet
and traffic every St. Magdalens festival, under pretense of Devotion and the
liberty of trading many English had hither relsorted: at the twelfth hour of
the day when the Merchants and Countrey-people were in greatest security, the
bur^e is invaded and not blood but wares sought after; the Lard of Iohnstoun
who was warden, and lard of Cock-pool, with many stout borderers having
surveyed and Ridden through the places where the people were met, to prevent
and hinder all disorders and dangers, at the noise of an incursion of the
English, dispatch Poasts to the adjacent bounds for supply, and in the mean
time rencounter the plunderers of the Fair. Here is it fought with greater
courage than force, and in a long continued skirmish the danger of the loss
stirred up and incited the parties as much as fame and glory.

The day was near spent leaving the advantage to either side disputable, when
the supply of fresh men come to defend their Country, and friends turned the
Fortune of the fight, and put the English borders all to the rout. The Duke of
Albany by the swiftness of his Horse, and the good attendance of his Servants
wins English ground: but the Earl of Dowglass laden and heavy with years
and arms, is taken by Robert Kirken-patrick(who for that service got the lands
of Kirk-michael) and brought as in triumph to Edinburgh. It is recorded that
when the Earl was come in the Kings presence, he turned his back and refused to
look him in the face, considering the many outrages he had perpetrated against
his Father, and this late offense. The King taken with the goodly personage,
gravity and great age of the man, commiserating his long patience and cross
fortune being in his young days designed to be a Churchman, confined him as
in a free Prison in the Abacy of Lyndores.

Besides he considered that when occasion served he might bring him out of this
solitariness, and in these turbulent times by his counsel and presence play
more advantageously his game of State, being a man of long experience in the
affairs of the world, and the most learned of all his Nobility. He was now
become tired of the Earl of Anguss, the remembrance of his first offense
remaining deeply engraven in his heart, and to counterpoise his greatness this
was the only weight. The Duke of Albany found little better entertainment in
England, the battle being lost, some men taken and killed (this being the first
road upon Scotland under the reign of Richard, who had been formerly so
fortunate in his own person) his fame injured, and reputation by this
diminished, the Duke began to be disliked, and was not received with that
kindness he was wont, whereupon by the assistance and convoy of John Liddale,
he secretly retired to France.

After the road of Lochmaben sundry incursions are made by the Scots upon the
English borders, and by the English upon the Scottish: The Champian ground is
scoured, houses are burnt, booties taken, with great loss to both, and little
advantage to any of the parties, Richard having his reign in the infancy, and
not yet settled nor come to any growth and maturity, being obnoxious to the
scandal of his Brothers Sons, and possessed with fears of Henry Earl of
Richmond then remaining in France, who by all honest and good men was earnestly
invited to come home, and hazard one day of battle for a whole Kingdom,
knowing it necessary for the advancement of his designs to have peace with all
his neighbor Princes to render himself more secure and safe at home, and
terrible to his enemies abroad, sends Ambassadors to Scotland to treat a
Peace, or a suspension of Arms for some years; King James no soflier rocked in
the Cradle of State than Richard; cheerfully accepts this Embassage; for by a
peace he may a little calm the stormy and wild minds of tumultuous Subjects,
reducing them to a more quiet fashion of living, and seclude his Rebels and
banished from entertainment in England, and all places of Refuge and Sanctuary.
The two Kings agreeing in substance, Commissioners are appointed to meet at
Nottingham the seventeenth day of September. For the King of Scotland appeared
the Earl of Argu^l, William Elphinstoun Bishop of Aberdeen, the Lord Drummond
of Stobhall, the Lord Olyphant, Archebald Whitelaw Secretary, Doncan Dundass,
Lion King of Arms. For Richard of England appeared the Duke of Norfolk, the
Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Stanley, the Lord Gray, the Lord Fitshugh,
John Gunthrope privy Seal, Thomas Borrow, Master of the Rolls, Sir Thomas Bryan
Chief Justice.

In the latter end of September. these conclude a peace between both Realms for
the space of 3 years. The same to begin at the rising of the Sun Septem. ^9. in
the year 1484. and to continue unto the setting of the Sun on the 29. of Sept.
in the year 1487. During which time it was aggreed that not only all hostility
and war should cease between the two Realms, but that also all aid and
assistance against enemies should be afforded.

It was agreed, the Town and Castle of Berwick should remain in the hands of
the English for the space of the foresaid term, with the same bounds the
English possessed.

That all other Castles, Holds, Fortresses during the term of thr^e years
should remain in the hands of those that held then at that present, the Castle
of Dumbar only excepted, which the Duke of Albany delivered to the English when
he left his Country. Which Castle for the space of six months should be
exposed to the invasion of the Scots, if they could obtain it, and during the
assaulting of this Castle, the Truce should not be broken. Neither should the
English within the castle do any harm to the Scots dwelling thereabouts, except
to those who invade the Castle, and at that time. And that it should be lawful
to any of the Parties to use all Statagems, and extend their power either for
winning or defending the said Castle.

It was agreed, That no Traitor of either Realm should be received by any of
the Princes of the other Realms: and if any Traitor or Rebel chance to arrive
in either Realm, the Prince thereof should deliver him upon demand made.

Scots abiding within the Realm of England and sworn there to the King, may
remain still, so there names be made known to the King of Scotland within
forty days.

If any Warden of either Realm shall invade the others Subjects, he to whom
such a Warden is subject shall within six days, proclaim him Traitor, and
certify the other Prince thereof within twelve days.

In every safe conduct this Clause shall be contained, Providing always that
the Obtainer of the safe Conduct be no Traitor.

If any of the Subjects of either Prince, do presume to aid and help maintain
and serve any other Prince, against any of the Contractors of this Truce, Then
it shall be lawful for him to whom he showed himself enemy, to apprehend and
attach the said Subject, coming or tarrying within any of their Dominions.

Colleagues comprehended in the Truce (if they would assent thereunto) on the
English part were, the King of Castile, the King of Arragon, the King of
Portugal, the Archduke of Austria and Burgundy the Duke of Bretaign. Upon the
Scottish part, Charles King of Denmvrk and Norway, The Duke of Guilderland,
this treaty was appointed to be published the first of October in all the great
and notable Towns of both Realms.

It was agreed that Commissioners should meet at Loch-maben the 18. of November
as well for redress of wrongs done on the west Marcbes, as for declaring and
publishing the peace, where the greatest difficulty was to have it observed.

Richard after this truce entreated a marriage between the Prince of Rothsay
eldest Son to King James, and Lady Anne dela Pool, Daughter to John Duke of
Suffolk of his Sister. To this effect Ambassadors meet at Nottingham, others
say at York, and it is concluded. Writings thereupon being drawn up* ingrosled
and sealed. And affiances made and taken up by Proctors and Deputies of both
parts. Lady Anne thereafter being styled the Princess of Rothsay. But by the
death of her Uncle she enjoyed not long that title:

After the league and intended marriage, King James wrote friendly letters to
Richard concerning the Castle of Dumbar, Whether he could be content that the
same should remain only six months in the power of the English, or during the
whole space of True? That he was not minded to seek it by arms during the term
of the whole Truce. Notwithstanding he earnestly required out of the bond of
Love and Frindship between them, since it was given unto the English by
Treason, and neither surprised nor taken in lawful war, it might be frindly
rendered: Richard dal^yd with him, and passed away that purpose with
complemental Letters all the time of his Government, which was not long; for
the year 1486. Henry Earl of Richmond came with some companies out of France
(of which that famous Warrior Bernard S^uart Lord Aubany, Brother to the Lord
Darnley in Scotland, had the leading) which by the resort of his Country men
turned into an Army, and rencountred Richard at Bosworth where he was killed,
and Henry proclaimed King of England: To which victory it was uncertain whether
virtue or fortune did more contribute.

Alexander Duke of Albany before this disaster of Richard, at a Tilting with
Lovys Duke of Orleance by the splint of a Spear in his head had received his
death-wound 1483 He was a man of great courage, an enemy to rest and peace,
delighting in constant changes and novations. He left behind two Sons, John
Duke of Albany begotten of his second marriage upon the Earl of Bulloignes
Daughter, who was Tutor to King James the fifth and Governor of Scotland, and
Alexand^r born of the Earl of Orkenays Daughter his first wife, Bish^p of
Murray, and Abbo^ of Skroon. Into which places he was intruded, to make the
Government of his other Brother more peaceable.

Margarite the Queen about these times, a good and virtuous Lady, died 1486.
and was buried at Cambu-kennel the 29. of February.

The overthrow and death of Richrd being known abroad, King I^mes, taking the
advantage of the time, besieged the Castle of ^umbar. The garrisoned Soldiers
finding no reliet nor assistance from their Country, and ascertained of the
change of their Master, rendered up the Fort to the hands of the Scots; it was
of no great importance to the English, and only served to be a fair bridge of
Treason for Scottish Rebels, and a Citadel of Conspiracies.

Henry King of England after his victory and Coronation, sent Richard Fox
Bishop of Excester, and Sir Richard Edgecomb Ambassadors to King James, for
renewing the Truce, and if it were possible, to agree upon a stable and lasting
Peace between the Realms. King James taking a promise of the secrecy of the
Embass^dours, that what he imparted to them, should not be laid open to his
Nobility, told, He earnestly affected a Peace with all his Neighbors, but
above all others with their King, as much for his own valor, as for the honor
and interests of the two Kingdoms: But he knew his people so stubborn and
opposite to all his designs, that if they understood his mind and resolutions,
they would endeavor to cross his intentions; wherefore publicly he could only
condescend to seven years truce, a long peace being hardly obtained from men
brought up in the free license of war, who disdained to be restrained within
the Narrow limits of Laws. Notwithstanding they should undertake for him to
King Henry, in the word of a Prince* that this Truce before the exspiring of it
should be renewed, and with all solemntyes again confirmed.

The Ambassadors respecting his good will toward their King, accepted the
conditions. Thus was there a Truce or Peace convenanted and confirmed for seven
years to come between the two Realms.

After so many back-blows of fortune and such canvassing, the King enjoying a
Peace with all his Neighbors abroad, became exceeding religious; the miseries
of life drawing the mind to the contemplations of what shall be after it.
During hisresidence at Edinburgh he was wont to come in Procession from the
Abbey of Holy-rood-house to the Churches in the High-Town every Wednesday and
Friday. By which devotion he became beloved of his People: Nothing more winning
their hearts than the opinion they have of the Sanctity of a person. And that
he did not this for the fashion nor hypocrisy, the application of his wit and
power to the administration of strict justice did prove; for he began to
suppress the insolences of strong oppressors, defend and maintain the Rights
of the poor, against Tyrants and abusers of their Neighbors. He sits himself
in Council daily, and disposes affairs of most weight in his own person.

In the Month of October following the Peace with England, 1487. a Parliament
was called, in which many acts were made against Oppressors. Justices were
appointed to pass thorough the whole Kingdom, and see malefactors deservedly
punished. Acts were made that no convention of friends should be suffered for
the accompanying and defense of criminal Persons: But that every one attainted
should appear at the most with six Proctors; that, if found guilty, they should
not be reft from Justice by strong hand. Such of the Nobility who feared and
consequently hated him, finding how he had acquired the love of his people by
his piety in the observance of Religion, and his severity in executing Justice,
were driven unto new meditations. They began to suspect he would one day free
himself from these turbulent Spirits who could not suffer him to enjoy a Peace,
nor reign. He had advanced at this time to Offices of State and Places men
whose Fortunes did wholly depend upon his safety and welfare: at which some
Noblemen whose Ambition was to be in public charge and of the Counsel,
pretending to that out of right, which was only due unto them by favor, did
highly storm and look upon those others with envious eyes. The King thus
falling again into his old sickness, they bethought them how to renew their
old remedy. They were also jealous of the remembrance of the dis-service they
had done him, and that he would never forget old quarrels; They were prepared
and ready to make a Revolution of the state, but had not yet found their Center
to begin motion, nor a ground for Rebellion. All this while there was not
matter enought for an insurrection, nor to dispose the Peoples Hearts to a
Mutiny.

The King delighted with his Buildings of the Castle of Sterlin, and the
amenity of the Place, for he had raised there a fair and spacious Hall, and
founded a College for divine service, which he named the Chapel Royal: and
beginning to be possessed and taken up with the Religion of these times,
endeavored to endow this foundation with constant Rents, and ample Revenues,
and make this Rock the choice Sanctuary of his Devotions. The Priory of
Coldingham, then vacant and fallen in his hands, he annexed the same to his
Chapel Royal, and procured an Act of Parliament that none of the Lieges should
attempt to do contrary to this union and annexation, or to make any
Impetration thereof at the Court of Rome under the pain of Treason. The Priors
of this Convent having been many years of the Name of Hume, it was by the
Gentlemen of that Name surmi'sd that they should be interested and wronged in
their Estates, by reason of the Tithes and other Casualtyes appertaining to
this Benefice, if a Prior of any other Surname were promoted to this Place. The
King being often petitioned and implored that he should not alter the
accustomed form of the Election of that Prior, nor remove it from their Name,
nor suffer the Revenues to be otherways bestowed than they were wont to be of
old; and he continuing in his resolution of annexing them to his Chapel: after
long pawsing and deliberation amongst themselves, as men stirred up by the
malcontents and a proud faction, fit for any the most dangerous entrprise,
they proceed upon stronger Grounds to over-turn his intentions and divert his
purpose. The Lord Hailles and others, of the Surname of Hepburn, had been their
constant friends, Allies and Neighbors; with them they enter in a combination,
that they should mutually stand to the defense of others, and not suffer any
Prior to be received for Coldingham if he were not of one of their two
Sirnames. This Conv^nant is first privately by some mean Gentlemen sworn, who
after draw on their Chiefs to be of the Party. Of how small beginnings does a
great mischief arise^ the male contended Lords knowing those two Sirnames to be
numerous, active and powerful in those parts of the Country where they
remayn'd, lay hold upon this Overture, and beginning from their particulars
they make the cause to be general. They spread Rumors abroad that the King was
become terrible and not to be trusted; notwithstanding all his Protestations
and outward demeanor, that he yet meditated Revenge, and had begun to invadea
nd shake the ancient privileges of the Humes, more out of Spite and discontent
against them for having assisted and followed the Lords of the Reformation of
the State, than any intention of the increasing the Rents of his new erected
Chapel. That ere long he would be avengedupon all whom he either knew were
accessory, or suspected to have been upon the Plot of Lawder Bridge, or his
committing in the Castle of Edenbrough. That it was some time better to commit
a fault unpardonable than venture under the Pardon. That the King had taken a
Resolution to live upon the Peoples contributions, and give his own Revenues
to particular Men. The faults of his Counselors are highly exaggerated. They
were base Persons, and he himself given to dissimulation, misdevotion and
revenge; as occasion served he would remember old wrongs: It was good to obey a
King but not to lay the head upon a Block to him, if a Man could save himself.

After along smother of discontent and hatred of the Nobility and People,
rankor breaking daily forth into Seditions and alterations. The Lord Hume and
Haylles being the Ringleaders, many Noblemen and Gentlemen under fained
pretenses, especially the courses of swift Horles, keep frequent meetings.
Where they renew their Covenant agreed upon at Lawder Church, the necessity of
the times and the danger of the Commonwealth requiring it, and gave their
oaths that at what time soever the King should challenge them directly or
indirectly, or wrong them in their Rights, Possessions, Places, Persons, They
should abide together as if they were all one Body, marry each others
quarrels, and the wrongs done to any one of them should be done to them all.

When the King understood the con^ederacy of the Lords, to anticipate the
Danger, he made choice of a Guard for the preservation of his Person and
Servants, Of which he made John Ramsay of Balmayne, a Man whom he had preserved
at Lawder and advanced to be Master of his household at Court, Captain: giving
him a warrant not to suffer any Man in Arms approach the Court by some miles.
This in stead of cooling, exasperated the Choler of the Malcontents, and
stirred them to assemble with numerous Retinues all in Arms. The King scarce
believing the Minds of so many were corrupted, and persuading himself the
Authority of the public name of a King would supply the want of some Power,
summond certain of them upon forty days to answer according to Law.

Of those some rent his Summons, and beat shamefully his Heralds and
Messengers for discharging their Offices: Others appeared, but with numbers of
their Adherents, Friends, Allies and Vassals: And here he found that the faults
of great Delinquents are not without great danger taken notice of, and
reprehended; he used some Stratagems to surprise the Heads and chiefs of their
faction: But unadvisedly giving trust to the promises of those who lent their
ears, but not their hearts to his words, his designs were discovered before
they produced any effect; his secrets all laid open to his great hatred and
disadvantage, the discoverers taking themselves to the factious Rebels, and
cherishing unkind thoughts in all whom they saw distasted with his Government;
Perceiving himself betrayed and his intentions divulged, he remained in great
doubt to whom he should give credit. The nature and manner of all things
changed by the League of the Confederates, he thought it high time to remove a
little further from that Torrent which might have overwhelmed him, and made
them Masters of his person. To temporize and win time, caused furnish the
Castles of Edinburgh and Sterling with provision of Victual, Ammunition, and
Garrisons to defend them from the dangers of war; he resolved to make his abode
beyond the River of Forth, and to leave the ^outh Parts of the Kingdom. After
which deliberation he entered a Ship of Sir Andrew Wood (a famous Navigator and
stout Commander at Sea) which pretended to make sail for the low Countries, and
was lying at Anchor in the Forth. These who saw him aboard, spread a rumor
that he was flying to Flanders. The Lords of the insurrection making use of
this false report seized on his carriage in the Passages toward the North,
rifled his Coffers, spoiled his Servants of their stuff and baggage. And then
after certainty that he was but landed in Fyfe, and from that was in progress
to the Northern parts, preparing and directing his good Subjects to be in
readiness to attend him at his return, they surprised the Castle of Dumbar. The
Moneys found in his Coffers wage Soldiers against him, and the Harness and
Weapons of his Magazines arm them. Having gathered some companies together,
tumultuously they overrun the Countries upon the South of the Forth, riffling
and plundering all men who went not with them, or whom they suspected not to
favor their desperate and seditious ends. In his progres, the King held
Justice Courts at Aberdeen and Inneress, where William Lord Creighton, not long
before impeacht with the Duke of Albany, submitted himself to his Clemency, and
was received in favor and pardoned: after which grace he shortly left this
world. Whilst the King in the North, the Lords in the South are making their
preparations; When they were assembled at Lithgow they find themselves many in
number and strong in power; the success of their proceedings being above their
hopes: there only wanted a Man eminently in esteem with the people, and noble
of Birth, to give lustreto their Actions, shadow their Rebellion, and be the
titular and painted head of their Arms. When they had long deliberared upon
this great Man, they assented all that there was none to be paralleld to the
Prince of Rothsay the Kings own Son. So strongly providence befools all human
wisdom and foresight; his keepers being corrupted by gifts, pensions and
promises of diverse Rewards, he is delivered into their hands: and by threats,
that they would otherways give up the Kingdom to the King of England, he is
constrained to go with them. To heighten the hatred against the King, and the
closlier to deceive the people (for the love of subjects is such toward their
natural Kings, that except they be first deceived by some pretense and notable
sophism, they will not arise altogether in arms and rebel) they make
proclamations and by their Deputies by way of Remonstrances spread abroad
seditious Papers, in what a Sea of blood would these men launch into? that all
true Subjects should come in defense of the Prince, and take arms; because his
Fathers jealousies and superstitious fears were risen to that height that
nothing but his Sons death or imprisonment could temperate them. That he was
raising an Army to take his Son out of their hands, that he might do with him
as he had done with his own Brothers. That force was the only means to work
his safety and keep the Plotters of this mischief within bounds, they also
should take arms to reduce the Government to a better form, for that the
Kingdom was oppressed with insupportable grievances: the King being altogether
given to follow the advice, projects and counsels of base men; to amass and
gather great sums of money from his people, upon which he studied to maintain
his Court and State, and give away his own.

When the Engine was prepared for the people, and spread abroad, they sent to
the Earl of Dowglass, then closely as a Monck shut up in the Abbey of Lyndores,
to come out, be of the Party, and assist them with his Counsel and Friends
promising if their attempt had happy Success, to restore him again to his
ancient possessions and Heritage, former dignitys and the Places of honor of
his Ancestors. The Earl, whom time and long experience had made wary and
circumspect, having a suspicion the Earl of Angus, who possessed the greatest
part of his estate, had been the chief motioner of this liberty, and that
rather to try what he would do, then that he minded really to set him free,
refused to come out of his Cloister. And by his letters dissuaded them from
their bold enterprise against their Prince; wishing they would set his house
and himself for a pattern and precedent of Rebellion. He sent to all such of
his Friends whom his disasters had left unruined to take arms for the King, as
the Dowglasses of Kayvers and others.

The King neither losing courage nor council for the greatness of the danger of
the Rebellion, trusting much to his good fortune, with such forces as came with
him from the North, in Captain Woods Ships and other Boats and Vessels prepared
to that end, passes the Forth near the Blackness, an old Fortress and Sea port
in West Lothian, not far from the Castle of Abercorn, and that place where the
Forces of the Earl of Dowglass left him, and the King his Father obtained so
harmless a victory. Before the arrival of the King at this Place, the Earls of
Montross, Glencarn, Lords Maxwell and Ruthven with others, advertised by
Letters of the Rendevouz, had come to the Place, had encamped, and were
attending him. And he mustered a sufficient Army to rencounter the Lords of the
association, who from all quarters were assembled, having with them the Prince
to add Authority to their quarrel. The two Armies being in readiness to decide
their indifferences by a Battle, the Earl of Athole the Kings Uncle so
travailed between the Lords of either party and the King, that a suspention of
Arms was agreed upon and reconcilement: and the Earl of Athole rendered
himself a pledge for the accomplishing of the Kings part of the reconcilement,
to the Lord Haylles, and was sent to be kept in the Castle of Dumbar.

This was not a small fault of this Prince: the Confederates forces were not at
this time equal to his, neither had they essayed to hinder the landing of his
Army, being but in gathering; the Castle of Blackness was for his defense, and
his Ships traversing up and down the Forth, in case of necessity for succor.
That if he had hazarded a battle, he had been near to have recovered all that
reputation he had before lost. Now upon either side some common Soldiers are
disbanded, some Gentlemen licensed to return to their own dwelling places. The
King in a peaceable manner retireth to the Castle of Edinburgh. The Earl of
Athole was now removed from him, and many of the other Lords who loved him
returned to their houses; the Counsel of man not being able to resist the
determinations of God. The Lords suspecting still the King to be implacable in
their behalf and unaccessible in his Castle, keeping the Prince always with
them, entering upon new meditations hold sundry meetings how to have his person
in their power, and make him a prey to their ambitious designs. The Town of
Edinburgh is pestered with troops of armed men, the Villages about replenished
with Soldiers. The King warned of his danger, fortifies of new the Castle of
Edinburgh for his defense, and is brought to such a tameness, that resolving to
do that with love of every man which he feared in end he should be constrained
unto with the universal hatred of all, and his own damage and danger, out of a
passive fortitude sent Commissioners, indifferent Noble men, to the Lords and
his Son to understand their intentions and what they meant. Why his Son was
kept from him, and continued the head of their faction. Why his Uncle was so
closely imprisoned, and himself as it were blocked up by their tumultuous
meetings in Arms? He was content they should have an abolition of all that was
past, that their punishments should not be infinitely extended, and that they
should think upon a general agreement after the best and fittest manner they
could devise, and set it down. They finding their offenses flew higher than
hope of pardon could ascend unto. Their suspicions, and the conscience of their
crime committed, breeding such a distrust out of an apprehension of fear,
answered that they found no true meaning. Open war was to be preferred to a
peace full of deceit, danger and fears, that being assured he would weave out
his begun projects against them, they could not think of any ^afety, nor have
assurance of their lives nor fortunes, unless he freely resigned the title of
his Crown and Realm in favor of his Son, and voluntarily deposed himself,
leaving the Government of the People and Kingdom to the Lords of his
Parliament, divesting himself wholly of his Royal dignity. Neither would they
come to any submission or capitulation, until he consented to this main point
and granted it submissivelye.

King James notwithstanding of this answer, after a clear prospect of the
inconveniences and mischiefs which were growing, and the many injuries,
indignities, and affronts put upon him, yet really affecting a peace, sought
unto Henry King of England, as also to the Pope and King of France to make an
attonment between him and his Subjects. The King accordingly interposed their
Mediation in a round and Princely manners, not only by way of request and
persuasion; but also by way of protestation and menace, declaring that they
thought it to be the common cause of all Kings, if Subjects should be suffered
to give Laws unto their Sovereign; a ligitimate King, though a Tyrant, was not
subordinate to the Authority of Subjects. James was not a Tyrant; his errors
proceeding most part form youth and evil Counsel. That suppose the King had
done them wrong, it was not wisely done, for a desire of revenge, to endanger
their particular Estates, and the peace and standing of the whole Kingdom.
What State was there ever so pure, but some corruption might creep into it?
That they should be very meant too far; That they would accordingly resent and
revenge it. Rage prevailing against Reason and fears, the Lords made that same
answer to these Ambassadors which they had sent to the King himself before. As
for the Popes Embassy which was sent by Adrian de Castello, an Italian Legate
was coming, and the Lords fearing the danger of it, for in those times it
might have drawn the most part of all the Towns, and the Commons, for fear of
Ecclesiastical Censures, to have adhered to the King, or stood in an
indifferency, made all possible haste before it should have been delivered, to
make head against their Sovereign, and decide their quarrel in a battle; Vraban
the fourth armed Henry the third King of England against all those that would
not return to their due and old obedience to him, and all his disloyal subjucts.

The King was in a strong Fort, and if he had remained still there, matters in
a little time had fallen forth more to his wishes; and his Enemies might have
been brought to a submission: for his good Subjects of the North, as the
Forbesses, Oguilbuyes, the Graunts, Frazeres, Meldrums, many of the Gordounes,
Keethes, and others who adhered to him out of affection and duty, were
advancing toward him. But whether misinformed or betrayed by some his own, who
made him believe that unless he could command the Country about Edinburgh, the
Castle was of no such importance as was the Castle of Sterlin for him, in
consideration of the passage over the River of Forth at a Bridge for those were
coming to his aid: The Lords of the association counterfeiting a Retreit and
dispersing themselves in the Country, that they might draw him from that bold,
he rashly and unadvisedly issued out of the Castle and left his beloved Town of
Edinburgh. The Earls of Montross, Glencarn, Lords Maxwell and Ruthen
accompanied him to the Blackness; his Forces here increasing he marched toward
Sterlin, the Rendevous and destinated Place of meeting for all his loyal
Subjects, there he displayed his Royal Standard. Here the perfidious Constable
(an unparralleld example of ingratitude) who had betrayed the Son, in an
hostile manner kept the Father out of his own Castle, Cannons mounted, Pistols
cockt, and leveld at him, and exposed him a prey to his Robels, In the
amazement and deliberation what to go about, being thus shut out of his Castle,
Tidings came to him, that the Confederates were come near to Falkirk, a little
Town six miles eastward from Sterlin, that his Army should not be discouraged
by this unexspected accident, trusting to his right and present Power; being
more stout than prudent, he resolves to set all upon the hazard of a Battle.
The Confederates had passed the Carron, a River under the Falkirk, and were
encamped above the Bridge near the Torwood: The King set forwards with his Army
upon the other side of the Torwood, near a small brook named Sawchy-Burn. This
field is a plain not far distant from that Bannoch-burn, where King Robert the
Bruce overthrew the great Army of Edward Carnarvan. Here both Armies advance
forward in Battle array.

The Lords ranged their Host in three Squadrons; the vantguard was led by the
Lords, Hume and Hailles and their friends consisting of east Lothian and
Marss-men; The middle ward was composed of the Liddesdale, Annandale, Ewesdale,
Tivotdale, Twededale, Galloway-Men: the main battle was of west Lothian-men,
where most of the Lords were, and amongst whom the Prince was kept. In the
Kings Army the Earl of Monteeth, Lords Aresken, Graham, Ruthen, Maxwell
commanded the vanguard. The left wing which consisted of Westland and Highland
men, was committed to the Earl of Glencarn. The Lords, Boyd, Lyndesay, the Earl
of Crawfoord commanded in the Rear or great Battaill, amongst whom was the King
armd from head to foot upon a great Coursier, easy to be known and discerned
from the rest. The first charge is valiantly given and Lance meeting with
Lance, the vanguard of the Lords began to yield ground, and was strongly
repulsed. But the next charge being given by Annandale Men and the rank Riders
of the Borders, The middle ward of the Kings Army is beaten back to the mayn
Battaill; Notwithstanding of which it is fought a while with mavelous
obstination and great hardiness and assurance, until the standard Royal was
beaten down, and those who defended it were slain, the violence of the
bickering being mostly where it was planted. The Kings army now beginning to
bow, nor being sufficient to resist the numbers of fresh assailers, the
Horsemen obeying no direction, turned their backs. In this rowt and confusion
of horse and foot men, the King seeking to retire toward the River of Forth,
where not far off some Boats and the Ships of Sir Andrew Wood attented the
fortune of Battle, by the fall of his Horse, in leaping a Ditch, being sore
bruised, was carried by such who knew him not, to a Mill at Bannoch-Burn. The
day was now the Confederates and wrong had prevailed against Right, when the
Prince of Rothsay amazed at the noise and clamours of the flying and following
Soldiers, and in suspicion of the worst, gave out express and strait
Commandment with threatenings to the Disobeyers, that none should presume to
pursue his Father, nor others in the chase. Notwithstanding which, he was
followed and killed in a Mill in cold blood. These who followed him were the
Lord Gray, Robert Sterlin of Keer, Sir Andrew Borthick a Priest, whom fame
reports after shiriving to have stobb'd him with a Dagger.

The Ensigns taken, the Army dissipated and put to flight, the Baggage rifled,
the Death of the King being rumoured through the Armies, the Victors turned
slow in the chase, and gave field-room to all that would fly, no severity being
used against any found unarmd; for the Lords of the association pursued the
King not the people. The discomfitted fled toward Sterlin; the victorious
retired to their Camp, and the next morning to Linlithgow. On the Kings side
Alexander Cunningham Earl of Glencarn was slain, and as some have recorded, the
Lords Aerskin, Simple, Ruthen, John Ramsay of Balmayn created Earl of Bothwell,
and his chief favorite, with their friends and Vassals: the Lard of Inneys,
Alexander Scot Director of the Chancery, with some Noblemens Friends and
Vassals: many were hurt who recovered of their wounds, and this Battle seemed
rather a brave encounter and meeting of Lances in some lists, than a Field of
great deeds of arms, and the victory was obtained rather by disorder, and the
rashness of the vanquished than by the valor of the victorious. This battle
was fought the year 1488. the eleventh day of June which is the festival of St.
Barnabas, the 29. year of the Reign, and thirty five of the age of this King.
He had issue James the fourth who succeeded, Alexander Archbishop of St.
Andrews, and John Earl of Mar: The Conspirators with all funeral Rites and and
Royal Pomp, as in expiation of the wrongs they had done him living, near his
Queen in the Abbey Church of Cambuskynneht, buried his body.

This King concerning his personage was of a Stature somewhat higher than
ordinary, well proportioned, his hair was black, his visage was rather long
then round, approaching in color more to those in the Southern than Northern
Climates. Concerning his conditions, He was a Prince of an haughty and towering
Spirit, loved to govern alone, affecting an absolute Power and Royal
Prerogative over his people. He knew that Noblemen were of his Predecessors
making, as the coin, and why he might not put his stamp upon the same metal,
or when these old Medails were defaced, that he might not refound them and give
them a new print, he thought no sufficient reason could be given. His reign
seems a Theater spread over with mourning and staind with blood, where in a
revolution many Tragedies were acted. Neither were the neighbor Kingdoms about
in a calmer estate during his reign. France under Lovys the eleventh, England
under Henry the sixth, Edward the fourth, and Richard the Usurper, Flanders and
Holland under Charles the Warlike; Arnold Duke of Guilders was imprisoned by
his own Son. As if the heavenly Influences were sometimes all together set to
produce upon this Ball of the Earth nothing but conspiracies, treasons,
troubles, and for the wickedness of the Inhabitants to deprive them of all
rest, and contentment.

This King is by the most condemned, as a rash, imprudent dangerous Prince:
good People make good Kings; when a people run directly to oppose the authority
of their Sov^raign, and assume Rebellion and arrogance for obedience, resisting
his fairest motions and most profitable commandments, if a King be martial, in
a short time they are beaten and brought under. If he be politic, prudent and
foreseeing in a longer time (as wild Dear) they are surprised, and either
brought back to their first order and condition, or thrall'd to greater
miseries. If he be weak and suffer in his Reputation or State or person by
them, the Prince who suc^eedeth is ordinarily the Revenger of his wrongs. And
all conspiracies or Subjects if they prosper not in a high degree, advance the
Sovereignty: This Prince seems not to have been naturally evil inclined, but
to have been constrained to leave his natural inclination and necessitate to
run upon Precipices and dangers: his turbulent Subjects never suffering him to
have rest. Many Princes who in the beginning of their reigns have bin admi^ed
for their fair actions, by the ingratitude of their Subjects, have turned from
one extremity to another, and become their rebellious Subjects executioners. He
was provoked to do many things by the in solency of private men: and what some
call tyranny and fierceness in a Prince, is but just severity. He sought to be
feared, believing it to be the only way to obedience. It is ture, injuries
took such deep impression in his mind, that no after service could blot them
away. The taking away of his Favorites, made him study revenge, which if he
had not done, he had to much of the Stoical virtues, little of the Heroical.

These who blame Princes, under a pure and absolute Monarchy for having
favorites, would have them inhumane, base and contemptible, and would deprive
them of power to confer favors according to the distinguishing power of their
understanding and conceptions. The choice a Prince makes of men whom he
advances to great employments, is not subject to any man's censure. And were it
bad, yet ought it to be passed over, if not approved; least the discretion and
judgment of the Prince be questioned, and his Reputation wounded: Favorites
are shrines to shadow Princes from their People, Why should a people not allow
a Prince some to whom he may unmask himself, and discover the secrets of his
Heart? If his secrets should be imparted to many, they would be no longer
Secrets? Why should it be imposed on a Prince to love all his Subjects alike,
since he is not beloved of them all alike? This is a desire to tyrannize over
the affections of Princes, whom men should reverence.

He seems too much to have delighted in retiredness, and to have been a hater
of business; nor that he troubled himself with any but for formalities sake,
more desirous of quietness than honor. This was the fault of the Governors of
his youth, who put him off business of State, that they might the more easily
reach their own ends, and by making him their shadow, govern after their
pleasure; Of this delight in solitariness his Brothers took their advantage and
wan the people to their observance.

He was much given to Buildings and trimming up of Chapels, Halls, and
Gardens, as usually are the Lovers of Idleness: and the rarest frames of
Churches and Palaces in Scotland were mostly raised about his time. An humor
which though it be allowable in men which have not much to do, yet is harmfull
in Princes; As to be taken with admiration of Watches, Clocks, Dyals,
Automates, Pictures, Statues. For the the art of Princes is to give Laws and
govern their people with wisdom in peace, and glory in war; to spare the humble
and prostrate the proud.

He is blamed of Avarice yet there is no great matters recorded of it, save the
encroaching upon the dealing, and taking the giving to whom he pleased of
Church Benefices; which if he had lived in our times, would have been held a
virtue. He was of a credulous Disposition, and therefore easy to be (...)
moved some to record He was given to (...) to inquire of future accidents:
which if it be credible was the fault of those times. Edward the fourth of
England is said to have had that same fault, and that by the misinterpertation
of a prophecy of a Necromancer, which foretold that one, the first Letter of
whose name was G. should usurp the Kingdom, and dispossess the children of King
Edward, he took away his Brother George Duke of Clarence; which being really
practiced in England, some Scottish writers (that a King of Scotland should not
be inferior, to any of his Neighbor Princes in wickedness) without grounds have
recored the same to have bin don by this King, his love was great to learned
men, he used as Counselors in his important affairs John Ireland a Doctor of
Divinity, and one of the Sorbon in Paris, made Archdeacon of St. Andrews, Mr.
Robert Blackadore, whom he promoted to be Bishop of Glasgow, Mr. William
Elphinstoun, whom of an Official or Commissary of Lothian, he surrogated in the
place of Mr. Robert Blackadore, and made Bishop of Aberdeen; and his faults
either in Religion or Policy may be attribuied to these and his other
Counselors.

Many have thought that the fatal Chariot of his Precipice was, that he had
equally offended kindred, Clergy, Nobility and People. But suppose this had
been true, why should such an horrible mischief have bin devised, as to arm his
own Son against him? and that neither the fear of Divine justice, the respect
of infamy with the present or after times, the danger of the example, had power
to divert the minds of men from such a cruel Design! This was really to sees
the Kid in the Mothers milk, and to make an innocent youth obnoxious to the
most heinous crime that could be committed. What ever courtains could be spread
to overshadow and cover this mischief, the horror of this fact possessed this
Prince to his last hour, and God out of his Justice executed the revenge of
this cruelty upon the Nobles, Commons, and the Prince himself at the field of
Flowden: where some of the chief Actors of this paricide were in their own
persons, others in the persons of their Successors, sacrificed to the Ghost of
this King.

James IIII King of Scotts Ano^ 1488

THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE and REIGN OF James the fourth, King of Scotland.
THe Lords who had chosen rather to be reputed famous Rebels than contemned
Subjects, by their boldness of enterprizing, skill of managing the public
affairs, and continued purchases, swelling to that greatness of power, that
they found none to counterpoise, few to oppose to their Designs; To make their
Rebellion lawful, and show the world they intended not the subversion of their
Country, but of their opinionative King, nor that they did dislike
Soveraignity, so they might have a Prince who would be ruled by their
directions, take the name, and leave to them the Majesty and Authority of his
Place: after the killing of the Father, call a Parliament for the installing of
the Son in the Royal Throne; few of the three Estates here meeting, except
themselves, and the Commissioners of Buroughs, in the Month of June the year
1488. at Edinburgh the Prince is crowned, then having not attained the
sixteenth year of his age. Though these men had assumed the Government, yet in
diverse parts of the Country they had bur doubtful obedience, nor was their
Authority universally acknowledged, the flames of dissension seeming yet
neither to be extinquished, nor altogether smothered with the life of the late
King. On the Sea Sir Andrew Wood, who had attended the event of the last
Battle, maintained resolutely the Quarrel of his dead Master. Five tall Ships
sent by the King of England to his Confederates aid (but which came too late)
pretending a Revenge upon his disloyal Subjects, pillaged the maritime Towns,
and forraged the adjacent parts of the Country, shut up the mouth of the River
of Forth, and interrupted the Commerce of Merchants. To repel which violence,
the Ships gathered by the Lords struggled in vain, being every way inferior
and weak to supprels their incursions and Algarads. On the land the Forces of
those who had stood out for the late King had rather been by the last conflict
scattered, than thoroughly broken and brought under. The ablest and most
convenient companies which were gatherd to his assistance, having never
assembled and joind in one body, the fight being inconsideratly precipitated
and the Dye thrown, before they could descend from the far Mountains, and cross
the Foord-less Rivers; And of those who were in the Fray not many being taken
prisoners, fewer killed, falling under the weight of friendly arms.

The prime Men of those who had chosen rather justly to follow the King, than
profitably his Rebels, finding themselves, for their loyalty, and that good
will which they had carried to their Sovereign, persecuted and proscribed in
their Fortunes and Persons, inflamed with indignation and shame resolve to
oppose wisdom to Fortune, courage to strength, and hazard some one day more for
the repairing the losses of former: the Pillage begun upon the Seas by the
English animating them. And being desirous to make as many fellows of their
danger as they could, they send Letters thorough all the Quarters of the
Kingdom to their Friends, Familiars and Confederates, encouraging them to ply
the business generously, opposing their valor and courage to the strength and
power of the abusers of the Prince. By public writings they cast aspersions on
the present Government. After that battle of Sterlin, and since the Coronation
of the King they had not fallen in the power of a Monarch, but under an
Olygarchy, the most depraved form of all Governments, the name and Title of a
King a young man searce sixteen years of age enjoyed, but he governed not, but
was by the Killers of his Father misgoverned, who under false pretenses
intended the ruin of the State. What reproach and shame would it be not only
with all men now living but also with Posterity to suffer these who had
hazarded what they had dearest for the honor and preservation of their Prince,
to be branded with the name of Traitors, be banished and followed to death.
Whilst the Transgressors and Abusers of all Laws, divine and humane, sit Judges
over them, as Revengers of general wrongs, usurping the Titles of Deliverers of
the Country, and Restaurers of the Commonwealth, amongst whose paws the
present King could not be assured and safe. They being the men who to justify
their injustice, and make their fact meritorious, brought him in Arms, not
knowing whither, against his King and Father, most woefully taken away: besides
the abusing of his Name and Authority in every civil matter. The late King had
lost the day and himself by his own errors, not by their power and designs.
Now they should oppose to their proceedings, and though they might be esteemed
inferior in number to them, yet (if they met together) they might be found
equal to them in worth and courage, being puffed up by the last misfortune, and
only putting their confidence in that they mastered their Designs.

Much being projected and designed for their meeting in arms, in the North
Alexander Lord Forbes, a Man born neither to rest himself, nor suffer others,
in Aberdeen, and other Towns on the point of a Lance displayed the shirt of
the slaughtered King purpled with his blood, inviting the Country as by an
Herald to the revenge of his Murder. In the West the Earl of Lennox, a man
eminent by his Birth and Fortunes has the same resolution; the Earl of
Marshall, Lords Gordon and Lyle, with their confederates in other parts of the
Kingdom, where their power or eloquence could prevail, move all their Engines to
advance the enterprise, and put every thing in readiness.

The Lords of the insurrection having the young King in their hands to
countenance their proceedings, joining discretion to their good succes,
determine except upon necessity not to spill more civil blood. And to disperse
the clouds of that appearing storm, they encourage Sir Andrew Wood, now
received in favor and brought not only to be no enemy, but to be their friend
and fellow-helper (having obtained from them the Barony of Largow, disposed to
him hereditarily of which before he had only a lease of the late King for his
first service) with his Ships to clear the Forth, and scour the (...) of the
English. And they launch out to his assistance the Vessels and Boats of the
Havens near adjacent. At that same time John Lord Drummond stuart of Strathern,
a Nobleman, courageous and adventurous, is directed to wait upon the Earl of
Lennox, stopped his ravaging and wasting the Country, and kept him back from
joining with his Confederates of the North, and infesting the more civil parts:
being the greatest, ablest and nearest Man of that Faction. The Earl had raised
many high-land and West-land men, recorded to be two thousand; but when he
could not pass the River of Forth at the bridge of Sterlin, the Lords having
invested the Town, he assayeth to pass amongst the Fens and Marshes at a Foord
not far from the head of the River, where other his Confederates had appointed
to meet him. Whilst he is encamped at Tilly-moss, far from all appearance or
suspicion of danger, the Lord Drummond by the advertisement of Alexander
Mackealp (who had taken Arms with the Earl only to find out his ways) in the
Night invadeth his Camp, the sentinels and these of the foremost Guard seized
upon, or killed, or driven back, they in the nearest Cabines amazed with the
sudden mischief, rise to arm themselves and think of fight, but finding the
danger to be on all sides and thorough the whole Camp, neither seeing before
them nor hearing any Directions given them for the great noise of the Invaders,
it being impossible to put themselves in array, confusedly each overthrowing
other take themselves to hopeless and disordered slight. Sleep here to some is
continued in death, many disburthening themselves of their arms, seek sanctuary
amongst the winding paths of these Marshes. Others are taken, but by their
acquaintance and friends suffered after to escape. Revenge is only followed
against such who in malice had enterprized any thing against the present
Government, and persevered in their attempts.

This defeit of the Earl of Lennox by the Lord Drummond, is seconded with the
rumor of a Sea victory obtained by Sir Andrew Wood against Steven Bull, a man
excelling in maritime affairs, who had come upon the Scottish seas to revenge
the Quarrel of his Matters Ships not long before taken and spoiled by Sir
Andrew, They had met near the Island of the May at the mouth of the River of
Forth, and arranging themselves for fight had been two days by the waves and
winds carried along the coast of Fife, driven at last amongst the M^unts of
Sand where the Tay loses his name in the Sea, the English ships taler, and of
a greater burden than the Scottish by ignorance or negligence of their
Mariners embanqued and stuck moored upon the Shelves: and being forced by
necessity to render were brought as Prizes to Dunde^: The rumor of these
Victories spread abroad, so amazed the Companies raised in the North by the
Lord Forbess, and other his Confederates, that they, changing their opinions
with the event of actions, gave over further prosecution or desire of war, and
every Man retired to his own home. After which by indifferent friends having
sought a reconciliation (it being more expedient to take them in by Policy than
by force) they were easily received in favor: amongst which was the Earl of
Lennox and the Lord Forbess.

The Governors to ingratiate themselves more with the people, by calming the
present troubles, and uniting the divided members of the Commonwealth; that
every man might have a public assurance for the freedom of his Person and
private estate and fortunes, call a Parliament, and it is held at Edinburgh in
February, having the Law in their own hands, that the insurrection might be
thought just; here was it adjudged that those who were slain in the field of
Sterlin had fallen by their own deservings, and justly suffered the punishment
of their rashness: that the Victors were innocently guiltless of the blood
there shed, and fairly acquitted of any pursuit: The three estates testifying
the same by their subscriptions and Signets.

It was Ordained, That they who came against the present King in aid of his
Father, should take remissions or pardons: and so many of them as were in
hereditary Offices, as Wardens, Justices, Sheriffs, Stewards, Baillyes,
Lieutenants, or in other public Charges, should be suspended from them for the
space of three years, that such who had offices for term of life, or for terms,
should be dispossessed and dennded of them altogether.

All which, though done under a color of Punishment, was only to invest
Places, and to turn some of themselves rich by their spoils. The punishment of
mean men challenged of these garboyls is either made little or passed over. All
Donations howsoever made by Patent from the King or by Parliaments in prejudice
of the Crown, beginning from the month of September before, till the day of
his decease are repelled and annihiled. All honors bestowed on such the late
King sought to obliege unto him were recalled. The Earl of Crawford was
divested of his title of being Duke of Montross, as the L. of Balmayn was of
his, of being Earl of Bothwell. Ambassadors are directed to the Emperor,
Pope, Kings of France and Denmark, and other Princes, to renew the Leagues,
ancient Confederacies and Allyances, as in times past had been the custom of
the Kings of Scotland to their neighbor Princes, but especially to take away
the blame of their Kings slaughter from the Governors: and manifest to all the
world the candor of their minds, and justice of their proceedings. For that
some few English Ships had shut up the narrow Seas of Scotland, and interrupted
the commerce of Merchants, pillaging the Coasts, Order was established for
building of many Ships, and that every Seaport should be stored with them, as
well to maintain traffic abroad with Strangers, as for fishing, and to be
walls to the Country at home. In a matter so important, and near concerning
the weal and standing of the State, the Barons were ordained to share and bear
a part with the Merchants and Buroughs. And in so fair a project, to encourage
his people, the King himself was content first to begin, and to build ships for
his own and the public service of the Kingdom. This being one of the greatest
miseries of the late King that he suffered himself to be misgovered by (as they
termed them) worthless men, some Prelates and Noblemen eniment in learning and
virtue are selected who should still be resident with the King, and of his
Council without the advice consent and decree of six of which if any matters of
importance were proceeded on and concluded, they should be void and ^ull:
Governors are appointed to bring up his Brothers.

Now is every thing ordered to the best, Justice is executed on oppressors and
Robbers, and in the remotest parts of the Kingdom, the King himself in person
sees it administered. He is of so contrary a temper to the humor of his
Predecessors that he granted freely to every man what could be demanded in
reason. To give a testimony to the world of the Agony of his mind, for the
Death of his Father, and what remorse and anguish he suffered for the faults of
those who brought him to the Field against him, he girded himself with a chayn
of Iron, to which every third year of his life thereafter he added some rings
and weight. Though this might have proved terrible to the Accomplices of the
Crime, yet either out of conscience of his gentle disposition and mild nature,
and confidence in his generosity, or of the trust they had in their own power
and Faction, they bewrayed no signs of fear, nor attempted ought against the
common peace and tranquillity, some records bear that they forewarned him by the
example of his Father not to take any violent course against them, or which
might irritate the people against him and every thing to embrace their
counsels: and that finding him repining and stubborn, beyond mediocrity giving
himself over to Sorrow and pensiveness, they th^ea^ned him with a Coronation of
one of his Brothers, telling him it was in their power to make any of the race
of his (...) their King: if he were Headstrong and refractory to oppose to
their wholesome directions and grave Couns^ls.

Amidst this Grief of the King and overweening of his supercilions Governors
Andrew Forman Secretary to Alexander the sixth Bishop of Rome arrived in
Scotland with instrutions for the Clergy, and Letters from his Master to the
King and the Nobles.

The Kings were full of ordinary consolations to assuage his passions, and
reduce his mind to a more calm temper for the accident of his Fathers death.

The most glorious victory a Prince could acquire, was sometimes to overcome
himself, and triumph over his disordered passions. In all perturbations, to
which we are subject, we should endeavor to practice that precept, No thing
too much, but chiefly in our passions of sorrow and wrath: which not being
restrained overwhelm the greatest and most generous Minds, that by passion the
fewest actions, and by reason the most do prosper.

Though a King he must not imagine himself exempt from things casual to all
mankind, especially in Seditions and civil tumults: from which no kingdom nor
State has been free. There being no City which has not sometimes wicked
Citezens, and always and ever an headstrong and mad multitude; he should take
what had befaln him from the hand of his Maker, who chastises those he loves.
What comes from heaven be should bear necessarily, what proceeds from Men
courageously; there was no man so safe, excellent and transcendent, who by an
insolent Nobility and ravaging Populacy might not be compelled to perpetrate
many things against his heart and intentions.

The will being both the beginning and subject of all sin, and the consenting
to and allowing the action being the only and main point to be considered and
look into* of which he was free, the sin committed was not his, nor could the
punishment which by the divine Justice might follow belong unto him.

Since he had done nothing of himself, but as a bound man had been carried away
by mutinous Subjects: these that lead transgress, not always they that follow.
To these men remorse and torture of conscience belonged, it was they should
lament and mourn who under false pretenses had abused the people, maskt their
Ambition and malice with a reformation of errors in the State, whose rage
could not be quenched but by the blood of there Sovereign. It was these should
bewail their in justice and cruelty, the sin, shame and judgment, for so
heinous a fact followed these men; He should not impute the wrongs and
wickedness of others, by which he had been a sufferer with his disastered
Father, to himself. Revenge belonged to the Almighty, to whose Tribunal he
should submit his quarrel. He should not decree the worst against his mutinous
Subjects, nor turn them desperate, as if there were no place to repent. Great
offenccs, ordinarily were seldom punished in a State, that it was pro^itable for
a Prince sometime to put up voluntarily an injury, the way to be invincible was
never to contend, and to stand out of danger was the benefit of peace, that he
should apply soft Medicine where it was dangerous to use violent; That
following his Maker he should endeavor to draw Good out of evil.

As he was for that disaster of his Father pittyed by Men upon Earth, so
assuredly he would be pardoned in Heaven. If his Subjects returned to their
crooked Byas and did revolt again, he would make the danger his own, use his
Ecclestastical censures and spiritual power against them till they became
obedient, and submitted themselves to the sway of his Scepter.

In the Letters to the Nobles he exhorted them to obedience.

Ambition was the cause of Sedition, which had no limits, and which was the
bane and wrack of States and Kingdoms of which they should beware of; Kingdoms
subsisting upon the reputation of a Prince, and that respect his Subjects
carried toward him. He was the Eye and Sun of Justice; the Prince weakened or
taken away, or his authority contemned; the Commonwealth would not only fall
into a Decadence, but suffer an Earthquake and perish* Either after by
Forrainers be invaded, or by intestine dissentions rent asunder. Confusions
followed where obedience ceased and left: Contempt deposed Kings as well as
death, and Kings are no longer Kings when their Subjects refuse to obey them.

That good people made good Kings, which he requested them to endeavor to be,
as they would answer to God whose Lientenants Princes were, and by whose power
they ruled.

After, this time the Lord Evaindale being dead, the Earl of Anguss, was made
Chancelour, and the Lord Hume, obtained the place of great Chamberlain of
Scotland, the Country enjoyed a great calm of peace, the grounds of dissension
seeming to be taken away.

The King in the strength and vigor of his Youth, remembering that to live in
Idleness was to live to be contemned by the world, by change of Objects to
expel his present sadness and to enable himself for wars when they should
burst forth, gave himself to recreations by Games, and with a decent Pomp
entertained all Knightly exercies keeping an open and magnificent Court. When
time and Exercise had enabled him, and he thought he had attained to some
perfection in marital Sports, Tilting and Barriers proclaimed; Rewards
propounded and promised to the Victors, Challenges are sent abroad unto
Strangers either to be Umpiers or Actors of Feats of Arms.

Charles the eight the French King, having an Ambition to reannex, the Duchy
of French Bretaign to the Crown of France, either by arms or the Marriage of
Anne the apparent heir, under the pretext and shadow of those painted Justings,
sends to Scotland some of the bravest Gentlemen of his Court, desiring
privily the assistance of King James against the English, if it should fall
forth that the King of England troubled his Designs.

Not long after well and honorably accompanied arriveth in Scotland a young man
naming himself Richard Duke of York son to Edward the fourth, true Inheritour
of the Crown of England, diverse Neighbor Princes testifying the same by the
Letters, which contained,

That Edward the eldest son of Edward the fourth who succeeded his Father in
the Crown, by the Name of Edward the fifth, was murdered by Richard Duke of
Gloucester their unnatural Uncle; but Richard the younger Son his Brother, by
the Man who was employed to execute that Tragedy (making report to the Tyrant
that he had performed his command for both Brethren) was saved, and with speed
and secrecy convoyed to Tourney, there concealed and brought up by his Fathers
Sister Margarite Dutchass of Burgundy; Nhat King James should acknowledge this
for Truth, and friendly assist this young Man, who was that very Richard Duke
of York, to recover his inheritance, now most unjustly usurped and Possessed by
Henry Tuder Earl of Richmond; That the right of Kings extended not only to the
safe preservation of their own, but also to the aid of all such Allies, as
change of time and State has often hurled down from Crowns to undergo an
exercise of sufference in both fortunes: and Kings should reposses Kings
wrongfully put from their own. As his Predecessors to whose royal virtues he
was heir, had repossessed Henry the sixth King of England, spoiled of his
Kingdom and distressed, by which Charity obliging all virtuous Princes unto
him, he should find ever as his own, Maximilian of Bohemia, Charles of France,
and Margarite Dutch^ss Dowager of Burgundy.

King James graciously receiving this young man, told him That whatsoever he
were, he should not repent him of putting himself into his hands, and from that
time forth, though many gave Informations against him as a Counterfeit,
entertained him every way as a Prince, embraced his quarrel, and seiling both
his own eyes, and the eyes of the world, he gave consent that this Duke should
take to wife Lady Katherine Gordoun daughter to the Earl of Huntley, which some
thought he did to increase the Factions of Perkins in England, stir the
discontented Subjects against King Henry, and to encourage his own Subjects to
side on his quarrel.

Not long after in person with this Duke of York in his Company, who assured
him of powerful assistance, he entered with an Army into Northumberland, but
not one Man coming to side with them, the King turned his enterprise into a
Road, and after he had spoiled the Country returned into Scotland. It is said
that Perkin acting the part of a Prince handsomely, where he saw the Scots
pillaging and wasting of the Country came to the King, and in a deploring
manner requested him to spare his afflicted people, that no Crown was so dear
to his Mind, as that he desired to purchase it with the blood and ruin of his
people: whereunto King James answered he was ridiculously careful of an
interest another man possessed, and which perhaps was none of his. The King of
England who delighted more to draw treasure from his people than to hazard the
spilling of their blood, to revenge the predatory war of the Scots, and find
out Perkin, requires a subsidy of his Subjects: and though few believed he
would follow so far a flying Heart, he was levying a puissant Army.

No sooner this Subsidy began to be collected amongst the Cornish-men when they
began to grudge and murmur, and afterward rebelled; which when it was
understood of the King, he retained the forces raised, for his own service and
use. In the mean time dispatching the Earl of Surrey to the North to attend the
Scots incursions, whilst the Cornish-men are in their March toward London,
King James again entered the Frontiers of England with an Army and besieged the
Castle of Norham in person. But understanding the Earl of Surrey was advancing
with greater forces, laden with spoil he returned back again; the Earl of
Surrey finding no Enemy, sat down before the Castle of Aytoun, which he took,
and soon after returned into England; the cold season of the year, with the
unseasonableness of the weather driving away time, invited a Treaty of Peace on
both sides.

Amidst these turmoyls and unprofitable incursions of the two Kingdoms,
Ferdinando and Isabella of Spain sent one Peter Hialas to treat a marriage
between Katherine one of their Daughters, and Arthur Prince of Wales. This
alliance being agreed upon, and almost brought to perfection King Henry
desirous of quietness, and to have an end of all Debates, especially these with
Scotland, communicates his intentions to Hialas a man wise and learned, and
whom he thought able to be employed in such a service: for it stood not with
his Reputation to sue unto his enemy for Peace.

But Hialas a stranger unto both, as having Direction from his Master for the
Peace of Christian and Neighbor Princes, might take upon him this
reconciliation.

Hialas accepts the Embassage, and coming to King James, after he had
brought him to hearken to more safe and quiet Counsels, wrote unto King Henry,
That he hoped that Peace might easily be concluded, if he would send some wise
and temperate Counselor of his own, that might treat of the Conditions.

Whereupon the King directs the Bishop of Duresm, Richard Fox, who at that
time was at his Castle of Norham, to confer with Hialas, and they both to treat
with some Commissioners deputed from King James. The Commissioners of both
sides meet at Iedbrough, and dispute many articles and conditions of Peace.
Restitution of the spoils taken by the Scottish, or damages for the same is
desired: but that was passed as a matter impossible to be performed. An
enterview in person at Newcastle is desired of both Kings: which being referred
to King James his own arbitrament, he is reported to have answered that he
meant to treat a Peace, and not go a begging for it.

The breaking of the Peace for Perkin Warbeck is highly aggravated by the
Bishop, and he demanded to be delivered to the King of England; That a Prince
should not easily believe with the common people, that Perkin was a fiction,
and such an one that if a Poet had projected the figure, it could not have been
done more to admiration, than the house of York by the old Duchess of
Burgundy, Sister to Edward the fourth, having first raised Lambert Simnel, and
at last this Perkin, to personate Kings and seduce the people. His birth,
education, not residence in any one place proved him a Pageant King, that he
was a reproach to all Kings, and a person not protected by the Law of Nations.

The Bishop of Glasgow answered for his Master, That the love and Amity
grounded upon a Common cause and universal conclusion amongst Kings to defend
one another, was the main foundation upon which King James had adventured to
assist Edward Duke of York; that he was no competent Judge of his title; he had
received him as a Suppliant, protected him as a person fled for refuge,
espoused him with his Kinsewoman, and aided him with Arms upon the belief that
he was a Prince; that the People of Ireland, Wales, and many in England
acknowledged him no less than their King, whether he were so or not; since for a
Prince he had hitherto defended him, he could not leave him upon the Relation
of his most terrible Enemy and the present Possessour of his Crown. That no
Prince was bound to render a Subject to another who had come to him for
Sanctuary, less a Prince who had recourse unto him for aid and Supply, and was
now allied with the ancient blood of the Country.

Much being said at last they conclude upon a truce for some months following.

After this treaty of Peace the Counterfeit Duke of York, with his Lady, and
such Followers as would not leave him, sailed over into Ireland.

This Truce happily concluded and continued, by a trifling and untoward
accident went near to have been given up and broken.

There were certain Scottish young men came into Norham Town, and having little
to do went sometimes forth and would stand looking upon the Castle. Some of the
Garrison of the Castle observing them, and having not their Minds purged of the
late ill-humour of Hostility, either suspected them or quarreled with them as
spies, whereupon they fell at ill words, and from words to blows, so that many
were wounded of either side, and the Scots (being strangers in the Town) had
the worst: Insomuch that some of them were slain, and the rest made have home.
The matter being complained on, and often debated before the Wardens of the
Marshes of both sides, and no good order taken, King James took it to himself,
and sent Marchmond Herald to the King of England to make protestation, That if
reparation were not done according to the Conditions of the Truce, his King did
denounce war. The King of England (who had often tried fortune, and was
inclined to Peace) made answer, That what had been done was utterly against his
will, and without his privity; But if the Garrison Soldiers had been in fault,
he would see them punished, and the Truce in all points to be preserved. This
answer pleased not King James. Bishop Fox understanding his discontent, being
troubled that the occasion of breaking the Truce should grow from his men, sent
many humble and deprecatory Letters to the King of Scotland to appease him.
Whereupon King James molified by the Bishops submiss and discreet Letters,
wrote back again unto him, That though he were in part moved by his Letters,
yet he should not be fully satisfied except he spoke with himself, as well
about the compounding of the present difference, as about other matters that
might concern the good of both kingdoms. The Bishop advising first with his
Master, took his journey to Scotland: the meeting was at the Abbey of Melrose
where the King then abode. The King first roundly uttered unto the Bishop his
offense conceived for the breach of the Truce by his Men at Norham Castle,
after speaking with him a part, he told him, That these temporary Truces, and
Peace were soon made and soon broken: but that he desired a straiter Amity with
the King of England, discovering his Mind, that if the King would give him in
Marriage the Lady Margarite his eldest Daughter, That indeed might be a knot
indissolvable; That he knew well what Place and Power the Bishop deservedly had
with his Master; therefore if he would take the business to heart, and deal in
it effectually, he doubted not but it would well succeed.

The Bishop answered soberly, That he thought himself rather happy than worthy,
to be an instrument in such a matter, but would do his best endeavor.
Wherefore the Bishop of Durh^m returning from Scotland to his King at London,
and giving count what had pas^ed, and finding his King more than well disposed
in it, gave the King first advice to proceed to a conclusion of Peace, and then
go on with the Treaty of Marriage by degrees; hereupon a Peace was concluded to
continue for both the Kings lives, and to the overliver of them one year after.
In this Peace there was an Article contained, That no English man should enter
into Scotland, nor no Scotch man into England, without Letters Commendatory
from the king of either Nations.

During this Treaty of the Marriage it is reported that the King of England
referred this matter to his Council, and that some of the Table in freedom of
Counselors (the King being present) had put the case, That Issues Males and
Females failing of the race of his two Sons, that then the Kingdom of England
would fall to the King of Scotland, which might prejudice the Monarchy of
England. Whereunto the King himself replied, That if any such event should be,
Scotland would be but an accession to England, and not England to Scotland, for
that the greater would draw the less, and that it was a safer union for England
than that of France.

Shortly after, the espousals of James King of Scotland with Lady Margarite the
King of Englands eldest Daughter followed: which were done by Proxy in all
solemn manner. The Assurance and contract was published at Paul's Cross the 25.
of January at London, in applause of which Hymns were publicly sung in the
Churches, and Bonfires with great feasting and banqueting set throughout all
the City.

Julius the second in the beginning of this Treaty did gratify King James with
a Sword and Diadem wrought with flowers of Gold (which the Popes on Christmas
even used to consecrate, a custom first brought in by Sixtus Quartus) which
were presented to him at Holy-Rood-House; the marriage was in August following
consummate at Edenbrough, King Henry bringing his Daughter as far as
Colliveston on the way: where his Mother the Countess of Richmond aboade; and
then resigning her to the attendance of the Earl of Northumberland who with a
great Train of Lords and Ladies of Honor brought her into Scotland to the King
her Husband, solemn days were kept at Court for banqueting, Masks and
Revelling, Barriers and Tilting proclaimed. Challenges were given out in the
Name of the Savage Knight (who was the King himself) Rewards designed to the
Victors. Old King Arthur with his Knights of the Round-Table were here brought
upon the Lists. The fame of this Marriage had drawn many Foreign Gentlemen to
the Court. Amongst others came Monsieur Darcie, naming himself Le Sieur de la
Beauty, who tried Barriers with the Lord Hamilton, after they had tilted with
grinding Spears. Some of the Savage Knights Company (who were robust high-land
men) he giving way unto them, smarted really in these feigned Conflicts, with
Targets and two-handed Swords to the Music of their Bagpipes, fighting as in a
true battle, to the admiration of the English and French, who had never seen
men so ambitious of wounds and prodigal of blood in sport. All were
magnificently entertained by the King, and with honorable Largesses and
Rewards of their Valor, licensed to return Home.

During the Treaty of this Marriage with England, a Monster of a new and
strange shape was born in Scotland near the City of Glasgow, the body of which
under the waste or middle varied nothing from the common shape and proportion
of the bodies of other men, the members both for use and comeliness being two,
their faces looking one way; sitting they seemed two men to such who saw not
the parts beneath, and standing it could not be discerned to which of the two
Bulks above the thighs and legs did appertain. They had differing passions, and
diverse wills, often chiding others for disorder in their behavior and
actions: after much deliberation embracing that unto which they both consented.
By the Kings direction they were carefully brought up, and instructed in Music
and Foreign Languages. This Monster lived twenty and eight years, and dyed when
John Duke of Albany Governed. Claud Gruget makes mention of the like Monster
born in Paris before the marriage of Henry the fourth the French King with
Margarite of Valois, but the birth and death of it were near together.

The King by his great Liberality unto Strangers abroad, and his lavi^h
spending at home, for religious Places were founded, Castles repaired, Ships
builded (three of an extraordinary greatness) finding himself needy of Treasure
to support the daily expenses at Court, engaged to many and sunck deep in debt;
and that Subsidies he could not levy except by the Suffrages of his Parliament,
by whose power they were imposed and rated sets the most learned Counselors
at Law and men experienced in foreign Policy to find out new means and ways to
acquire and gather him moneys by Laws already made and Ordained, which was in
effect to pole the people by executing the rigor of Justice, the Fortunes of
wise men arising often on the expenses of Fools, after the example of King
Henry the seventh of England, his Father-in law, who taking the advantage of
the breach of his penal Statues gave power to Sir Richard Empson and Edmond
Dudley by Informers and Promoters to oppress and ruin the estates of many of
his best Subjects, whom King Henry the eight to satisfy his wronged people,
after his decease caused execute. Old customs are by these men pryed into, and
forgotten absolet Statutes quickened.

Amongst the titles of possessing of Lands in Scotland there is one, which in
process of time of an ungodly custom grew strong and is kept for a Law, being
fetched by imitation from the Laws of the neighboring States; That if the
possessour of Lands die, and leave a Minor to succeed to him his Tutelage
belongs to the King, and the profit of the Lands until the Minor be of the
age of one and twenty years. This is of those lands which are termed Wards. The
King causes bring up his Wards, but bestows no more of their Rents upon them
than is useful to such of that age. By another Law they have not any thing
better than this, which they call Recognition, that if the evidences of any
possessour of Ward-lands be not in all points formal, and above exceptions of
Law, the lands (the possessours put from them) shall return to the Lord
Superior: and like to this, That if a Possessour of Ward Lands without the
consent of the Superior, sell and put away the half, or above the half of his
land and Farm, the whole land and Farm returns to the Superior or Lord
Paramount. They have lands held with clauses which they call irritant, that if
two terms of a few duty run unpaid into the third, the Land falls unto the
Superior. When those laws and other like them by reason of the Neighbourin
cursions and troubles with England, and the civil broyls at home had been long
out of use amongst the Subjects, and the execution of them as it were in a
manner forgot, these Projectors and new Tol-masters the king giving way to
enrich his Exchequer, awakned them. Many of the Subjects by these inquirles
were obnoxious to the king and smarted, but most the most honest, who were
constrained either to buy their own lands and inheritance from the Exchequer,
or quit and freely give some portion of them to those Caterpillars of the
State. The King was so dearly beloved of his people, that in the height of
those Grievances (which reached near the exorbitant avarice of his Father) none
refused or made difficulty to give all that the laws ordained. The King seeing
their willingness to perform, and knowing their great disability thereunto, out
of his singular Grace and Goodness remitteth not only the rigor, but even the
equity almost of his laws, insomuch that thereafter none of his Subjects were
damnified in their persons or estates by his proceedings: which gained him the
hearts of all: And to put away all suspicions and jealousies from their minds
(an Ordinary practice amongst Princes) acts that fill Princes coffers ever
being the ruin of their first Projectors, of any wrong intended, He suffered
the Promoters and Projectors of this polling, with others of the most active to
be thrown into Prisons, where some miserably ended their days.

The year 1507. James Prince of Scotland and Isles was born at Holy-rood-House,
the 21. of January: the Queen in her throws of birth, being brought near the
last agony of death, the King (overcome with affection and religious vows)
takes a Pilgrimage for her recovery on foot to Saint Ninian: in Galloway; a
place in those credulous times famous for the burial of St. Ninian the Apostle
of the Britains, and notorious by the many Processions and Visits of the
neighbor Countries of Ireland and England; at his return he finds his Queen
recovered, the child after dyed at Sterlin, with the Bishop of Galloway, who
was appointed to attend him. The year following the Queen brought forth another
son named Arthur at Holy-rood-House, but he died also in the Castle of
Edinburgh: and Henry the seventh his Grandfather accompanied him to the other
world. King James to the Coronation of the young King his Brother-in-law
sends Ambassadors.

After the death of his two Sons, and his Father-in-Law, as if he had been
warned from above to think upon his own mortality (whether he had resolute
intention so to do, or that for reasons known to himself, he would have it so
appear) he gives out, That out of remorse for bearing arms in the Field where
his Father was slain, he had a resolution to leave his kingdom and visit the
holy Sepulcher. Then to prepare his way Robert Blacka-Towre Abbot of
Dumfermling is directed; but the Abbot in his journey is arrested by death, and
the King finds other hindrances to keep him at Home.

Amidst these deliberations his Queen is delivered in the Palace of Linlithgow
of her third Son, in the Month of April 1512. who succeeded to the Crown, and
was named James.

About this same time Bernard Stuart that famous Warrior under Charles the eight
of France, who commanded the French in Bosworth Field, came to Scotland,
followed by Andrew Forman then Archbishop of Burges, and Bishop of Murray,
with Alexander Stuart the Kings natural son, after promoted to be Archbishop
of St. Andrews. The cause which was given out to the rumors of the people of
their coming, was, That the French King having no male children, craved the
advice and counsel of the King of Scotland his Confederate, concerning the
marriage of his Eldest Daughter: whether he should bestow her upon Francis of
Valois, the Daulphine and Duke of Augulesm, or upon Charles King of Castile,
who had presented her with many tokens of affection, and by his Ambassadors
earnestly sought her from her Brother. But their great errand was to divide the
King from his Brother-in-law King Henry, and make him assist Lo^ys: these two
Potentates intending a war against other.

Anne Daughter of Francis Duke of Bretaign after the death of her Sister
Isabella remained sole heir of that Duchy, her wardship falling to the French
King Charles the eight; He terrified so her Subjects, guided her kindred, and
the principal persons about her, that making void the pretended marriage of
Maximilian king of the Romans, which was by Proxy, she was married unto him.
Notwithstanding he had the Daughter of Maximilian at his Court, with great
exspectation of a marriage to be celebrate with her. After the death of King
Charles, Lovys the twelf having married Jane the Sister of Charles and Daughter
to Lovys the eleventh, by his many favors bestowed upon Pope Alexander the
sixth, and his Son Caesar Borgia, obtains a Brief of Divorce against her, by
the power of which (her weakness for the bearing of Children (the necessary
upholders of a Crown) by his Physicians being proved) he had married Anne of
Bretaign, for he would not loose so fair a Dowry for the blustering rumor of
Malcontents, which in a little time would grow stale and vanish. Pope
Alexander dead, Julius the second, a turbulent, unquiet, but magnificent
Prelate, and a stout defender of Church-Patrimony, suspicious of the power of
the French in Italy, and that they would not rest content with the kingdom of
Naples and Duchy of Milan, but one day hazard for all; fearing also they
would, because they might, put him out of his Chair, and substitute in his Room
their Cardinal of Amboise, or some other of their own, began to study novations
and means to send the French back to their own Country, his ordinary discourse
being that he would one day make Italy free from Barbarians. He requires King
Lovys to give over the protection of the Duke of Ferrara, and of Annibal
Bentivoglio whom he had thrust out of Bulloign. The King refusing to forsake
Confederates, the Pope betaketh him to his spiritual Arms, and threatens with
Excommunication the Duke and all who came to his aid and support, especially
the French; they decline his Sentence, and appeal to a true and lawful General
Council, with which they threaten him. Henry the eight then in the fervor of
his youth, amidst a great Treasure left by his Father, and by more than
ordinary bands of love and friendship tied to the Pope, (as having dispensed
with the marying his Brothers widow) interposeth himself as an Indifferent
Mediator and Intercessor for Peace between the two parties, but in effect was
the chief maintainer of the Quarrel, effecting nothing because he would not.
Conditions being refused by King Henry he essayeth draw the French arms from
the Popes territories by cutting them work nearer home, and bringing a
nec^ssity upon them to defend their own. Upon this determination he desires
king Lovys to restore and render to him his Dutchies Guyenne and Normandy with
his ancient inheritance of Anjow and Main, and the other old Possessions of
the English in France, which wrongfully had been detained and kept from him and
his Ancestors. The war of Italy by ^hese threatenings was not left of: for the
Pope conming to Bollogn with intention to invade Ferrara, is besieged with his
Cardinals, and he sends Declarations to the Christian Princes, protesting the
French not only thirsted after the Patrimony and Inheritance of S. Peter, but
even after Christian blood. Mean while he absolveth the Subjects of King Lovys
from their oath of Allegiance, abandoneth his kingdom to any can possess it; at
a Council at Lateran he dispatched a Bull wherein the title of most Christian
King is transferred upon Henry king of England, who to his former titles of
France having now the approbation of the Pope, and the kingdom interdicted,
prepares an expedition in person. After which with five thousand barded
Horses, Forty thousand Foot, coming in Picardie, he encampeth before
Therovenne, a Town upon the Marches of Picardie: Here the Emperor Maximiliam,
resenting yet his old injury, enters into the King of Englands pay, and
wears the cross of Saint George: But so long as he stayed in the Army, it was
gov^rned according to his counsel and direction.

King James before his meeting with Bernard Stuart and Bishop Forman, was fully
purposed to prove an indifferent beholder of this War: but Bernard having
corrupted the Courtiers, and the Bishop the chief Churchman of the kingdom,
after their long and earnest intercession he was drawn altogether to affect and
adhere to the French.

To throw the apple of Dissension, Bishop Forman is sent to king Henry to
demand certain Jewels by their Fathers Will, or her Brothers Prince Arthurs;
appertaining to Queen Margarite his Sister.

King Henry mistrusting that Embassy, offers all and more than they demand
from him. Shortly after the English beginning to interrupt the traffic of the
French by Sea, king James will send his Ships, lately well manned and equipped
for fight, which not long before had been prepared (as was given out) to
transport the king into Syria to his Cousin Queen Ann, supposing this Gift would
rather seem a Pledge of friendship and alliance to the English than any Supply
of War. But James Earl of Arrain having got the command of them, instead of
falling toward France, arriveth in Ireland, whether by tempest of weather, or
that he would disturb the Kings proceedings in assisting the French, instigated
and corrupted by King Henry, it is uncertain: and after he had spoild
Knock-Fergus a maritime village, returns with them to the Town of Air.

The King taking in an evil part the invasion of Ireland, but more the lingering
of the Earl, for he had received Letters from Queen Anne and Bishop Forman,
regretting the long and vain expectation of his Ships, gives the Earl of
Anguss, and Sir Andrew Wood a Commission for both him and them. The Earl of
Arrain by his Friends at Court, understanding his Masters displeasure, ere they
could find him, hoiseth up Sails, and commits him self rather to the
uncertain fortune of the Seas, than the just wrath of a King. After great
Tempest arriving in French Bretaign, these Ships built at such extraordinary
Charges, Sayls and Cordage being taken from them, rotted and consumed by
weather, in the Haven of Erest.

Now matters grew more exasperate between the Brother Kings; Robert Car Warden
of the Borders is killed by three English, Hieron, Lilburn, Struthers. Andrew
Barton, who upon an old quarrel begun in the reign of King James the third, had
purchased Letters of Reprisal against the Portingals, by Thomas Howard the
English Admiral is slain, and his Ships taken. To this last Grievance (when it
was expostulated) King Henry is said to have answered, That truce amongst
Princes was never broken for taking or killing of Pirates.

Alexander Lord Hume Warden of the East Marches in Revenge of accumulated
injuries with three thousand men invadeth the English Borders, burns some
Villages, and forrageth the Fields about. But having divided his forces, and
sent a part of them laden with spoils toward Scotland, he falls in an
ambush of the English: where Sir William Bulmure with a thousand Archers put
him to flight, and took his Brother George. During these border incursions, the
Lord Dacres and Doctor West came as in an Embassy from England, not so much for
establishing a Peace, and settling those tumults, begun by the meeting of
Commissioners (who assembled and concluded nothing) as to give their Master
certain and true Intelligence of the Proceedings of the Scots with the French,
and what they attempted.

Monsieur de la Motte was come with Letters from the French to stir King James
to take arms against the English, and had in his voyage drowned three English
Ships, bringing seven with him as Prizes to the Harbor of Leyth. Robert
Bartoun in revenge of Andrew Bartouns death, at that same time returned with
thirteon Vessels all Prizes. King Lovys had sent a great ship laden with
Artillery, Powder and Wines; in whicd Mr. James Oguylbuy Abbot of Drybrough
arrived, with earnest request for the renewing of the ancient League between
France and Scotland, and Letters froom Queen Anne for the invasion of England.
In which she regretted he had not one Friend nor maintainer of his Honor at
the Court of France (after the late delay of the sending his Ships) except her
self and her Ladies: that her request was, He would for her sake whom he had
honored with the name of his Mistress in his Martial sports in time of peace,
march but one mile upon the English bounds, now in time of an appearing war
against her Lord and Country.

The King thinking himself already engaged and interested in his fame, drawn
away by the promises, eloquence, and other persuasions of the French,
assembleth the three Estates of his Kingdom to deliberate about a war with
England. Many oppose it, but in vain; for at last for fear of the Kings
displeasure it is concluded, uncertain whether by a worse Counsel or event. But
before any hostility against the English they determine and decree that King
Henry shall by an Herald be fairly advertised and desired to desist from any
further invasion of the Territories of the French King, or Duke of Guilders
(who was General of the French Army) the King of Scotlands Confederates and
Kinsemen: which not being yielded unto, the War as lawful and just shall be
denounced.

Henry the eight then besieging Therovenne, answered the Herald who delivered
his Commission: That he heard no thing from him, but what he had expected from
a King a Despiser of Gods and Man's Law; for himself, he would not give over a
War so happily began for any threats. Neither did he care much for that Man's
friendship, of whose unconstancy he had so often had experience, nor for the
power of his Kingdom and ambitious poverty.

After this answer of the King of England, A Declaration by the King of
Scotland was published almost to this sense.

Though Princes should direct their Actions more to conscience than Fame, and
are not bound to give an account of them to any but to God alone, and when
Armies are prepared for Battle, they look not so much to what may be said, as
to what ought to be done; the (...) being over thought to have had reason upon
their side, and the justest cause: yet to manifest our sincerity, and the
uprightness of our proceedings, as well to these present times as to posterity,
who may hereafter enquire after our deportments, that all may take a full view
of our intentions and courses, we have been moved to lay down the justness and
equity of our Arms before the Tribunal of the World.

The Laws of Nations and of Nature, which are grounded upon the Reason by which
Man is distinguished from other Creatures, oblige every one to defend himself;
and to seek means for ones own preseration is a thing unblamable; bnt the Laws
of Sovereignty lay greater Obligations upon us, and above all men Monarchs and
they to whom God has given the Governments of States and Kingdoms, are not
only bound to maintain and defend their own Kingdoms, Estates and Persons, but
to relieve from unjust Oppression, so far as is in their power, being required,
their Friends, Neighbors and Confederates, and not to suffer the weak to be
overthrown by the stronger. The many Innovations and troubles raised upon all
sides about us, the wrongs our Subjects have suffered, by the insolences and
arrogance of the Counselors of Henry King of England our Brother-in-Law, are
not only known to our Neighbor, but blazed amonst remotest Countries. Roads
and Incursions have been made upon our Borders; Sundry of our Leiges have been
taken, and as in a just war, turned Prisoners; the Warden of our Marches under
Assurance has been miserably kelled; our Merchants at Sea invaded, spoiled of
their goods, liberties, lives: above others, the chief captain of our Ships put
to Death, and all by the kings own Commission; upon which breaches between the
two kingdoms, disorders and manifest wrongs committed upon our Subjects, when
by our Ambassadors we had diverse times required satisfaction and Reparation,
we received no justice or answer worthy of him or us, our Complaints being
rejected, and we disdainfully contemned, that longer to suffer such
Insolences, and not by just force to resist unjust violence, and by dangers to
seek a remedy against greater or more imminent dangers; Not to stand to the
defense of our Lieges, and take upon us their protection, were to invite others
to offer the like affronts and injuries to us hereafter.

Besides these Breaches of Duty, Outrages, Wrongs done unto us, his Brother
Henry king of England without any just cause or violence offered to him or any
of his by the king of France, has levied a mighty Army against him, invaded
his Territories, using all hostility: Continuing to assault and force his
Towns, make his Subjects Prisoners, kill and ransom them, impose Subsidies, and
lift moneys from the quieter sort, which wrongs, damage and injustice we
cannot but repute done unto us in respect of our earnest intercessions unto him
and many requests rejected, and that ancient League between the two kingdoms
of France and Scotland, in which these two Nations are obliged respectively,
and mutually bound to assist others against all Invaders whatsoever; that the
Enemy of the one shall be the Enemy of the other, and the Friends of the one
the Friends of the other. As all motions tend unto rest, the end of a just war
being Peace, that our Brother (who has no such Enemy as the too great Riches
and abundance in which he swimmeth) may entertain Peace with his Brother
Princes, and moderate that boundless ambition, which makes him usurp Dominion
over his equals; we have been compelled to take us to defensive arms; for our
Brother has now declared himself, and vaunteth that he is sole Judge and
Umpire of the Peace of Europe, and that from his will, the differences of
Successions and Titles of Principalities, wrongs and other interests depend, as
that all should be obsequious to his authority; and what particular Authority
can be more intolerable, than that he should hinder so great and just a Prince
as the King of France to claim his own and defend his Subjects?

If our Brother the king of England by the supply and assistance of many
neighbor Countries, now by the Provocation of the Bishop of Rome, arising upon
all sides against the French, should extend his Power and Victory over France
(under what color and pretense of Justice so ever) to what an extremity shall
the kingdom of Scotland be reduced, having so powerful and ambitious a
Neighbor? Fear of any neighbor Princes Greatness, when it extends it self
over adjaeent Territories, is a Good cause of Defense and taking of Arms,
which cannot be but just, since most necessary.

We are not ignorant that here will be objected against us, The breach of a
League contracted between our Brother and us: We have not broken that League;
but for great Causes and Reasons separate our selves from it, our Brother
having taken away the means, occasions, reasons, were had to observe it. In all
Leagues, Confederations, Alliances and Promises amongst Princes, the last
Confederation is ever understood to be contracted without prejudice to the
Rights of any former Alliances: and when our Ambassadors made that League with
our Brother, it was to be understood that it should hold no longer, nor we
longer be bound unto it than he should keep to our first Allies and ancient
Confederates, not breaking their Peace, nor troubling the Government and
Estates of their Countries. A National League is ever to be preferred before
any personal, an ancient to a new; the Leagues between the kingdoms of France
and Scotland having continued many ages, should justly he preferred to that
which we as a new Ally of the house of England did contract, which yet we are
most willing to keep: but the love of our Country passing all private respects
has moved us to separate our selves for a time from it.

All Leagues, Confederations, Alliances, Promises amongst Princes are
respectively and mutually understood, with this condition and Law, providing
both keep upon either side; the one party breaking or departing from the
League, Alliance or Promise, the other is no longer bound to keep nor adhere
unto it. So long as the King of England kept unto us, we kept unto Him: He now
having many ways broken to us, we are no longer obliged to keep to him; That
same oath which obliged and tied us, after his breach absolving and making us
free; and of this we diverse times advertised him, giving him assurance, except
we would betray that Trust and confidence our Subjects and Confederates had in
us for the maintenance of their peace and safety, we could not but assist them
in their just cause (howsoever the justest actions have not ever the mrst
profitable events) and be constrained to have a recouse to arms for a remedy of
their present misery.

And now notwithstanding of our advanced Expedition, and preparations for war,
that the world may judge rightly of our intentions, We declare and manifest
that if our brother shall leave off the Invasion of our Confederates, use no
more hostility against them, and give satisfaction for the wrongs done unto our
Subjects, that we shall disband our forces: and are content that all matters of
difference as well between the King of France, and our brother, as our brother
and us, be amicably judged, decided and taken away. As that not only a Truce
and Cessation of their Misery for a time, but a perfect and lasting Peace be
concluded and established, to the full contentment, and lasting happiness of
the three kingdoms and our posterity.

Whilst the King stayed at Linlithgow attending the gathering of his Army, now
ready to set forward, and full of cares and perplexity, in the Church of St.
Michael heard Evensong (as then it was called) while he was at his Devotion, an
ancient Man came in, his amber colored locks hanging down upon his Shoulders,
his forehead high and enclining to baldness, his Garment of azure color,
somewhat long girded about him with a Towel or Table Napkin, of a comely and
reverend aspect. Having enquired for the King, he intruded himself into the
prease, passing through till he came to him, with a clownish simplicity, leaning
over the Canons Seat where the King ^ate, Sir (said he) I am sent hither to
entreat you for this time to delay your expedition, and to proceed no farther
in your intended journey: for if you do, ye shall not prosper in your
enterprise, nor any of your followers. I am farther charged to warn you, if ye
be so refractory as to go forward. not to use the acquaintance, company or
counsel of Women, as ye tender your honor, life and estate.

After this warning he withdrew himself back again, into the prease; when
service was ended, the King enquired earnestly, for him, but he could no where
be found, neither could any of the Standers by (of whom diverse did narrowly
observe him, meaning afterward to have discoursed further with him) feel or
perceive how, when, or where he passed from them: having as it were vanished in
their hands.

After his Army had mustered in the Borrow-moor of Edinburgh (a field then
spacious and delightful by the shades of many stately and aged Oaks) about the
midst of the Night there is a Proclamation heard at the Market Cross of the
Town, summoning a great many Burgesses, Gentlemen, Barons, Noblemen to appear
within forty days before the Tribunal of one Plot-Cock; the Provost of the
Town in his Timber Gallery having heard his own Name cited, cried out that he
declined that Judicatory and appealed to the mercy of God almighty.

Nothing was the King moved with those advertisements, thinking them Scenick
pieces acted by those who hated the French and favored the English faction:
being so boldly and to the life personated that they appalled and stroke with
fear ordinary and vulgar judgments, as Trage-Comedies of Spirits. The Earl of
Anguss dissuaded him from that expedition, and many of the most reverend
Churchmen, but the Angel which most conjured him was Margarite his Queen who
at that time was with child; her tears and prayers shook the strongest beams of
his Resolutions. She had acquainted him with the Visions and affrightments of
her sleep; that her Chains and Armelets appeared to be turned into Pearls; she
had seen him fall from a great Precipice; She had lost one of her eyes. When he
had answered these were but Dreams, arising from the many thoughts and cares of
the Day, but it is no Dream (says she) that ye have but one Son, and him a a
weakling; if otherways than well happen unto you, what a lamentable day will
that be, when ye shall leave behind you, to so tender and weak a Successor,
under the Government of a woman, for inheritance, a miserable and bloody war?
It is no dream that ye are to fight a mighty people; now turned insolent by
their riches at home and power abroad: that your Nobility are indigent ye
know, and may be bribed to leave you in your greatest danger. What a folly,
what a blindness is it to make this war yours, and to quench the fire in your
Neighbors house of France, to kindle and burn up your own in Scotland? ye have
no such reason to assist the French, as ye have to keep your promises to
England, and enjoy a Peace at home. Though the English should make a conquest
of France, will they take your Crown, or disin her^ their own r^ce, this is
even as the left hand would cut off the right? Should the Letters of the Queen
of France, (a woman twice married (the first half in Adultery, the last almost
Incest) whom ye did never nor shall ever see) prove more powerful with you,
than the cries of your little Son, and mine, than the tears, complaints, curses
of the Orphans and Widows which ye are to make? If ye will go, suffer me to
accompany you; it may be my Contrymen prove more kind toward me than they
will to you; and for my sake yield unto a Peace. I hear the Queen my Sister
will be with the Army in her husbands absence; if we shall meet, who knows
what God by our means may bring to pass.

The King answered all her complaints with a speedy march which he made over
the Tweed: not staying till the whole forces came to him, which were arising
and prepared.

The twenty two of August coming into England he encamped near the water of
Twisel in Northumberland, where at Twisel-haugh he made an Act, that if any man
were slain or hurt to death by the English, during the time of his aboade in
England. his heirs should have his Ward, Relief and marriage. Norham, Wark,
Foord, Eatel, are taken and cast down. Amidst this hostility the Lady Foord (a
noble Captive) was brought in a pitty-pleading manner, with her daughter (a
Maid of excellent beauty) to the Camp. Not without the Earl of Surreys
direction, as many supposed, for they have a vigorous Prince and his Son
(though natural by the gifts of Nature and Education above many lawful) to try
the Magic of their eloquence and beauty upon. The King delighting in their
Company, not only hearkeneth to the discourse of the Mother, but gives way to
her counsel: which was, if she should be dismissed, to send him true and
certain intelligence of what the English would attempt, taking her way to their
Camp: but in effect proved the winning of time to the Earl of Surrey, and the
losing of occasion to him. Her few days stay bred in him a kind of
carlessnesse, sloth, procastination and delay, a neglect, and as it were a
forgetfnlness of his Army and business: eighten daiestarying in England, in a
Territory not very fertile, had consumed much provision, the Soldiers began to
want necessaries, a number in the night by blind paths returned to their own
Country. In a short time only the Noblemen and their Vassals attended the
King. These request him not to spend more time on that barren Soil, but to turn
their Forces against Berwick, which Town was of more importance, than all the
Hamle^s and poor Villages of Northumberland, neither was it impregnable or
diffic^le to be taken, the Town and Castle being no ways provided and
furnished to endure a siege. The Courtiours move the King to continue the
beleaguering of Berwick till their coming back: which would be an easy
conquest Northumberland once forrag'd, in absence of the bravest of the English
then in France.

Whilst the Army languished, and the King spent time a Foord, the Earl of
Surrey directs an Herald to his Camp, requiring him either to leave off the
invasion of his Masters Country, and turn back giving satisfaction for wrongs
committed; or that he would appoint a day and place wherein all differences
might be ended by the Sword. This Challenge being advised in Counsel, most
voices were that they should return home, and not with so small number as
rema^ned endanger the State of the whole Kingdom, enough being already
a^chieved for fame, and too much for their frien^hip with France; why should a
few Soldiers, and these already tired out by forcing of Strengths, throwing
down Castles, be hazarded against such multitudes of the English, supplied
lately and increased with fresh Auxiliaries? Thomas Howard Admiral, a Son of
the Earl of Surrey, having newly brought with him to New Castle out of the Army
lying in France five thousand men, and one thousand tall Sea men. If they
should return Home, the English Army could not but disband, and not
conveniently this year be gathered again, consisting of men levied from far and
distant Places. Again if they should be engaged to come to a Battle; their own
Country, being fields to them well known, would prove more commodious and
secure to fight upon than English ground, besides the opportunity of furnishing
and providing the Camp with all necessaries at less charges. The French
Ambassador and others of his faction remonstrate to the King, what a shameful
retreit he would make, if at the desire of the Enemy he returned, and without
the hazard of a Battle, being so near unto him; that by fighting in England, he
kept his own Couvtrey unforraged; and consumed the Provision of his Enemy which
at last would weaken his forces: That for contentment to both Armies, Islay a
Scottish Herald should return with Rouge-Cross the English, and condescend
upon a day, promising them the mean time tarrying and abode till the
righteousness of the cause were decided in a Battle.

The set and appointed Day by the Heralds in which the two Armies should have
joined being come and the English not appearing, nor any from them: The
Nobility again resort to the King; show how by the ^light of the Enemy matters
were prolonged from one day to another: the English forces daily increasing,
whilst the Scottish wear away and waxed fewer: that ^light should be opposed to
^lights; the day designed by the Heralds not being kept, it would be no
reproach to them to turn home without battle, or if retiring, to fight upon
their own ground. If this counsel pleased him not, but that he would there give
them battle, The next was to study all advantages for victory, either by
stratagem, or the odds and furtherance of the Place of fight; Where the Chiviot
hills decline toward the plainer fields arising behind them with high tops
with best Ordnance should be fortified; the water of Till running deep and
foord-less upon the right hand, and but passable at the Bridge, the first
Companies of the enemy being passed, before they could be relieved and
succored by their followers, the Bridge by the Artilery should be beaten down,
and the enemy charged when they began to pass the Water.

The King, impatient of Counsel, answered, though their number increased to as
many more as they were, he with that remainder of his Army would fight them.
That advantages were to be embraced according to the occasion of the fight
without tedious deliberation, if any man was afraid he might if he pleased
return Home. A strange Resolution in a Prince, who imagined every man in his
Army to have the same strength, courage, boldness and resolution with himself.

This answer astonished the Nobility, and since they could not persuade him to
a fair retreat, but that he will fight and that without the advantage of the
Bridge, being inferior in number to the English (for they were reckoned by the
Scouts fix and twenty thousand) they fortify themselves according to the
Commodity of the Hill where they lay encamped with a resolution not to suffer
the King to hazard his person in the battle. If victory should incline to them,
their Gains were but small and Glory less, extending but over some few of the
Nobility, and a small parcel of the Body of the State of England, a number of
yeomen, and pressed Horsemen, the flower of the Kingdom being in France. But if
they were overthrown, theirloss would prove unco^parable, yea unspekable, a
martial young King either k^l'd, taken or put to flight; wherefore they think it
fitting, not necessary, the King be pleased with so many as either chance or
election might separate with him, to be a Spectator of the fortune of the day.
To this the King replied, he neither wanted ability to discharge the part of a
Soldier, nor wisdom to command as a General, and to outlive so many valiant
Contrymen would be more terrible to him than death it self. When forced to
give way for his personal presence in the field; they appoint some to be
arraied in like furniture of Arms and a like Guard as the King; Shadows to
per^onate him in sundry quarters of the field, that the enemy should not set
one man as their chief mark to invade, from whose death the victory and
conclusion of the war might depend: and if the King should fall, the Army
should not lose courage, nor be brought to believe he were lost, so long as
they saw a General with his Coignoscance and Guard present and near them to be
a witness of their valor and achievements, as not long before at the battle
of Fornou in Italy had been practiced by the French to their king Charles the
eight.

By this time the Earl of Surrey with the power of the North of England, was
come within three miles of the Place where the Scottish Army was encamped, and
perceiving he could not but with great disadvantage fight them; he sends an
Herald requiring the King to come forth of his strength to some indifferent
ground, where he would be ready to encounter him. The King being forward to
condescend to this request, the Lords cried out, it was madness to accept of
opportunity of fighting from his Enemies, and to set all at a main chance
according to their appointment, it being their advantage to prolong time, and
trifle with him, in whose Camp there was already scarcity of victuals, which
ere long might put him to such a stand, that he should not know well what to
do. Neither was it likely he could be furnished from the inner parts of the
Country, by reason of the cumbersom ways for carriage to pass, after the
falling of so great and continued rains, and the softning of the Ground; that
by sitting still, and committing nothing to Fortune, he might have his enemy at
his pleasure; if they dared assail him at their perils be it. He lacked nothing
but patience to be victorious.

The Scots keeping their Trenches, the earl essayeth to draw them out, and the
ninth of September removing his Camp marches toward the same Hill of Flowden
where they lay encamped; his Vant-guard with the Cannon passes the water of
Till at Twysel bridge, the Reer-ward going over at Mylnfoord. King James seeing
them pass the water imagines they meant to win a Hill between his Camp and
them; To prevent which (setting fire to the Cab^nes raised of boughs of Trees
and Reeds) he removes to another Hill, before the English could observe his
motion, the smoke darkning the air between the two Armies. Whilst the Scottish
Army was removing the English advance to the foot of Flowden hill, by which
they have double advantage, the Scottish ordinance could not much annoy them,
they marching upwards and under the level thereof, again by their shot they
might easily gall their enemies as they came downwards upon them.

The fatal hour of the Battle approaching the English draw up in good order six
and twenty thousand men (some write thirty) in two Battails any of which was
equal in number to the whole Scottish Army. Thomas Lord Howard Admiral had
the Vant-guard, of which Sir Edmond Howard his Brother led one of the wings,
and Sir Marmuduke Constable the other; The Lords Dacres and Cliffoord, with Sir
Edward Stanley kept the Rear: the Earl of Surrey with Latymer Scroop, Sir
Stephen Bull kept the main Battle. The Scots by their fewness of number not
being able to order many Battailons, marshal themselves in four, three of which
should enter in fight and the fourth attend for supply. The King kept the
middle or main; Alexander Gordoun Earl of Huntley had the right wing of the
Van; the Earls of Crawford and Montross led the other, and some have recorded
the Lord Hume: The third Army was guided by Matthew Earl of Lennox, and the
Earl of Arguyl, where was Mackenney and Mackclean* with the fierceness of the
High-landers. Adam Hepburn Earl of Bothwell with his Friends and the flower of
the Gentry of Lothian, kept off for sudden dispatches and chances of the
Battle.

The Earl of Huntley making down the Hill where they encamptneer the foot of
Branx Town, encountreth that Wing of the English Host which was led by Sir
Edmond Howard, which after a furious and long fight he put to flight, and so
eagerly pursued the advantage, that Sir Edmond had either been killed or taken,
if he had not been rescued by Bastard Hieron and the Lord Dacres, the
Battaillon which the Earls Lennox and Arguyl led (being High-land men)
encouraged with this first glance of victory, loosing their Ranks, abandoning
all order (for ought that the French Ambassador La Motte by signs,
threatenings, clamours, could do to them) brake furiously upon the enemy, and
invade him in the Face, of whom they are not only valiantly received, but by
Sir Edward Stanleys traversing the Hill, enclosed, c^t down at their backs and
prostate. The Middle ward which the King led, with which now the Earl of
Bothwell with the power of Lothian was joined, sought it out courageously body
against body, and Sword to Sword. Numbers upon either side falling till
darkness, and the black shadows of the Night, forced as it were, by consent of
both* a Retreit: Neither of them understanding the fortune of the day, and unto
whom victory appertained.

Many brave Scots did here fall, esteemed to above five thousand, of the
noblest and worthiest Families of the kingdom: who choosed rather to die than
outlive their friends and Compatriots.

The Kings natural Son Alexander Archbishop of St. Andrews, the Bishop of the
Isles, the Abbots of Inchjefray and Kill Winny, The Earls of Crawfoord,
Mortoun, Arguyl, Lennox, Arrel, Cat^ness, Bothwel, Athol; the Lords
Elphinstoun, Aerskin, Forbes, Ross, Lovet, Saintclare, Maxwell, with his three
Brothers, Simple, Borthick; Numbers of Gentlemen, Balgowny, Blacka-Towre,
Borchard, Sir Alexander Seatoun, Makenny, with Macklean, George Master of
Anguss, and Sir William Dowglass of Glenbervy, with some two hundred Gentlemen
of their name and Vassals were here slain.

The English left few less upon the place, but most part of them being of the
common sort of Soldiers, and men of no great mark* compared with so many
Nobles killed, and a King lost, the number was not esteemed nor the loss
thought any thing of.

The Companies of the Lord Hume had reserved themselves all the time of the
fight, keeping their first order, and when by the Earl of Huntley, he was
required to relieve the Battallion where the King fought, he is said to have
answered That that man did well that day who stood and saved himself. After the
retreat his Followers gathered a great booty of the spoils of the slaughtered.
This fight began Sept. 9. about four of the clock after Noon, and continued
three hours the year 1513.

About the dawning of the next Morning the Lord Da^res, with his Horse-Troops
taking a view of the Field, and seeing the brazen Ordnance of the Scots not
transported, with most part of the fallen bodies not rifled, sends speedy
advertisement to the Howards and the pensive Army: inviting all to the setting
up of Trophies, Spoil, and transporting of their great Ordnance to Berwick,
amongst which were seven Culverins of like size and making, called the Seven
Sisters.

Diverse diversely report of the Fortune of the King; We without affirming any
thing for certain, shall only set down what Fame has published, a false
Witness often of human accidents, and which many times by malignant brains is
forged, and by more malignant ears received and believed. The English hold that
he was killed in this Battle; the Scots that many in like Arms with the like
Guards, were killed, every one of which was held for the King: Amongst others
Alexander Lord Elphinstoun his Favorite, who had married Elizabeth Barley one
of the Dames of Honor of Queen Margarite;

He was a man not unlike to the King in face and stature, and representing him
in arms in the field, with the valiantest and most courageous of the Army
fought it out, and acting heroically his part, as a King was killed, heaps of
slaughtered bodies environing his. In the search where the fight was, the
number, taleness, furniture of the dead bodies being observed, their faces and
wounds viewed, his body, as if it breathed yet majesty, was amidst the others
selected, acknowledged for his Masters, brought to Berwick and embalmed. That
it was not the body of the King, the girdle of Iron which heever wore, and then
was not found about him, gave some, though not certain, testimony.

Some have recorded that the fortune of the day inclining to the English, four
tall men mounted upon lusty Horses, wearing upon the points of their Lances,
for coignoscances, Streamers of Straw, mounting the King on a Sorrel Hackney,
convoyed him far from the place of fight, and that he was seen beyond the
Tweed, between K^lso and Dunce. After which what became of him was uncertain.
Many hold he was killed in the Castle of Hume, either by the intelligence
between the English and the Lord Humes kindred, or out of fear (for they were at
the slaughter of the Kings Father and the most violent in that fight) or of
hopes of great fortunes, which would follow innovations, and the confusion of
the State, being men who lived best in a troubled Common wealth and upon the
Borders.

One Carra follower of the Lord Humes, that same night the Battle was fought,
thrust the Abbot of Kelso out of his Abbacy: which he never durst attempt the
King being alive. Another, David carbreath in the time of John the Governor
vaunted that however John wronged the Humes, he was one of fix who had abated
the insolency of King James, and brought him to know he was a Mortal. To these
is added, that the Governor John, not long hereafter, cut off the heads of the
Lord Hume, and his Brother without any known great cause. The Common people
(ever more addicted to superstition than verity) believed he was living, and
had passed over the Seas, and according to his promise visited the holy
Sepulcher in Palestine. Therefore his other offenses and the bearing of Arms
against his Father, in prayers and Penance he spent the remainder of His
tedious days.

That he would return again when he found opportunity, and the necessity of
Europe requird him. This report was of as great truth, as that which the
Burgundians have of the Return of their Duke Charles after the Battle of Nancy,
most of them believing he escaped from the conflict. He was lost the twenty and
five year of his Reign, the thirty and ninth of his age the ninth of September
1513.

This King was of a vigorous body, his stature being neither too tall nor too
low, of a pleasant countenance, of a pregnant wit; but by the faults of the
times in which he lived not polished with Letters. He excelled in horse-manship
fencing and shooting. By much watching, slender diet, and use, he was enabled
to endu^e all extremities of weather, scarcity or want of rest, with good
health of body.

He was just in giving judgment, in punishing malefactors severe, yet
tractable and moderate. With the peril of some few he restrained vices and
rather shook the Sword than struck with it. He knew there were some things,
though Princes might, yet they ought not to do. He was easy of access. most
courteous in speech, and meek in answering every man. He was so far from being
over taken with anger or other violent perturbations, that he was never
observed to have given an evil or disobliging word to any, or that the color
of his face changed by any offense offered him, or informations given him,
relying without passion upon his own magnanimity.

He was of a free and liberal disposition, far from any ostentation. As he
understood well the Art of giving, so to acquire and purchase he was not
sufficient of himself, but made use of men who drew more hatred upon their own
heads, than moneys into their Princes coffers.

Though he delighted more in War than the Arts, he was a great admirer and
advancer of learned men. William Elphinstoun Bishop of Aberdeen builded by his
Liberality the College of Aberdeen, and named it The Kings College, by reason
of those Privileges and Rents the King bestowed upon it.

His Generosity did show it self in not delivering of Perkin Warbeck; he
trusted much, and had great confidence in his Nobility, and governed by love
not by fear his people.

It is no wonder amidst so much worth, that some humane frailty, and some
according discord be found. There is no day so bright and fair, which one
moment or other looks not pale, and remains not with some dampish shadow of
discolored Clouds. He was somewhat wedded to his own humors, opiniative and
rash; Actions of rashness and timerity even although they may have an happy
event, being never praise worthy in a Prince. He was so infected with that
illustrious crime which the Ambitious take for virtue, desire of Fame, that be
preferred it to his own life, and the peace of his Subjects.

He so affected popularity, and endeavored to purchase the love of his people,
by Largesses, Banqueting* and other Magnificence, diving in debt, that by
those Subsidies and exc^ssive exacti^ns which of necessity he should have been
constrained to have levied and squeized from the people, longer life had made
him lose all that favor and love he had so painfully purchased, that death
seemed to have come to him wishedly and in good time.

The wedding of others Quarrels, especially of the French, seems in him
inexcusable; a wise Prince should be slow and loath to engage himself in a war,
although he has suffered some wrong. He should consider that of all humane
actions and hazards, there is not one of which the precipitation is so
dangerous, as that of beginning and undertaking a war. Neither in humane
affairs should there more depths be founded nor hidden passages searched and
pryed into than in this. He should remember that besides the sad necessity
which is inseparable from the most innocent war (the wasting and destroying of
the goods and lives of much people) there is nothing of which the Revolutions
and Changes are more inconstant, and the conclusions and ends more uncertain.

The Sea is not more treacherous, false and deceiving, nor changes not more
swiftly her calms into storms than wars and the fortune of arms do, the event
and success belying the beginning. It is not enough that a Prince know a war
which he undertaketh to be just, but he should consider also if it be
necessary, and if it be profitable, and conduce to the State which he governs.

As men of strong and healthful bodies follow ordinarily delight in their
youth, he was amourously carried away. He confined the Earl of Anguss in the
Isle of Arran, for taking Jane Kennedy a Daughter of the Earl of Cassilles out
of Galloway, a fair and noble Lady, of whom he became enamoured as he went in
his pilgrimage to St. Ninians. In his last expedition the Lady Foord was
thought to have hindered the progress of his arms, and hastened the success of
the battle.

Though virtue be sometimes unfortunate, yet is it ever in an high esteem in
the memories of men: such a desire remained of him in the hearts of his people
after his loss, that the like was not of any King before him; Princes who are
out of this life being only the Delights and Darlings of a people. Anne the
French Queen not many days outlived the rumor of his death. He serves for an
example of the frailty of great men on the Theater of this world, and of the
inconstancy of all Sub-Lunary things.

He had children, James and Arthur who dyed Infants, James who succeeded him,
Alexander born after his death who dyed young; Alexander a natural son,
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, so much admired and courted by Erasmus; Margarite
of a Daughter of the Lord Drummonds, married to the Earl of Huntley, whose
mother had been contracted to the King, and taken away (to his great regret) by
those who governed the State, that he should not follow the example of King
Robert his Predecessor, who married a Lady of that Family; James earl of Murray.

Iams V King of Scotes Ano. 1514

THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE and REIGN OF James the Fifth, King of Scotland
THe fatal accident nd over throw of the King, and Flower of the Nobility of
Scotland at Flowden filled the remnant of the State with great sorrow, but with
greater amazement and perplexity: for by this great change they expected no
less than the progress and advancement of the Victors Arms and Fortune, and
feared the conquest, se^virude and d^solation of the whole Kingdom. The
rigorous season of the year being spent in mourning and performing of last
duties to the dead for their lost kinsmen and friends; and the gatheing
together the floating Ribbs and dispersed plancks of this Shipwreck, the Peers
assembled at Sterlin, where being, applying themselves to set their confuons in
order, and determine on the Remedies of their present evils, the lively
pourtraict of their Calamities did represent it self to the full view. The head
and fairest parts which Majesty, Authority, Direction, Wisdom had made emin^nt,
were cut away, some turbulent Churchmen, Orphan Noblemen, and timorous
Citizens, fill their vacant places: and many who needed directions themselves,
were placed to direct and guide the Helm of State; such miseries being always
incident to a people, where the Father of the Country is taken away, and the
Successor is of under age. In this Maze of perplexity to di^oblige themselves
of their greatest duty, and give satisfaction to the most and best, the lawful
Successor and Heir JAMES the Prince is set on the Throne and Crowned, being at
that time one year five months and ten days of age, and the hundredth and
fifth King of Scotland. The Last Will and Testament which the late King had
left before his expedition, being publicly seem and approved, the Queen
challenges the Protection of the Realm and Tutelage of her Son, as disposed
unto her so long as she continued a Widow and followed the Counsel and advise
of the Chancellor of the Realm, and some other grave Counselors, and she
obtained it: as well out of a Religion they had to fulfill the will of their
deceased Sovereign, as to shun and be freed of the imminent arms and imminent
danger of her Brother the King of England. Being established in the Government,
and having from all that respect, reverence and observance which belong to such
a Princess, she sent Letters to the King of England; that having compassion
upon the tears and prayers of a Widow, of his sister, of an Orphan, of his
Nephew, he would not only cease from following the War upon Scotland (then at
war with it self and many ways divided) but ennobled by courage and goodness,
be a defense unto her the infant her Son against all injuries to be offered
them by Forrainers abroad, or any of the factious Nobility* who would oppose
themselves a against her at home. To which King Henry answered, That with the
Peaceable he would entertain Peace, and with the froward and turbulent war; if
the Scots would live in Peace they should have it for his part, but if they
would rather fight, he was not to refuse them. That he husband had fallen by is
own indiscreet rashness, and foolish kindness to France, that he regretted his
death as his Ally, and should be willing to prohibit all hostility against the
Country of Scotland during the minority of her Son, for a remedy of present
evils, one years Truce and a day longer was yielded unto; in which time he had
leisure to prosecute his designs against France, without fear of being
disturbed or diverted by the incursions and inroads of the Scots upon his
borders.

The Government of a woman and a child over a people ever in motion, mutinous
and delighting in Changes, could not long subsist firm, nor continue a after
one fashion. The first shake and disorders of the Kingdom arose, and was
occasioned by the ambition and avarice of the Churchmen (the Moth-worms of
State) being seconded by the factious Nobles and Malcontents; and it was the
distribution of the Offices, Places, Benefices, vacant by the deaths of those
slain in the late Battle. Andrew Form^n Archbishop of Burges, Bishop of
Murray, and Legate to the Pope Julius, Gaven Dowglass Bishop of Dunkell, Uncle
to the Earl of Anguss, John Hepburn Prtour of St. Andrews, contend all three
for the Archbishopric of St. Andrews. Gaven Dowglass was presented to it by
the Queen, Andrew Forman by the Pope, John Hepburn was chosen by the Chapter
his Canons; and sundry of the Nobility favored is election, they said also te
place whilst it was vacant belonged unto him: and his party was so strong that
none dared publish te Popes Bull in favor of Andrew Forman for many days.
Till Alexander Lord Hume then chamberlain and warden of he East Marches, won by
many promises, and the Abbacy of coldingham engaged and presently given in hand
to his younger Brother David, in despite of the opposition of the Lord Haylles
and the faction of the Hepburns, then seditious and powerful, well backed by
his Friends, Vassals, Adherents all in Arms, caused publish and proclaim it at
the Market cross of Edinburgh, which action first incensed the Priour to plot
mischief against the family of the^ Humos. William Elp^instoun Bishop of
Aberdeen by many of the Clergy and some of the Nobility had been desired to
accept this Dignity, but he refused it, being now weary of earthly greatness,
and making for another world, for at this time at Edinburgh he left this.

As ordinarily when one faction is near extinguished, the remnant subdivideth,
after these jars of the Church men, which were cherished by the Nobility, the
Nobles began to jar among themselves, and grudge at others preferments.
Alexander Lord Gordon ruled and commanded the Countries northward the River of
Forth, as Alexander Lord Hume usurped almost a royal Authority, and commanded
over the Countries on South Side of the Forth, and Earl of Anguss went about a
fairer couquest.

James Earl of Arran Lord Hamiltown being nearest in blood to the King, could
not but wit indignation look upon the undeserved greatness of these Usurpers,
under the shadow of this Olygarchy, turbulent, evil disposed, and men
abhorring horring quietness ravaged the Country and did what they pleased.

Amidst these confusions these confusion the Queen in April brought forth the
posthumous child in the Cattle of Sterlin, whom the Bishop shop of Cathness,
Abbot of Dumfermlin, and the Arch-Dean of St. Andrews baptized and named
Alexander. After she was recovered and had required her wonted strength of
body, she found the authority of her place was turned weak, and that ^he
enjoyed nothing but the name of Governing, the people delighting to live rather
without rule and in all disorders than to be subject to the obedience of a
Woman though a Queen. After great deliberation and many essays in vain to curb
their insolency and vindicate her authority from their contempt, as also to
save her son from the dangers of an insulting Nobility, and settle her estate,
she resolved to match with some Nobleman eminent in power and worth, who could
and would protect her and hers in greatest extremities Amongst the choice of
the young Noblemen of Scotland for a long succession of renowned Ancestors,
comelyness of person, nobleconversation, prudence in affairs of State, being
lovely, courteous, liberal wise, none was comparable to the Earl of Anguss; him
she determines to m^ke Partner of her Royal Bed and Fortunes; and as ordinarily
in m^tters of love it falls out, by the impatience of delay, without
acquanting her Brother the King of England, or the Nobles of the Kingdom with
her design, she afterward marryeth him, transferring, if she could, the whole
weight of the Kingdom and the rains of the Government of the State into his
hands, having no more freedom in her own determinations.

No sooner was this revealed to the World, when the Nobility and Gentry divided
into two Factions, one adhering to the Dowglass, in whom kindred, friendship
long observance had bred hopes of benefit and preferment; another of such whom
envy of his greatness and advancement had made hungrey of change. The first
would have the Government continued in the Queens person and Her husbands:
because hereby the Realm should still have peace with England, which at that
time was the most necessary point to be respected. The adverse party, of which
the Lord Chamberlain was the principal, who was a man both in Power, Parentage,
Riches equal, if not beyond, to many of the great men of the Country,
importuned the election of a new Governor and Protector of the young King.
The Queen loosing by her marriage both the tutelage of her Son and the
Government, should not take it to heart that another were chosen and put in her
place.

Her marrying the Earl of Anguss had made him too great already to be a
Subject; the continuing of her in Authority would promote him to the greatness
of a Prince. Who should be Governor, is upon both sides long and coutentiously
argued. Many gave their voices for the Earl of Arran, as being near in blood to
the King, and a man affecting peace more than others, and every way sufficient
for such a Charge. The Chamber lain had determined of another, and told it was
a wrong to bar from so high an honor a man of the Masculine line in blood to
the King, and prefer one of the feminine. John Duke of Albany, son to Alexander
Duke of Albany, the Brother of King James the third, before all others by all
reason should be preferred to the Government. Being demanded if he would the
first, to give example to others, set his hand to this election, he without
pawsing performed it, with a protestation, that though the rest of the Nobility
opposed it, as to his coming into Scotland to accept the Government, he alone
would go to France, charge him with it, be his Convoy hither, and maintain his
Title.

This he was thought to have done, for that despairing to reach and obtain this
Dignity himself, out of emulation he laid a design that never any other of the
Nobles of the Kingdom should reach it: affecting rather to give a stranger the
place than a Competitor, bringing in the French to equal the balance as
principal, himself only as accessory, nothing doubting of a chief place in
State, as well for his forwardness in this election as for the necessity of his
Service which the French could not well want, and should never be lacking. He
feared aslo if the faction of the Dowglasses prevailed, the greatness of the
Earl of Anguss would be an umbrage to his, and lessen and impair it; Their
Lands and Fortunes lying near to other, as that the Queen by her power in
England would cross his f^irest projects.

The King of England had sent a Letter to the Lords of Scotland (as he had done
to the French King for that same effect) remonstrating how dangerous it was for
the State of Scotland, and young King, if they should make choice of the Duke
of Albany.

Notwithstanding of all which through ambition, malice, envy of others,
discords amongst themselves, they made choice of this Gentleman, a stranger by
his education and birth, ignorant of the nature and manners of the Scots: whose
Father was banished for Treason against his Brother* and dyed unrestored. One
altogether devoted to the French King, and an enemy to the English; not caring
to keep the Country of Scotland in Wars and Troubles, so he might defend the
French Nation, by making the Scots fight their battles.

After many private Letters from his Friends in Scotland (especially from the
Chamberlin) inviting him to come home and accept his new dignity, the Duke at
last is required by the State, and Lion King of Arms is directed to him, to
acquaint him with their proceedings, and make him forward on his way. He to
endear his coming and make himself the more desired of the People, excusing
his stay for a while (which he laid upon the Treaty of Peace, which was then to
be agreed upon between England and France, by the marriage of Lovys the French
King with Mary the youngest Sister of Henry King of England, which required his
presence) sends home the King of Arms with Letters from the French King, with
Sir Anthony Darcea le Si^ur de la Beauty. This man propounded certain
conditions which the Duke required. What should be the form of his Government,
his Guards, what Castles should be delivered to him for his Garrisons; the
restoring his patrimony and Fathers dignities to him. Which particularities
being condescended unto, to Castle of Dumbar was instantly delivered to la
Beauty to be kept for a French Garrison at the Dukes coming: and Sir Patrick
Hamilton, Brother to the Earl of Arran, James Oguilbuy Abbot of Arborth with
the King of Arms, were sent back again to France. After their arrival the Duke
of Albany furnished with all necessaries by the French King with eight well
rigged Ships took the Seas, and in the month of May arrived on the West coasts
of Scotland, from whence with a great retinue of the Nobles and Barons of the
Country by easy journeys, the Queen meeting him, he came to the Town of
Edinburgh* In the Parliament which had been porogued for his coming, the Duke
accepted the Government, and gave his oath of fidelity to the King and
Country: and the three Estates gave their oath of obedience to him, and both
swore in the administration of Justice, neither should be deficient to others.
Here is he restored to all his Fathers inheritance, titles and honors. Being
declared Dukes of Albany Earl of March, and Governor of the Kingdom till the
Kings full maturity. Many Laws are made for the weal of the Kingdom, and to
gratify his Linnage, James the natural Son of James the fourth is created
Earl of Murray.

At the presence of this new Governor the face of the State turned more
beautiful, and the Court more Royal, oppr^ssion is restrained, justice
sincerely executed, the Court is frequented with good and virtuous men,
Malefactors and naughty persons banish themselves. He makes a progress to all
the notable Towns of the Kingdom, seeing crimes punished, and faults amended.
Being a Stranger and not thoroughly acquainted with the municipal Statutes and
particular practices of the Country, in matters great and of importance he
proceeds by the instructions and informations of some choice men of the
Nation it self. Especially since he was not infinite to listen to the advice of
every one, he gave himself to hearken and follow the opinion and counsel of
John Hepburn Priour of St. Andrews: whose judgment in his greatest
difficulti^s he receives as an Oracle. This man being of a subtle wind,
malicious, crafty, rich and endued with some Courtly eloquence, by a
counterfeit Pretense of knowledge of the affairs of the Kingdom and State
(neither in some things did he err) at first being very familiar with the Duke
and in a little time after, by bribing secretly some of his choice Servants,
turned his only Privado, and almost possessed alone his judgment and ear. He
informed him of the strength and Riches of the Country, of the nature ot the
people, manner of theri Laws, revealed to him many secrets of the Government.
He gave him a Catalogue of the whole deadly fewds and divisions amongst the
Noble men and Gentry, opening unto him which were inveterate, and had long
continued, and which were fresh, upon what accidents they had their beginnings.
How in prosecuting Revenge in them they cared not how innocent any man was if
he were of the Name and Alliance, but rather thought the more innocent any was
the more it testified their spite which they desired to manifest by taking him
away. He showed him what factions were in the Kingdom, who swayed them, and
were the heads. He told him the Scots were a violent fierce people, mu^inously
proud, and knew not how to obey without the Sword were drawn. That they were
never absolutely governed by their own Kings themselves, far less would they be
ruled by him who was but a Governor, and half a Stranger. King James the first
they had killed, they had made a League against King James the second, in open
Battle they had overthrown King James the third, and the last King was be best
judgments thought to have been secretly taken away: here (calling to mind the
proclaiming of the Archbishop Andrew Formans Bull) he omitted nothing could
derogate to the Chamberlains reputation and honor, and an evil opinion of him
in the Governor.

He instructed him how the great Houses of Scotland were so joined and linkt
together, by kindred, alliances, Bonds of service or Homage, that no Gentleman
of any quality, although a Malefactor and a guilty person, could be presented
to justice without some stir, commotion, tumult of the Grandees and their
factious friends: Amidst so many strong parties and confederate malcontents,
the Governor by the power of the Scots themselves, and his own Kindred, Friends
and Followers were not powerful enough ^afely to administer justice: for which
cause the King of France should be implored to send hither competent forces to
quell the infolencies and shake the pride of the factious Nobles. The heads of
the factions which had a principal ^way in the Kingdom at that time would
either be cuto off, or kept under, but with such cunning and dexterity that it
should not be perceived, nor found out; that many were aimed at and interessed
when some few did suffer and fall. That for the present there were three heads
to be looked unto as ^eared and like to bring Novations in the State, being m^n
able to change the present Government.

The Earl of Anguss, a man in the prime of his youth, of high flying thoughts
by his Alliance with the King of England, and that estimaion the people
conceived of him by the demerits of his Ancesters, and the singular love the
Subjects bare him, carried a mind above the fortune of a private man, and
seemed not born to live a subjects life, each action of his bearing in it
majesty and magnificence, he had power to hurt if he would hurt.

The Lord Chamberlain, a man unpolisht, stubbornly stout, haz^rdous, mighty in
riches and power, and consequently proud, of a working mind and vehement
Spirit, whom time and experience had hardened by great exployts and most
dangerous actions, who had the malice to be a Spectator of the discom^iture of
his Prince and Countrymen at Flowden, was likely to attend the opportunity of
traverses and changes.

The third was the Archbishop Andrew Forman, once Secretary to the Pope, who
though he was not of any Noble Ste^ nor descent of blood, nor for his
Followers, Friends, and Adherents much to be taken notice of or feared, yet
considering him as his Legateship, pluralty of benefices, many pensions from
Princes, had gilded him over, and ballancing him by his present treasure, he
could make a weak party strong, and add weight to what side soever he inclined.
He was therefore with piercing eyes to be looked into, and all his actions and
ways to be observed.

The Governor gave not great attention to what the Priour had instructed
against the Archbishop, having before had some inkling of the rancor, grudge
and enmity between them. And he was conscious the Archbishops riches were
above envy; he having been even more solicitous magnificently to spend what he
had acquired than hoord up. Neither did he bestow so much upon any of his
Countrymen, as he did upon the French, the Friends and Servants of the
Governor. He knew he was also so circumspect as not to adhere to any of the
factions of the time, in a neutrality indifferently and friendly ente^taining
all his Compatriots.

Nor was he much moved at his information concerning the Earl of Angus, finding
him a man peaceable, courteous to all and aff^ble; and though of aspiring
thoughts, carried often away with his private delights and Courtly pleasures.

But what the Priour informed against the Lord Chamberlain he deeply ingraved
in his memory, and ever after his countenance bewrayed certain flaws of ill
concealed discontent: Neither did he thereafter show him wounted favors, which
the Chamberlain observing and guessing at the change of the Governors mind
toward him by more than ordinary evidences and signs: He having been the only
man who wrought his advancement and coming to Scotland, his deserts now either
forgot or ungratefully remembered, full of grief and disdain, retired from the
Court to his own Castles, where, when he had rested a while, half astonished to
see his hopes so frustrate, he takes new resolutions and determinations to
play the Governor double or quite. Hereafter he leaves no means untryed to
become entire with the Queen and her Husband, and by observance and frequent
meeting with them, he wrought himself not only to be embraced as their Friend,
but their Counselor, and one in whom they had great confidence. He many times
with them deplored the public calamity, when his own particular only stong
him, accusing himself of his too much forwardness in calling home a man born an
exile, whose father dyed banished for his ambition, and her ess^yed to take the
Crown form his eldest Brother. Since this man was the nearest of blood to
succeed who could not perceive his last work would be the making away the
innocent child, his Pupil, to ascend the Royal Throne himself; in the height of
malice accomplishing what his Father out of a desire to rule did project. By
his tender years the King could not prevent his danger, his Mother might
anticipate it, that new necessities required new remedys only one postern gate
remained yet open, which was that the Queen would transport her Son to England.

When this plot was whispered to the Governor, who wanted not his Emissaries
among the Queens attendants, it was no sooner revealed than believed, and no
sooner believed, when (being a man who used celerity in all his actions) with
as many men as have could suffer him to gather, forthwith marched from
Edinburgh to Sterlin, there unawares he surprised the Castle, and in it the
Queen with her two Sons. A Council being assembled, the King with his brother
Alexander are sequestered from their Mother, and trusted to the custody of four
Lords, who by turns interchangeably should attend the two Princes and have a
care of their education. That no violence should be offered them, certain
Gentlemen of the French and Scots are appointed still to wait on and guard
them; from this suspicion the seeds of enmity began to be sown between the
Queen and the Governor, which neither time nor wisdom thereafter could take
away and root out.

Amidst this storm of Court, the Lord Chamberlain brought to a new traverse of
his thoughts with his Brother Mr. William Hume fly toward England; the Queen
with her Husband and Sir G^orge Douglas his Brother with an unexpected
suddeness have to Tantallon, and from thence to Berwick, from which they had a
convoy to the Nunnery of Colstream: Here they attended advertisment from the
King of England what course to follow and know his pleasure. He recommended
them to the Protection and care of the Lord Dacres, and assigned the Castle of
Harbottle in Northumberland for his Sisters residence during her abode in these
Northern parts, and the troubles of Scotland.

The Governor not a little perplexed at the flight and escape of those
Conspira^ours, sends Ambassadors to the Court of England to clear himself to
the King of what might be surmised against him concerning these new strangers
come to his Country. He had done nothing which should have offended the Queen,
made her afraid, or to entertain or harbor a sinister thought of his
proceedings. Neither did he intend any thing against these had followed and
accompanied her, which should have moved them to leave their Country; unto whom
if they pleased to return they should be welcome, enjoy their wonted freedom,
and keep peaceably what they had poss^ssed. If they were conscious to
themselves of any misdemeanor he would not be too precise in the search of it.
He also trafficked by the friends of those who favored the Dowglasses and Humes
to persuade them to a Return, giving them fair promises of obtaining what they
should demand. Till at last he removed them to bow and yield to his desires.
The fugitive Gentlemen returned; but the Queen being with child, and near the
time of her delivery, was nec^ssitated to stay still, till at Harbottle Castle
she brought forth her daughter Margarite, after Grandmother to James King of
Britain. So soon as she was able to endure travel, and be transported, King
Henry with an honorable retinue brought her to his Court, where she was by him
and his Sister Mary (late Queen of France) welcomed. In May she made her
progress through London to Baynards Castle, and from thence to Greenwich.

The Contrivers of the exploit of transporting the King to England being within
the Country, and, as it were, secure, the Governor, whose head was filled with
suspicions, not thinking himself bound by promises, will have them give a
reckoning of their enterprise and flight into England. Against some he has
clear proofs, fair and manifest evidences; aganist other bare surmises and
naked suspicions, for they had not left the Country, nor had they been
partakers of the Queens fortunes. Here with an unexspected suddenness, M. Gaven
Douglas Uncle to the Earl of Angus, Bishop of Dunkel, Mr. Patrick Panther
Secretary to the late King, were committed. Mr Gaven in the Castle of St.
Andrews, Mr. Patrick in Garvet Castle. The Lord Drummond Grandfather to the
Earl of Angus, having beaten a Lion Herault, who too imperiously had given a
charge to answer such things should be objected against him, was imprisoned in
the Castle of Blackness. Alexander Lord Hume being charged to answer for his
actions and proceedings, and not appearing, was denounced Rebel, his movables
seized on and brought to the Exchequer. Stirred up and irritated by this
outrage, he makes Roads upon the neighbor bounds, plundereth Dumbar which was
the Governors chief resort, and to revenge his wrongs, sets on work the
Robbers on the borders. To repress and bridle this ravaging, the Governor in
person with a thousand hardy Soldiers marches to the Borders* directs some
companies to find out the Lord Hume; but he, either dismayed at the worth and
fortune of the Governor, or broken and bowing under the burden of his won
miseries, comes to the Governor and submitted his life and estate to his
faith and clemency: brought to Edinburgh, he is trusted to the custody of James
Earl of Arran the Husband of his Sister, with threatenings under pain of High
Treason, that he should not part with him, nor suffer him to escape. The Lord
Hume had not long staid in the Castle of Edinburgh, when with glosses of
probalityes of changes casual, and such as might fall forth, he moved the Earl
of Arran to be of his Mind, and brought him to conspire against the Governor,
and hazard to put himself in his place of State. He himself was the only man
who had brought in the Governor, and he knew well how to put him out, if the
Earl would be of the Party, and by his negligence nor reject a Supreme honor
thrown in his arms. He is begun already not to be loved, if he was not already
hated by the subjects b^ his imperious proceedings. If the King of England
could find some few Noblemen to make head against him, he would constrain him
to leave the Country. The Earl of Arran was nearest heir to the King, it was
more reason he should be second in the Kingdom than John, who though descended
of a brother, yet a banished man, and a stranger to the Scots Nation, with whom
they had not so much as intercourse and fami^iarity of language. After many
such like imducements, the Prisoner took away his Keeper with him to the South
parts of the Country: and both by Letters to their Familiar, Kindred, and
acquaintance, and private meetings with other Noblemen strove to make strong
and increase their faction.

In the beginning of the Spring John Stuart Earl of Lennox, the Sisters son of
the Earl of Arran, listed himself in the party of the conspiring Lords, and
with a number of his Friends and Followers invested the Castle of Galsgow;
which if they could have kept, had been a great advancement to their
intentions. But the Governor gathering an Army of as many as have would suffer
him to assemble, the Defenders not being strong enough to resist him, recovered
the Castle with small loss of his men. After which in indignation he marched to
throw down the Castle of Hamilton; here victorious anger was conquered by pity
and compassion: for the old Countess of Arran being at that time there resident
(who was daughter to King James the second, Sister to King James the third,
mother to the Earl of Arran, Grandmother to the Earl of Lennox, Aunt to the
Governor) a Lady venerable for years and virtues, with tears of affection and
sorrow falling down at the Governors feet, and received by him with great
commiseration in a merciful manner, not only preserved the Castle, but by the
means of the Archbishop Andrew Forman, entered into a Treaty for peace to her
Son, and the Earl of Lennox. And in November the two Earls coming to Edinburgh
by the means of this Archbishop were reconciled with the Governor. About this
time (his Mother being far from him to discharge the last duties of affection
toward him) Alexander Duke of Rothsay, brother to the King, a child to
^^miration beautiful and Delightful, dyed at Sterlin, and was buried in the
Abbey Church of Cambuskenneth.

The term of Peace between the two Kingdoms being almost expired, and both
having a desire to continue it, the English sent their Commissioners to
Coldingham, to whom the Duke, then resident at Dumbar, sent Monsieur du Plains
Ambassador for the French King, Sir William Scot of Balweary, and Gaven Dumbar
Arch-Dean of Saint Andrews. These after some altercation concerning the
Scottish Fugitives, conclude a Peace between the Nations from the midst of
January till the feast of Whitsuntide after. The English comprehended in the
Articles the Earl of Anguss, the Lord Hume, and the rest of the Queens strayed
Faction, with all their Kinsmen, Clients and Followers. The Lord Hume was
received again into the Governors favor, with condition that if he after break
his promises and oaths, his old faults should be remembered and joined to his
new. Master Ga^en Dowglas^ and Mr. Partrick Panther were set a Liberty, The
Lord Drummond who had been (...) was again restored, the Ea^l of Ang^ss with
these who had followed him with many c^remonies, and great store of Fri^ndship,
was welcomed again to the Court.

The Disorders of the Kingdom called a Parliament, in which many acts were made
to restrain and keep under bold and wickedmen, and preserve the peace of the
Kingdom. In this Parliament it was Ordained, the Kings Brother Alexander being
decea^ed, that the Governor should be reput^d second person of the Realm, and
next heir to the Crown. Notwithstanding of the claim made by Alexander Stuart
the elder brother of the Governor, who was begotten on a Daughter of the Earl
of Orkenay, to whom the Duke of Albany their Father had been lawfully joined in
marriage before his coming to France, and thus before the marrying of the Earl
of Bulloignes daughter the Mother of John the Governor, upon which ground
Alexander had grea reason to make his claim and protestation as heir to his
Father. Notwithstanding of his challenge and bravado, Alexander being more fit
for a Cowl than a Crown, in open Parliament gave over all title he had to the
Crown in his brothers favor. Whereupon to deprive him ever hereafter of
lawful Succession they turned him Priest, being made Bishop of Murray, and
Abbot of Skoon.

A truce being sincerely kept with England, tumults within the Country
appeased, particular deadly fewds and jarres of private persons eith^r curbed
or smothered up, the Governor gives himself so^e weeks to his Courtly
recreations at Faulk-land, with what pastime soever he be delighted, or beguile
the hours all the day long, in the might he is often haunted by his old
familiar the Priour of St. Andrews, whom ambition, spite, malice never
suffered to take any rest.

This man put in the Governors head and made him beli^ve, that his endeavors
and pains heretofore would prove but vain in settling the Government, and that
the peace of the Kingdom should never be lasting, firm and permanent, if so
dangerous a Subject as the Lord Chamberlain remained alive: whom neither
rewards could soften, nor honors and preferment oblige and make constant. How
many times had he been pardoned? How often and without a cause had he returned
again to his fo^mer Conspiracies? Should the Governor of his own free will or
of necessity be moved to return to France, what would not the boldness of this
man attmept in his absence, which his authority and presence could never curb
and keep within compass? the life of this man would be the death and total ruin
of the Peace of the concord and harmony of the State, bring forth nothing (...)
dangerous and wicked effects; the violence of ambition having pulled him from
his own judgment. Should he be challenged and put to a trial of hi^ Peers, He
could not shun the blow of Justice, the cry of his oppression and wrongs having
reached heaven? A member so often in vain cured and still gangrened should be
cut off.

The Governor, whose Brains the Priour had now embrued with jealousies,
thought it no great matter upon the in^ormations he had received to put the
Chamberlain to a Trial; for if he proved not guilty, it would be but to leave
him in that state and case he was found in; and calumnies though they do not
burn yet black. Being come to Edinburgh he appointed a convention of the
Nobility, all which time he earnestly tr^fficked with the Friends of the Lord
Chamberlain that he should not be absent, the matters to be determined in
Counsel concerni^g him nearly, and he had need of his advice and counsel.

The Court and City being full of whisperings and expectation of some sudden
change, many disswadeth the Chamberlain from appearing, if he appeared, that he
would leave his Brother Master William (a man equal in judgment and courage to
himself) behind. He trained into false hopes by the bl^^dishments of the
Governor toward his friends and inveigled by presumption, with his Brother,
and (Sir Andrew called by the Country Lord) David Car of Farnehast comes to
Court, where they were with many ceremonies welcomed by the Governor, with
more than ordinary favors en^ertained, and shortly after all three imprisoned,
produced in judgment to answer to such things as should be objected against
them according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and submitted to the Sentence of a
Jury. No new cri^e was laid to their charge, James Earl of Murray the natural
Son of the late King, accused the Chamberlain of the death of his Father: who
by many witnesses was proved alive, and seen to come from the Battle of
Flowden: This by pregnant evidences not being proved, he was indicted of diverse
other points of Treason, and his private faults are found out and laid against
him: they renew the memory of the late stirs of State and these disorders, of
which he was eith^r the Author or accessory to them. He had favored and
maintained the Factions, Thefts and Robberies of wicked Mal^f^ctours on the
Borders: he had not honorably nor honestly carried himself at the Battle of
Flowden, performing neither the duty of a Soldier nor Commander. He had
suffered the English to repair and of new fortify the Castle of Norham, which
without either trouble to himself or danger of his Friends, he might have
hindered. Of every of which points and particularities he not clearly justifying
himself, the Judges prepared and directed by the Governor (whom they record to
have given information of a heinous crime committed by the Chamberlain and his
brother, for the odiousness of it not to be revealed to the people) pronounce
him and his Brother guilty, and condemn them to have their Heads cut off. The
day following the sentence was put in execution, and their heads fixed on the
most eminent part of the Town of Edinburgh. David Car of Farnhast, either by
the Jury, being declared not guilty (as some have recorded) or by the
Corrupting of his Keepers (as others) or by the permission of the Governor,
escaped this danger; which brought the People to believe the Chamberlain was by
his means entrapped, To sinck whom he put himself in hazard of drowning.

This Calamity of the Family of the Humes, being so ancient, potent and
courageous, br^d terror and astonishment in many of the other Noblemen of the
Kingdom, and estranged their Hearts from the Governor; his ears began to be
after attentive to every rumor, and his eyes pryed into each accident; at
l^st, as if he were wearyed with wrestling with the many disorders, and
cumbersome Factions of the Country, he sought how by some fair way he might
for a while return to France. Ambassadors being sent from King Francis to
Scotland to renew the ancient League between the two Nations, when the Nobles
assembled to make choice of the man on whom they should transfer the honor of
the accomplishment of so solemn an action and pass to France, the Governor
carried the matter so by means of the French, that it was conferred on himself,
but with his condition (to entertain them with hopes of his Return) that he
should not stay above six Months out of the Country, Having obtained this
privileged absence of them, his next care was to preserve the State from any
alterations till his Return, and to find the Government as he left it. Hereupon
to preserve the Person of the King, he is conveyed from Sterlin to the Castle
of Edinburgh, and trusted to the custody of the Earl of Marshall, the Lords,
Ruthen and Borthick, two of which should be always resident with him, and
accompany and assist the Lord Areskin his constant and unremovable Guardian.
For the Government of the State he leaves seven Deputies in his Place, The
Earl of Arran, Angus, Huntley, Arguyl, the Archbishops of St. Andrews and
Glasgow; to these is adjoined Sir Anthony Darcey le Sieur de la Beauty, whom
he had made C^ptain of Dumbar, and promoted to be in the Lord Humes Place,
Warden of the East Marches, keeping the days of Truce and Justice Courts. This
was the man to whom the entire Conduct of all the Governors affairs was
entrusted, and who should give him advertisement of what did pass in Scotland,
during his abode in France. That no discord should arise amongst men equal in
places and authority (the ordinary occasion of division) several shires which
they should govern to every one of them are alloted. To Sir Anthony Darcey was
destinated the Government of the Merss and Lothian; to the other their shires
were appointed as the convenience of their dwelling places, Friends and Kindred
did afford them. Under pretexts and fair colors of honor, and as to pass the
time, and be trained in French Civility, also for the greater magnificency, the
Governor took in his company the Earl of Lennox, the Lord Gordon, Masters of
Glenca^n and Arran, other young Lords; who in effect were so many Hostages,
that no stir by their Parents, Kindred, Friends, should be raised during his
absence. He likewise under dark Shadows and far sought pretenses committed to
such Castles as were garrisoned with French Soldiers, as Dumbarton, Dumbar,
Gar^et, certain Barons of the South and West Countries, and who wanted nothing
but liberty, not for any thing they had done, but what they might do the
Governor being out of the Kingdom. Matters brought to such a pass as his best
Politicians could devise, accompanied with Master Gaven Douglas Bishop of
Dunkell, and Master Partick Panther, Secretary to the late King, men whom he
feared to leave behing him, and entertained (though he knew they loved him not)
as his bosom friends, in June at Dumbartoun he took Shipping.

Queen Margarite after she had remained a year in England, understanding by
Letters the Governor had taken the Seas, and was on his way toward France,
honorably dismissed by her Brother came to Scotland. At Berwick she was
received by her Husband the Earl of Anguss; but he was not accpeted with the
favors he was wont; for that plague of too much love (jealousy) had infected
her, having gotten some inkling that he delighted in a free bed, and during the
time of her abode in England had entertained a MIstress in Douglas -dale, an
injury beyond degree of Reconcilement, after which she began to disdain him,
and seek how she might be devorced from him. Though whilst the King was kept in
the Castle to Edinburgh all access unto him was refused her, when h^ was
transported to the Castle of Craigmillar, out of a suspicion and rumor the
Plague had infested Edinburgh, by the courtesy of the Lord Areskin, she had
liberty to visit him, But her frequent haunting him out of too much motherly
kindness, breeding a suspicion in his Guardians, that, as had once before been
practiced by a Queen in Scotland, she had an intention to have stolen him away
and send him to his uncle, restrained her longer access to him, and procured
his retu^n back again to the Castle of Edinburgh.

Sir Anthony Darcey having by his vigilance, pains, courage, given many proofs
of his worth in defense of the Borders, and administration of Justice in those
shires he governed; The other Governors, often disagreeing amongst themselves,
either out of Love of rest, and to be vacant from business, or out of malice to
procure him greater hatred, declare him absolute Deputy: and they gave their
promises to second him in way of Justice: and here he found the difference
between extremes and mediocrities. Many disdained a Stranger should be in that
place, so many brave men of their Nation neglected. A quarrel at that time,
either true and real, or (as others have recorded) altogether forged and
contrived to draw the Deputy in a Danger, arising between the Stewards of the
Lord of Langtoun, and one of his Uncles, who by the power and means of Sir
David Hume of Wedderburn, whose Sister was his wife, had thrust out and ejected
the young heir and them of their own Castle of Langtoun, and kept it by force.
The Deputy a^companyed with certain Lords of the Borders, and some French men
his own Domestics came to the Town of Dunce* to hold a Justic Court concerning
this Riot. The Humes, who thought nothing juster than revenge, nor nobler than
the effects of anger, having sworn a requital of their Chie^s wrong, and to pay
the Governor home when occasion should be offered, by the counsel and
forwardness of Sir David Hume, lay an ambush, and ly in wait for the Deputy;
the Plot not failing, they invade him at such a disadvantage, the some fo this
Servants killed, he was constrained to seek an escape by the swiftness of his
Horse, who in the chase either falling or sinking in a marish, left his M^ster
to the cruelty of his Persuers, who struck off his head, and to feed their eyes
with the spectacle of their rage, set it to the disgrace of the French on the
battlements of the Castle of H^me. This end had Sir Anthony Darcey who deserved
so well both of France and Scotland, having been courteous, valiant, and noble
in all his actions, and a great Administrator of Justice, who spared no travel,
and freely adventured upon any dangers to suppress malefactors, and desend the
weak and innocent.

The Governors, That g^eater mischief should not follow the boldness of these
men, made choice of the Earl of Arran to resist their outrage, and declare him
Warden of the M^rches and Supre^m. Which ele^tion displeased the Earl of Angus;
the Earl of Arran armed with power, neglecting Angus his interest, immediately
committed Sir George Douglas his his Brother to the Castle of Edinburgh, and
Mark Car in Garvet Castle, out of a suspicion they were accessory to the
slaughter of Sir Anthony Darcey. In a Parliament shortly following many of the
Humes and Cockburns Fugitives for this slaughter, and for that they had invited
the English to their aid and spoil of the Country, are declared Rebels. The
Parliament being dissolved, the Earl of Arran with a sufficient number of
Soldiers, and some great Ordinance, besieged the Castles of Hume and Langtoun,
and had them rendered to his mercy.

When the accident of Sir Anthony Darcey was noised at the Court of France,
King Francis is recorded to have said he never looked for better at the hands
of the Scots, and that the Duke of Albany should have deputed men of their own
nation to have governed them, and not a stranger, being a people delighting in
Misgovernment, ever well pleased at the Falls and tragical ends of their
Rulers, and joying to see any hard hap happen to them they deem happy.

The Bishop of Dunkell who had accompanied the Governor to France, used such
diligence at the Court, that he was employed to be the first Messenger to the
Country of the great promises and many Ceremonies of the French, at the
confirmation of the League, with their protestations for the preserving and
maintaining the Liberties of the Kingdom of Scotland against all who would
essay to impair them. Not long after arrived the Earl of Lennox and an Herald
with Letters from Kiug Francis and the Governor, amplifying and putting a
larger gloss on the same. But when by other Letters the Queen and Nobles had
received certain intelligence that King Francis and the King of England had
composed their Quarrels, entered in a new band of Amity, a defensive League
being p^ssed between them, Tournay rendered to the French, promises upon either
sidesolemnly made for a Match to be between the Daulphine of France, eldest son
to King Francis, and the eldest daughter of Henry King of England, when age
should enable them for marriage; and that in the large Treaty of Peace, not one
word was set down for the quietness and help of those who for the quarrel of
France have lost their King, and endangered their whole Kingdom; no care had of
their welfare and prosperity, they stormed not a little, and thought their
lives and travels evil employed. Then with as great have as such a matter
required they dispatched Letters back again to the Governor blotted with
complaints and expostulations. The year following to excuse his oversight, the
French King sent a Reason why he had not made mention of the Scottish nation in
his league with England, He had studied to give satisfaction to some of the
Scottish Nobility (obliquely touching the Duke of Albany) whole minds he knew to
be altogether averse from any peace or Truce with the English nation; whose
undaunted Spirits and great courages were only bent to revenge there deaths of
their King, Kinsmen and Compatriots. This evasion not giving satisfaction to
the best advised of the Council, the French King interposed his endeavors with
King Henry to have a cessation of arms for as short a time as he could devise.
V V herupon Clarencieux and onela Fiot, coming to Scotland, the one from the
king of England, the other from the French King, a Truce was concluded between
the two Kingdoms for one year and a whole day. The reason of this Truce was
thought mostly to be for that the Kings of England and France, the next Summer,
were to have an interview, and with all Princely courtesies entertain each
other.

The Kingdom began to be sensible of the absence of the Governor, factions
increasing, the Commons suffering daily outrages, the Nobility and Gentry
deciding their Rights by their Swords. The Earl of Rothsay and the Lord Lindsay
contending which should be Sheriff of Fyfe, with tumultuary arms invade each
other, and hardly by the Deputies were restrained, till the one was committed
to the Castle of Dumbar, and the other to the Castle of Dumbartoun, Robert
Blackadour Priour of Coldingham, with fix of his Domestic Servants, is killed
by the Lord of Wedderburn. The King out of a suspicion that the plague was in
Edinburgh, being transported to the Castle of Dalkieth by the Convoy of the
Earl of Arran, who was then Provost of the Town: it being the season when the
Townsmen make election of their Magistrates for the year following; when the
Earl was returned and sought to enter the Town, he found the Gates shut upon
him by the Citizens, who alleged he came to invade their liberties in the free
choice of their Magistrates: the tumul^ continues the most part of the night,
and the next morning early the people dividing infactions, and skirmishing in
the streets, a Deacon of the Crafts is killed by the faction of the Hamiltons,
which alienated the minds of the Townsmen altogether from the Earl of Arran,
and made them en^line to the Earl of Angus, some of whose friends and followers
had rescued some of the Citizens, and taken part with others; which made many
after conceave this discord was plotted by some noblemen enemies to the Earl of
Arran, amongst which the Earl of Angus was the chief.

After this tumult the Earls of Angus and Arran sought likewise ^o cross each
other in their proceedings: the one maintaining the enemies of the other: who
had a quarrel against the Earl of Arran, the Earl of Angus befriended him, as
the Earl of Arran supported and sided those who had any discontent against the
Earl of Angus. A suit falling between the Earl of Angus and David Car Lord of
Farnehast about the Ballywick of Jedbrough Forest, the Lands appertained to
the Earl, the title and power to sit Judge belonged to the Lairds of Farnhast,
Sir James Hamilton the natural Son of the Earl of Arran assisted the Lord of
Farnhast; and besides those who out of good will, friendship, kindred,
vassalage, did follow him, he gathered forty Soldiers such as were found upon
the Borders, men living upon Spoil and rapine, to be of his party. The Lord of
Cesfoord (then Warden of the Marches) who with his Counsel and Force sided the
Earl of Angus, at the Rumor of the approach of Sir James to Iedbrough,
encountreth him, and his forty Hirelings abandoning him in his greatest
danger, Cesfoord killing some of his followers brought to make use of his spurs
toward the Castle of Hume, where after a long chase he got Sanctuary. The day
following the Lord of Farnehast held a Court in the Town of Iedbrough, as
Baily to the Earl of Augus, and the Earl himself kept his Court three miles
distant in Ied-ward Forest. In the month of May after, certain Noblemen
assembled at Edinburgh to accommodate all quarrels, and make an atonement
between the Dowglasses and Hamiltons. Many Lords of the West here meet,
attending the Earl of Arran, the Earls of Lennox, Eglintoun, Cassiles, the
Lords Ross, Simple, the Bishop of Galloway, Abbot of Pasley. The provost of the
Town of Edinburgh Archembald Douglas of Kilspyndie, Uncle or Couses Germain to
the Earl of Angus, yielded up his place to Robert Logan Lord of Restlerig. The
Lords of the West by the advice of James Beatoun Chancelour (in whose House
they often assembled) laid a plot to surprise the Earl of Angus, then attended
but by some few of his Friends and as it were solitary. They thought him to
great and insolent a Subject, to whose power never one of theirs alone, was
equal in all points, and they had many things to challenge him upon when the
Governor should return. The Earl of Angus, forewarned of their intention,
employed the Bishop of Dunkell his Uncle to offer them what honorable
satisfaction they could require. All that he propounded being rejected by
implacable men, and finding the only way to be freed of violence, to be
violence, and that danger could not be avoided but by a greater danger, with an
hundred hardy resolute men armed with long Spears and Pikes, which the Citizens
as he traversed the Streets, out of Windows furnished him, he invested a part
of the Town, and barricadoed some Lanes with Carts and other impediments which
the time did afford. The adverse party trusting go their number, and the supply
of the Citizens (who calling to mind the slaughter of their Deacon, show them
small favor) disdaining the Earl should thus muster on the Streets, in great
fury invade him. Whilst the bickering continued, and the Town is in a Tumult,
William Douglas brother to the Earl of Angus, Sir David Hume of Wedderburn,
George Hume brother to the late Lord, with many others by blood and Friendship
tied together, enter by violence the East Gate of the Town (the Citizens making
small resistance) force their passage through the throngs, seek the Earls
enemies, find them, scour the streets of them. The Master of Montgomery eldest
Son to the Earl of Eglintoun, Sir Patrick Hamiltun, Brother to the Earl of
Arran, with almost fourscour more are left dead upon the place. The Earl
himself finds an escape and place of retreat through a Marsh upon the North
side of the Town; The Chancelour and his retinue took Sanctuary in the
Dominican Friars; the tumult by the slaughter of some, and flight of others
appeased, the Earl of Angus now freed of danger, licensed all who pleased
without further pursuit peaceably to leave the Town of Edinburgh, and return to
their own Houses. Some days after the Humes well banded and backed with many
Nobles and Gentlemen of their lineage by the Earl of Angus consent, took the
Lord Humes and his brothers heads from the place where they had been fixed, and
with the funeral Rites of those times interred them in the Blackfriars.

The Earl of Angus having angled the peoples hearts by his Magnificence,
Wisdom, Courage and Liberality, his Faction began to bear greatest sway in the
Kingdom. For the continuance of which, the King of England dealt most earnestly
with the French King to keep the Duke of Albany still in France with him. But
the French had contrary designs. And when the Duke understood the great
discords of the Nobility of Scotland, persons of Faction being advanced to
places, dangerous immunities being granted to the Commons, France and England
beginning to be tired of their Peace, and preparing for a new war: to curb the
Scottish Factions, keep the Nation in quietness in it self, by giving the
Subjects other work abroad, whilst common danger should break of particular
discords. Notwithstanding of the English Ships which lay in wait to take him,
after he had been about five years in France, in November he arrived on the
west coasts of Scotland at a place named Garloch. The Governor coming to
Edinburgh, set himself to amend the enormities committed in his absence; the
Magistrates of the Town are deposed, because in the late uproar they had been
evil seconds to the Lords of the west, when they went to surprise the Earl of
Angus. A Parliament is called, to which many Noblemen and Gentlemen are cited
to make appearance in February to be tried, and to answer for offenses
committed by them in the Governors absence. The appointed time being come,
these who appeared not, were indicted and ^led into England. Amongst which, and
the chief, were the Humes and Cockburns, men Authors and accessory to the death
of Sir Anthony Darcey. The tide now turning, and men's affections changed, the
Earl of Angus, with his brother Sir George Dowgl^s, by the intercession of the
Queen, are constrained to seek a Pardon: which was obtained for them, but with
the condition that they should leave the Country, and stay in France one whole
year, which they obeyed. Others have recorded they were surprised in the night,
and in French Ships conveyed privately away. Mr. Gaven Douglas Bishop of
Dunkell, in the absence of his Nephew, finding the Governor violent in the
chase of the Faction of the Dowglasses, fled privately to the Court of England,
where he gave informations to King Henry against him. He alone had taken to him
the custody of the young King, the sequel w^ereof he much feared; he was an
irreconciliable enemy to the whole Family of the Dowglasses. The principal
cause of his coming to Scotland was to engage the Nation in a War against
England, that the English Should not assist the Emperor against the French
King, and make his Nation slaves to France.

This Bishop shortly after dyed at London, and was buried in the savoy Church:
having been a man noble, valiant, learned, and an excellent Poet, as his works,
yet extant, testify.

The King of England upon such informations sent Clarencieux (King of Arms) to
Scotland to require the Duke to avoid the Country, according to the Articles
agreed upon between the French King and him in their last truce.

It belonged ( said Clarencieux) to his Master to tender the life, welfare,
honor, fortunes of his Nephew, of none of which he could be assured so long as
the Duke ruled and stayed in Scotland. It was against all reason, and
unbeseeming, the man should be sole Guardian to a King, who was the next heir
to the Crown: how easily might he be tempted by opportunity to commit the like
unnatural cruelty which some have done in the like case both in England and
other parts of Europe? if he loved his Nation and Prince (as he gave out) he
required him to leave the Country, which if he yield not unto, but obstinately
continued in a re resolution to stay, he denounced from his Master present war.
He farther complained, That the Earl of Anguss, who was King Henry's Brother-in
Law, was by him banished and detained in France; That during the banishment of
the Earl, which had been near a whole year, the Duke had imp^tuned his Sister
the Queen with dishonest love.

The Governor answered Clarencieux, That what the Kings of France and England
agreed upon in their Treaties of Peace was to him uncertain, but of this he was
most certain, That neither the King of England nor France had power to banish
him (a Forainer over whom their authority did not reach) his native country,
like over like having no jurisdiction.

As concerning the King of Scotland, who was yet young in years he reverenced
him as his sovereign Lord, and would keep and defend both him and his Kingdom
according to his Conscience, honor and bound duty; that there were ever more
men in the world who desired to be Kings, than there were Kingdoms to be
bestowed upon them, of which number he was none, having ever preferred a mean
estate justly enjoyed, before a Kingdom evil acquired. For the Earl of Angus,
he had used all Courtesies toward him, notwithstanding of his evil demerits,
not for his own sake (he did confess) but for the Queens sake, whom he honored
and respected as the Mother of his Prince, and toward whom he should continue
his observance. That the King of England needed not misdoubt he would attempt
any thing should derogate from the honor of his sister, that complements of
mere courtesy in France, might be surmised sometimes by English Ladies to be
solicitations and suits of Love.

For the War, with which in case of his Stay, he threatened his nation, he would
use his best endeavors to set his in a posture of Defense.

When this answer was reported to King Henry, he gathered a great Army to
invade Scotland, and essay if by their own dangers the Scots people could be
moved to abandon and disclaim the Dukes authority. Seven great Ships came to
Inche-keeth and spoiled the adjacent Coasts: all the Scots and French which did
then inhabit London, and other places of England, were put to their fines, and
commanded to go off the Country.

In compensation and for equal amends, the French King seized all English men's
goods in Bourdeaux, imprisoned the persons, and retained the money to be paid
for the restitution of Tournay. The Earl of Shrewsbury making incursions on the
Borders, burned the one half of Kelso, and plundered the other.

At this time the Emperor Charles the fifth came to England, and stirred King
Henry to take arms against the French Kings and the French had sent
Ambassadors to Scotland entreating and conjuring the Scots by their old and
new League to arise in arms and invade England. The Governor assembled the
three Estates at Edinburgh, which together condescended to the raising of an
Army to resist the incursions of the English and defend the Kingdom, to
encourage every man for fighting, the Wards of those which should fall in this
expedition, were freely remitted and discharged by Act of Parliament, and
pensions designed to the Widows and Daughters of those who dyed in this
service. This Empyrick balm could the French apply to cure the wounds of the
Scottish Commonwealth.

The Earl of Shrewsbury advancing (as was reported) toward the west Borders,
an Army was far gathered and encamped on Rosline-moor, which after, according
to the orders given, marched to Annandale and forwards, came to the Esk, a
River running in the Irish Seas near Carlisle; the Governor delighted with the
Seat and standing of the place, caused dig Trenches, and by the advice of
certain French Gunners placed some Field Pieces, and small Ordinance for
defense of them, and spread there his Pavilions. The Citizens of Carlisle
terrified at the sudden approach of so powerful an Army, offer many presents
for the safety of their Town, whch he rejected. The English Army not minding to
invade the Scots so long as they kept themselves on their own ground and
advanced not, the Governor endeavored to make the Scots spoil the Country by
incursions, but he finds them slack and unwilling to obey and follow him,
most part refusing to go upon English Ground, amongst whom Alexander Lord
Gordon was the chief and first man. The Governor finding his command
neglected, and some Noblemen dissenting from what he most intended, comes
back to the place where they made their stand, and desires a reason of their
stay. They told him, they had determined to defend their own country, not
invade England. That it neither consisted with the weal of the Commonwealth,
nor as matters went at that time, had they sufficient forces to make invasive
War: That the Governor did not instigate them to invade England for the love
he carried to Scotland, but for a benefit to the French, by diverting the war
prepared by the English against them. That by invading they might make
themselves a prey to their enemies; they were Men and not Angels; it was enough
for them whilst their King was under age to defend his Kingdom from the
violence of Foreigners. Put the case they werein one battle victorious,
considering the slaughter and loss of their Nobles and Gentry in that purchase,
they might be overthrown in a second fight, and then to what would the King the
Country be reduced^ their last King might serve them for a pattern, the Revenge
of whose death should be delayed till he himself were of years to undertake it.

The Governor brought to an exigent, said they should have propounded these
difficulties before they took Arms, and on the place of Battle. Temerity
misbecame Noblemen in action, but especially in matters of War, in which a man
cannot err twice. At the convention of the three Estates when war was in
deliberation, they should have inquired for the causes of it; he was not to
bring them upon the danger of war without their own consent. The English had
made many incussions upon their Country, burning and ravaging: who stand only
upon defense, stand upon no defense; a better defense of their own Country
could not be found than by invading the Country of their Enemies. They should
not be dejected for that accident at Flowden, since it was not the fault of the
Soldier, but the Treason of their Chamberlain who had suffered for it. That
the glory of the Nation should raise their courages, and inflame their bosoms
with a desire of revenge: The Kings honor and their piety toward the Ghosts
of their Compatriots, craved no less from them. That if they would not invade
England, at least, for their Reputation and Fame with the World, they would
pitch there a short time their Tents, and try if the English would hazard to
assail them. That it would be an everlasting branding their honor, if
timorously in a suddenness they show their backs to their enemies, and dared
them not in the face by some days stay.

The Queen, though absent, had thus persuaded the Noblemen, and having
understood the Governor to be turned now flexible, she dispatched a Post to
him, requesting he would be pleased with a Truce for some Months, and that he
would commune with the Warden of the English Marches, whom she should move to
come to his Tent and treat with him. The Governor finding he stood not well
assured of some of his Army, and knowing what a cumbersome task it was to
withstand the violence of their desires, determined to follow their own
current: seemed well pleased to hearken to their opinion. Hereupon the Lord
Dacres Warden of the West Marches came unto the Governors Camp the eleventh of
September (and, as some have recorded, the Queen also) where a Cessation of
Arms was agreed unto for some days, in which time the Queen and the Governor
should send Ambassadors to treat for a Peace with King Henry, and shortly
after Ambassadors were directed to the Court of England, but returned without
any good don, King Henry demanding extraordinary and harmful conditions to the
Realm of Scotland.

The year 1522. Andrew Forman Archbishop of St. Andrews, dyed, and James
Beatoun Archbishop of Glasgow and Chancellor of the Kingdom came in his place
of St. Andrews, the Archbishop rick of Glasgow was conferred upon Gaven Dumbar
whom the King after advanced to be Chancellor of the Kingdom.

The Governor resenting highly the slighting of the Ambassadors by the King
of England, but more the contempt and scorn of the Scottish Nobility in
refusing to follow him, in October by the West Seas past over to France,
promising that if a peace in this mean time were not concluded with England, he
would the next Summer bring such Warlike Briggades of French and Germans, that
he should not stand much in need of his own Countrymen, who had continued so
refractory and backward to his designs. He demanded from King Francis five
thousand German Horsemen, and ten thousand foot to be transported to Scotland:
which with the Scots who would accompany him, he thought sufficient to continue
a War with England. The French could not spare so many men, having Wars both
with the Emperor and the English, but they gave him three thousand Pikes, and
one thousand Lances. The Governor intending to return to Scotland, receiving
intelligence that the Ports toward the coasts of France were watched by the
English to entrap him in his passage, bestowed his Ships so covertly here and
there in small companies to avoid all suspicion of any purpose he had to stir
that year, as that thereupon the English Fleet under the Conduct of Sir William
Fitz-Williams, which had attended and waited his coming forth, until the
Midst of August, brake up and bestowed themselves in convenient Ports against
the next spring. The Duke then watching opportunity, and readily gathering
together his dispersed Ships, to the number of some fifty Sail, embarked his
men at Breast in Bretaign the one and twenty of September, and landed at
Kirkowbry, or the Isle of Arran, in the West of Scotland. In his company was
Richard de la Pool who had been banished England, and to his power faithfully
assisted the Governor. He arrived the same time that Ied-brough was burnt by
the English; for Thomas Earl of Surrey high Admiral of England, the Marquess of
Dorset and his Brother, with a competent power entering Scotland had burnt many
Towns, and overthrown Castles a^^ Piles.

At his coming the Duke assembled the Lords at Edinburgh, where they agreed
that an Army should forth with be gathered, and the 28. of October was
appointed for their meeting at Dowglas-dale. At the day prefixed the Army
marched toward Coldstream upon the Tweed. Out of this Army the Governo^r
having selected a number of the hardiest Soldiers of Scots and French, and
convoying some Artillery over the water under the command of David Car of
Farnehast, on the last of October they besieged the Castle of Wark, which was
defended by Edward Lile or Lisle. The Assailants upon the outmost Ward
continuing their Battery entered by main force the second Ward, but being there
repulsed and beaten back, a great Tempest arising, and fearing the swelling of
the River of Tweed might cut them off from their Army on the other side, they
turned back and repassed the Water; the Report of the Earl of Surreys forces
come to rescue the Castle and lying at Anwick, and also perplexed them not a
little; the Earl of Surrey at his approach finding the Enemy retired to the
other side of the River, the Castle safe, and having no Commission to pass the
English marches, of to invade Scotland, made mo further pursuit. In the mean
time the Queen who had ever sought to make firm friendship with her Brother,
and break the amity of France, sent to him to yield to a cessation of War,
hoping in that time to work some agreement between the two Nations. Whereunto
the King consenting, the Governor finding the Scottish Lords averse to his
intentions, that he was this time served as he had been before (they refusing
still to enter upon England) and that striving would but the more chafe them,
also condescended. Thus a Truce was promised, and faithful peace concluded till
the last of November, being the Feast of St. Andrews; the Win^er past without
any invasion of the English on Scotland, or the Scots on England.

During the time of this Truce many serious consultations were amongst the
Lords of Scotland whither it were more fit to continue this War, of give it
over. Many of them held it unreasonable that for the only pleasure of the
French King the Realm of Scotland should suffer any more damage by the
continuing of so needless a War, and that the Duke of Albany was always set to
perform what the French desired, not what was expedieut for the Scottish
Nation, nor what was in their possibility to accomplish. Wherefore they wished
that their young King now having attained some years of discretion, and passing
the age of a Child, might bear some away in the Government of the Realm. Some
argued that a King sooner than the Sons of Noblemen went out of the bondage of
Tutelage, and enjoyed greater immunities, his age often being re^koned from the
time of his conception. That the administration and charge of the Kingdom
should early be given him, that he might with his years grow in the art of
Governing; Since we find the same to be usual in the perfection of other arts
and Sciences. Others entertained other thoughts, That to a child who could not
by the weakness of his judgment discern Right from Wrong, the Helm of State
should not be trusted, and that the Peers of the Kingdom might be challenged of
dotage by their Neighbor Countries for giving to a Child the Sword of Justice,
which he might thrust in their own entrails one day, or wound therewith the
bosom of the Commonwealth.

The Governor finding the Lords divided amongst themselves, and their reasons
averse to his intentions, and that not only the people, but the Soldiery were
weary of him, and had bent their affections upon their young King, foolishly
preferring the ignorance and simplicity of a child to his prudency, experience,
and long practice of State* requested them to give him leave to return to
France, and to forgive him any error he had committed, which he protested was
of ignorance not of malice. Having from men distasted with him, without any
opposition, obtained what he required, far from any outward show of inward
coffeehouse, or disquieting himself at the ingratitude of some whom he had
advanced to Honors, he came to Sterlin, where after some days stay with the
King, when he had given him such instructions of State, as he was able to
understand (for he was but then in the thirteenth year of his Age) with many
tokens of love, and demonstrations of sincere affection he took his leave of
him: and his Ships attending his passage on the West, with a great retinue of
Scots and French, he held his way toward them, and recommended himself to the
Sea in the Spring time, now the third time for France, after which he returned
not at all into Scotland.

He was a Prince adorned with many Virtues, Active, Courageous, Resolute, and
knew how to use men as they are.

If he had not been opposed by the Queen and Nobility, he was likely to have
lost himself and the whole Kingdom, or revenged the death of his Cosen.

His courteous nature went above his ambition; he could as well lay down his
Honors, as he had modestly, when they were laid upon him, received them.

Before the Rumor of the Duke of Albanies taking the Seas was spread abroad,
the King of England by secret Letters had required the Earl of Angus, who then
an Exile staid in France, to come to him; after the receipt of which, with a
short-leave taking he left France, where he had staid almost three years,
comes to England; King Henry had brought him to believe, That the Duke had
determined to extirpate his whole Linnage: To prevent which he made him offer
of Men and Ammunition to preserve his own* and by his faction at home, and his
assistance, to send the Duke over Seas; which if he had stayed, the Earl was
esteemed powerful enough to have accomplished.

The Duke of Albany being in France, the Queen with the Government of the
State, assumeth the person of her Sonne^ whom she moved to leave Sterlin and
come to Edinburgh; the third day after he had made his entry in the Town she
lodged with him in the Maiden Castle, and it seized on, armed with authority,
she doubted not to make the Country yield her all obedience. That the Supreme
Magistrate of the Town should not oppose her Designs, he is put from his
Office, and the Lord Maxwell (a man to her obsequio^s) is substituted in his
place.

To give the fairer luster to her Actions, a Parliament is called at Edinburgh,
that what she did, might consist with Law.

When King Henry understood the Duke had left Scotland, to exclude and bar him
all regress, he sent one Magnus, a great Orator, but greater by the renown of
his skill in the Laws, with Roger Ratcliff, his Ambassadors, to try how the
Scots, amidst unnecessary turmoils, would relish a Truce and Ces^ation of
Arms* and these lay the blame of all the disorders and discords between the two
Nations upon the Duke; The Nobles tired with their tedious Wars, beginning to
espy a Heaven of rest, cheerfully accept of this Embassy, and agree unto a
Truce for one whole year. To confirm which they condescend Commissioners shall
be dispatched (...) who shall treat not only for a Truce, but for a firm and
lasting Peace between the two Nations, and unite the two Crowns in bands of
Amity, as well as they were united in degrees of blood.

The Earl of Angus, his enemy abandoning the Kingdom, after honorable
entertainment of the King of England, many promises to befriend him, and
blandishments at his departing, comes to Scotland, and his return began to
change the Game of State. The Queens and Earl of Arrans Faction carried all
matters of importance; the Earls of Lennox, Arguyl, and the Humes had been
sequestered from public employments; the first faction by his presence find
their power diminisht, the other by his counterpoise and assistance have new
hopes of arising; both factions disliked that Angus should arise to the first
place, and suspected he would not be content with the second; they loved to
have him an equal, not Supreme.

Private jarrs smothered and interests delayed, matters concerning England
requiring a hasty and present discharge, Gilbert Earl of Cassiles, Robert
Cockburn Bishop of Dunkell, David Mill Abbo^ of Cambus kenneth, are sent
Commissioners to the Court of England. At Greenwich they are honorably and
kindly received by King Henry, whose countenance promised them a refusal of no
reasonable thing they would require. The Bishop had a speech, the Sum of which
was,

That dissension and hatred taken away between the two Nations, a faithful
Peace might be agreed unto and confirmed, their Discords turned into Union,
their Rancour into Love; which to bring to pass and make durable* the only
apparent and probable means, was to bestow the Lady Mary the Kings daughter,
upon James the young King of Scotland.

The English with great joy applauded to what was said: And King Henry
appointed certain Commissioners to treat about that purpose in private. These
when they had met to advance the Union of the Kingdoms, desired these
Conditions.

First, That the Scottish Nation giving over, and fairly forsaking the League
they had with France, should enter in a new League with them, upon the same
conditions and terms which were contained in their League with France.

Next, That the young King of Scotland till by age he was able for marriage,
should be brought up at the Court of England.

When the Ambassadors of Scotland, had answered, That these conditions were
above their Commission, to which they could not well answer, and desired a time
to acquaint the Council of Scotland with them; it was condescended unto. Thus
two of them remaining at London the Earl of Cassiles, returned to Scotland to
bring back an answer.

When the day in which the Parliament should have been held was come, the Queen
and they who were of her faction, as the Earls of Arran, Murray, Eglintoun,
fearing the Earl of Angus might turn the wavering peoples affection, and move
them to some Revolt, which might hinder their Determinations, or terrify the
Commissioners by the frequent convention of his Friends and Followers,
constraining their voices, and restraining their freedom of speech: Or that
they had a plot to surprise some of the contrary Faction, and by authority of
Parliament commit them in that place, caused a Proclamation to be made, That
none of the three Estates should sit or assemble themselves in the Town of
Edinburgh, but that they should keep their meeting in the castle and there give
their presence. The Earls of Angus, Lennox, Arguyl, Archbishop of Saint
Andrews, Bishop of Aberdeen and Dumblane, with their adherents, and others, who
joined with them rather out of fear than good will, refuse to enter the Castle,
and require, That the Parliament be kept in the accustomed Place, the King may
in Triumph be shown to his own people, conveyed along the High Street. All
which b^ing denied them, giving out That Justice was violated, the King kept
against his will as a Prisoner, the Government and custody of his person seized
on without consent of the three Estates, they surround the Castle with two
thousand men in Arms, stop all furniture of food and victuals, which should
been afforded by the Town. In this distress they in the Castle turn the great
Ordinance against the Town, and threaten the innocent Citizens with the
overthrow of their buildings. Some powder and time spent in terrifying the
people, at last Churchmen interposing themselves, and interceding, persuading
with the parties, an accommodation and atonement is wrought, their fury
quenched, all rancour suppressed, injuries forgotten, the King in magnificence
and pomp is convoyed from the Castle to his Palace at Holy-rood-house, and the
Estates assemble in the wonted place of the Town of Edinburgh.

In this Parliament the Authority of the Governor is abrogated, by which means
they saved him a labor from returning into Scotland again; Eight Lords were
chosen to have the custody of the Kings person quarterly, every one his Months
successively, and the whole to stand for tke Government of the State; yet with
this Limitation, That the King by their Counsel should not determine, nor
ordain any thing in great affairs to which the Queen, as Princess and Dowager,
gave not her free consent and approbation.

The Lords were, the Archbishops of S. Andrews and Glasgow, the Bishops of
Aberdeen and Dunkel, the Earls of Angus, Arran, Lennox, Arguyl.

Time urging resolution, the Lords of Parliament direct the Earl of Cassiles
again to the Court of England to declare their resolution concerning the
marriage of the King and the establishing a Peace between the Kingdoms.

The news of the overthrow of the French Army, and the taking of their King at
Pavia by the Imperialists being come to the Court of England before the Arrival
of the Earl of Cassiles, King Henry told the Scottish Ambassadors in plain
terms, He could not determine any thing concerning the Marriage of his
Daughter, without acquainting the Emperor her nearest Kinsman and his
Confederate, with his proceedings, which could not be done in have, and so
soon, as they required, considering the troubles of Italy.

Hereupon the Ambassadors, their hopes of this Alliance delayed, having
obtained a Truce between the two Nations for the space of three years and three
months faithfully to be kept, returned to their own Country.

The State began of new to be tossed by the troublesome Factions of the Queen
and Earl of Angus, the Original of which Sprang from matters of the Church; the
Abbacy of Holy-rood-House falling vacant by the promotion of Georg^ Creightoun
Abbot to the Bishop-rick of Dunkell; the Earl of Angus, to whom the custody of
the King was u^sted, either by lot or consent, moved him to confer this Abbacy
upon his Brother Mr. William Prior of Coldinham, without acquainting the Queen
with the Gift, or seeking the consent of the other Rulers: at this the Queen
turned so displeased, that abandoning the King to the Pleasure of the Earl of
Angus, She with her Followers retired to Sterlin. By this unconsiderate retreat
the Earl administered all alone, leaning to the greatness of his own power, that
some might have thought the Queen set her Game to make up his. All favors and
punishments pass by him, All Offices and Places of importance are distributed
to his favorites; He made Archembald Douglas his Uncle Treasurer, Sir George
his Brother Great Chamberlain; the Abbacies of Coldingham and Holy-rood-house
were in his Brothers hands, neither temporal nor ecclesiastical Dignity escapt
him; his greatness instantly procures him envy.

The Archbishop of Saint Andrews, the Earls of Arran, Arguyl, Murray, who were
of the Queens faction* lay a plot to accuse Angus of high Treason. They
challange him, that he kept the King against his will, insolently restrained
his Liberty, and that contrary to the order established by the Estates, which
was that the custody of his person should every four Mon^ths by turns be
allotted to the Governors of the Country in a Circle; That he could not
dispose of any thing of moment alone, the contrary of all which he had usurped;
whereupon they charge him to dismiss the King, and restore him to them, and the
other Counselors equal in Government with him, under the pain he should be
reputed a Traitor and no loyal Subject, for this invassalling his Prince to
his attendance.

The Earl of Angus himself to this answered not, but Sir George his Brother
moved the King to give the answer himself. His Mother and those other Ruler's
should not be thus solicitous for him; for with none more cheerfully, willingly
and contentedly could he live and spend his time than with the Earl of Angus,
neither could he leave the company of one so highly favored of his Uncle, and
so well meriting of himself.

For all this answer he had secretly sent Letters to his Mother, and those of
the adverse party, entreating, They would remove him from the Earl, and not
suffer him any longer to remain under him imperious Government, and if it could
not be otherways done, to accomplish it by main force of arms, if they had any
pity, or if any Sparks of duty remained unquenched in them toward him, if
they dared Enterprise ought for a Royal, though now thralled, Supplyant, or
obey the Command of a King in Prison; that the answer which he sent before unto
them and his Mother was by constraint and compulsion drawn from him, and far
from his Mind.

Upon this advertisement the Queen and they of her Faction, assemble what power
they could raise in such a suddenn^ss at Sterlin, and with great expedition
marched toward Edinburgh to separate the King from the Earl his Guardian; Who,
resolved to repel force by force, with the Townsmen of Edinburgh, many friends
and adherents, and the King, though against his will, marched out of Edinburgh
to encounter the fight of these Rebels. When the Leader of the Queens forces
understood the King in person was in the adverse Army, either dazzled with the
splendor of the presence of a King, or fearing if they joined in battle, the
person of their Prince might be endangered, or that they found themselves not
strong enough in number and arms for a Conflict, they retired back again to
Sterlin, where they disbanded, and returned everyman to his own dwelling place:
The Queen with the Earl of Murray went to Murray-land, the Earls of Arran and
Arguyl to the West, the Archbishop of St. Andrews to Dumfermling.

This Faction dissipated, the Earl of Angus remained more stable, and assured
of his Guardianship, and now he finds no Competitour.

The want of the great Seal being a hinderance to many of his projects, and he
disdaining to be a suitor to his enemy; for dispatch of public affairs,
caused the King send a Letter for it, and the Archbishop with all respect sent
it immediately to the Earl: with whom to be equal he took himself to new
Meditations.

The Queen many ways provokt by her Husband the Earl of Angus, and lastly by
detaining her Son Against his will and contrary to the public course agreed
upon, the Archbishop persuaded her To intend a process of Divorcement against
him, and dissolve her marriage; this might produce some great effect, at least
it could not but diminish the Earls reputation among the people. The Queen and
the Earl many times in private between themselves agreed upon a separation,
disliking each others conditions; for it was fatal to her as to her Brother
King Henry, to delight in change of Wedlock, and be jealous of her Matches. The
Earl is therefore cited before the Archbishop of St. Andrews to hear the
sentence pronounced according to the Laws of the Church in those times; at the
day appointed he appears. The Queen alleged, He had been betroathed, given
his faith and promise of marriage to a noble woman of the Kingdom (a daughter
of Traquare) before the marrying of her, and so by reason of that Precontract
he could not be her lawful husband. The Earl confesses; The Archbishop
pronounces the sentence of Divoncement, but with this Reservation and
Restraint, That the Child come of the Queen and the Earl the time of their
marriage by the ignorance of the Mother (the Queen) should not suffer any loss,
damage or disadvantage.

The King of England resented highly this Divorcement, endeavored by his
Letters to hinder it; for he thought some things tolerable in men, which were
in competent and shameful in women, and after never carried such respect to his
Sister as he had done before. Of these she made little reckoning, for after the
sentence given, she married Henry Stuart, Son to the Lord Eavendale, whom K.
James to do honor to his Mother, promoted to be Lord Meffan, and General of his
Artillery.

Whilst the King remained a shadow to the Earls Government amidst so many
distractions, discords and jars of the Grandees, the Court turned solitary and
unfrequented by any Noblemen, save these of the Dowglasses own faction, amongst
which the Earl of Lennox, showed himself most indifferent. For he for his own
ends attending the Court, in a short time so framed himself to the Kings
humors, that he delighted alone in his conversation, and often hid none of his
inward thoughts and secret intentions from him. Among others he many times
importuned him to give him a sound advice how he might de delivered form the
Earl of Angus, of whose bondage he had been long weary, whose rule over him was
turned now into tyranny, his ambition having mounted to that height that he was
not content to command and Kingdom, but to thrall and keep under his Sovereign
Lord the King himself, that he effects of his Governing were the dispersing of
his Nobles, and banishing of his mother from him.

The Earl of Lennox, who by his familiarity with the King was become suspicious
of Angus, and had an intention to tumble out a man hated of his Prince,
establish himself in his place, and rule the young King alone, aggravating his
and the Countries miseries, told him, after much entreaty, The Lord of
Balclough was the only person to be employed in such a service; a man of
unlimitted desires, displeased, strong in power, mightlly hated, and who had
inve^erate hatred against the Earl of Angus, who wanted nothing but opportunity
to execute his rancour: If this conceived exploit had not a desired success,
then he himself would by main force either win his Prince, or loose his life in
the Enterprise. The Lord of Balclough secretly advertised of the Kings
intention gives way to much oppression and many insolences on the borders,
the redress of which required the presence of the Prince. Complaints are given
against them, and the King to do justice accompanied with the Earls of Angus,
Lennox, Lords Hume, Flamin, Areskin, Cesfoord, Farnehast, and others comes to
Ied brough. But when they had stayed there some days, small redress was of
wrongs, no justice executed, the chief men of the Borders not producing the
Delinquents of their Names, to answer according to law as was the ancient
custom. Thus as they came they were returning, when at Melrose as they hoverd
at the passage of a Bridge over the Tweed, certain companies of men in arms
appeared on the Descents of Hellidon Hill: which being come with in distance of
discerning were known to be commanded by the Lord of Balclough, and numbered a
thousand all borderers and broken men. The Earl of Angus, not a little moved at
so sudden an apparition, by an Herald craveth to understand their intentions,
and how in such a hostile manner they dared come so near the Kings person,
withal charging them under pain of high Treason to retire. The Lord of
Balcloughs answer was, he came to do the King service, invite him to his house,
show him what forces he was able to raise upon the Borders when necessity
should require his service and assistance. That he would not obey a charge
contrary to the Kings mind, of which he was conscious, and herewith he marched
forwards. Presently the Earl alighting on foot, leaving the Earl of Lennox,
Lords Areskin, Maxwell, Sir George Douglas Ninian Creightoun with the King as
Spectators of the Game, with the Lord Flammin and other his Friends, marshalled
his Men for the Charge, which was given with a great shout and clamor of these
Borderers. The Lord Hume, Lards of Farnehast and Cesfoord had taken their leave
of the King who gladly dismissed them, but upon advertisement of the sudden fray,
being not far of they return in have with an hundred Lances, in good time for
the Earl of Angus, and falling upon one of the Wings of Balcloughs troops force
them to yield ground, and some to turn their backs, upon which suddenly
follows the Chase. Cesfoord and Farnehast; eagerly persewing. Here at the
descent of a little Hill, by the blow of a Lance which a Domestic of
Balcloughs threw from his Arm, the Lord of Cesfoord if slain, and by his death
the Chase left off to be followed, and a long deadly fewd between the Scots and
Cars was begun, fourscore Borderers were killed in this bickering assisting
Balclough, himself was wounded with many of his friends, the Earl of Anguss
lost not a few besides the Lord of Cesfoord.

The Earl of Angus after this road of Melross perceiving his enemies to
increase, and the affections of some of the Nobility turned f^^m him, composing
the old difference between him and the Earl of Arran, entered into condition of
a strict friendship with him, and was content he should be his partner and
fellow-governour in distribution of Causualities and ruling the Country. When
the King had considered how twice his intentions had been broken, and unhappily
without success, he began to essay the third by the Earl of Lennox, whom
challenging of his promise he desired to gather an army, and joining his Forces
with the Queens to restore him to his Liberty. The Earl of Lennox, before
suspected, after the League and friendship of Earl of Angus with the Earl of
A^ran, became declared ^ enemy to Angus, withdrew himself from Court: and some
few Months being passed, at Sterlin he makes a Declaration to all the Leiges
of his intentions, inviting them to assist and side with his cause. One
thousand men came from the High-lands to him, the Earl of Cassiles and Master
of Kilmayers come from the West with two thousand, the Queen and Archbishop
James Beatoun, direct many of their Vas^alls from F^sse to him: Thus with three
strong Briggades he marches toward Lynlithgow.

The Earl of Angus understanding these preparations to be against him,
imploreth the assistance of his best Friends to withstand them, especially the
Carres and Humes, to who^e valor he had lately been so far obliged. He sends
Letters to the Earl of Arran and the Gentlemen of the name of Hamilton,
regretting the estate of the Commonwealth, requiring their speedy aid. That in
so perilous time setting aside all particular Respects and Quarrels, they would
have a care of the Common good of the Country. If the Earl of Lennox should
carry the King from him, and remained Victor of the Field, he would not stay
there, his next mark would be the Hamiltouns, whom he was in the way to put
from all title to the Crown, the report going already that the King would
intail it to him out of his own favor, and had designed him Heir to the Earl
of Arran, he having no children of his own. That the King had a magnetical
affection toward him, which, if Fortune favored him with a Victory, would
increase, now meritting which before was but mere favor. The custody of a
young King was not for a man of so short experience. The Hamiltouns finding
that man their Suppliant who late was their Competitor, delighting to live in a
trouble State, and be Copartners of the Government and mannaging the affairs of
the Kingdom, which was promised them in their new band of Friendship, laying
aside all former discontent and grudge accept the Quarrel, and assemble their
Forces at Lynlithgow. To this Town the Earl of Lennox was advancing, and he
being the Sisters Son of the Earl of Arran, by Gentlemen well affected toward
him, and of his kindred, they entreat him to turn back, and not to try the
hazard of a battle for a conquest; he could not long enjoy the Government of a
young Prince, whom a little more time would make Governor of himself, and who
(perhaps) would reaward his service with disgrace; It being ordinarily seen
that great obligations to Princes procure rather their hatred than love, whilst
it is more easy to pay men by contempt than benefits: that if he came
forwards, no interest of blood would save him from their just and lawful
stopping of his passage and enterprise. The Earl of Lennox answered, it was no
time then in the eye of the world to abandon so just a quarrel, that shame
wounded deeper than death, which he would rather embrace than not see his
Prince at Edinburgh. And finding the Bridge over the Avan possessed by the enemy,
passed his Companies over the River Et near the ancient Monastery Immanuel; the
Master of Kill-mayers guides the Vantguard, consisting of Westland men; the
Earl of Cassiles and himself the main Battle, many of which were high-land men,
being of all (as some write) ten thousand. The Earl of Angus having essayed in
vain to bring the King to the Field with the power of Edinburgh, leaving that
Charge to his Brother Sir George and Archembald Douglas Provost of the Town,
accompanied with the Humes and Carres, being of all two thousand, marketh a
speedy march toward Lynlithgow. But the Earl of Arran, spurred by the ambition
and youthful heat of his Son Sir James Hamiltoun, had begun the fight before be
could appear; for a long time it is valiantly fought, victory inclining to
neither side, till a great clamor arose seconded by the appearance of fresh
Troops of enemies, the Dowglasses and their Friends, at which alarm many of
the High-land and West-land men turned their backs; the rest by the advantage
of the place sustain the Fight.

The King, after much loytering and many delays (having heard the Armies were
near joining) and much solicitation of Sir George Douglas, issues out of
Edinburgh at a slow march. But when at Corstorphine Hills he was awakened with
the noise of the great Ordinance, he urges his Followers to make all haste to
come to the fight. It was reported Sir George Douglas drove his Horse, in a
great rage gave him injurious words, which he never after forgot. Being half
way he is advertised that the Earl of Lennox highland-men were fled, and by all
appearance the Earl of Arran was Master of the Field. This news perplexed him
not a little, but making the best of that worst, he dispatched all his
domestic Servants with Andrew Wood of Largo, to save so many as they could in
the Chase, especially the Earl of Lennox, whose life he now tendereth as his
Crown. But this Earl after he had been taken by the Lord of Pardowye, in cold
blood was unnaturally slain by Sir James Hamiltoun, who either killed or
wounded on the face all that came under the dint of his Sword in the Rout.

They found the Earl of Arran mourning over his Corpse, over which he spread his
cloak; the Lord of Howstoun lay dead by him, the Master of Killmayers sore
wounded at their coming, maintained the fight, and was by them with difficulty
saved, with so many others as either the Kings authority or their power could
reskew. This Conflict hapened in September.

After the victorious Earls had rested their wounded Soldiers, and refreshed
them selves in Lithgow, they accompany the King to Sterlin, and immediately
march through Fyffe in quest of those who had been the cause of taking arms
against them, of which number the Queen was; but the Archbishop of Saint
Andrews was the most eminent, who, as before he had seconded Arran to surprise
Angus, so now he had stirred Lennox to the overthrow of them both. Because
Archbishop was not to be found (for he (as some record) was turned a true
Pastor, and in Shepherds weeds kept sheep on some Hill) they spoiled the
Abbacy of Dumfermling, and Castle of St. Andrews, defacing all the Ornaments,
and carried away the Movables and stuff in them. The Queen with her husband
Henry, Stuart, and James his brother, betook them to the Castle of Edinburgh,
which the Lords at their return besieged. The Mother hearing her Son was
amongst the Besiegers in person, obtaining favor for her husband and his
Brother, caused the Gates to be cast open. But for their safety such who loved
them, advised the King to commit them to that place during his pleasure.

Now the Earl of Angus and Arran summoned all who had born Arms against the
King to appear in judgment, and answer according to the Law as Traitors. Some
compounded for Sums of money, others became Dependers of the Houses of Angus
and Arran: Gilbert Earl of Cassiles being summoned and compearing, Hugh Kennedy
his Kinsman answered the indictment, that he came not against the King but to
assist the King, for proof of which he offered to produce the Kings own Letter.
Though the Earl of Cassiles escaped the danger of the Law he did not the fury
of the Revenge, was taken about some disparaging words; for as he was returning
home, he was surprised in the way and killed; Some write by the Sheriff of
Air, but by the direction of Sir James Hamiltoun.

About this time the Archbishop of St. Andrews, and other Churchmen in
revenge of the spoiling of his Houses, and persuing himself, for questions of
Religion, burn the Earl of Arrans brothers Son Mr. Patrick Hamilton, and banish
Mr. Patricks brother James Sheriff of Lithgow.

Not long after, men's wrath by time diminishing and their blood growing colder,
the Archbishop having bestowed on the Earl of Angus, Sir George his Brother,
and other their Friends, some Church benefices and many Leases of Tyths, was
reconciled unto them, and with appearance of great friendship they mutually
entertained and feasted each others at the Christ-Mass in the City of S.
Andrews. But small confidence could be long among reconciled enemies.

Now went every thing as the earl of Angus could have wished, he was not only
entire and familiar with the Kings person, but with his Office; some of his
enemies were dead, others overthrown in open Field, with the rest he was
reconciled. No faction for power or richess was equal to his; Nor remained
there any Castle Fortress not ceised on by him, and garrisoned with his Friends
and Followers, except the Castle of Sterlin, a part of the Queens Dowry, which
being desolate by her Miseries, and only haunted by some of her poorest and
meanest Servants, was neglected by the Earl, which in him was a great error,
the fitness of the place for a revolution and change of Court considered. Many
days the Earl had not seen his own dwelling Places, nor thought upon his
private affairs, being carried away by the storms of Court, now he thinks he
may securely pass to Lothian, whilst at Faulkland the King shall be safely
entertained by his Brother Sir George, Archembald his Uncle, and James of the
Parkhead Captain of the Guards; having earnestly entreated their attendance on
the King, he crosses the Forth, with resolution soon to return. His departing
was not so concealed, but the Archbishop of St. Andrews had knowledge of it,
and he inviteth Sir George to see him in his City of St. Andrews, to receive
the Leases of the Tyths promised, all now perfected, valid, and according to
Law sufficient. Whilst Sir George is here detained, Archembald the Treasurer by
other Letters, for matters of love, is enticed to Dundee; But nothing could
make the Captain of the Guards leave his Charge. The King amidst his solitary
Walks in his Park of Faulkland considering of what a tedious Train he was
relieved, and how suddenly occasion might turn her bald scalp, if presently he
took not hold of her, resolves to accomplish by Stratagem, what the Factions
of his Nobles could not perform by force. It is delightful to understand every
particular circumstance in the progress of the actions of Princes. Upon this
resolution he directs the Forrester of the Park to give advertisement to such
Gentlemen about, who kept Hounds, the next morning to attend him, for he would
early have his Game. He suppeth sooner than his custom was, entertaining the
Captain of the Guards with more than usual ceremonies and representations of
the next mornings, sport, withal inviting him to go to his rest, the Night
being short about the Summer solstice. The Waiters all shifted and the Court
hushed, shutting his Chamber door, in the apparel of one of his Grooms,
unperceived he passed the Guard to the Stable; where with two who attended him,
with spair Horses he posted to Sterlin, where by the Queens intelligence he was
expected in the Castle.

When the certainty of this escape was noised abroad, many Noblemen repair to
Sterlin, some by Letters sent unto them, others at the rumor of his evasion,
that in a little time he found him safe and far from any danger again to be
surprised, the Earls of Arguyl, Atholl, Glencarn, Monteeth, Huntley, The Lords
Graham, Drummond, Levingstoun, Sainclaire, Lindsay, Evandale, Ruthen, Maxwell,
Simple, the Earl of ^glintoun, Rothess, James Beatoun Archbishop of St.
Andrews, the Deviser of his escape. The Earl of Angus full of miss-giving
thoughts, with many of his Friends, was also on his way to Sterlin; but
Proclamations being made against him, Discharging him from all Offices and
public functions, and being by an Herald forbidden with his friends and
followers to come near the Court by some Miles, under pain of Treason: either
moved by inward terrors, or love of the Peace of his Country, turned back to
^inlithgow, where two days he attended News of the Kings pleasure, which at
last was declared, That neither he nor none of his should presume by some Miles
to approach his residence. The more particular favors were, That the Earl
should confine himself beyond the River of Spay in the North, whilst his
Brother, Sir George Dowglass, should render himself Prisoner in the Castle of
Edinburgh, and there remain during the Kings pleasure. When the Dowglasses had
refused these offers, they are cited to answer according to Law in a Parliament
to be holden in September at Edinburgh.

Before the day of appearing the Earl of Angus accompanied with an able Train
of his Friends and Followers essayeth to enter the Town of Edinburgh, and there
attend the coming of the King; but by the Lord Maxwell, and the L. of
^ochinvarre, who in the Kings name had invested the Town, he is kept out, and
the King with an unexspected suddenness, with two thousand men coming from
Sterlin, he removed. The Earl not appearing at the appointed day, is by Decree
of Parliament attainted and forfeited, with his brother Sir George Douglas,
Archembald Douglas his uncle, Alexander Drummon^ of Carnock, and others.

The points of which they were to be accused, were, The assembling of the Kings
Lieges with intention to have assailed his person; The detaining of the King
against his will and pleasure, and contrary to the Articles agreed upon the
space of two years and more; all which time the King was in ^ear and danger of
his li^e. At this Parliament (some write the King made a solemn oath never to
give a Remission to any of the Dowglasses there forfeited, as the Lords did,
never to intercede nor request for any of them: and in disgrace of the Earl of
Angus* Henry Stuart who had married the Queen his wife, was created Lord Meffan.

The Dowglasses having all favor denied them, being openly declar^d Enemies to
the King and Country, commit all hostility (the last refuge of desperate men)
on their enemies bounds, Caust-land and Cranstoun are burned, they ravage even
to the Gates of Edinburgh, the harmless people suffering for the faults of the
great; under shadow of their followers all robberies and oppr^ssions brack
forth, and by whomsoever committed, are laid to their charge. The King will not
hear of them in any other terms than Oppres^ours and common Robbers. In their
defense they fortify their Castle of Tantallon with the readiest provision
taken from the nearest adjacent bounds. In October the King raises a great
company of Soldiers, with great Ordinance, and other Engines of War brought
from the Castle of Dumbar, Tantallon is be^ieged, but prov^th impregnable; and
David Faulconer the General of the Ordinance at their removing is slain. A
Commission is sent to the Earl of Bothwell, as the Kings Lieutenant, to invade
with Fire and Sword in all places the Dowglasses, which he, either out of human
compassion, or that he knew wise Statesmen should extenuate the faults of
others rather than aggravate them, refused to accept. But the Earl of Arguyl
and Lord Hume accepted that charge, prosecute them where they might be
apprehended, till after much misery and night-wandring at home, they were
constrained with Alexander Dummond of C^rnock, who had been partaker of their
misfortunes by his consanguinity with the Earls Mother, who was Daughter to the
Lord Drummond, to fly into England, where they were charitably received, and
honorably entertained by King Henry the eight.

Now are the Offices and Lands of the Dowglasses disposed upon; the Archbishop
of Glasgow, Gaven Dumbar is made Chancelour, Robert Bartoun, who was in
especial favor with the King, Treasurer, great Customer General of the
Artillery and Mines, and other their Charges are given unto others.

The King of England intending a War against the Emperor Charles the fifth,
sends Ambassadors to Scotland for a certain time to treat a peace, and if it
were possible to reconcile the Dowglasses with the King. Five yerrs truce was
resolved upon; but for the Dowglasses, the King would hearken to no offers;
only Alexander Drummond by the intercession of Robert Bartoun, and the
Ambassadors, had liberty to return home. When the Earl of Northumberland and
the Earl of Murrey, who had full power to conclude a Truce, had met the other
Commissioners upon the Borders, the factious great men and rank Ryders there,
put all in such a confusion by urging difficulties, that they parted without
agreeing unto any articles or certain conclusions: which the King took in so
evil a part, that divining from what head this interruption sprung, he
committed sundry Noblemen to the Castle of Edinburgh, till they gave hostages,
and secured the borders from invasion or being invaded. In the Month of June
following with a great power he visited these bounds, executing Justice upon
all Oppressors, Thieves and Outlaws. In Ewsdale eight and forty notorious
Riders are hung on growing Trees, the most famous of which was John Arm-strong;
others be brought with him to Edinburgh for more public execution and example,
as William Cockburn of Henderland, Adam Scot of Tushelaw, named King of Thieves.

The year 1530. the King instituted the College of Justice; before it was
ambulatory, removing from place to place by Circuits; Suits of Law were
peremptorly decided by Baylies, Sheriffs, and other Judges; when any great and
notable cause offered it self, it was adjudged Soveraignly by the Kings
Council, which gave free audience to all the Subjects. The power and privileges
of this College was immediately con^irmed by Pope Clement the seventh.

In this Court are fifteen Judges ordinary, eight of them being spiritual
persons, of the which the most ancient is President, and seven Temporal men:
The Chancellor of the Realm when he is present is above the President. There
are also four Counselors extraordinary, removable at the Princes pleasure.

This institution is after that Order of Justice which is administered in Paris,
first instituted by Philip the fourth, the French King the year 1286.

The King about this time storeth his Arsenals with all sort of Arms; the
Castles of Edinburgh, Sterlin, Dumbartoun, and Blackness, are repaired and
furnished with Ordnance and Ammunition.

Whilst no certain Truce is concluded between the Realms of England and
Scotland, the Earl of Angus works in this interim so with the King of
England, that Sir E^ward Darcey is sent to the Borders; who when his
solicitation for restoring the Earl, at the Scothish Court had taken no effect,
yea had been scorned, after he had stayed at Berwick with the Garrisoned
Soldiers, and some selected companies out of Northumberland and Westmerland
makes a Road into Scotland; Coldingham, Dunglas, and adjacent Villages they
burn, ravage the Country toward Dunce. Some Scottish Ships and Vessels were
also at this time taken by Sea. When a reason was sought of this invasion in a
cessation of Arms, and calm of Truce; They require the Dowglasses may be
restored totheir ancient inheritances, and whatsoever had been withheld from
them, and that Cannabiem (a poor Abbacy) be rendered to the English, as
appertaining of old to the Crown of England. The Earl of Murray being declared
Lieutenant makes head against them: but the English daily increasing in
number, and his companies not being suffcient to make good against so many and
large in cursions, the power of Scotland is divided into four Quarters every
one of which for the durance of forty days by turns takes the defense of the
Country. The English finding by this intercourse of new Soldiers the War to
be prolonged, would have gladly accepted of Peace, but they disdained to sue
for it to the Scots: it was thought expedient that the French, a Friend then to
both, should be a Mediator to reconcile them, whereupon, after an Ambassador
had come from France, Commissioners first meet at Newcastle and after at
London, James Colvil of Easter Weyms, Adam Otterburn of Redhall, William Stuart
Bishop of Aberdeen, the Abbot of Kinloss. These conclude a Peace To continue
between the two Realms, during the two Princes lives, and one year after the
decease of him who should first depart this life.

About this time the secrets of the Ecclesiastical Doctrine and Authority
beginning to be laid open to the view of the World, the politic Government of
Kingdoms began to suffer in the alteration and discovery. The Lady Katherine
daughter to Ferdinando and Isabella, King and Queen of Spain, and Sister to the
Mother of Charles the fifth Emperor, had been married to Arthur Prince of
Wales, eldest Son to Henry the seventh King of England, he dying, by the
dispensation of Pope Julius the Second, her Father in Law gave her again in
Marriage to Henry his other Son the Brother of Arthur. This Queen though
fruitful of children, and often a Mother, brought none forth that long enjoyed
life, and came to any perfection of growth, except one only Daughter Mary. Her
Husband either out of spleen against the Emperrour Charles, or desire of male
children, or other Causes known to himself, pretended great scruples in his
conscience, would make himself and the world believe, that his marriage was not
lawful. After deliberation with his Churchmen, whom he constrained to be of
his mind, he kept not longer company with his Queen; his Churchmen used all
their eloquence to make the Queen accept of a Divorce, which she altogether
refus^d, and had recourse to the Pope, who recals the cause to himself. At
Rome, whilst in the con^istory, the case is made difficult, and the matter
prolonged* King Henry impatient of del^i^s, and amorous divorceth from his own
Queen and marries Anne Bullen 1533.

Then the Pope with his whole Cardinals gave out their Sentence, That it was
not lawful for him by his own authority, to separate himself from his wife;
that his marriage with Katharine was most lawful, not to be questioned, and
that under pain of Excommunication he should adhere unto her.

King Henry well experienced in the great affairs of the World, considering how
the threatenings and thunders of the Bishops of Rome, even in these ancient and
innocent times when they were believed and reverenced, in his Kingdom produced
never great effects, thought them to no purpose in a time when Doctrine was
published to the World, embraced and believed of numbers, by which they were
contemned and scorned: upon this and other grounds he refuses to obey, and the
Pope continneth his menacing.

This disorder and boldness of the King of England moved the Emperor and the
Pope to try if they could win the King of Scotland to arise in arms against his
Uncle King Henry. The Emperor essayeth it under pretense of other business of
great importance. For having given way to new opinions in Religion amongst his
Countrymen of Germany, and finding them mounted to that height as to have
produced the effects he de^ired, [by this division laying a foundation to turn
the Imperial Crown Hereditary to his own House, which, Germany being all of one
mind and undistracted, he could never have brought to pass] he compels the
Bishop of Rome to condescent to a general Council or Assembly of the Clergy of
Europe, the only and sovereign remedy to cure diseased minds, and accord
different opinions: but he knew well that by the Church of Rome, men would be
delegated to this meeting, turbulent, and so far from pacifying tumults began,
that instead of Water they would apply Oil and Wood to these flames, turn
opinions before disputable, irreconciliable, and leave matters worse than they
found them. Having implored the aid and assistance of the Potentates about him
to the setting forward of so pious and holy a work, he sends Gods callo
Errico (a Sicilian) for greater secrecy cie by Ireland to the King of Scotland.

This Ambassador for a token of that affection the Emperor his Master carried
to the person and virtues of King James, presents him with the Order of the
Golden-fleece 1534. with solemn Protestations for the observing of these
ancient Leagues and Confederacies contracted between the Princes his Masters
Predeceslours and the Kings of Scotland, to continue ever amongst themselves.

His other instructions were Plaints of the wrongs done to his Aunt Katharine,
most injustly repudiate and forsaken by a King forsaken of God and abhorred of
men. The marriage of Ann Bullen should wound deeply King James, it being likely
by her Succession he should be barred of his Right to the Crown of England: The
Emperor by his Ambassador expostulating the wrongs of his Aunt, had gained
nothing, but that for his sake she was the worse entertained. To make more
strong and lasting the Emperors friendship with King James, he (if he pleased)
would make him an offer and give him the choice of three Ladies, three Mary's,
all of the Imperial Stem: Mary of Austria the Emperors Sister, the Window of
Lovis King of Hungary; Mary of Portugal, the Daughter of his Sister Eleonara
of Austria: Mary of England the Daughter of Katharine and King Henry. And would
undertake the performance of this last, either by consent of her Father, or by
main force. The greatest but last of his instructions was that to suppress the
Heresies of the time he would concur with the Emperor for the convocating a
General Council, and obviate the calamities then the threatening the Christian
Religion.

The King with great cheerfulness and many thanks, that the Emperor
entertained him with such respect, and held him worthy so fair and Royal
Alliance, and the participation of affairs of such importance and moment,
received this Embassage.

For the Council, providing it were a general Council lawfully convocated by
the Emperor and Christian Kings, as the first Councils were wont, free and
holy (as nothing is more holy than a general convocation of Christians) the
most charitable and quiet of the Clergy, and such who would pacify matters,
not the most zealous and ^iery Spirits, or men corrupted by rewards being
delegated unto it, being premonisht of the time and place, he would apply his
will unto his, assist him, thither send his best Orators and most convenient
Churchmen. That if a true Council could not be obtained, every Prince should
reform the Errors of Doctrine and faults of the Clergy within his own Dominions.

The Proceedings of his Uncle were grievous unto him, being a man altogether
thralled to his own opinions. For the Good of the Christian Religion and Peace
of Europe, it were expedient that all her Princes were united together in amity
and love, and their Arms directed against the common enemy the Turk. For
himself he would be Mediator to reconcile the Emperor and his Uncle,
endeavor to recall him to the love of his Wife, nor by any persuasions to be
induced to condescend to ought prejudicial to Queen Katharine.

The three Ladies were every one in the superlative worthy, especially* Mary of
England, for that great reason of uniting the Isle of Great Britain, but she
was not in her own power, nor in the power of the Emperor, that he could
bestow her upon whom he pleased. That to ravish her out of the hands of her
Father would be, beside the danger of the Enterprise, a breach of Divine and
humane Laws.

It was not safe for Paris that he preferred one of the three Goddesses to the
other two, for prizing those three (that the Emperor might know how dearly he
respected and earnestly affected his affinity) there remained a fourth Lady
near in blood to the Emperor, Isabella Daughter of Christian King of Denmark,
and Isabella the Emperors own Sister, whom, besides her matchless virtues, for
the vicinity of the Nation to his, and the conformity of their harmless
humors, he made choice to be Queen of his affections and Dominions.

Godscallo answered this last, That a match with Lady Isabella of Denmark could
not with the Emperors credit be brought to pass, because she was promished
already to another, Frederick Count Palatine, and the marriage might be
accomplished before news came to the Emperor of the Kings election.

This choice of the Kings was but an evasion, for Sir Thomas Areskin of Brichen
Secretary, and David Beatoun Abbot of Arbroth, under pretense of renewing the
League between France and Scotland long before had been directed to France
about a Marriage with the eldest Daughter of King Francis, which John Duke of
Albany projected when the League between the two Kingdoms was renewed at
Rochell.

Henry King of England had now renounced all obedience from the Bishop of Rome,
and thorough his whole Dominions abrogated his authority, and Paul the third
after his assuming the Papacy, set forwards by the Emperor and his Cardinals,
who thought either to recover England or burnt it up by a Foreign or civil war,
never left thundering against him. But after John Fisher Bishop of Rochester
was beheaded (a man imprisoned for adhering to the Pope, then for his
persecution, and that the king might carry him greater respect, made Cardinal)
the whole Conclave stir the Pope against King Henry. And full of Grief and rage
remonstrate what danger would follow their Order if this Example unpunisht
should have way. They maintained the Papal power against all Princes, which now
for fear of their Lives they would be forced to forsake, or to proceed with
great (...) and neglect, if by any secular power they might be called in
Judgment and embrue Sc^ffolds with their blood. The Pope* though highly
provok^, parted not from his Resolution, yet used a sort of moderation; he
threatens still to let f^ll the blow, in the mean time holding his hand.

Thus to give satisfaction to his Court, he formed a Process against King Henry
and a most severe sentence, but abstained from the publication of it during his
pleasure; Secretly sending many copies of it to those Princes he thought could
be useful to his Designs when occassion should serve, and he proceed with a
constant rumor of the Bull shortly to be put in execution and published.

Amongst many interested in wrongs by the King of England, considering there
was none comparable to the Nation and King of Scotland, he directs hither
John Antonio Come peggio; This Legate finds King James at Faulkland 22.
February 1535. and here with many Ceremonies and Apostolical Benedictions,
delivers him a Cap and a Sword, consecrated the Night of Nativity of our
Savior: which the fame of his valor and many Christian virtues had moved his
Master to remunerate him with. Also (says the Original) that it might breed a
terror in the heart of a wicked neighboring Prince against whom the Sword was
sharpened.

The Popes Letter in most submissive style contained. A Complaint for the death
of John Bishop and Cardinal of Rochester, miserably taken away by the hand of
an Hangeman. The Calamities of England occasioned by the Kings Divorce from
Katharine of Spain, and his Marriage with Anne Bullen; That since the Roman
Church had received great disgrace and a deadly wound, and by patience procured
more and more wrongs from the King of England, She was constrained to use a
s^aring Iron. For the application of which she had recourse to his Majesty, a
Prince ^or his Ancest^urs Piety and his own renowned. His aid, maintenance,
protection she implored; Since King Henry was a Despiser, a Scorner, One who
set at naught the censures of the Church: an Heretic, Shismatick, a shameful
and Shameless Adulterer, a public and professed homicide Murderer, a
Sacrilegious Person, a Church-Robber, a Rebel guilty of ^ese-Majesty divine,
outrageous, many and in ^^merable ways a Fellon, a Criminal: By all Laws
herefore (...) to be turned out of his Throne: The King of Scotland for the
Defense of the Church would undertake something worthy a Christi^n King and
himself: he would endeavor to suppress, Heresy, defend the Catholic faith
against those whom the justice of almighty God, and judgments were now prepared
and already ready to be denounced.

The King kindly entertaining the Legate, answered the Pope with much regret
for the estate and stubbornness of the King of England. Who would not be struck
with Pity that a King who late amongst Christian Princes was honored with the
title of Defender of the Faith, should be obnoxious to so many crimes, that now
amongst Princes he could scarce be reputed a Christian? This compassion was
common to him with others, but he by a necessity of Nature, and neerness of
blood felt a more piercing sorrow; he should leave no means untryed to recall
his Uncle to the obedience of the Church: and though by his Ambassadors, he
had once or twice went about the same, but in vain, he would study a way how
face to face he might give him his best counsel, and remonstrate how much good
he would do the Christian World and himself by returning again to the Chruch.
Mean while he requested him not to be heaady, forward nor rash in executing the
Sentence against his Uncle, which would but obdure him in his separation.

King James not having lost all hopes of Uncle, directs the Lord Arskin to
England, to acquaint him with the Emperors and Popes Embassages; and to take
his Counsel about a marriage with the Duke of Vandosms Daughter whom the French
King had offered to him, his own Daughter being weak and sickly. In this
Embas^age there was a complaint against the Londoners, who in their passage to
the Island fishing, spoiled the Coasts of Orknay and the adjacent Islands: with
a Request that King Henry would not succor the Lubeckers against the Duke of
Hulstein.

The King of England not to prove inferior to the Emperor the Pope in
conferring honors upon his Nephew, admits him to the Fraternity of the
Garter, which he delivered to the Lord Areskin his Ambassador. And thereafter
dispatched William Lord Howard, brother to the Earl of Norfolk (as if that name
were a sufficient Scar-crow to the Popes Sword and the Emperors Golden-^leece)
to Scotland, who made such hasty journeys that he prevented the News of his
coming, and at unawares found the King at Sterlin. The Substance of his
embassage was, That the Kings of England and Scotland might have an interview
at York, at which meeting the King of Scotland should be declared Duke of York,
and General Lieutenant of the Kingdom of England. That his Master having
instructions of the Alliances offered him by neighbor Princes, did offer to
his own and his Counsels, judgment if they could find a more fit, than to
contract a marriage with his Daughter, which might be easily perfected if his
Master and King James could condescend upon some few points.

When the King had taken these Propositions into deliberation, the Churchmen
suspecting if this meeting and match had way, the King would embrace the
opinions of the new Reformers, set all their wirs to overthrow it. The nearest
Successors to the Crown, covering their claim and interest, argued, That to
marry the Lady Mary of England who for many years would not be mariagable was
not a right way to continue his race by procreation of children, and that his
impatience of living alone, would not be much abated by marying a Child. That
King Henry projected this marriage to no other end than to hinder him from
better Allyances, or to facilitate an entry to the kingdom. That when a Prince
would take advantage of any neighbor Prince, it was more safely done by
alliance than open force. That it was more safely King Henry, being a wary
Prince, never meant to mary his Daughter at all as long as himself lived, but
to keep her at Home with him, bearing many Princes in hand to save him from
Dangers both at home and abroad: which counsel was practiced lately by the Duke
of Burgundy.

Most oppose neither to the meeting of the two Kings, nor to the Alliance, but
to the place of their meeting, which seemed unto them of no small importance
being in the heart of England, and amidst the most martial people of that
Nation.

They require the two Kings might have their interview at Newcastle, this
place, when they meet, being most commodious for furnishing all necessaries by
Ships; That the number of their Trayn should be agreed upon, as one thousand,
which none of th, two Kings should exceed. That the time should be at the Feast
of Saint Michael the Archangel between the Harvest and the Winter, which would
have the consummation of the Ceremonies, and not suffer the Kings to prolong
time, but invite their return to their own chief and principal Cities. When it
was declared to the Lord Howard, that the consent of the Nobles of the Kingdom
obtained, the enterview at the Feast of Michaelmas at Newcastle might be
condescended unto; he would neither accept of the place nor time, His Master
having already (as matter he had never put in question) made great preparations
for this interview at York, that he would think his offers slighted and an
affront put upon him, if any excuses were alleged to the contrary: Thus with
some bravadoes to the Council he departed.

The King to give satisfaction to his Uncle of his Councils proceedings with
the Lord Howard, sends after him Sir Adam Otterburn of Red-hall, who lays
the fault of his not appearing upon the Lord Howard, complaining, That he
menaced the Counselors, and would have forced their votes; that he was a
great Friend to Sir George Dowglasse and other Rebels, who convoyed him to
Scotland, and accompanied him back again. It was against the credit and honor
of free born Princes to be threatened, what was friendly begun should friendly
continue and end: Princes should not be constrained, especially in matters
which were not of Debt but benevolence.

Amidst these importunities and solicitations King James with five well manned
Ships takes the Seas, giving out a Voyage for France; and the French record it
was his first adventure to come to them: but it is more likely this proceeded
from Policy of State, to try the affections and demeanor of the great ones of
his kingdom in his absence, rather than any intended voyage toward Forainers.
For with this Fleet he arriveth at Orkenay, there in some Forts places
garrisons, sails about the Islands of Sky and Jews, surprizeth the chief of
the Clannes of those Highland Islanders, whom he sent for Hostages to the
Castles of Dumbartoun and Edinburgh. And when by the skill of one Alexander
Lyndsay his Pilote, he had sounded the remotest Rocks of his Kingdom, he was
driven by storms to take Land at Saint Ninians near Whitehorn in Galloway. This
Voyage bread great fear in those Islanders and Savages, and brought long Peace
and quietness to those Countries thereafter. At his Return to Edinburgh for
Disorders committed or surmised in his absence, most part of the great Men near
the Borders are charged to enter their persons in Ward during the Kings
pleasure. Walter Scot of Balclough is committed to the Castle of Edinburgh, the
Lord Hume to the Castle of Down, Farnchast to Faulkland, the Lord of Iohnstoun
and Mark Car to Dundee: and others elsewhere. He knew the common Riders never
made incursions without either the command or tollerance of these Superiors.

The remote High-lands and Borderers made peaceable by the incarcerations of
the Chiefs of the Clannes and Families there commanding, he may when occasion
is offered in person visit any neighbor Prince or State. To second his former
Ambassadors in their suit in France he had sent the Earl of Murray, William
Stuart Bishop of Aberdeen, with others: and King Francis in regard of the
indisposition of his Daughter Magdalen, had made an offer to them of his
nearest kins-woman.

The Kings mind having been long troubled with youthful thoughts by the many
matches offered him; and thinking marriages contracted and trusted to the eyes
of others, one way or other deficient, resolves to go in person and woe for
himself. Upon this resolution he embarked at Leith, concealing the intention of
his Voyage; many suppose he makes for England to pacify his Uncle, for many
wished the same: Whilst he is on the Ocean, the Winds contrarying his course, a
violent Tempest separating his Ships, the Pilote asks him to what Coast he
should direct his Course; To any thou best likest (answered the King) except
toward England; the storm increasing and sleep shut^ing up the Kings eyes,
these who accompanied him, command the Pilote to turn sails again for Scotland,
and not struggle with the pittiless Element for matters which might be delayed,
and a little time could not turn worse: so when the King awoke, he found
himself near his own Harbors upon the Forth, and was so highly displeased with
the Authors of his return that he never pardoned them: the fault was laid on
Sir James Hamiltoun, and to stir him more against this Man, there wanted not
who said, His obedience to his Prince was dissembled, that he accompanied his
Master to no other end in his voyage than to cross his intentions so far as was
in his power.

The season thereafter being more fit for Navigation, he ascends again his
Ships at Kirkcaldie, and with a prosperous wind the tenth day after arrived at
Deep in Normandy; The Earls of Arran, Arguyl, Rothess, Arroll, Lords Flamin,
Boyd, attended him, with many Barons and Knights: the Earl of Murray, young
Lennox and Cassiles, the Lord Areskin, and Abbot of Arbroth expected him at
Paris; but he, preventing the fame of his coming, with a small Trayn holds
his way to Vandosm, to see the Lady Mary of Burbon, all which way one John
Tennant personating the Lord of the Company, he passed undescryed. But come to
Va^dosm, whether the Lady had a Letter for the same from David Beatoun, or that
by matching the faces of one of those Strangers with a Pourtraict she had of
King James, in likeness (as she said) he was found out, and challenged by the
Lady of that fault, which was easily confessed and pardoned? He found her very
beautiful, and eminent in all Princely excellencies, but bethinking how he
having choice of three Princesses, all Daughters of Kings, if he should fix his
affection on this Lady at the first interview, he should be obnoxious to the
indignation of the other, he returned as he came toward Rouen, where his
Nobles attended him, and having understood King Francis was to give the
Emperor Battle in Provence, quitting his Retinue, he posted toward him. The
Daulphine meets him at the Chapel between Tarray and St. Sopho^in in the
Country of Lions, King Francis receives him with as much honor as could be
desired and convoyeth him to Paris; the Peers of the kingdom haste from all
quarters hither to entertain this Stranger Prince, and the Court is changed
into an Academy of Knightly exercise, where King James proves inferior our to
none in ^eats of Arms. Magdalen the Kings eldest Daughter is his Mistress, a
Lady fair, young, of a lovely countenance, and comely behavior, above all
others of the kingdom. The Lady Margarite her younger Sister (who after was
married to the Duke of Savoy) is offered to him, by reason of the tender and
weak disposition of her Sister: but Magdalen by the glaunces of her Princely
Woer reobtaining her health (her body as it were following the Temperature of
her Spirit, or that it appeared to her self and her Father so) King James
continuing in his first resolution, the marriage is contracted between them, an
hundred thousand Crowns of the Sun being promi^ed in Dowry, besides thirty
thousand Franks of yearly pension during the life of King James; the jointu^e
assured to her by the King of Scotland, was all the lands possessed by any
former Queen, the Earldoms of Strathern and Fyfe with the Palace of Faulkland,
and other lands of the best and most certain revenue.

Thus Anno in the Church of Nostre-Dame in Paris, the King of Scotland married
the Lady Magdalen in presence of her Father, seven Cardinals, the King of
Navarr, many great Dukes and Barons.

King Francis after the Solemnities of this Marriage, having Piccardy and
Piedmont then overrun by the Imperialists; and King James fearing he might
suffer wrong in his absence from the King of England, with assurance of mutual
Amity, part from other in the end of April, and from New Haven the Queen with
her husband the 29. of May arrives at the Port of Leith; it is reported that
after she put her foot on the Shore upon her knees she kissed the ground,
Praying for all happiness, to the Country and people. Never Queen in so Short
a time was more beloved of her Husband, nor sooner made conquest of the hearts
of her Subjects: Nor was their greater hopes conceived of any alliance than of
this, nor greater joy did ever arise for those hopes, but as in the life of man
there is ever remaining more of bitter than sweet: so were these contentments
but Shadows, matched with the real Sorrow that the death of that young Lady
brought forth. For she lived not many weeks after her Arrival in Scotland,
when of a Fever, which she contracted in June, she departed this life in July:
She was buried with the greatest mourning Scotland ever till that time was
participant of, in the Church of Holy-rood-house near King James the Second.

These last honors to the dead Queen and funeral pomp finished, the King
(desirous of Succession) has yet his thoughts wandering in France; Mary of
Burbon daughter to Charles Duke of Vandosm, being frustrate of her Royal hopes,
had not only turned religious, but was dead of displeasure. Whilst he
disported himself at the Court of France, he had been acquainted with a Lady
rich in all excellencies, who next Magdalen had the power of his affections,
Mary of Lorrain Sister to Francis, Daughter to Rhene, Duke of Guize, and Widow
of the Duke of Longue^ille: Her he thinks for her Stemm, healthful
complexion, fertility (for the had been a mother) and other fortunes, worthy of
his love. But to try her affection toward him, he directs David Bea^oun his
late paranymph, and the Lord Maxwell to France. Whilst they traffic this
Marriage, many false accusations (as Plots laid against his person) are
intended one after another at the Court, amongst which two are remarkable for
their notable calumny.

John eldest Son to the Lord Forbess, a young Gentleman chief of his name,
hardy and valorous, but evi^ brought up, and therefore easily suspect to be
capable of sin, had for a Servant or companion, and ordinary sharer of his
pleasures, one named Strachan, a man come of the dreg of the people, and
perfectly wicked. This man after much familiarity, and some fecret service and
attendance, to sa^iate his insatiable desire, desired earnestly something from
the Master of Forbess which he passionately refused to give him, upon which,
carried away with rage and malice, he not only renounced his friendship and
service, but betook himself to the Service of his Enemy the Earl of Huntley: by
whose advice he forgeth a malicious Plot to overthrow him. To compass their
design they accuse the Master of Forbess to have had once an intention and Mind
to kill the King, that the Dowglasses might be restored to their wonted honors
and ancient possessions. By price and prayers witnesses are procured to prove
this against him, and convict him, or at the least to leave him suspected and
taxed with this Treason. Though this crime was not sufficiently and clearly
proved, yet was the Master of Forbess indicted, and convicted by an Assize, for
having conspired the Kings death, for the which he was beheaded and quartered,
and his Quarters set aloft upon the Gates of Edinburgh.

This Gentleman's death proves how dangerous the Society and company of the
wicked is to any; for ascending the fatal scaffold, he justified his innocence
of what was laid to his Charge, but confessed the guilt of the Lord of Drums
blood by the justice of God brought him to that end. His Father the Lord
Forbess was upon suspi^ion kept long after in the Castle of Edinburgh. The King
when he could not amend what was past, testified he was grieved at the death of
this Nobleman; for he banished Strachan, because he had so long concealed the
Treason of Forbess, silence in a matter importing no less than the life of a
Prince, being reckoned equal to the Treason, he made his second brother one of
his Domestics, restoring him to the estate which was forfeited.

This thunderclap was immediately followed by another, for the quality of the
person, and strangeness of the crime deplorable, but more for the horror and
terror of the punishment.

Jane Dawglas nister to Archembald Earl of Angus, the Widow of John Lion Lord
Glammes, with her Husband Archembald Campbell of Keepn^eth, her young Son the
Lord Glammes, and an old Priest, were brought to Edinburgh, committed, and
accused that they should have poisoned the King. Their accuser was William Lion
a kinsman of the late Lord Glammes. This treason had no probability of truth
among such who knew the accused, being persons who lived far from the Court in
their solitary mansions, seldom or never almost seeing the King. Nevertheless
their accusations were believed, and strict command given to the Judges to
dispatch their process.

William Lion aggravating the case represented to the King the an^^ent faults
of the Family of the Dowglass^s, committed against his ^redecessors, the
particular wrongs of Earl Archembald, now stirring the English against him, and
ravaging his Borders; That he should believe, he not being able to be restored
to his first estate by prayers and solicitations of Neighbor Princes, nor by
open force, now set on work his last engines to come to his end, though it were
with the life of his sovereign; That in so secret and dangerous a plot he could
not use but his nearest kindred; a Woman, and his own Sister, might attempt
such a mischief, her^ex and other qualities making her less suspect to have
access to his person.

Suppose clear proofs could not be found against her, the whole race of the
Dowglasses should be extirpate, being a Lineage only ^ertile in bringing forth
monsters of Rebellion. That by sparing her life, and suffering her to escape,
he should afford her time, license and power to execute what she but now
(perhaps) had intended.

The King, not knowing the man's particular hatred against this Lady (for some
write, He did inform against her in revenge that she refused to marry him,
giving her self to another) suffered the Process to be concluded.

Some of the Judges would have referred her to the Kings clemency till a
farther trial of the Witnesses might be had, upon whose testimony the Process
did depend, it being a safer way in Judgment to absolve the guilty, than
condemn the innocent. But the most part gave her over to the Assizers; the
better part of which being in voices fewer, the greater, who neither respecting
conscience within them, nor shame with the present age and posterity, nor the
supreme justice of Heaven, find this poor Lady guilty, and she is condemned to
be burnt alive. Her sentence was executed the fifth day after the beheading of
the Master of Forbess on the Castle hill of Edinburgh, in sight of her Husband.
who either out of Revenge or Fear, after this tragical end of his Lady, seeking
to save himself by escape out of the Prison, whilst he came over the Wall by
the shortness of the Cable was dashed against the Rock, and found dead. Though
the tender years of the Lord Glammes, her son, proved his innocence, he
remained prisoner in the Castle till after the Kings death. The old Priest,
when after torture, nothing could be proved against was set at liberty; William
Lion the author of this calumny, was banished the Country, which justified the
Ladies integrity, and verifyed than however Princes love to find out Treason*
they hate the Informers except upon clear grounds.

Upon the like suspicions Droomlenrigge and Hemps-Field ancient Barons, having
challenged others, had leave to try the verity by Combat; the lists were
designed by the King (who was a Spectator and Umpire of their Valor) at the
Court of of the Palace of Holy-rood-house. They appeared upon the day, armed
from head to foot, like ancient Palladines, and after many enterchanged blows
to the disadvantage of their Casks, Corslets and Vantbraces, when the one was
become breathless, by the weight of his arms and thunder of his blows, and the
other (who was short sighted) had broken his ponderous Sword, the King, by
Heralds, caused separate them, with disadvantage to neither of these
Champions, and the verity which was found, was, that they dared both fight in
close Arms.

The Abbot of Arbroth, and the Lord Maxwell by many enterchanged letters full
of Princely love, had assured the King and the Lady Mary of Lorrain, and
articles being agreed upon, to the great content of the French, they were
espoused by Proctors, as is the costome amongst Princes, with great triumph in
the City of Paris, in the presence of the French King and many Peers; after
which solemnity Monsieur d' Annabault Admiral of France, accompanied herto
New Haven in the beginning of the Month of June1538. where she embarked, and
with many French Ships, when she had been tossed on the Seas, came to
Fysses-ness, where at Cayrel she was attended by the Noblemen, and the King,
who consumated the marriage in the Cathedral Church of St. Andrews in July.

Nothing more linketh the affections of the married than children: the first
year the Queen answers her husbands hopes, and in S. Andrews was delivered of
a Son, who was named James; the Archbishop of St. Andrews and Earl of Arran
being his Godfathers, and the Queen the King^ Mother his Godmother 1539. in
Febr. thereafter she was crowned Queen of Scotland in the Abbey Church of
Holy-rood-house by the Abbot of Arbroth; at which time Margarite the old Queen
falling sick at Methven in few days departed, and was buried in the
Cha^terhouse of St. Iohnstoun near the Tomb of King James the first. The King
her Son, with all the Nobility, and Gentry being present at her funerals, which
were celebrated in most solemn and pompous manner. Not long after James Beatoun
Archbishop, a man of great age, followed this Lady to the other World: he had
provided Successors to his Benefices, and his Archbishops See to David
Beatoun, afterward Cardinal, whom the King accepted and admitted without
contestation.

The kingdom now began to be divided in opinions of Religion, they which held
the helm of State, laboring in vain ^o reconcile them; the King was sore
perplexed and uncertain what course to follow; suppress them he could not; to
give way to them, without shaking the strongest beams of the policy of his
Kingdom, seemed unto him impossible; his privy Counselors being more of his
ancient Servants, than Nobles or Church men (of which many were piping through
these flecked clouds of ignorance) as they favored gave their opinions, some
one way, some another, and a freedom of speech being given, one of them as
they were in his chamber together, spoke to him to this purpose.

Sir, amongst the many blessings your Subjects enjoy under this your
Government, this is not the least, that for the Weal of your Majesty, and the
public good of the Kingdom, the meanest of your Subjects may freely open his
mind and declare his opinion unto you his Sovereign.

And if ever there was a time in which grave, good and sound counsel should be
delivered to your Majesty, it is this, and the difficulties of the
Commonwealth do now require it. Nor ever in matters of advice and
consultation, can we embrace and follow what is most reasonable, and what
according to Laws, Justice, and Equity should be, but what necessity drives us
unto, and what is most convenient for the present time to be, and what we may
well and fairly accomplish and bring to pass.

The Estate of your Kingdom is troubled with diversity of opinions concerning
Religion; It is to be wished that the one only true Religion were in the
hearts of all your Subjects, [since diversity of opinions of Religion and
heres^es are the very punishment of God Almighty upon men for their horrible
vices and roaring sins. And when Men forsake his fear and true obedience, God
abandoneth them to their own opinions and fantasies in Religion; out of which
arise Partialities, Factions, Divisions, Strife, intestine Discords, which
burst forth into civil war, and in short time bring Kingdoms and Commonwealths
to their last periods] But matters arising to such a height and disorder, as by
all appearance, they are like to advance in this Kingdom, the number of the
Sectaries daily increasing, without dissembling my thoughts to your Majesty,
The preservation of the People being the Supreme and principal law which God
Almighty has enjoined to all Princes.

I hold it more expedient to give place to the exercise of both religions, than
under pretense and shadow of them to suffer the common Peace of your Subjects
to be torn in pieces. What can wisdom (Sir) advise you to do with these
Separatists? Either they must be tolerated for a time, or they must altogether
be removed, and that by death or banishment.

So soon as a Prince begins to spoil, ban^sh, kill, burn his people, for
matters abstract from sense and altogether spiritual, he becomes as it were a
Plague unto them. It is an Error of State in a Prince, for an opinion of Piety
to condemn to death the adherers to new doctrine. For, the constancy and
patience of those who voluntarily suffer all temporal miseries and death it
self for matters of faith, stir up and invite numbers who at first and before
they had suffered were ignorant of their faith and doctrine, not only to favor
their cause but to embrace their opinions, Pity and commiseration opening the
Gates. Thus their belief spreads it self abroad, and their Number daily
increases.

It is no less error of State to banish them. Banished Men are so many Enemies
abroad, ready upon all occasions to invade their native Country, to trouble
the peace and tranquillity of your Kingdom.

To take Arms against Sectaries and Separatists will be a great Enterprise, a
matter hard and of many dangers; Religion cannot be preached by arms; the first
Christians detested that form of procceedings; force and compulsion may bring
forth Hypocrites; not true Christians. If there be any Heresy amongst your
people, this wound is in the Soul; our Souls being Spiritual Substances upon
which fire and iron cannot work, They must be overcome by spiritual Arms;
Love the men and pity their errors.

Who can lay upon a man a necessity to believe that which he will not believe,
or what he will believe, or does believe, not to believe. No Prince has such
Power over the Souls and thoughts of men, as he has over their bodies. Now to
ruin and extirpate all those Sectaries, what will it prove else than to cut off
one of your arms, to the great prejudice of your Kingdom and weakening of the
State? they daily increasing in number, and no man being so miserable and mean,
but he is a member of the State. The more easy manner and nobler way were to
tolerate both Religions, and grant a place to two Churches in the Kingdom, till
it shall please Almighty God to return the minds of your Subjects, and turn
them all of one will and opinion: Be content to keep that which ye may, sir,
Since ye cannot that which ye would.

It is a false and erroneous opinion, That a Kingdom cannot subsist which
tolerateth two Religions: Diversity of Religion shuts not up Society, nor
barreth civil conversation among men; a little time will make persons of
different Religions contract such acquaintance, custom, familiarity together,
that they will be intermixed in one City, family, yea marriage Bed, State and
Religion, having nothing common.

Why (I pray) may not two Religions be suffered in a State (till by some sweet
and easy means they may be reduced to a right Government) since in the Church
(which should be union it self, and of which the Roman Church much vaunteth)
almost infinite Sects and kinds of Monks are suffered: differing in their Laws,
Rules of government, Fashions of living, Diet, Apparel, maintenance and
opinions of perfection, and who sequester themselves from our public union.
The Roman Empire had its extension, not by similitude and likeness of Religion.
Different Religions, providing they enterprise nor practice nothing against the
Politic Laws of the Kingdom may be tolerated in a State.

The Murders* Massacres, Battles, which arise and are belike daily to increase
amongst Christians, all which are undertaken for Religion, are a thousand times
more execrable, and be more open, plain, flat impiety, than this Liberty of
diversity of Religions, with a quiet peace, can be unjust.

For as much as the greatest part of those who flesh themselves in blood and
slaughter, and overturn by Arms the peace of their Neighbors (whom they should
love as themselves) spoiling and ravaging like famished Lions, sacrifice their
souls to the infernal powers, without further hopes or means of their ever
recovering and coming back, when those others are in some way of repentance.

In seeking liberty of Religion, these men seek not to believe any thing that
may come in their Brains; but to use Religion according to the first Christian
institutions, serving God and obeying the Laws under which they were born.

That Maxim so often repeated amongst the Churchmen of Rome, That the chase
and following of Heretics is more necessary than that of Infidels, is well
applied for the enlarging and increasing the Dominions, Soveraignity and power
of the Pope, but not for the amplifying and extending of the Christian
Religion, and the Weal and Benefit of the Christian Commonwealth.

Kingdoms and Soveraignityes should not be governed by the Laws and Interests
of Priests and Church men, but according to the exigency, need, and as the case
requires of the Public Weal, which often is necessitated to pass and tolerate
some defects and faults. It is the duty of all Christian Princes to endeavor
and take pains that their Subjects embrace the true faith, as that semblably,
and in even parts they observe all Gods commandments, and not more one
commandment than another.

Notwithstanding when a vice cannot be exstirpate and taken away without the
ruin of the State, it would appear to humane judgments that it should be
suffered. Neither is there a greater obligation, bond, necessity of Law, to
punish Heretics more than fornicators, which yet for the peace and
tranquillity of the State are tolerated and past over. Neither can a greater
inconviency and harm follow if we shall suffer men to live in our Commonwealth
who believe not, nor embrace not all our opinions. In an Estate many things are
for the time tolerated, because they cannot without the total ruin of the
State be suddenly Amended and Reformed.

These men are of that same nature and condition of which we are; they worship,
as we do, one God, they believe those very same holy records; We both aim at
Salvation; We both fear to offend God; We both set before us our happiness: The
difference between them and us hangs upon this one point, that they having
found abuses in our Church, require a reformation. Now shall it be said for
that we run diverse ways to one end, understand not rightly others language; we
shall pursue others with Fire and Sword, and exstirpate others from the face of
the Earth? God is not in the bitter division and alienation of affections, nor
the raging flames of sedition, nor in the Tempests of the turbulent Whirl-winds
of contradictions and disputations, but in the calm and gentle breathings of
Peace and Concord: If any wander out of the Highway, we bring him to it again;
If any be in darkness, we show him light and kill him not; In Musical
Instruments if a string jar and be out of tune, we do not frettingly break it,
but leasurely veer it about to a Concord: and shall we be so Churlish, cruel,
uncharitable, so wedded to our own superstitious opinions, that we will
barbarously banish, kill, burn those whom by love and sweetness we might
readily winn and recall again?

Let us win and merit of these men by reason, Let them be cited to a free
Council; it may be they shall not be proved Heretecks, neither that they
maintain opinions condemned by the ancient Councils. Let their Religion be
compared and paralelled with the Religion of the first Age of the Church.

Shall we hold this People worse than the Jews, which yet have their Synagogues
at Rome it self? Let them receive instructions from a free and lawful Council,
and forsake their errors, when they shall be clearly and fairly demonstrated
unto them. Heresy is an error in the fundamental grounds of Religion, Schism
intends a resolution in Separation: Let a good Council be convocated, and see
if they be ready or not to r^unite themselves to us.

That which they believe is not evil, but to some it will appear they believe
not enough, and that there is in them rather a defect of good than any habit of
evil. Other points when they shall be considered, shall be found to consist in
external ceremonies of the Church, rather than in substance of doctrine, or
what is essential to Christianity. These men should be judged before condemned,
and they should be heard before they be judged; which being holily and
uprightly don, we shall ^ind it is not our religions, but our private intrests
and passions which troubles us and the State.

The King followed not this opinion, but gave himself over to the counsel and
Government of the Prelates. They remonstrate to him, that he should not rashly
alter approved and long received customs; that there was nothing more
dangerous in Government, than to abase the authority of ancient Laws. Let him
well consider and set before his eyes the malice of Man, who ever when he is
drawn off one course of evil precipitateth himself in a worse; It was less evil
in State to tolerate disorders known, unto which usual and accustomed remedies
might be applied, than by altering and changing foundations to give way to new,
to find out Remedies to which, would take and consume a whole age. That this
would be a way, not only to take away the abuses, but even the good uses of
every thing, and put in hazard all matters and main points concerning Religion.
They desired him to consider how there were two sorts of persons affecting
these new opinions and studying Novations. The multitude or common people, and
some of the Nobility and Gentry. It was likely the common people might be
deceived; and to give them satisfaction, and appease them, by granting them a
Reformation or change in religion, would not be a means to illuminate and
instruct them, but to bring in a popular license. If he should suffer them to
misbelieve, distrust, call in question points of Religion, or search or find
out more light, they would immediately thereafter presume to make Laws and
limit the Government, by degrees restraining the Sovereign authority, and after
they had examined, sifted narrowly, and discust Ecclesiastical authority, they
would essay to correct and find the difficulties of the Temporal. That it was
more easy to oppose and resist the first demands of the multitude, than
pleasing them in a part, after bound and limit their desires and petitions. As
to the great Men of his Nobility and Gentry he might be assured they had not
Religion and piety for their ends, but to impatronize and lay hold on the
Church Rents, and Ecclesiastical goods. To turn absolute and free men,
acknowledging neither Church nor King. To this end many reserved themselves,
and kept close their opinions, attending the change: which once appearing,
their faces would turn all one way. Which imminent evils, if the King would
prevent, there was no other means than to use his authority and power, whilst
the most and greatest part of his Kingdom yet obeyed him. That celerity in this
was most necessary before their number increased, and er^ they discovered that
universal commodity, which would follow the embracing of these new opinions. It
was safer to compose these Tumults by his absolute command and authority, and
if this produced not the wished effect to perform it by arms, than to give
reins to a popular license, and the ambition of great Men.

After this counsel had prevailed, most rigorous inquisitions are established,
and punishments denounced against all who professed opinions differing to the
Church of Rome.

Whereupon some out of a muffled zeal of Religion* others to revenge their
particular quarrels, most to possess movables and lands, pursue many to
judgment. Of which some are executed by fire, others banished, many imprisoned,
amongst which was the famous Poet and Historian George Buchanan, who whilst his
Keepers slept, escaped by a Window of the Prison the Muses holding the Cable;
the more frequent the public executions were and banishments, the greater
number embraced the opinions of them which suffered.

The King of England having understood that the Pope, giving out the confirming
of a Peace between the Emperor and the French King, had a meeting with them at
Nice (a maritime Town upon the confines of Provence) and assuring himself that
matters there would be both consulted upon, and determined to his prejudice,
sends again to his Nephew the King of Scotland, that he would come and see
him at York, for now he had more vehemently irritated the Pope, having
condemned as Rebels, and confiscated the goods of all who maintained Papal
authority; and raised from their Tomb the Bones of Thomas Becket (commonly
named Saint Thomas of Canterbury, canonized by Pope Alexander the third, for
being killed for the maintenance of the liberties of the Church 1171. to whom
there was yearly a Festival Day kept by the Roman Church) and by the hands of a
common Executioner caused burn in ashes and throw them in the River. The
revealing of which to the world was a secret more derogatory to the Pontificial
State, than any stumbled upon heretofore, or opened up. Upon this the Sentence
of Ex-communication, some years deferred, was pronounced against him. By which
he was deprived of his Kingdom, and those who adhered to him, declared
incapable of what they possessed. His Subjects were dispensed from their Oath
of Allegiance, and discharged to obey him. Strangers were inhibited traffic
with his Kingdom. All Christians charged to arise in arms against him. The
Estates, goods and persons of such Subjects as followed him, given over to be a
prey and spoil to any would invade them.

It was time for him to look to himself. Such of the Nobility as loved peace,
and the Weal of the two Kingdoms, stirred King James to this interview,
especially they who favored the reformed Religion; assuring him King Henry was
disposed with all demonstrations of good will, that his person would be far
from any danger. And if by this conference they should join in bands of Amity,
a great benefit to themselves, Country and posterity would redound. Why would
King Henry in the face of the World and Neighbor Princes, brand so his
Reputation, as to break the Laws of Hospitality, wrong a Prince whom he had
invited to come and see him? Why would he violate those of consanguinity
attempting against his own Nephew? The Emperor Charles the fifth had been his
Guest, and after Royal entertainment, was friendly dismissed. He met with
Francis the French King at Bullen; which meeting seemed rather of Brothers come
to countenance some marriage Pomp, than contending Neighbors. If King Henry
had born any discontent against his Nephew, he might long ere now have
satisfied his ambi^ion, and at more easy rate, when the King his father with
most of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland received that fatal overthrow by
the Hills of Flowden and Banks of Till; the refusing of an interview might
divide the King and his Uncle upon which might follow some unnatural War.

Upon the other part the Churchmen set all their Power to hinder this
interview, persuading themselves it would give a terrible blow to their Estates
or Religion. The principal cause (say they) why the King of England is so
passionately earnest to have this meeting, is to persuade his Nephew to conform
Church Matters in Scotland to those already begun in England; to abolish the
Popes authority, to drive Religious persons from their Lands, Rents, Houses;
invest the jewels and ornaments of the Churches. Which counsel and example if
King James should follow, he would hazard or lose the friendship he had with
the Pope, Emperor and French King, his best confederates, abandoned of which
he and his Kingdom would be left a Prey to the tyranny of his Uncle; if Henry
kept no faith to God, Men had no reason to trust unto him. That this Interview
was to entrap his person; He being the man whom the Pope and Emperor had
designed to set upon his Throne, and revenge their quarrels; That it was grossly
to err, to he carried away with a shadow and appearance and leave a Substance,
to trust at once his Crown, person and liberty to an Enemy. And since examples
move more than precepts, let him think upon the hazard of King James the first,
eighteen years Prisoner, and after sold to his Subjects; Malcolm and William
Kings of Scotland. He should remember (if yet he were therein to be instructed)
that Princes serve themselves with occasions over their Neighbors, that they
have greater care to satisfy their ambition, than fear of shame for doing of
wrongs with the present times or posterity. That their Oaths were no longer
kept than they observed their advantages. That after he falls in his hands,
he ought to follow his manners, Religion, forsaking and giving over his own
natural disposition, manners and freedom, have no other affections nor motions
than his. For who comes under the roof of a Tyrant turns slave, though he
was a free man ere he did enter. That this meeting with the body, would
endanger the Soul and infect it with his errors, corrupting it with false
opinions grounded upon a liberty to live to ^ensuality and Epicurean pleasure.
If upon the slighting of this Interview, King Henry should denounce war against
King James and invade his Country, they in his just defense should furnish
moneys to entertain an Army and overturn his proceedings. For the present
necessity they offer to pay to him fyfty thousand Crowns yearly; and in any
hazard of the Estate voluntarily to contribute all their rents and revenues,
providing it would please his Majesty to suffer justice to proceed against
those who scandalously had sequestered themselves from the holy Church, and to
the contempt of his Laws publicly made profession of the opinions of Luther.
That the goods of all who should be convict of Heresy (which they esteemed to
no less than an hundred thousand Crowns of yearly Rent) should be brought to
the Exchequer, and their lands annexed to the Crown. To this effect they entreat
his Majesty to give them sufficient Judges truly Catholic and full of zeal and
severity.

After long reasoning upon both sides it was agreed, the King should not
altogether refuse to meet his Uncle, but adhere to the first to offer propunded
to this Emb^ssador concerning this Inter-view. The meeting to be at New castle,
one thousand at the most in train with either King, the time to be the Feast of
St. Michael the Archangel.

These Conditions not being embraced by King Henry, would if not abolish
totally, at the least prolong the time of this meeting; the King of England
thinks his Nephew too imperious to assume the Injunction of the whole
circumstances of their meeting, but rather than his suit should take no effect,
accepts both of the Place and number of the Train: and that the might have
some point yielded unto him* requires the time may be the first of August.
These Conditions being almost agreed upon, three or four hundredth Riddesdale
and Tinedale men, with other Borderers, break upon Liddesdale, and therewith
large incursions kill and forage. This during the Treaty falling miserably
forth, so much irritated King James that, accepting the offers of his Clergy,
he gave over inwardly all intentions of any inter-view: By prolonging time
laboring to wind himself out of the Maze. Hereupon he sends Letters full of
excuses for his stay; representing his many grievances and wrongs suffered; and
the seeds of discord began now to be sown amongst them. To light^n and
recreate his cloudy thoughts, the Queen is delivered at Sterlin of another Son,
who with great solemnity is baptized in the Chapel of the Castle, and named
Arthur.

The Prelates after mature deliberation present Sir James Hamiltoun, natural
Son to the Earl of Arran, to be supreme Judge of the Inquisition, against all
suspect of Heresy and new opinions differing from the Faith of the Roman
Church. The King approving their judgments in their choice, admits him. Sir
Jaws cheerfully accepts this new honor: For now his ambition will find many
guilty and miserable supplicants: Yet was this charge his ruin. For whilst he
persecuteth all who were informed against to be suspect of the Reformed
Religion, having many in Jayls, and numbers in his Scr^les to bring within the
Labyrinth of a Process, the supreme Providence arresteth himself.

James Hamiltoun Sherif of Linlythgow, Brother to Master Patrick Hamiltoun
Abbot of Ferme (who had suffered for Religion, and was cousin to Sir James
Hammiltoun of Fennard, Lord Inquisitor) for embracing his Brothers opinions,
had been persued so by the Churchmen that he was constrained to forsake his
own Country, and some years wander as a banished man abroad; But by his friends
at Court having purchased a License or Protection for some months to see his
desolate Family, and put his private Affairs in order, comes home. Where
finding the censorian Power to be in his cousins hands (for where should he
have Sanctuary, if he were challenged by so near a Kinsman for matters of
Religion?) imagining to himself an oversight and preterition, outdateth by his
stay his Protection. Sir James to curry the favor of the Churchmen, and
testify how dearly the cause of the Catholic Faith touched him, resolves to
begin with his Cousin. For if he were so burnt up with zeal, that he spared not
his own blood in the quarrel of the Roman Faith, what Heretic could pass
unpunisht? Besides the investing himself in the Sherifs Office and Lands (which
he never minded to restore) he had a Picque against him, for that whilst he
sat Judge in Lithgow, he pronounced a sentence by which he was interested in
some petty gain.

The Sheriff falling so far short of his expectation, that he finds himself
the first subject of his Cousins justice, and highly resenting his Kinsmans
cruelty, whom he knew under pretext of Piety ready to execute his own Revenges,
resolves to prevent his mischief. He had sometime been familiar with Sir
James, had known his bypath; his secret Plots and ayrie brags had not escaped
his observation; some alike in kindred, to them both were emissaries suborned,
to mark not only his actions but words and behavior, by which one way or
other he might be intrapt; He knew Sir James stood in some umbrage with the
King* and that some suspicions by no Innocence could be taken away. When at
last he had found his hot-spur Cousin (who threatened him with Death and Fire)
within the circle of his conjurations, he directs his Son to the King, who at
that time was ready to pass the Forth in his Barge; this bashful Messenger
gives advertisement from his Father, that the King should make his person sure
from his foes at home; for Sir James Hamiltoun had secret intelligence and
Plots with the Earl of Angus and Dowglasses, and that he attended only the
occasion when he might surprise him, either alone, or with a mean retinue, and
the or openly he would invade him, or breaking up his Chamber-doors ass^ssinate
him. The King giving attentive ear to a business which concerned him, no less
than the safety of his Person, the accusation being given by a Cousin of the
suspect, against a family, which a little disorder in the State might turn
Successors to the Crown, directs the young man to Edinburgh, and beyond his
private instructions gives him a Ring (well known by the chief Officers to be
a taken of power and se^recie) to assemble so many of the Counsel as were
resident. Sir Thomas Arseken, Secretary, Sir James Lermound, Master of the
Household, William Kirkcaldie Treasurer and others, meet, fear, consult upon the
Treason, labor how to prevent it; come to Sir James his Lodgeing, make sure
his Person in the Castle of Edenbrough: and at that same time proceed,
according to the Kings direction to instruct his Process. Sir James
passionately resenting his imprisonment, by his friends imploreth the aid of
the Churchmen upon his innocence. They apprehending his accusation to be a
stratagem of State forged by these of the Reformed Religion, for the stopping
any further progress of the Inquisition, already so furiously begun, interpose
their credit with the King for his Liberty to the discharging of his Commission
against Heretics. If the King should hearken to every Informer against a man
in State and Office, he should never have an end; for thus no man is so
innocent who may not be detracted and calumniated. Sir James was known to be a
man rash and insolent in words, his brains having been a little giddy (like one
looking from a great height) by his advancement in honors and place in Court;
but sincere in the service of his Prince and loyal. If he was arrogant in
boldness of terms, that was to acquire some more credit with the Commons, that
he might do better service to his Prince.

They who committed Sir James Hamiltoun, knowing the King facile and easy to
be wrought upon by the Clergy, some of them too, professing or giving way to
the reformed Religion, resolve (if he should escape free of this accusation)
that an imminent ruin hung over their persons and estates. Necessity and fear
combining the distracted powers of their minds, they come prostrate before the
King, beseech him not so much to look to the quality and circumstances of the
crime, as to the evil inclination of the man, who, powerful, factious, and
naturally vindicative, would never forgive nor forget the danger he was driven
unto; that His Majesty would consider his passed life, terrible and cruel
against all whom he could overreach; That to give him liberty, and relieve
him of his imprisonment, before the crimes of which he was accused were clearly
proved, or not, would be their, and the accusers overthrow; whom they esteemed
loyal Subjects, and except upon evident probabilities, and never given
informations against him. That he was a man perfectly hated of the People, and
a more acceptable sacrifice could not be ^ffer'd unto their fury if he proved
guilty. At their Supplications the King gave the Judges full power to proceed
against him, and administer justice according to their consciences and the Laws
of the Kingdom. The pannall being found guilty of such points of the Indictment
as was laid against him, was condemned to die, and thereafter accordingly
beheaded, his Quarters being set aloft on the Town gates his Lands annexed to
the Crown.

The Crimes of which he was found guilty (as from those who lived near that
time have by tradition been received) were, he had intelligence with the Earl
of Angus and Dowglasses, whom he labored to have restored, though with the
Kings, death, he had a plot to have broken up the Kings Chamber-doors, and
killed him, divolving the title of the Crown, or at least Government of the
Kingdom to his kindred. Being ditected to have repared a Castle in Bute, and to
this effect receiving three thousand Crowns in April, he went not thither,
attending some change in the State, which was to be accomplished by treason
against the Kings person. He kept still with him men of disperate minds and
fortunes who at his direction durst enterprise any mischief.

Where he had repaired some of the Kings houses, he had placed a Statue
resembling himself, or which to some he had named his Statue (what Mole-hills
are turned into Mountains when a Prince will pry into the actions of a
disgraced Subject?) above the Kings arms. He had detracted from his Master,
naming him the king of Clowns and Priests, and Scourge of the ancient Nobility;
He had labored to hinder the Kings marriage at his being in France.

To these points the people (who rejoiced in his ruin) added, he had slain
cruelly the Earl of Lennox at the battle of Lithgow. after he was Prisoner to
Purdowye; he had way^laid Gilbert Earl of Cassiles who was killed by his
direction and Counsel.

This back-blow of Fortune proves, that it is dangerous once highly to offend
a Prince, and after remain in his service; for Princes put old offenses up as
neglected, and when the occasion serves them, surprise long after the
Delinquents for some faults of which they are scarce guilty.

Sundry of the Nobility, appalled at this sudden fall of Sir James Hamiltoun
(for though they loved not the Man, they hated the example of such strict
Justice) left the Court, retiring to their own dwelling Houses: which made the
King suspicious of them, and believe they favored the reformed Religion, and
preferred the friendship of King Henry his Uncle to his. Neither was he herein
far Mistaken: for some feared not to send him word, that they had learned the
Churchmen had set him on work to extirpate his ancient Nobility, as if it were
an easy matter to create as many out of the Gentry, in whom (being his own
Creatures) he might have great confidence than any made by his Predecessors.

After this he turned so retired, sullen and melancholy, that every thing
displeased him, and he became even insupportable to himself, not suffering his
Domestic Servants to use their ordinary disport and recreations near him. And
as all day he proj^cted and figured to himself new cares to perplex himself,
some of which might fall forth, others could never come to pass; So in the
night time the objects of his daily projects working upon his fantasy, limmed
their dark shadows of displeasures, which gave him terrib^e affright in his
sleep. Amongst many of which, two are recorded as notable; one in the History
of the Church, the other common; both seem to have been forged by the Men of
those times, who thought fictions as powerful to breed an opinion in
discontented minds as verities, and they may challenge a place in the poetical
part of History. As he lay in the Palace of Lithgow about the midst of the
night, he leaped out of his Bed, calls for Lights, commands his Servants to
search Thomas Scot his Justice Clark, who (he said) stood by his Bedside
accompanied with hideous weights cursing the time that ever he had served him;
for by too great obedience to him, he was by the justice of God condemned to
everlasting torments.

Whilst they about him labor to cure his wounded Imagination, news came that
Thomas Scot about that same hour of the Night was departed to the other World
at Edinburgh and with no better Devotion than he was represented to the King.

After Sir James Hamiltoun had ended his part of this Tragecomedy of life, he
seemed to the King to have returned on the Stage, and in a ghastly manner with
a naked Sword in his hands, he thought he parted both his arms from him,
advertising him he would come again shortly, and be more fully revenged, till
which occasion he should suffer these wounds. The next day after this vision
(which is recorded to have been the seventh of August) word came that both his
Sonns were deceased and that almost in one hour. James the Prince (then one
year old) at St. Andrews, Arthur one month old at Sterlin.

The King of England finding himself disappointed by his Nephew of their
meeting, and understanding it to have been occasiond by the Rhetoric and
liberality of the Churchmen: having many of the Nobility of Scotland of his
faction (whose innocence interpreted his Religion to be the reformed, though
indeed it was of his own stamp, for he abolished the Pope but not Popacy) by
making prizes of Scottish Ships upon the Seas with his Fleet and incursions of
his garrisoned Soldiers upon land begins the prologue of an unnecessary war.

King James to stop the English incursions places George Gordoun Earl of
Huntley with his full power and authority at the Borders, and directs James
Lermound of Darcey, toward his Uncle, to give sufficient reasons of his not
meeting him at Newcastle, withal to seek restitution of his Ships, since taken
before any lawful War was proclaimed, and to expostulate the hostility of the
Borderers.

King Henry not only refuses render the Ships, or give a reason for the
breaking forth of the Garrisons on the Borders, but delaying the answer of the
Scottish Ambassador upon advantage of time, s^ndeth Sir Robert Bows seconded
with the Earl of Angus and Sir George Douglas, in hostile manner to invade
Scotland. These to the number of three thousand, burn, spoil, small villages,
and ravage the Country near the debatable bounds. The Earl of Huntley omitteth
no occasion to resist them, places garrisons in Kelsoo and Iedburgh, assembling
all the hardy Bordrers, and invadeth the English and Scottish forces at a Place
named Hall-den rig; here it is soundly skirmished, till the Lord Hume by the
advancing of four hundred fresh Lances turned the fortune of the Day; for the
English were put to flight; the Warden Sir Robert Bows Captain of Norham, Sir
William Mowbray, James Douglas of Parkhead with a natural Son of the Earl of
Angus, were taken Prisoners (the Ear^ by the advantage of his horse escaping)
with others to the number of six hundred. The Warden stayed in Scotland till
the Kings death.

This Road happened prosperously to the Scots the 24. of August 1541. being a
Dise-mall St. Bartholomew to the English.

The War continuing till Midsommer, King Henry sent the Earl of Norfolk, whom
he named the Rod of the Scots, with great power toward Scotland; with him the
Earls of Shrewsbury, Derby, Cumberland, Surrey, Hereford, Angus, Rutland, and
the Lords of the North parts of England, with an Army of forty thousand men,
as they were esteemed. With them he directs James Lermound of Darcey the
Scottish Ambassador to keep an equal march till they came to B^rwick, and there
to stay that he should not give advertisement to his Master of any of his
proceedings, the Earl of Huntley upon advantages of places resisting the
adventuring Routs who essayed to cross the Tweed. But King James hearing the
old Duke of Norfolk was their Leader, raises from all the parts of his Kingdom
Companies, and assembling them upon S^wtery^ edge mustered thirty thousand men.
They encamped on Fallow-Moor, the King having advertisement that the Duke would
march toward Edinburgh. Ten thousand strong, the Lords Hume, Seatoun, Areskin,
to make up the Earl of Huntleys forces, are sent toward the borders: The King
himself expecting the Artillery and other furniture of War staieth with the
body of the Army in the Camp. Durin this time it is reported the Lords plotteth
a Reformation of the Court, according to the example practiced at
Lawder-Bridge: especially against such who were named, Pensioners of the
Priests; but because they could not agree among themselves about those who
should stretch the ropes, every one striving to save his kinsman, or friend,
they escaped all the danger.

That this attempt being revealed to the King, he dismissed some of his
favorites in great fear to Edinburgh. So malicious is faction armed with power.

Thomas Duke of Norfolk, by such in the Scottish Camp who favored King Henry,
having understood the preparation and mind of King James to meet him in an open
field, well knowing that Fortune had that much of a woman to favor young men
more than old, and that honorable ^etreits are no ways inferior to brave
Charges, retireth off the Scottish ground, and keeps his forces on their own
marches. For the valor and resolution of this young Prince might (perhaps)
spoil and divest him of his former purchased Laurels and Palms, to the applause
of King Henry, who some thought (being weary of his service) to this effect
sent him to Scotland. A great number of the Lancastrian^ and North-Humbrians,
who, upon hopes of spoil, had followed him, pretending want of Victuals, and
the rigorous season of the year, with arms and baggage leave this Army. Having
done little harm to the Scots, and suffered much hunger and cold at B^rwick, he
prepares a retreit toward London.

When King James understood the Duke had repassed the ^weed, he encou^aged his
Army to follow him. The Common Soldier was indifferent; the Noblemen refuse to
fight except upon Scottish ground. The King urges them with the commodity and
advantage of a Revenge of the old wrong of the Duke, commanding an Army neither
of the Gentry, nor many Nobles of England, but of Hirelings and pres^ed
Artizans, whose number would prove hurtful to themselves, and turn them in a
disordered confusion. They had many days suffered famine, and all necessities
of War; their vigor and courage was spent; that the English fought far off,
and they at home. There wanted not matter to answer, but a man to deliver the
King an answer; generally they refuse to fight. To defend the person of their
Prince, the State and Country* they would hazard their their lives, and if
they had any thing more dear. If the enemy would stay on Scottish ground, they
would do their uttermost to make him retire, or by main force expel him; But to
invade England and tempt an Army, who not only was retired but returned to
their own bounds, they neither had so just^a quarrel as they wished, nor were
they sufficient at that time to pursue them. Their proyisions for war were
spent, the winter approached, victuals consumed; that despare often turned it
self into true fortitude, and men in good Order retiring would not be too near
followed, that even flying enemies should have Bridges of Gold. Now if they
were to charge the Enemy they would not have the Kings presence, a man young,
rash, valorous, upon whose life, not only the glory of the Battle, but the
life of the Commonwealth depended, his two Sons being Lately departed. For if
the fortune of War brought a period to his life, the Crown would remain at the
mercy of the Victor; that the Kings glory was not little that he had in so
short a time with so small forces, and these suddenly gathered, stop the
progress of so mighty an Army* which was so long in gathering, and boasted of
such great matters, yet which (...) not advance one mile in Scottish ground.
Whether the English fly or retire, they had suffered as much wrong as they had
done, and now to fight them (and that perhaps) with disadvantage, was to put in
hazard what was already acquired.

The Duke of Norfolk returning to London, the King with his Army comes to
Edinburgh, which immediatehe disbanded; but he forgot not the secret Plot
against his Favorites, nor the open refusal of his Nobles to fight on English
ground: as if the Earth were not all one piece and matter, and men the
destinade inhabitants of it every where; the Cardinal David Beatoun, Oliver
Saintclair, Craggy^ Ross, and others add fuel to these flames, Falla-Moor
plot mightily in^tigating them.

The King avouched publicly, That the Nobility neither loved his honor, nor
desired his continuance amongst them.

To cooll these smooking humors and breed in the King fairer hopes of his
Nobles, the Lord Maxwel offers, giving him ten thousand men to command (if
the State thought it expedient) to invade England at Salloway, affirming the
State and fortune of those who assail, to be better than theirs who are still
put to their defense. The English forces being divided, he doubted not to stay
longer on English ground than the Duke had done on the Sootish, and to
effectuate something to the Kings content. The King thanking him for his offer,
appolnteth a Rendezvous to be at the West Marches. No proclamations are
divulged for the Levies of men, but close Letters sent.

The Cardinal and the Earl of Arran (the one a Churchman of a mind above many
Nobles, the other a Nobleman of an humility under any Churchman) to give
false perspective to those proceedings, by sound of Trumpets, and beating of
Drumms raise men openly, march toward Hadingtoun, and the East Borders; Whilst
the Earls of Cassiles, Glencarn, Lords Flammin, Sommervail, Arsekin, Barons
Aytoun, Langtoun, Ormestoun, Waughtoun, and many others, accompanied with the
Kings domestic Servants ride to the West Borders.

The night before the Road, the King himself came to Loch-Maban, attending the
event of the in^ursion. Companies coming from all quarters of the Countries
about, none knowing of another, with the power of the Scottish Borderers, pass
the Water of Esk, burn certain Hamlets of the Grahams on the very limits.

Sir Thomas Whartoun Warden of these Marches, not a little troubled at such a
frequent assembly of the Scottish Riders, raising the power of the Country,
places them by a little hill, where he might take a view of their forces, in
good order; with him were Bastard Dacres and Jack Musgrave, two valiant
Captains.

The Scottish Lords beholding the English, range themselves in a Battallion,
desire to know the Kings Lieutenant General, for now it was to marshall their
Companyes, and every man to take him to his Charge. Presently Oliver Saintclair
upon crossed Pikes is mounted, the Kings Banner displayed, and the Commission
read in which he is designed Lieutenant, and all commanded, in the Kings name,
to obey and follow him.

It has been reported by those who were acquainted with Oliver, that the
Commission was not read, but that at his very sight such a tumult, confused
clamor, and enter shouldering of Male contents arose, their rancks were
broken, the military order turned into a confusion, none so repining as the
Lord Maxwel and the Borderers; Who if he had had patience to have heard the
Commission (as Oliver protested) was Lieutenant, and not he, whose charge was
only to present it.

The English who now were ready for the Fight, observing this disorder, take
the advantage upon the occasion, and brake forwards with a military shout,
whilst the others are in doubt whether to flee or stand, and the Guidiats and
Scullons are pesle mesle thronging with the foot Soldiers and they with the
Horsemen. Here is a general surprise, most part willingly rendering themselves
to the English without any show of defense, or the slaughter of any person of
any side. This overthrow proves that neither arms nor the multitude and
numbers of Soldiers, without their love and hearts avails any thing in a
Field, yea rather they are hurtful the more in number they be, if their
affection be alienated from their Commanders.

It is recorded that at this road, which was named Solloway-Moss, every English
had three or four Scots for Prisoners, and when their wanted men to take them,
the women of the neighboring Hamelet and Boys had Prisoners; the Earls of
Cassiles and Glencarn, the Lords Maxwel, Flammin, Sommervail, Olivant, Gray,
Robert Areskin Son to the Lord Areskin, Oliver Saintclain; The Lairds of
Craggy, Aytoun, Langtoun, Ormestoun, Waughtoun, many of the Kings Domestic
Servants were taken Prisoners, brought to London, and remained there till after
the Kings death.

The certainty of this voluntary defeat coming to the King at Loch-Maban (or
Carlawfroke as others) so astonished all the powers of his mind that he neither
had counsel nor resolution what to follow, neither remembering his own valor,
nor the number of his Subjects yet flourishing; he remained as one distracted,
and abandonned of all hopes. The Plot of the Nobles at Falla Moor against his
Servants, the refusing to give battle on English ground, made him apprehend
that the whole body of his Nobility had conspired his overthrow.

The Cardinal and Earl of Arran coming to Edinburgh, he also returned; all so
cast down that they were ashamed to come within sight of each other some days.

After which, in a retired manner, he passed to Fyffe, and from Hall-yards to
Faulkland, where he gave himself over to Sorrow. No man had access unto him,
no, not his own Domestics. Now are his thoughts busied with revenge, now with
rage against his scornful Nobility: long watchings, continual cares, and
passions, abstinence from food, and recreation, had so extenuated his body,
that pierced with grief, anguish, impatience, despair, he remained fixed to his
bed.

In these Trances Letters come from Lithgow to him, That the Queen was
delivered of a Daughter the eight of December. When he heard it was a Daughter
was born, he is said to have turned his face from them that read the Letters,
and sighing a farewell to the World, it will end as it began (says he) the
Crown came by a woman, and it will with one go; many miseries approach this
poor Kingdom; King Henry will either make it his by Arms or Marriage.

The Cardinal put in his hands some blanck Papers, of which they composed a
Letter Will, which whether he subscribed or not, is uncertain. After which he
said not many words which could be understood, but mused on the discomfiture of
his Servants at the Solloway-Moss. In which fits he left this world the
thirteenth of December 1542. the three and thirtieth year of his age and two
and thirty of his Reign.

Some record he was troubled by an unkindly medicine, and that the Cardinal was
conscious to it, but upon far conjectures: for the event proved that his death
was not only the ruin of the Cardinal, but of the whole Churchmen of the
Kingdom, and frame of the Roman Religion. His body was conveyed from Faulkland
to Edinburgh; the Cardinal, Earls of Arran, Arguil, Rothess, Marshal,
accompanying it; and in January buried in the Abbey Church of Holy-rood-hous^,
near the body of Magdalen his first Queen. He left behind him many natural
children; of his Marriages only one daughter, five days old at his death, the
Heir of his Kingdom and misfortunes.

This King was of a well made body and excellent mind, if it had been carefully
polisht; he was of a middle stature; Nature had given him strength and ability
equal to any; but by exercise he had so confirmed it, that he was able to
endure any travel, and practice all feats of Arms, as his attending on
Malefactors proved; for he was ordinary thought the first of his Troops who
persued them, and the last that left the chase, being daring and forward. In
his private affairs he was attentive and liberal, yet spared his Treasure that
he should not want, and when occasion required, caring for no charges. Never
man did entertain Soveraignity more familiarly, being of easy access to the
meaner sort as to the great. He was studious of all good arts, natu^ally given
to Poesy, as many of his verses yet extant testify. He was of as great
sorbriety as of little continency; he was a great favourer of learned men. The
poor men loved him, the great feared him; he made the rushy bushes keep the
herds of Cattle; he was thankful toward his Friends, dangerous toward his
Enemies. He infinitely obliged his people by establishing a Justice Court among
them, and bringing all sorts of Manufactours from neighbor nations home. By the
Germans he found the Gold Mines of Crawfoord Moor, being unknown to this part
of the world before him, out of which he extracted treasure. He left his
Arsenals furnished with all sorts of arms and furniture for War. Now as in
pictures not only the light but the shadow is observable, let us look upon him
in all his umbrages. This Prince in his long persuit of the Dowglasses seems to
have had a strange humor, that he could never forgive; And most of his
miseries may be traced to this Source; these he would have extirpate, and the
King of England could not forsake a man who was his brother-in-law, and had
been ever obsequious to him: Seeking only that he might be restord to his own,
out of which he was cast, not by any treason or aspiring to the Crown, but of
an ambition he had to be near the King, and equal to any Subject: his own
worth, kindred and followers animating him thereunto; having married the Kings
Mother and one of the greatest Kings Sister of those times.

The burning alive of the Lady Glames, beheading of the Master of Forbess, and
after him Sir James Hamiltoun, turned many of his Nobles from him, and made the
Commons detract him. For though they delight sometimes to have great men made
equal to them, when they find not evident proofs and sound grounds of their
sufferings and executions, they abhor the Actors. Princes should remember that
as the people are their Subjects, so are they the Subjects of time and
providence.

This humor of revenge made many believe if he had not been prevented by
death, many Scaffolds had been embrued for Falla-moor Plot, and Solloway-Moss.
The Lord Maxwel, who had studied the Character of the King, at that Road vowed
(when he might have escaped among his known Borderers) he would rather be the
KING of Englands Prisoner, and see him at London, than return home, and be
shamefully hanged at the Cross of Edinburgh.

He studied very much the overthrow of his ancient Nobility, not considering
that the titles of Crowns in Hereditary Kingdoms belong only to Kings for that
they are the most Ancient Noblemen, and also first of the Primitive Blood.

In his last years he was altogether governed by Romish Prelates, dangerous
Pilots in the Ocean of a troubled State; that Body in which one humor
signorizeth, cannot last long, and a Prince perishes when he is governed by
only one sort of men. Neither was he ruled so much by them out of great zeal
to Religion (being a Prince altogether given to his own pleasures) as that he
found them counterpoise the Nobility, whilst he swayed the ballanc.

His death proves his Mind to have been raised to the highest strain, and
above mediocrity; for he could die, but could not digest a disaster. He
seems to have had too much confidence in himself, and that he forgot the
conditions of Mortality. Whilst he suffered himself to be carried away by the
current of grief, and swallowed up in the gulf of despair.

All his faults are but as some few Warts in a most pleasing and beautiful
Face. He was very much beholding to the excellent Poets of his time, whose
commendation shall serve him for an Epitaph. Ariosto, who knew him only by
fame, in the person of Zerbino, whom he names Prince of Scotland, glaunceth at
his worth.

Zerbin di Bellezza e di Valor
Sopra tutti i Signori eminente,
Di virtu essempio e di Bellezza raro.
In another place; but Ronzard, who with his Queen came to Scotland, and was
his Domestic Servant, deseribeth him more to the life.

Ce Roy D' Escosse estoit en la fleur de ses ans:
Ses Cheveux non tondus commine fin or luisans
Cordonnez et crespez flotans dessus sa face,
Et sur son col de laict luy donnoit bonne grace.
Son Port estoit royal, son reguard vigoureux.
De vertus, et de honor, and de guerre amoureux.
La douceur, et la force, illustroien^^ son visage.
Si que Venus et Mars en avoient fait partage.
So happy is a Prince when he cherishes and is intertain'd by the rare
spirits of his time, that even when his Treasures, Pomp, State, Followers,
Diadems, and all external Glory leave him, the sweet incense of his Fame in
the Temple of Honor, persumeth his Altars. A Prince's name is surer preserved,
and more deeply engraven in Paper, than in all the rusting Medalles, blasted
arches, entombed Tombs (which may serve to any as well as to him) raised with
such loss of time, vain labors of Artizans, vast expense, to be the sport of
the Winds, Raines, Tempests, Thunder, Earthquakes, or if they shun all
these, of superstition, faction and civil Broils.

After this Prince had some years rested in a Tomb* not only it, but the most
part of the Church was made equal ^o the ground, by the Armies of his Uncle
King Henry the eight, whose malice left him not even when he was dead, proing
as horrible an Uncle, as Nero was a son. A while after he was transported to
another Vault, by the piety of his matchless Grandchild James King of Great
Britain; where he was embalmed again, enshrined and his Coffin adorned with the
Arms of the Kingdom, cognoscances and a Crown. With which Honors I leave him,
till some famous pen, encouraged by the favors of his Royal Successors, raise
his Fame from the dust of obscure Papers to Eternity.

THE END.
MEMORIALLS OF STATE.
Considerations to the KING.
December 1632.
THere is nothing more dangerous to a King than to suffer Majesty, and that
sacred respect which a Subject owes him to be violated, and his Fame and
Reputation lessened by other men's boldness, whose presumption may lead them
forwards not only to dally with his Person, but with his Crown. But his ears
are so often guarded by these men, that he never hears verities till he has
granted what he cannot well amend, and his wounds be incurable. If a Prince
hold any thing dear it should be the Right and Title of his Crown, which
concerns not only himself but his Posterity, out of which a small Jewel
taken away, makes it the less Radiant; And to all Subjects that should be as
Mount Sinai, not to be approached. In every case we should take greater heed to
what in it is hurtful, than to what is in it profitable; for what profit and
commodity any thing carries with it, easily presents it self unto us; but
any one point which may hurt us, unless it be observed and carefully taken
away, may overthrow and bring to naught all that has been rightly intended.

The restoring of the Earl of Monteeth in blood, and allowing his descent and
title to the Earldome of Strathern is thought to be disadvantageous to the
King's Majesty, and that a more dangerous blow could not be given to the
Nobleman himself. We may easily conjecture of things to come and imagine them
by those of the like nature which have proceeded. The Stage of the World is the
same still, though in times the Actors be changed, and come about again.

For the Kings Majesty, it would be considered if Henry the sixth King of
England would, if it had been in his power, reclaimed the approbation restoring
in blood and allowing of the descent and title of Richard Duke of York, who
openly in Parliament thereafter made claim for the Crown, as in his own ^ight,
laying down thus his title.

The son of Ann Mortimer who came of Philipe the Daughter and sole heir of
Leonel Duke of Clarence, third Son to King Edward the third, is to be preferred
by very good right in Succession of the Kingdom before the children of John of
Gaunt the fourth Son of the said Edward the third: but Richard Duke of York is
come of Philipe the Daughter and sole Heir of Leonel Duke of Clarence, third
Son to K. Edward the third, then to be preferred before the children of the
fourth Son who was Henry.

The like reason may be alleged in the Title of the Earl of Strathern. The
children of a first marriage by the common Law are to be preferred in the
Succession before the children of the second marriage; for the marrying of
Elizabeth Moor did but legitimate and make her children to succeed after the
children of the first marriage.

As for the authority of a Parliament, it would be considered, whether or not
the Authority of a Parliament may confer and entail a Crown from the lawful Heir
thereof, to the next apparent heirs. Or if an Oath given unto a King by man's
Law should be performed* when it tends to the suppression of Truth and Right
which stand by the Law of God. Then if one Parliament has power to entail a
Crown, whither may not another Parliament upon the like conside rations restore
the same to the righteo^s heirs.

But the Subject resigneth all his right to his King. It would be considered
whether a Subject may safely capitulate with his Prince, that is to say, give
over and quit-claim all right and title which he has to his Sovereigns Crown,
his Right being sufficient, and if by his capitulation his heirs be bound, and
if it be honorable for a Prince to accept his conditions.

The trouble which Edward Baliol raised in Scotland, is yet recent to the
Readers of Histories.

Notwithstanding that his Father John Baliol had resigned unto Robert King of
Scotland all the right and title which he or any other of his had, or
thereafter might have to the Crown of Scotland concerning any interest or claim
which might be avouched for any cause or consideration: He, anno 1355. gave to
Edward the third, King of England, a full resignation of his pretended Right of
the Crown of Scotland, As before, being assisted by the said King and the
confederate Gentlemen of Scotland in a Parliament holden at Perth, where he had
been confirmed King of Scotland by the three Estates.

It would be considered if the Pope, the Kings of Spain or France after some
revolutions of years, seeking to trouble the Estate and peace of this Isle,
should entertain and maintain one of the Heirs of the Earls of Strathern (as
Queen Elizabeth did Don Antonio the Prior of Crato, who claimed the Crown of
Portugal, to reclaim whose Kingdom She sent the Earl of Essex and Drake) or
should marry one of them to their nearest Kinswomen, and send him armed with
power to claim his Title to the Crown of Scotland, as King James the fourth of
Scotland practiced upon Perkin Warbeck naming himself Richard Duke of York; to
whom he gave in marriage Lady Katharine Gordoun Daughter to the Earl of
Huntley, and thereafter with all his forces, to estable his said Ally in his
Title invaded England. It would be considered whether they had a fair bridge to
come over to this Isle.

It would likewife be considered if the Earl of Strathern, though a mean
Subject, these two hundred years, having been debarred from all title to the
Crown, and now by the indulgency and exceeding favor of the Prince, being
restored to his descent in blood and served Heir to his great Progenitors, and
indirectly as by appendices to the Crown, if either out of displeasure, or for
want of means to main^tain their estates, he or his should sell and dispose
their Rights and Titles of the Kingdom of Scotland to some mighty and Foreign
Prince, such as is (perhaps this day the King of Sweden) who wants nothing
but a title to invade a Kingdom, not knowing whither to discharge his
victorions forces. It would be considered if that title disposed to that Priuce
were sufficient to make him King of Scotland. Or if establi^hing his right upon
fair conditions, such as is liberty of conscience, absolution and freedom from
all taxes and subsidies, the transferring of Ward lands into fewd, the people
of Scotland might give him their Oath of Alleagiance; or if he might redact the
King of Scotland to give him satisfaction and compound for his right of the
Crown of Scotland.

It would to these be considered, If times should turn away the minds of
Subjects from their Prince, by superstition, sedition and absolute Rebellion,
as what may not befall an inconstant ever wavering Nation? to an Aristocratie,
Oligarchy, Democratie, or absolute Anarchy. If the Rebellious subjects and
abused Populace might not make advantage of such Men, who draw their titles
from Evanders mother to trouble the present times.

That nothing could be more dangerous to the Nobleman himself than this
service, may be understood by the like examples.

Clouis King of France having understood that a Nobleman of Artois named
Canacare blown up by Power, had vaunted that he was come and lineally descended
from Clodion le Chevelu, and by that same Succession was heir of the Crown of
^rance, closed not his ears to it (says the History) but caused extirpate that
Sower of impostures and all his Race.

Henry the fourth King of England after the deposure of King Richard the
second, kept Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, who had a just title to the Crown,
under such Keepers that he could never do nor attempt any thing till he dyed.
But Henry the seventh King of England took away Edward Plantaginet Duke of
Warwick Heir to George Duke of Clarence, by reason of his jealousy of
Succession to his Uncle Edward the fourth.

Margarite Plantaginet his sole Daughter (married to Sir Richard Pole knight)
by Henry the eight restored to the Earldom of Salisbury, was attainted
threescore and two years after her Father had suffered and was in the Tower of
London beheaded, in whose person dyed the surname of Plantaginet.

Anne Plantaginet Daughter to Edward the fourth, being married to Thomas Howard
Earl of Surrey and Duke of Nor^olk was the ground and chief cause wherefore
King Henry the eight, cut off the head of Henry Earl of Snrrey; though the
pretended cause whereon he was arraigned was the bearing certain arms of the
house of York, which only belonged to the King.

Mary Queen of England cut off the head of Lady I^^e Gray and the Lord Guilford
her Husband, for their title to the Crown; and that same reason was the
overthrow and final destruction of Mary Queen of Scotland by Queen Elizabeth.

The Duke of Guise by a Genealogy deduced from Charles the Great, in the reign
of Henry the third the French King, was thought to aspire to the Crown of
France, and suffered at last for this and his other presumptions.

It is notoriously known, that these two hundred years the Race of Euphane Ross
in her children David Earl of Strathern and Walter Earl of Athole, and all
their Succ^ssion by all the Kings of Scotland sithence, have been ever
suppressd and kept under, and for reason of State should still be kept low and
under, unless a Prince would for greater reason of State advance them, to give
them a more horrible blow, and by suborning mercinary men, make them aim above
their reach to their last extirpation. Dum nesciunt distinguere inter flamma
and praecipitia,
Princeps quem persequitur honorat and extollit in altum.


An intended Speech at the West Gate of Edinburgh to King JAMES.
SIR,
IF Nature could suffer Rocks to move and abandon their natural places, this
Town, founded on the strength of Rocks (now by the chearing Rays of your
Majesty's presence, taking not only motion but life) had with her Castle,
Temples and Houses, moved toward you, and besought you to acknowledge her
yours, and her indwellers your most humble and affectionate Subjects; And to
believe how many souls are within her circuits, so many lives are devoted to
your sacred person and Crown. And here Sir She offers by me to the Altar of
your glory, whole* Hecatombs of most happy desires; praying all things may
prove prosperous unto you; that every Virtue and Heroic Grace which make a
Prince eminent, may with a long and blessed Government attend you. Your
Kingdoms flourishing abroad with Bays, at home with Olives; presenting you
Sir, who art the strong Key of this little World of Great Britain, with those
keys which cast up the Gates of her affection, and design you power to open all
the springs of the hearts of those her most Loyal Citizens.

Yet this almost not necessary; For as the Rose at the fair appearing of the
morning Sun, displayeth and spreads her purple^* So at the very noise of your
happy return to this your native Country; their hearts (if they could have
shined through their breasts) were with joy and fair hopes made spacious. Nor
did they ever in all parts feel a more comfortable heat, than the glory of your
prefence at this time darteth upon them.

The old forget their age and look fresh and young at the appearance of so
gracious a Prince; the young bear a part in your Welcome, desiring many years of
life, that they may serve you long; all have more joies than tongues. For as
the words of other nations far go beyond and surpass the affection of their
hearts; So in this nation the affection of their hearts is far above all they
can express by words. Daign then Sir from the highest of Majesty, to look down
on their lowness and embrace it; accept the homage of their humble minds;
accept their grateful zeal; and for deeds accept that great good will which
they have ever carried to the high deserts of your Ancestors; And shall ever to
your own, and your Royal Race, whilst those rocks shall be overshadowed with
buildings, buildings inhabited by men, and while men be induced, either with
counsel or courage, or enjoy any piece of Reason, Sense, or Life.

An Apologetical Letter.
March 2. 1635. MY LORD,
IN a time when men for reading of Papers concerning State are challenged, it
must be a great hazard to write them, and a greater to send them from home, and
the most to send them to one so near the Helm as is your Lordship, who the next
day (perhaps) may put in the Princes hands what is sent him. And then, though
what is set down may be free of great faults, yet must it pass and be
understood as it pleases the Prince to construe it. But what Marius Geminus
said to Julius Caesar, may be said to King Charles; Caesar, qui apud te audent
dicere, magnitudinem tuam ignorant; qui non audent, humanitatem. And writing to
your Lordship I know to whom I write. Thus the way of glory lying near the
Gates of danger, I have adventured this sheet of Paper of which I beseech your
Lordship to be both Judge and Patron.

What a noise has been raised in this Country by prosecuting a piece of
writing, supposed to be derogatory to the Honor of the Kings Majesty! No times
have been without such men. Wise men keep their thoughts locked up in the
Cabinets of their Breasts, and suffer the faults of times patiently, Fools rail,
cry out, but amend nothing. What ever advise has been given for the putting of
Libellers to the extremity of Law, I would say (withal humble respect to grave
Statesmen) that in a matter of a Calumny and reproach with Subjects, a Prince
can do nothing more ^itting his own fame and reputation, than to slight and
contemn them, as belonging nothing to him; and that twere better to neglect,
than be too curious in searching after the Authors. So Theodosius, Honorius
Arcadius were wont to say, if any Man speak ill of the Emperor, if he do it of
lightness, it is to contemned; if of madness, to be pittyed; if of injury, to
be remitted. And Alexander the Great used to say, Regium est benefacere and
male audire; or as Plutarch reports it, Regium est a quibus male audias,
magis esse iis beneficum. Nero (otherwise a terrible Prince) when that Pasquil
was given out against him?

Quis neget AEneae magna de stirpe Neronem?
Sustulit hic Matrem, sustulit ille Patrem.
Or as DION cites it, (...).
Nero, Orestes, Alcmaeon, Matricidae.
He took no notice of it, followed not the Writers with aany punishment, sought
them not, as ye find in Suetonius, Et quosdam ad Iudicem delatos ad Senatum,
affici graviore poena prohibuit. Writings which we scorn and make none account,
of themselves vanish and turn into naught. If we chafe and fret, it would
appear that we have been therein touched, and vively see in them our own faults
and misdemeanor taxed and laid open.

If these Papers for the Kings honor were not to be seen and read, or if they
did derogate to the same of the Nobles, why were they not suppressed and
hidden? but is this the way to suppress and hide them? to imprison, arraign,
banish, execute the persons near whom they are found? or is it not rather to
turn them a piece of the Story of the Time to make such a noise about them, and
by seeking to avoid the smoke to fall into the fire? what we would most evite
and shun, to be the Authors to bring upon our own heads?

What gained Queen Elizabeth the twenty three of her Reign, by cutting off the
hands of Stubbes and Page on a Scaffold for writing that Book against her
marriage with the Duke of Anjou, save that out of horror of that new and
unpractised punishment, the people acknowledged her to be the right and not
uncertain daughter of King Henry the eight, and she began to be feared, where
before she was beloved of her Subjects? whom a people fear they hate, and whom
they hate they wish taken way. A Prince should be more violent in revenging
other men's quarrels than his own. That unfortunate Duke of Buckingham in the
time of Richard the third, could make good use, against the Succession of the
Race of Edward the fourth, in his Speech to the Commons of of London, by
remembering them of the strange proceedings of King Edward against a Merchant
named Burdet: who dwelling at the sign of the Crown, and having said to his
Son, that after his death he would make him Heritor of the Crown, meaning his
own house, was for this Tale in four hours after quartered, which blot is
eternally fixed to that Prince.

In the Reign of King Richard the third, who had ever known than Pasquil
against three of his Courtiers, Louell, Ratcliff, and Catsby, The Rat, the Cat,
and Louel that Dog,
Rule all England under the Hog.
If his tyranny had not been mightily extended against that poor Gentleman
Collingburn the Maker of it? Ye will say, it is in a Princes power to suppress
such Papers by Authority; That is the only way to make all men seek them, and
being found highly prize them. Tacitus tells us of certain verses of
Fabricius Veiento against Churchmen and Senators, which were condemned to be
burut; as long as the reading and finding of them was dangerous, they were much
sought for, and with danger read: but being afterward licentiate to be read,
and the liberty of having them obtained, they were forgotten and no man cared
for them.

No Prince, how great soever, can oblish Pens, nor will the Memorials of ages
be extinguished by present power; the posterity rendering to every one, his due
honor and blame. It is true that great men should direct their great care to
Fame and hold nothing more dear unto them; and he who contempneth it,
neglects those actions by which it is acquired: But it is pity men should be
more careful and studious of fame for times to come, in which they are not,
than of honesty in the present time in which they live.

Sometimes it is great wisdom in a Prince not to reject and disdain them who
freely tell him his duty, and open to him his misdemeanors to the
Commonwealth, and the surmis^s and umbrages of his people and Council for the
amending disorders, and bettering the form of his Government. As if a man
should tell King Charles, That there is none in all his Kingdoms here can reckon
himself Lord of his own goods amongst so many taxes and taillages, so much
pilling and polling. So that substance is daily plucked and pilled from honest
men to be lashed out amongst unthrifts, that as Thucydides writes of the great
plague in his time at Athens, Men seeing no hope of safety spent all they had
in one night: So the uncertainty of enjoying and holding what they have for the
present draws the thrifty and unthrifty to one end, for no man being sure of
Lands, less of moneys, every man is turned in a desperate carlessness of his
estate.

As to tell him also about this Subject who is the subject of this Letter, the
People say, Kings seeking Treason shall find Land, and seeking Land shall find
Treason. The denial of a Princes desire was the destruction of an innocent
Naboth; the voice of the people should not be kept up from the ears of a Prince.

As to unfold to a King, if Usury be not lawful at all (for it is against
Nature that money should beget money, and not tolerate by the Mosaical Law, and
in Ezekiel, cap. 18. v. 13. it is reckoned amongst the roaring sins, such as
are Adultery and bloodshed) it being a sin in the persons of subjects, it is a
greater sin in the person of a Prince; for any sin is greater in the person of
a Prince, then in the persons of subjects: As sin was worse and greater in
Angels than men. Nothing is profitable to a Prince which is not joined with
honor; and the State of Kings unless it stand in pureness and fidelity, it
cannot subsist in power.

As to tell King Charles, what a strange thing it is so swear a man for the
true value of his own Substance. Since the valuing of Subjects Lands and Rents,
Rents were never less, nor the Lands worse; a secret scourge of God having
followed it, the Country scarce affording bread to the Laborers of it.

Remember David's numbering the people. In the times of King Henry the eight,
Regnante Cardin, Volseio, this was held uncouth, strange and terrible; and no
wonder if men scare and start at it now, under a Prince of so meek a Spirit, so
innocently good: who prefers peace before war, rest before business, honesty
before profit. None of all his, kingdom, no, not one being more holy, more
chaste, nor a better man; in whom reigns shamefastness and modesty and
Patience, taking all wor^ly crosses in good part: never gaping for glory, not
thir^^ing after riches: but only studying the health of his soul, peace of his
Kingdoms, and how to advice the holy Church, and restore her to her first
Rents and i^tegrity. But God knows what he has predestined and ordained
for the Scourge of this Country, against whose Ordinance prevails no counsel.

A Prince should be advertised that the hatred and distaste of men^ present
estates and fortunes sets them on work and makes them exceeding earnest to
seek novations; for finding themselves plunged in the beggari^ of a miserable
e^tate, as many do believe, it turns not them base, nor keeps them under,
but raises in them a mad desire to change their for u^e; and this has been
the ensign of Malcontents to attempt and enterprise dangerous matters; for it
has often been found that nothing has sooner armed a people than poverty, and
poverty has never so often been brought upon a Nation by the unfruitfulness of
the Earth, by disasters of Se^s, and other human accidents, as by the Avarice
of the Officers and Favorites of Princes; who are brought foolishly to believe
that by tearing of the skins of of the flock they shall turn the Shepherd
rich. It is no property of a good Shepherd to shear often his flock, and ever
to milk them. Nor is it of a Prince to gall and perpetually a^llict a people by
a terrible Exchequer. Brutorum se Regem facit qui premit suos. Now in such
Theams it were not evil for a Prince to read Ian Marianai and George Buchanans
piece de jure Regni apud Scotos, for his own private and the public good.

Princes h^ve in their actions this disadvantage, that in matters of wrong and
injuries concerning their S^bjects, though they sometimes suffer by reason of
their power, being thought stronger, they are ever este^med to do the wrong,
which should move them to abstain from all violent courses, and think really
their Subjects losses are their own.

Ye will then say, the case of Princes is pitiful if Writers of infamous
Libels be not rigorously punished; without all question the Law is just and
necessary against them. But in some cases good Princes never follow the rigor
and extremity of punishment set down by their Laws, no, not against the
naughtiest Subjects, and especially when the case concerns their own
particulars. There is much to be considered in the convoy of such Libels: If
they contain Truths there is small wrong in such pap^rs, as to call Mary
Magdalen a Sinner, Matthew a Publican, Thomas a Misbeliever, Paul a Pe^secutor,
Peter a Denyer of his Master, and the rest fugitives from him, and these are to
be slighted and past over. If they contain mixed truths and apparences, they
may be neglected; If they admit no interpretation, but true and flat railing,
then is a Princes patience to be tried, and the Libel to be scorned. If they
propound novelty and causes of sedition upon apparent grounds, they are to be
answered, and by good reason to be overthrown. If they be presented by way of
Supplications for redressing of errors in the State, it is a question whether
they be Libels or not. That Supplication of Humphrey Duke of Gloucester to King
Henry the sixth of England against the Cardinal of Winchester Archbishop of
York may have place amongst Libels; for the King is taxed there of notable
dotage. As that by the counsel of the Cardinal, he had set at Liberty the King
of Scots, suffered his Jewels and household stuff to be sold, granted the
Cardinal a Charter of Pardon for taking up his Rents, which were sufficient to
have maintained the wars in France many years. The setting of the Duke of
Orleance at liberty, against the Duke of Burgundy the great friend of the
English, and many other points. Yet this being done by way of Supplication, for
redress of wrongs in the State, he was not threatened for (perhaps) verity, but
remitted to the Council, and what for fear, and what for favor (says the
English History) the whole matter was winked at touching the Duke, and nothing
said against the Cardinal* Miseria summa ubi de injuria conqueri pro delicto
habetur.

These who set their Prince on work to follow and pursue such an idle piece of
Paper, if they had fair Judges, and powerful enemies near the Court, may
themselves be brought within compass of that same punishment, which they would
have laid upon others; as Perillus was brought to take an Essay of his own
brazen Bull: for no better are they which relate, divulgate and are occasioners
to have infamous Libels published, than they which write them. And these men
have done what in them lay to make that Paper public, and have recorded in the
Annals of this Kingdom to all ages, what should have been smothered in the
darkest pits of Oblivion. They have often assembled the Kings Majesty's
Subjects to the great charges and vain attendance of many Noblemen and Barons
to see their passions put forward. They have busied the Prince to condemn
others by power (a Minister of their attempts) and not purge himself to
posterity; for such a Paper should have been answered by a Pen, not by an Ax.
There is no Prince living, no, nor dead, but Subjects have and do both write
and speak of after their fantasies. Augustus in a Letter to Tiberius, Noli in
hac re indagere et nimium indignari quemquam esse qui de me loquatur male;
satis est enim si hoc habemus ne quis malefacere possit. And Tiberius in the
beginning of his reign (though after he killed Cremutius Codrus for words) was
wont to say, in Civitate libera linguam quoque liberam esse debere. Wise
Princes have never troubled themselves much about talkers; weak spirits cannot
suffer the liberty of judgments, nor the indiscretion of tongues. To strive to
restrain them, is the work of busy Bodies, who would fain have somewhat to do,
but know not what, nor how to help Domitian to kill gnats with his Dagger;
having won points and conclusions heretofore in the State beyond their hopes,
they begin to foster great and shameful hopes beyond the reach of all
obtaining. A Prince should be such toward his Subjects as he would have God
eternal toward him, who full of mercy spares peopled Cities, and darteth his
Thunders amongst the vast and wild Mountains.

To ARABELLA Countess of Lothian.
Madam,
AS those ancients who when they had given over with credit any faculty
wherein they excelled, were wont to offer the Tools and Instruments of their
Art to the Shrine of some Deity: My Musical recreations giving place to more
laborious, serious, (my Lute these many days (like my mind) lying out of tune,
keeping no harmony in perfect discord) I offer these airs and tabulature to
your Ladyships harmonious Virtues; and to whom could they more deservedly
appertain, than unto her whose goodness of nature, and eminent known virtues of
mind, may justly entitle the only Grace and Muse of our Northern Climate.
Though the Gift be not much worth, I hope your Ladyship will daign to accept it
as if it were a greater and more precious from a Giver brought already in
admiration of your Ladyships worth, and who desires nothing more than to remain

Your Ladyships to command. W. DRUMMOND.

To Isabella Countess of Perth.
Madam,
YOur Courtesi^ has prevented me, it being mine to offer you thanks, both for
esteeming me worthy so honorable a Task, and for measuring those lines
according to affection, and not their worth; for if they had any, it was all
(as the Moon has her light) borrowed from the Rays of your Ladyships own
invention. But this quality becomes well your sweet disposition, and the
generosity of that Noble Stem of which you have your birth; as does the
erecting of that notable Monument to your all-worthy Lord; by the which ye have
not only obliged all his kindred now living, but in ages to come the unborn
posterity to render you immortal Thanks. Your Desert and good opinion of me
have by a gracious violence (if I can be so happy as to do you service) won me
to remain, your Ladyships

Ever to Command, W. DRUMMOND.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of PEARTH.
My Noble LORD,
THough as Glaucus says to Diomed in Homer, Like the Race of Leaves, the Race
of Man is, that deserves no question: nor receives his being any other breath;
the Wind in Autumn strowes the Earth with old leaves, then the Spring the Woods
with new indews; yet I have ever thought the knowledge of kindred, and the
Genealogies of the ancient families of a Country, a matter so far from
contempt, that it deserves highest praise. Herein consists a part of the
knowledge of a man's own self. It is a great spur to virtue to look back on the
worth of our line. In this is the memory of the dead preserved with the living:
being more firm and honorable than any Epitaph. The living know that band
which tyeth them to others. By this man is distinquished from the reasonless,
and the noble of Men from the baser sort. For it often falls out, though we
cannot tell how, for the most part that generosity follows good Birth and
Parentage. This moved me to essay this Table of your Lordships house, which is
not inferior to the best in this Isle and greatest. It is but roughly (I
confess) hewn, nakedly limmed, and after better informations to be amended. In
Pieces of this kind, who does according to such light as he receives, is
beyond reprehension.

Your Lordships humble Servant and Kinsman, W. Drummond.

To the Right Honorable J. Earl of T.
My Lord,
THe Ocean, though great Rivers with many currents pay him Tribute, disdains
not to receive also the lesser loyal, though ignoble, Brooks, which by one only
Urn power themselves into his bosom; no more will your Lordship, after the many
congratulations of your Country, of the State, of your great Friends, reject
the applause of the Muses (fair, though contemned, Mistress) who by me offer
this Posy of Flowers to your Lordship (who is the flower of Nobleness) in
acknowledgment of your Lordships constant zeal toward them, and their many
obligations toward you, congratulating your prosperous Fortunes, which they
wish to increase, and praying the heavens at last may turn so propitious to
virtue and true worth, that though they do not reward them upon Earth, yet the
world may see that they do not suffer them ever to lie oppressed. They have
fair hopes that the advancement of your Lordship is the advancement of them,
for the body preceding, the shadow must follow. Your Lordship being near the
helm of the State, they exspect a new Saturnian world: knowledge must flourish,
ignorance decay (as Mists before the Sun) Innocence live guarded, oppression
trampled, and they shall no longer hereafter have occasion to wish, ask, or
complain.

Your Lordships Servant, W. Drummond.

To the truly Noble S. R. Carre, Gentleman of the Kings Majesty's Bedchamber.
SIR,
HOw joyful were all here who either love worth in others or are conscious of
any part of it in themselves, to hear the happy event of your late danger? but
yet the apprehension of what might have fallen forth (if Providence had not
otherwise disposed) does still with a pensive fear possess their minds. It was
too much hazarded in a point of Honor; why should true Valor have answered
fierce Barbarity, Nobleness Arrogance, Religion Impiety, Innocence Malice? The
disparagement being so vast. Was it for knowing this when ye left us, that ye
graved with your Diamond in a Window; Frail Glass thou bear this name as
well as I,
And none does know in which it first shall dye.
And had ye then to venture to the hazard of a Combat the exemplary of virtue;
and the Muses Sanctuary? the lives of twenty such as his who has fallen, in
Honors Balance would not counterpoise your one. Ye are too good for these
times, in which, as in a time of Plague, men must once be sick, and that
deadly, ere they can be assured of any safety. Would I could persuade you in
your sweet walks at home to take the prospect of Court Shipwracks; forgive mine
importunity, your many courtesies in my behalf, and the World, which is a
Witness of them, force me to bear a part in all your Fortunes, and ever, whilst
I remain my self to be,

To serve you, February 10. 1620. W. Drummond.

To the Right Honorable Earl of L.
My Noble Lord,
OF that duty I ow to your Lordship, and love to your honorable Father, I have
adventured to bear a part in his Obsequies, a work I must confess profuse; no
verses of mine, nor any others, having power to add any thing to his noble
Memory, being so strongly upholden by your Lordship, and his other excellent
children, that it is like to be contemporary with the World. For whatsoever
has now failed of the honor I intended, I beseech your Lordship to accept my
serviceable and infallible love for all supplement. If your Lordship esteem
these among the Scutcheons, Colors, and other day-lasting Ornaments of the
Funeral pomp, I shall hold them sufficiently honored, and in what is within
the compass of my power, remain,

Your Lordships ever to command, W. Drummond.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Perth.
My Noble Lord,
IN this storm of the State I had resolved to set my affairs in order, exposing
all to the hazard of what might fall forth, and fly to the shadow of your
Lordship, finding at this time, that not to prove true, Minima Parvitate sua
tuta sunt; for the humility of my fortune, and my retired and harmless form of
living, could not save me from being employed to serve here the ambition of the
great Masters of the State; as if I had no more to do with time, I was
appointed to spend it in attending the Committee of the Shire; at my first
initiation charged to be at that fatal service, and horrible execution of
Dunglass* they directed me to ravage and plunder the more peaceable neighbors
about; this Trojan Horse labored to give me a command over Horses. All which
employments being contrary to my education and estate, knowing, that Pareil
sier Pareil a nulle Puissance, and that they were not my lawful Masters, I
shuned and performed no more than pleased me, which acquired me no small
Spite. If the Parliament of England, and matters since fallen forth, had not a
little cooled this fervency or frenzy, I knew not where to have found
sanctuary, save with your Lordship, nor knew I what thanks to render your
Lordship, for your gracious protection, and many courtesies offered me. If I
should sacrifice my fortunes, liberty, life, I would rather lose them for your
Lordship, than for any Democracy. Your Lordships favors shall be ever be
remembered, and sought to be deserved in what is within the compass of
performing, and power of

Hawthorn-Den December. 1. 1640. Your Lordships Humble Servant. W. Drummond.

To the Learned and Worthy Gentlewoman.
Worthy M.
I should be too ambitious, I will not say arrogant, if I thought that honor,
which you give me in your delicate Verses to be due to the honored, and not
rather to the honourer. They reflect and turn back unto your self (as to a more
renowned wonder) that praise by desert, which ye bestow upon me of your mere
courtesy. Alas my Muses are of no such value to deserve the blazon of so
pregnant and rare a wit. Perhaps ye raised them to show the highness of your
spirit, which ever transcendeth mean measures or to make known how excellently
ye can praise any thing that you please. But howsoever (praise being the reward
of virtue, and proceeding from so sound a judgment, and one so praiseworthy)
I will think hereafter my Muses worthy praise, because ye held them such, or if
they were such before, that they were such because they were ordained to be
praised and loved of you. I can but admire your ingine and thank your
courtesy, and wish that time and fortune may prove so gracious, accomplishing
my desires, to make me know how to acquit them, till which occasion as ever
you have me,

Your most

To his Worthy Friend, S. G. K.
SIR,
WHen out of curiosity this last week I had entered these large and spacious
Galleries, in which the Fair of St. German is kept, and had viewed the diverse
Merchandise and Wares of the many nations at that Mart, above the rest I was
much taken with the daintiness of the many Pourtraicts there to be seen. The
devices, Posies, Ideas, Shapes, Draughts, of the Artificers were various, nice,
and pleasant. Scarce could the wandering thought light upon any Story, Fable,
Gayetie, which was not here represented to the view. If Cebes the Theban
Philosopher made a Table hung in the Temple of Saturn, the Argument of his rare
Moralities, and Iovius and Marini, the Pourtraicts in their Galleries and
Libraries the subject of some books; I was brought to think I should not commit
a great fault, if I sent you for a ^oken, from this Mart a Scan^ling of this
Ware: which affords a like contentment to the Beholder and possessour.

The Pictures of the Roman Emperors appeared in one Plate, those of the
Bishops with the Triple Crowns in another, with those of all the Kings and
great Princes in Europe-Lucretia was showing her bleeding breast; on this Table
Flora her bewitching Twins, on that not far from these Mars is surprised by the
Lemnian, and the Senate of the Gods are all laughing; near by Jupiter is
coming down in a golden Shower in his Danaes lap. One would have wished Argos
his eyes to gaze on Hellen in the prime of her beauty, as when the Phrygian
Youth stole her away, or Theseus, in one place of the Table, and see her
distilling tears for the ruin of Troy in another. The Agamemnon of Timantes at
the sacrifice of Hermione was here to be seen. And what did surpass that in
Invention, a Painter had hidden the imperfection of the work of his Work, who
having painted a Lady which had but one eye, he had set her face so cunningly
that her one side appearing only to the view, left a desire in the Beholder,
to wish for the other, which one could not but imagine beautiful, at which she
seemed to smile. The Father of our Factions, Meonides himself, was here
represented, with closed eyes, and a long beard of the color of the Night, to
whom was the honor of Mantua adjoined, his head wreathed with Baies, his face
was somewhat long, his che^ks scarce with a small down discrying his Sex; that
they might be known after so many years, the Crafts-man had s^t down, They were
thus standing in the Roman Capitol. The Cyprian Goddess was in diverse shapes
represented. The first was naked as she appeared on the Hills of Ida, or when
she arose from her foamy Mother, but that she should not blush, the Painter had
limmed her entering a Green Arbor, and looking over her shoulder; so that there
were only seen her back and face. Another had drawn her naked, her face,
br^st^, belly to the view exposed, her blind child by her, but to cover that
which delighted Mars so much, he made her arm descend to take hold of Cupid,
who did embrace her. The third had drawn her lying on a Bed with stretched out
arms, in her hand she presented to a young man (who was adoring her, and at
whom little Love was directing a Dart) a fair face, which with much ceremony he
was receiving, but on the other side, which should have been the hinder part of
that head, was the Image of death; by which mortality he surpassed the others
more than they did him by Art. It were to be wished this picture were still
before the eyes of dolting Lovers.

On a Table there was a horse tumbling on his back with his four feet toward
the Heaven, which was thought to be Sejanus so fatal to his Masters, being so
proportionable and to the life painted, a German offered Gold for him, but he
accused the Painter that he had not painted him running: which the Painter
easily amended by turning up of the other side of the Table: so small a
distance is between the extremities of mortal things. So with little pains a
countenance laughing is made to weep, and one weeping to laugh. Whose thoughts
are so sad and fixed to the cares of this World, which could not have been
sequestrated for a time from them, and delighted with the aspect of the
countenances of the Ladies of the differing Climates of the Globe of this
Earth, represented unto us as the blazing asteri^ms of Heav^n? The Spanish
seeming proud and disdainful, but that her eye spoke somewhat else, and her
pale color ap^proaching to ashes, did show she harbored languishing
perturbations. The French looking Courteous and toward, but such courtesy and
towardness seemed not to entertain base imaginations. The English mild and
humble with such eyes as Venus used to smile with in the days of Homer. The
Venetian Lady appeared the Noblest Lover, for the neither thundered despair nor
promised hope, yet did she lend her ear to the soul-charming sounds of a Lute.
The Roman was almost naked from the waste upwards, discovering the Sistering
Apples of her Breast, and what might be, without a blush, seen, which would have
rowsed old Nestor. The Grecian resembled Our English, but that her face was
more Round; She wore on her head a Garland, which made her looks more grave
than the Others. The Turkish differed little from the Roman, only She somewhat
appeared more Thais like. The Moorish had her eyes black, rolling and wanton,
and her face was as black as her eyes. Where (who could think it, save he who
did see it?) by the comely proportion of her face* her shini^g hair enriched
with Jewels, and her ears beautified with Gemms, she was near as pleasant
(beauty mustering it self in blackness and a comely behavior) as those others
of Europe. I had almost forgotten the Belgic and these neighbor Countries, in
whom the pure natural colors of beauty appeared. The first to show the
lightness of her sex, was all in Feathers, the others differed not much from
her but was further off from Art, and looked more Countrey-like.

Not far from those was Cassandra, her hairs so covering her face that
Lycophron might well have known her. The Sybels by hersighed out their
Prophecies.

To these was joined the Picture of a yonng Lady, whose hair drew near the
color of Amber, but with such a bright luster that it was above Gold or Amber,
her eyes were somewhat green, her face round, where the Roses strove to surpass
the Lillies of her Cheecks, and such an one she was ^imm^d as Apelles would
have made choice of for the beauty of Greece. She was said to be the Astrea of
the Marquess D' Vr^ee.

Many famous battails of the ancients were represented, some of the later
times, above all others the Crafts-men had striven to show to the life the
Battle of Le Panto, the flying Turks and following Christians. Some Galliasses
made a sport to the winds, others all in flames in the midst of the Seas; the
diverse postures of fighting and perishing Soldiers with the scattered Oars,
Planks and Ensigns, might have made some dream they were amidst these though in
quietness, and one the Seas whilst they were safe on ground. Many Towns were
here to be travailed thorough at an easy rate, Rome, Napler, Florence,
Constantinople, Vienne, and without passing the Seas, London and Venice.

Here were many double Pictures, the first view show old men and young Misers
gathering carefully, the second view show young men and prodigals spending
riotously, with stultitiam patiuntur opes. Churchmen and grave Senators
consulting and seriously deliberating the one face of the Pictue represented,
the other Fools dancing, Soldiers dicing and sighting. A Lady weeping over her
dead Husband, accompanied with many Mourners, the first view, the second
represented her second Nuptials, Nymphs and Gallants revelling naked, and going
to Bed.

Now when I had considered all (for these Galleries were a little All, it ye
please) casting mine eyes a side I beheld on a fair Table the Pourtraicts of
two which drew my thoughts to more seriousness than all the other. The first
clad in a Sky-colored Mantle bordered with some red, was laughing, and held
out his finger by way of demonstration in scorn to another in a sable Mantle,
who held his arms a cross, declined his head pitifully and seemed to shed
tears. The showed that he was Democritus, the other that he was Heraclitus. And
truly considering all our actions except those which the Service and Adoration
of God Almighty, they are either to be lamented or laughed at, and man is
always a Fool, except in Misery, which is a Whit Stone of Judgment.

PARIS, Febr. 12.
To S. W. A.
SIR,
THe promise given by me to a dying friend shall at this time I hope excuse
mine importunity. He requested me to remember his love to you, and that desire
he ever had to do you service. And though dying so lively expressed this
affection that who would set it in Paper had need of his own eloquence. This
remembrance he left, made me to be in this his Executor in delivering this
Legacy. Some Papers he left also concerning some of your affairs, which
because death prevented his delivering of them to me, I think are ^oosed in the
Stuff of his Cabinet. Your absence increased greatly that Melancholy which
bereft us of him. If any thing more precious had been left to my Trust, ye
might have been assured it had been delivered to you by your

W. DRUMMOND.

To the truly Noble S. R. K. Gentleman of the Kings Bed Chamber.
SIR,
HOw ever fortune turn her Wheel I find you still your self, and so ballasted
with your own worth, that ye may out-dare any Storm. This is that Jewel which
neither change of Court, nor Climates, can rob you of; of what is yours, ye
have lost nothing. By this Quadran I have ever measured your height; neither
here could the vapors of Court make me err.

Long since I learned not to esteem of any golden Butterflies there, but as of
Counters, whose Places give them onley worth. Ye are born to act brave parts on
this Theater of the World, as your Prince is wise, so I am assured he is well
read in Man, and knows ye are not one to be lost. What know ye to what end that
Sovereign Wisdom, who has hitherto been so strong a Defense unto you, has
removed you from your Country? By this means ye may return more welcome, more
beloved, and with greater honor than when you left her. How often has plainful
means brought men to that happiness, which in their prosperity they never could
reach in their thoughts nor expect? Now since your departure I verily think all
our life to be but a Dream, and that God has placed our happiness elsewhere.
He is only miserable and wretched who holds himself such: as that man only
blessed who is content with a little. Happiness consisting neither in honor
nor riches, but in an equality and moderation of Desires. Forgive my free
writing, I have not had leisure to vail my thoughts, your Brothers departing
being so unexpected.

W. DRUMMOND.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Perth.
My Noble Lord,
AFter a long inquiry about the Arms of your Lordships ancient House, and the
turning of sundry Books of Impresaes and Herauldry, I found your UNDES famous
and very honorable.

In our neighbor Country of England they are born, but inversed upside down,
and diversified. Torquato Tasso in his Rinaldo makes mention of a Knight who
had a Rock placed in the Waves with the Word Rompe ch'il percote. And other
has the Seas waves with a Siren rising out of them, the word Bella Maria,
which is the name of some Courtezan. Antonio Perenotto, Cardinal Gravella had
for an Impresa the Sea, a Ship in it, the word Durate out of the first of the
Aeneades, Durate et vosmet rebus servate secundis. Tomaso de Marini Duca di
terranova had for his Impressa the Waves with a Sun over them, the Word Nunquam
Siccabitur astu. The Prince of Orange used for his Impresa the Waves with an
Halcyon in the midst of them, the word, Mediis tranquillus in undis, which is
rather an Emblem than Impresa because the figure is in the word. By reason of
your Lordships name and the long continuance in your House to none they
appertain more righly than to your Lordship. Drum is in the old Celtique and
British Language an Height, and Onde in all the Countries almost of Europe a
Wave; which word is said to have bin given a in Storm by Margarite Queen of
Scotland to a Gentleman who accompanied her, the first of your Lordships House.
But to make an Inquiry in sirnames were now too long.

W. Drummond.

To the truly Noble S. R. K.
COntentments are never so really Contentments as when they come after some
calamity.

Afflictions meet
And mingling with our joys make them more sweet.
After your late danger and long absence by your kindly returning to your
Country and Recovery of lossed favors, this has doubled it self: We err
often by deeming those things hurtful, which are but changes for our greater
Good; Crosses serve for many uses, and more than Magistracies decipher the Man.
Brave minds like lamps are discerned when they are canopyed with the night of
affliction: and like Rubies give the fairest luster when they are rubbed. The
sight of so many stately Towns and differing manners of Men, the conquest of
such friends abroad, and try all of these at home, the leaving of your
Remembrance so honorable to after times, have made you more happy in your
distress, than if, like another Endymyon, ye had sleeped away that swift course
of days in the embracements of your Mistress the Court. Forgive my Comparison,
for if Courts be changing Moons; why should not favorites be Endymions? I write
often unto you, for that in way of friendship I had rather be charged for
super-abundancy than defect: from him who is no more his own than by respect
and affection yours.

W. DRUMMOND.

To his much honored friend M. A. J. Physician to the KING.
IT is more praise worthy in Noble and excellent things to know something,
though little, than in mean and ignoble matters to have a perfect knowledge.
Amongst all those rare Ornaments of the mind of Man, Poesy has had a most
eminent place, and been in high esteem, not only at one time, and in one
Climate, but during all times and through those parts of the world where any
ray of humanity and civility has shined. So that she has not unworthily
deserved the name of the Mistress of humane life, the height of Eloquence, the
quintessence of knowledge, the loud Trumpet of Fame, the language of the Gods.
There is not any thing endures longer: Homers Troy has outlived many
Republikes, and both the Roman and Grecian Monarchies; she subsisteth by her
self; and after one demeaner and continuance her beauty appears to all ages.
In vain have some men of late (Transformers of every thing) consulted upon her
Reformation, and endeavored to abstract her to Metaphysical Ideas, and
Scolastical Quiddities, denuding her of her own habits, and those Ornaments
with which she has amused the world some thousand years. Poesy is not a thing
that is yet in the finding and search, or which may be otherwise found out,
being already condescended upon by all Nations, and as it were established jure
Gentium, amongst Greeks, Romans, Italians, French, Spaniards. Neither do I
think that a good Piece of Poesy, which Homer, Virgil, Ovid, Petrarch, Bartas,
Ronsard, Boscan, Garcilasso (if they were alive) and had that language, could
not understand, and reach the sense of the writer. Suppose these men could find
out some other new Idea like Poesy, it should be held as if Nature should
bring forth some new Animal, neither Man, Horse, Lion, Dog, but which had some
Members of all, if they had been proportionably and by right Symetry set
together. What is not like the Ancients and conform to those Rules which has
been agreed unto by all times, may (indeed) be something like unto Poesy, but
is no more Poesy than a Monster is a man. Monsters breed admiration at the
first, but have ever some strange loathsomness in them at last. I deny not but
a Mulet is more profitable than some Horses, yet is it neither Horse nor Ass,
and yet it is but a Mulet. There is a Tail told of a poor miserable Fellow
accused of Bestiality; and he at his Arraignment confessed, That it was not out
of any evil intention he had done it, but only to procreat a Monster, with
which (having nothing to sustain his life) he might win his bread going about
the Country. For the like cause it may be thoright these men found out their
new Poesy differing from the Matters, Manners, Rules of former ages; either
they did not see the way of Poesy or were afraid to enter it. The verses of
Camillus Quernus as they are imitated by Strada seem very plausible and to
admiration to some, but how far they are off right Poesy children may guess.
These men's new conceptions approach nearer his, than to the Majesty and
Statelinefs of the great Poets. The contempt and undervaluing of verses has
made men spare their travel in adorning them; but Poesy, as it has overcom
ignorance, at last will overcom envy and comtempt. This I have been bold to
write unto you, not to give you any instruction, but to manifest mine obedience
to your request.

W. D.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Sterlin.
WHen the pitiful news came of so dear Funerals, though I had an intention to
have written to your Lordship, I restrained my self, both because your wound
was flagrant, and that I had not an argument of comfort, which was not your
own. Nothing is now left me but to manifest that the sense of this loss could
not but perplex him grievously who never made any difference between your
fortunes and his own. I hold my self Copartner of all your Griefs as I have
been of your prosperities. I know your Fatherly affiction, I know too your
constancy, which being seasoned with piety, will not suffer you to repine at
that which is the determinate will of God. Your erudition and experience
instruct you, that such accidents should be taken in a good part, and
cheerfully, which are not incident to us alone, and which by our sighs, tears,
plaints, we may not evite and put far from us; ye must not attend till time
mitigate your languor, for this do the vulgar sort of men, with sola dies
poterit tantum lenire dolorem. A wise man should prevent and anticipate time,
overrun newborn Grief, which is an ungrateful Guest, thrusting out and ran
sacking the Masters of their Inn. I who am conscious to your patience and
wisdom, am assured ye have performed all this already, upon which confidence I
will leave off to trouble you further, or lay a heavier burden and needless
task upon my self.

W. Drummond.

To --
SHould ye think to escape this Enemy of Virtue, Fortune, when she never
spares the most Worthy? who has ever yet in many excellencies been eminent,
whom she has not either after one fashion or other, if not trampled yet
tossed? and make not a long search in the old ages of the world, and through
the Mists of Antiquity, but look upon our own Times, and our Fathers. Ye have
Sidney cropped in the vigor of his Youth by a murdering Bullet; Rawleigh
brought to a fatal Scaffold; la Nove, with the Marquess D' Urfee complaining in
miserable Prisons; Tasso famishing in the like Thraldom; the two Counts of
Mirandula Spectacles of Pity and Cruelty, the one by too soon a Death (if
death can be too soon) the other by being assassinated by his neerhst kinsemen.
As if Excellencies were the only Object of Disasters, and some secret influence
labored to make the bravest of men and the basest equal. Or that the superior
powers thought Glory to belong only to them, and no praiseworthy Actions
should befall poor Mortals. Yet should they not envy silly men a dusty honor,
which in some small moments of time vanishes, and reaches no further than the
narrow bounds of some few Climates of this small Globe of the Earth. We may
doubt whether Excellencies and Heroical Virtues were to be desired with so many
dangers and miseries lackying them, or a homebred, untaught, rude Plobeian life.

W. DRUMMOND.

To S. W. A.
SIR,
MY silence this time past proceeded no ways of any forgetfulness of you, but
from my many new cares, and sorrows. The loss of so many friends this season
has estranged me from my self, and turned my mirth into mourning; what civil
arms and discord have performed in other kingdoms of Europe, a still mortality
has done in this. So many Funerals these many years have not been seen as in
this one. There are few bands of kindred, societies, acquaintances, friendship,
which by death are not broken here, without respect of Age, vigor, rank,
quality; and justly this mortality might claim the name of Pestilence, if the
Dead were deprived of customary burial. Well have some Astrological Divines
guessed that this year should be the great Judgment. What is recorded of the
years 100. and 120. that Church yards were not ample enough to contain the dead
bodies, but that new ground was dug up, is true in this; and what of the
year 1348. that the third of mankind was sweeped from the Earth: we may say
that though this Country has not lost the third, yet that the Almighty
providence has taken away the tenth part of the People. This is (perhaps) a
part of that Judgment which the late blazing lights of Heaven did signify
unto us, the defects of the Sun, besides the malignant influences of other
Caelestial Bodies. This one year is enought to make men hereafter, if not
altogether believe, yet fear Astrological Predictions, which though they fail
in particulars, yet strangely hold true in some generals. Heavens I hope shall
preserve you ad molliora et meliora tempora; to be a witness and Recorder of
their Just Proceedings on this Globe of the Earth, for the Good of your self,
your Friends, and all that love you.

1623. W. Drummond.

The Oath of a KNIGHT.
I shall fortisie and defend the true holy Catholtque and Christian Religion
presently possessed at all my power.

I shall be loyal and true to my Sovereign Lord the King his Majesty, and do
honor and reverence to all Orders of Chivalrie and to the noble office of Arms.

I shall fortify and defend justice to the uttermost of my power, but feed or
favor.

I shall never fly from the Kings Majesty my Lord and Master, or his
Lieutenant in time of battle or medly with dishonor.

I shall defend my native Country from all aliens and strangers at all my
power.

I shall maintain and defend the honest Adoes and Quarrels of all Ladies of
Honor, Widows, Orphans, and Maids of good Fame.

I shall do diligence, wherever I hear tell there is any Traitors, Murderers,
Rovers, and Masterfull Thieves and Outlaws, that suppress the Poor, to bring
them to the Law at all my Power.

I shall maintain and defend the Noble and gallant State of Chevalrie with
Horses, Harnesses, and other Knightly Apparel to my Power.

I shall be diligent to enquire and seek to have the knowledge of all Articles
and points touching or concerning my duty contained in the Book of Chevalrie.

All and sundry the Premises I oblige me to keep and fulfill, so help me God by
my one hand, and by God himself.

To his loving Cousin
IF wishes could have place or prevail, I wish ye could be moved to separate
your self from the frequent conversation and company of that envious Gentleman,
otherwise keep your self so close and secret in your demeanor, that of your
chief and most Sovereign actions he be altogether ignorant. All other evils may
be remedied, envy excepted; which, though they have the worst that are affected
with it, yet as a plague it does hurt to all who approach it. Give me an
ambitious man, though he were of a more transcendent conceit than Pride her
self, If I render him imagined honor, praise him, use him with all due
respects, I shall in a little time turn him my friend. Place me with a
Damouret, if I cope not with him, if I praise him in the presence of his
Mistress, he will be ready to perform like duties to me. If I shall converse
with an avaritious, a little gain will win him to me: only the envious with
nothing is satisfied nor appeased, no drug can cure that plague, if thou
would amend it, it must be with thine own life. There remains no way to
make him thine, save by turning miserable, that thus he may pity thee. The
envious does not mark and observe any good in another, but fifteth only
imperfections, and setting a part conditions and qualities, which are
praiseworthy in person, turns his eyes to those few blemishes which may be
reprehended and amended. Each other Vice seems humane: Envy the Vice and Sin
of Devils. A strange gangren of a perverse mind, that others happiness should
turn it miserable.

What I have else to advertise you of, expect in my next.

W. Drummond.
December 6. 1623.
To S. M. D.
IT is much argued amongst those men, who will have a reason of every thing,
why good men ordinarily are deserted of Fortune, and many evils arise to
preferments. The first answer is, that lewd, bold men have strong fanta^ies,
and attempt upon many diverse matters, which good men by their bashfulnesse and
towardness never essay to reach. The next answer is, That lewd men suffer
themselves to be guided by nature, or the starry influences, or rather (being
Fools) give themselves over (like Beasts) to be carried by their appetites, and
the virtuous are led by reason which often contrachecketh it self, and by long
meditation and advise what to do, leaves off all doing: and suffers others
in the interim to carry the Garland; ye have spent now many years at Court, and
yet that Clock which has strock ten to others, is still pointing at one or two
to you. Have you not yet taken a distasting and Saciety of that old Mistress of
yours the Court? her long delay in preferring you tells you are too honest. Me
thinks ye should have a desire to recreate your self at last in your native
Country with the remembrances of passed Contentments at Court, as your
Kinsemen here have a longing after so long a time to see you, and unanimously
now salute you.

May 12. 1630. W. Drummond.

To his loving Friend A, Cunningham L. of Barnes.
THis is no small Misery of us Islanders that, as exiled, we can not take a
view of Gods fair and spacious Earth without crossing the stormy, braking and
deceitful Seas; And it is no less a misery here in this part of our Island,
that can hardly repair unto you demi-Islanders without dancing and tossing on
your arm of Sea; of all pastimes and exercises I like sailing worst, and had
rather attend the Hunters and Faulkoners many days, ere I sailed one half day.
It it is a part of Noah^ Judgment: If it shall be my good fortune to arrive in
your Island, prepare no Games of strength for our recreation, and after a
saciety of discourse and reading, let us not trouble our selves with any
sedentary pastimes; the Dies are for the end of a Drum amongst Soldiers, the
Tables for Goutish and apoplectick persons to make them move their joints; the
Cards for women to observe their discretion. But if we shall have a desire of
change of thoughts, let us not refuse the Chesse, the only Princely Game (next
Government) in the World, yea the true Image and Pourtraict of it, and training
of Kings. Here is a King defended, by a Lady, two Bishops, two Knights, at the
end of the Lists, with two Rooks, Fortresses, or Castles. Before those to
prepare and make plain the passages, march eight Pawns, Enfantes perdues
exposed to all desperate Services, every one standing for their Monarch. The
Deviser of this would represent unto us a game of State. First for the Bishops;
that nearest to Kings should be Eccle^ siastical grave Men, who by oblique,
traverse and mystical ways (such is their passage) should effectuate their
Masters designs and safety. Though the Knights be not always nearest to the
Kings, it falls forth that even as the Knights at Game of Chesse by their
leap, giving an Escheke to their Kings, the Kings are constrained to change
places, from which by covering and overshadowing themselves with some other
piece, in any other eschekes they may escape free and exempted. So there is no
danger in the State a King should so much fear as the revolt of his Nobles. For
the Towers or Castles named Rooks, these are the walled Towns, which serve for
a Refuge for the conservation of the Kingdom. Here is a King resembled who
marches but one pace, whilst all the other Pieces of the Chesse board put
themselves now on the offensive, then on the defensive, for his safety. To
teach Kings that it is not for them upon whose life the peace and happiness of
the whole subjects rely, to expose themselves every shock and hazard of battle,
as a Captain. Since for the safety of the King, he may make an extraordinary
leap from his own station to the station of the Rook or Tower, as to a Fortesse
holdable and impreg nable against the greatest assaults of his Enemies. The
privilege of the Lady is considerable, she may sometimes progress on the ways
of the Bishops, then on those of the Rooks or Towers, only she is hindered and
inhibited from the leap skip bound of the Knights, as a thing undecent: Though
Plato in his Republic permits women to fight. The Game is concluded with
the Mate of the King, that is a fool or madman in the Italian. If the other
pieces keep not themselves, they may, as dead, be taken and removed off the
Chesse hyphen board, but the King by loss of men loses not the victory, he may
by a hazard carry it with the meansest of his pieces, as his Army is wisely and
warily conducted. The King receives not that disgrace in imagination as that
they dream of his taking, but is enough that they bring upon him such confusion
and disarray, that blocked up and denuded of all support he cannot march to any
Hold or Station. Which brought to pass, we tell he is mated, that is, either
madman or fool. To signify what disafter so ever befall a King we should not
attempt on his person. Moreover, even in the midst and throng of all his best
pieces the mating of the King is the conclusion of the Game; which shows us
that on the preservation or overthrow of our King the overthrow or preservation
of our State depends. The recompense of the Pawns is not be forgotten. When
they can win and ascend the furthest part of the Chesse-bord on the Sunney
side, as the first which mount a breach, in this case they are surrogated in
those void Rooms of the pieces of honor, which because they suffered
themselves to be taken, were removed off the Board, which in effect is to
represent the punishment and guerdon due in a Commonwealth to good or evil
actions. The Game ended, Kings, Queens, Bishops, Knights, Pawns, peslemelled
are confusedly thrown in the box, the conclusion of all earthly actions and
greatness. If Hieronymus Vida can be found with Baptista Marini his Adone, we
shall not spare some hours of the night and day at their Chesse, for I affect
that above the other; and here have we played without a Chess-boord on paper
for a preamble to our meeting.

W. Drummond.

To his worthy Friend Master Benjamin Johnson.
SIR,
THe uncertainty of your abode was a cause of my silence this time past, I have
adventured this packet upon hopes that a man so famous cannot be in any place
either of the City or Court where he shall not be found out. In my last I sent
you a description of Lough Lomond with a map of Inch-merinoch, which may be
your Book be made most famous with the form of the Government of Edinburgh, and
the Method of the Colleges of Scotland; for all inscriptions I have been
curious to find out for you, the Impressaees and Emblemes on a Bed of State
wrought and embroidered all with gold and silk by the late Queen Mary mother to
our sacred Sovereign, which will embbellish greatly some pages of your Book,
and is worthy your remembrance; the first is the Load stone turning toward the
pole, the word her Majesty's name turned in an Anagram, Maria stuart, saverturn
attire, which is not much inferior to Veritas armats. This has reference to a
Crucifix, before which with all her Royal Ornaments she is humbled on her
knees most lively, with the word undique; an Impressa of Mary of Lorrain her
Mother, a Phoenix in flames, the word en ma fin git mon commencement. The
Impressa of an Apple Tree growing in a Thorn, the word Pervincula crescit. The
Impressa of Henry the second the Fr^nch King, a Cressant, the word, Donec totum
^impleat orbem. The Impress^ of King Francis the first, a Salamander crowned in
the midst of Flames, the word, Nutrisco et extingo. The Impressa of God^rey of
Bullogne, an row paffing throw three Birds, the word, Dederit ne viam Casusve
Densve. That of Mercurius charming Argos with his hundred eyes, expressed by
his Caduceus, two Flutes, and a Peacock, the word, Eloquium tot lamina clausit.
Two Women upon the Wheels of Fortune, the one holding a Lance, the other a
Cornucopia; which Impressa seems to glaunce at Queen Elizabeth and her self,
the word Fortunae Comites. The Impressa of the Cardinal of Lorrain her Uncle, a
Pyramide overgrown with Ivy, the vulgar word, Te stante virebo; a Ship with her
Mast broken and fallen in the Sea, the word, Nunquam nisi rectum. This is for
her self and her Son, a Big Lion and a young Whelp beside her, the word, unum
quidem, sed Leonem. An emblem of a Lion taken in a Net, and Hares wantonly
passing over him, the word, Et lepores d^victo insultant Leone. Gammomel in a
garden, the word, Fructus calcata dat amplos. A Palm Tree, the word, Ponderibus
virtus inna^a resistit. A Bird in a Cage, and a Hawk flying above* with the
word il mal me preme et me spavent a Peggio. A Triangle with a Sun in the
middle of a Circle, the word, Trino non convenit orbis. A Porcupine amongst Sea
Rocks, the word, ne volutetur. The Impressa of King Henry the eight a
Port^ulles, the word altera secu^itas. The Impressa of the Duke of Savoy, the
annunciation of the Vi^gin Mary, the word Fortitudo ejus R^odum tenuit. He had
kept the Is^ of Rhod^s, Flourishes of Arms, as Helms, Lances, Co^sl^ts, Pike^,
M^skets, Canons and the word, Dab^t Deus his quoque finem. A Tree planted iu a
Churchyard environed with dead men's bones, the word, Piet as revocabit ab
orco. Ecclipses of the Sun and the Moon, the word, Ipsa sibi lumen quod invidet
anfert; glauncing, as may appear at Queen Elizabeth. Brennos Balances a sword
cast in to weigh Gold, the word, Quid nisi Victis dolor? A Vine tree watered
with Wine, which instead to m^ke it spring and grow, mak^th it fade, the word,
Mea sic mihi prosunt. A wheel rolled from a Mountain in the Sea, Pien^ di dolor
voda de Sperenz^. Which appears to be her own, and it should be Precipitio
senz^ speranza. A heap of Wings and Feathers dispersed, the word, Magnatum
Vicinitas. A Trophie upon a Tree, with Mytres, Crowns, Hats, Masks, Swords,
Books, and a Woman with a Vail about her eyes or muffled, pointing to some
about her, with this word, Vt casus dederit.

Three Crowns, two opposite, and another above in the Sea, the word, Aliamque
moratur. The Sun in an Eclipse, the word, Medio occidet Die.

I omit the Arms of Scotland, England, and France severally by themselves, and
all quartered in many places of this Bed. The work manship is curiously done,
and above all value, and truly it may be of this Piece said Materiam superabat
opus.

I have sent you (as you desired) the Oath which the old valiant Knights of
Scotland gave, when they received the Order of Knighthood, which was done with
greater solemnity and magnificence.

W. Drummond.
July 1. 1619.
To his Worthy Friend M. A. G.
I Never found any greater folly in the actions of Men than to see some busy
themselves to understand the accidents to come of their lives; This knowledge
of things to come not revealed to us, is no ways needful for us. Wheresoever
this superstition is once received, Men are driven, and, as it were haunted
with Furies, and are deprived of all calmness, quietness and rest. I never knew
any who had recourse to those unlawful curiosities who lived the ordinary age
of man. God omnipotent removing his Grace from them gives them over to fall
under the Fate of their own fears. By the credulity and violent desire of him
who inquireth to know these things, Astrological Predictions come to pass, not
by the nature of the things themselves, which are fortuital events, and have no
natural causes, being voluntary. The mistakings and uncertainties of these
Predictions, should make us contemn them, Astrologi fingunt non docent. The
truth of Astrological Predictions is not to be referred to the constellations of
heaven, the Genethliaticks have other observations than the Stars; they
conjecture by the disposition, temper, complexion of the person, by the
physiognomy, age, parents, education, acquaintance, familiarity, conversation,
out of all which they collect many apparences, possibilities, likely hoods: and
their prophecies are referred ad Sort^em, ad Pacta, ad Prudentiam consultorum,
and stultitiam Consulentium; the sagacity of the Astrologer, the blokishnes of
the Consulter. Of Contingencies, no certain knowledge can be obtained by Art.

But all those events which Astrologers aver to come are fortuital and casual
contingents, then they cannot be learned or known by any precepts of Art. How
can a Caldean by that short minute, instant, moment of time in which a man is
born, set down the div^rse changes, mutations* accidents of his life? if we
were to consider of those things, it would appear we should not be solicitous
so much, and take notice how the air is affected at the infants coming in this
world, as we should observe and respect the matter and disposition of the whole
body, in which a greater virtue is infused, or of the time of the conception.
Then how unlikely is it, and without any s^mblance of truth, that the many
almost numberles conjunction of Stars, which occur and present themselves in the
progress of a Man's life, should match and countervail that one Horoscope or
Conjunction which is found at his birth? Moreover to find out and know the
actions of the free will of a man of what importance should we hold
nourishment, education, age, the place, his conversation, every one of which
after their own manner contributing to the constitution and complexion of the
person, how great effects must all these together produce? If that moment of
the time of birth be of such moment, whence proceeederh the great differences
of the constitutions of Twins, which though together born, have strange, diverse
and contrary ^ortunes in the progress of their lives? all that knowledge (if
there be any such?) of things contingent to which we attain by the aspects of
Stars, is uncertain frivolous and changeable. This the Devils themselves
consessed, when upon consultations of things to come for the most part they
gave doubtful and ambiguous answers. The Stars are not malignant mischeivous,
spiteful, nor by their aspects malicious, if they were such, that should be
either by election or nature. They are not by Election, for then they should
have senses and fouls, and as Animals be troubled with perturbations, and
tossed like unto us, which followe^h election. They are not malicious by
nature, since God created them, and God is not a Creator of what is evil: nor is
the framer wh^ts not good; the Heavens are all good and in every degree and
figure the divine bounty shines. Why do not Astrologers at their pleasure
procreate Kings, for they have no great labor but to choose out opportun^m
ho^rnt, and ask counsel of the fatal Stars? Had Giges, who of a servant became
a King, a kingly aspect, or Servius Tullus or that Tartar Tamerlane royal
Images and figures? Vain should all Laws be, all sentences and doom of Judges,
vain the Rewards of virtue and good men; vain the punishments of vices and
evils, if the great beginnings and Originals of them were compelled, driven and
forced, and if what is just or wrong were not in a man himself. The Thief
should not be a Thief, the Murderer a Murderer, wicked and unjust they should
not be, the one being necessitated to steel, the other to shed blood by the
Stars. Trust in the first cause God Almighty, and scorn vain Predictions. That
infinite eternal essence, though the Stars should incline, yea necessitate, and
be averse, can countermand and turn them propitious: All things turn unto the
best unto such as rely on his Eternal goodness:

W. Drummond.

A CYPRESS GROVE.
THough it has bin doubted if there be in the soul such imperious and
super-excellent power, as that it can by the vehement and earnest working of
it, deliver knowledge to another without bodily Organs and by the only
conceptions and Ideas of it produce real Effects; yet it has bin ever and of
all held as infallible and most cretain, that it often (either by out ward
inspiration, or some secret motion in it self) is augure of its own
misfortunes, and has shadows of approaching dangers presented unto it before
they fall ^orth. Hence so many strange apparitions and signs, true visions,
uncouth heaviness, and causeless uncomfortable languishings, of which to seek a
reason, unless from the sparkling of God in the Soul, or from the Godlike
sparkles of the Soul, were to make unreasonable by reasoning of things
transcending her reach.

Having often and diverse times, when I had given my self to rest in the quiet
solitariness of the Night, found my imagination troubled with a confused fear,
no, sorrow or horror, which interrupting* sleep did astonish my senses, and
rowse me all appalled, and transported in a sudden agony and amazedness; of
such an unaccustomed perturbation, not knowing, nor being able to dive into any
apparent cause, carried away with the stream of my then doubting thoughts, I
began to ascribe it to that secret foreknowledge and presaging power of the
prophetic mind, and to interpret such an Agony to be to the Spirit as a
faintness and universal weariness uses to be to the body, a sign of following
sickness, or as winter Lightnings or Earth quakes are to Common* wealths and
great Cities, Harbingers of more wretched events.

Hereupon not thinking it strange if whatsoever is human should befall me,
knowing how providence overcoms grief, and discountenances Crosses; and that as
we should not despair of evils which may happen to us, we should not be too
confident, nor lean much to those Goods we enjoy; I began to turn over in my
remembrance all that could afflict miserable Mortality, and to forecast every
thing that with a Mask of horror could show it self to humane eyes: till in the
end, as by unities and points, Mathematicians are brought to great numbers, and
huge greatne^s; after many fantastical glances of the woes of mankind, and
those encumbrances which follow upon life, I was brought to think, and with
amazement, on the last of humane terrors, or (as one termed it) the last of all
dreadful and terrible Evils, Death.

For to ea^ie censure it would appear, that the Soul, if it fore see that
divorcement which it is to have from the body, should not without great reason
be thus over-grieved, and plunged in inconsolable and unaccustomed sorrow:
considering their near union, long famil^arity and love, with the great change,
pain, unliness, which are apprehended to be the in separable attendents of
Death.

They had their being together, parts they are of one reasonable Creature, the
ha^ming of the one, is the weakening of the working of the other; what sweet
contentments does the soul enjoy by the senses? They are the Gates and Windows
of its knowledge, the Organs o^ its Delight. If it be ^edious to an excellent
player on the Lute, to abide but a few Months the want of one, how much more
the being without such noble Tools and Engines be plainful to the soul? And if
two Pilgrims which have wandered some few miles together, have a hearts-grief
when they are near to part, what must the sorrow be at the parting of two so
loving Friends and never-loathing Lovers, as are the Body and Soul?

Death is the violent estranger of acquaintance, the eternal Divorcer of
Marriage, the Ravisher of the children from the Paren^s, the S^ealer of Parents
from their children, the interr^r o^ Fame, the sole cause of forgetfulness, by
which the living talk of those gone away as o^ so many Shadows or age-worn
Stories: all strength by it is enseebled, Beauty tu^ned into deformity and
rot^enness, honor in contempt, Glory into baseness. It is the reasonless
breaker off of all Acti^ns, by which we enjoy no more the sweet pleasures of
Earth, nor gaze upon the stately revolutions of the Heavens, Sun perpetually
sets, Stars never rise unto us, It in one moment robbe^h us of what with so
great toil and care in many years we have heaped together: By this are
Successions of Linages cut short, kingdoms left heirless, and greatest States
orphaned: it is not overcome by Pride, ^mothered by Flattery, diverted by time,
Wisdom save this can prevent and help every thing. By death we are exiled
from this fair City of the World, it is no more a World unto us, nor we no more
a people unto it. The ruins of Phanes, Palaces, and other magnificent Frames,
y^eld a sad prospect to the soul, and how should it without horror view the
wrack of such a wounderful Masterpiece as is the body?

That death naturally is terrible and to be abhorred, it can not well and
altogether be denied, it being a privation of life, and a not-being, and every
privation being abhorred of nature, and evil in it self, the fear of it too
being ingenerate universally in all Creatures; yet I have often thought that
even naturally to a mind by only nature resolved and prepa^ed, it is more
terrible in conceit than in verity, and at the first Glance, than when well
pryed into, and that rather by the weakness of our fantasy, than by what is in
it, and that the marble colors, of Obsequies, Weeping, and funeral pomp (which
we our selves castover) did add much more ghast^inesse unto it than otherways
it has. To aver which conclusion, when I had gatherd my wandering thoughts I
began thus with my self.

If on the great Theater of this Earth amongst the numberless number of men, To
die were only proper to thee and thine, then und ^ubtedly thou had reason to
repine at so severe and partial a Law? but since it is a necessity, from the
which never an age bypast has been exempted, and unto which they which be,
and so many as are to come, are thralled (no consequent of life being more
common and familiar) why should it thou with unprofitable and naught availing
stubbornness, oppose to so unevitable and necessary a Condition? this is the
highway of Mortality, our general home, behold what millions have trod it
before thee, what multitudes shall after thee, with them which at that same
instant run. In so universal a calamity (if Death be one) private complaints
cannot be heard, with so many Royal Palaces, it is no loss to see thy poor
C^ban burn. Shall the heavens stay their ever-roling wheels (for what is the
motion of them but the motion of a swift and ever whirling wheel, which twineth
forth, and again uprolleth our life?) and hold still time, to prolong thy
miserable days, as if the highest of their working were to do homage unto
thee? thy death is a piece of the Order of this All, a part of the Life of this
world, for while the World is the World, some Creatures must die, and others
take life. Eternal things are raised far above this Sphere of Generation and
Corruption, where the first Matter, like an ever flowing and ebbing Sea, with
diverse waves, but the same water, keeps a restless and never tyring current;
what is below, in the universality of the kind, not in it self does abide, Man
a long line of years has continued, This man every hundred is swept away. This
Globe environed with air, is the sole Region of death, the Grave where every
thing that takes life must rott, the Stage of Fortune and Change, only
glorious in the unconstancy and varying alterations of it, which though many
seem yet to abide one, and being a certain entire one, are ever many. The never
agreeing bodies of the Elemental Brethren turn one in another, the Earth
changes her countenance with the seasons, sometimes looking cold, and naked,
other times hot and flowery: Nay, I cannot tell how, but even the lowest of
those Celestial bodies, that mother of months, and Empress of Seas and
moisture, as if she were a Mirror of our constant mutability appears (by her
too great neerness unto us) to participate of our changes, never seeing us
twice with that same face, now looking black, then pale and wan, sometimes
again in the perfection and fullness of her beauty shining over us. Death no
less than life does here act a part, the taking away of what is old, being the
making away for what is young. They which forewent us did leave a Room for us,
and should we grieve to do the same to those which should come after us? who
being suffered to see the exquisite rarities of an Antiquaries Cabinet is
grieved that the curtain he drawn and to give place to new pilgrims? and when
the Lord of this Universe has showed us the amazing wonders of his various
frame. should we take it to heart, when he thinks time, to dislodge? this is
his unalterable and unevitable Decree, as we had no part of our will in our
entrance into this l^i^e, we should not presume of any in our leaving it, but
soberly learn to will that which he wills, whose very will gives being to all
that it wills, and reverencing the Orderer, not repine at the Order and Laws,
which al-where and allwaies are so perfectly established, that who would essay
to correct and amend any of them, should either make them worse, or desire
things beyond the level of possibility.

If thou do complain that there shall be a time in the which thou shall not
be, why do thou not too grieve that there was a time in the which thou waste
not? and so that thou art not as old as that enlifening Planet of time? for not
to have been a thousand years before this moment, is as much to be deplored as
not to live a thousand after it, the effect of them both being one: that will
be after us which long long before we were, was. Ous Childrens children have
that same reason to murmur that they were not young men in our days, which we
have to complain that we shall not be old in theirs. The Violets have their
time, though they impurple not the Winter, and the Roses keep their season
though they disclose not their beauty in the Spring.

Empires, States, Kingdoms, have by the doom of the Supreme Providence their
fatal Pe^i^ds, great Citiesly sadly buried in their dust, Arts and Sciences
have not only their Ecclipses, but their wainings and deaths, the ghastly
wonders of the world, raised by the ambition of ages are overthrown and
trampled, some Lights above, not idly entitled Stars, are loosed and never more
seen of us: The excellent Fabric of this Universe it self shall one day suffer
ruin, or a change like a ruin, and poor Earthlings thus to be handled complain.

But is this Life so great a good, that the loss of it should be so dear unto
Man? if it be? the meanest Creatures of Nature thus be happy, for they live no
less than he: If it be so great a ^elicity, how is^ it esteemed of Man himself
at so small a rate, that for so poor gains, nay, one disgraceful word, he will
not stand to loose it? what excellency is there in it, for the which he should
desire it perpetual, and repi^e to be at rest, and return to his old
Grandmother Dust? of what moment are the labors and actions of it, that the
interruption and leaving off of them should be to him distastful, and with such
grudging lamentations receive?

Is not the entering into Life weakness? the continuing sorrow? in the one
here is exposed to all the injuries of the Elements, and like a condemned
trespasser (as if it were a fault to come to the light) no sooner born than
mancled and bound; in the other he is restlesly like a Ball tossed in the Tenis
Court of this World, when he is in the brightest Meridian of his glory, there
mistereth nothing to destroy him, but to let him fall his own height, a reflex
of the Sun, a blast of wind, nay, the glance of an eye, is sufficient to undo
him: How can that be any great matter, which so small instruments and slender
actions are masters of?

His body is but a mass of discording humors boiled together by the conspiring
influences of superior lights, which though agreeing for a trace of time, yet
can never be made uniform, and kept in a just proportion. To what sickness is
it subject unto, beyond those of the other creatures; no part of it being which
is not particularly infected and afflicted by some one, nay, every part with
many so that the life of diverse of the meanest creatures of nature has with
great reason, by the most wife, been preferred to the natural life of man: and
we should rather wonder how so fragil a matter should so long endure, than how
sosoon decay.

Are the actions of the most part of men, much differing from the exercise of
the Spider that pitcheth toyls and is tapist, to pray on the smaller Creatures,
and for the weaving of a scornful web evisceateth it self many days, which
when with much industry finished, a tempestuous pusse of wind carries away
both the work and the worker? or are they not like the plays of Children? or
(to hold them at their highest rate) as is a May Game, or what is more earnest,
some study at Chesse, every day we rise and lie down, apparel and disapparrel
our selves, weary our bodies and refresh them, which is a circle of idle
Travels, and labors (like penelopes task) unprofitably renewed. Some time we
are in a chase after a fading Beauty, now we feek to enlarge our bounds,
increase our treasure, feeding poorly, to purchase what we mnst leave to those
we never saw, or (happily) to a Fool, or a Prodigal heir: raised with the wind
of Ambition, we Court that idle name of Honor, not considering how they
mounted aloft in the highest ascendant of Earthly Glory, are but like tortured
Ghosts wandering with golden fetters in glistering Prisons* having fear and
danger their unseperable executioners, in the midst of multitudes rather guarded
than regarded; they whom opake imaginations and inward melancholy, have made
weary of the world, though they have withdrawn themselves from the course of
vulgar affairs, by vain contemplations, curious searches, are more disquieted,
and live a life worse than others* their wit being to sharp to give them a
taste of their present infelicity, and to increase their wo^s; while they of a
more shallow and simple conceit, have want of knowledge and ignorance of
themselves, for a remedy and antidote against all the calamities of life.

What Camelion, what Euripe, what Moon does change so often as man? he seems
not the same person, in one and the same day, what pleases him in the morning
is in the evening unto him distast^ul. Young he scorns his childish conceits,
and wading deeper in years (for years are a Sea, into which he wadeth until he
drown) he esteems his Youth Unconstancy, Rashness, Folly; Old he begins to
pity himself, plaining, because he is changed that the world is changed, like
those in a Ship, which when they launch from the shore, are brought to think
the shore does fly from them. When he is freed of evil in his own estate, he
grudges and vexes himself at the happiness and fortunes of others, he is
pressed with care for what is present, with sorrow for what is past, with fear
for what is to come, nay, for what will nev^r come, as in the eye one tear
forces out another, so makes he one sorrow follow upon a former, and every day
lay up stuff of grief for the next.

The Air, the Sea, the Fire, the Beasts, be cruel executioners of man, yet
Beasts, Fire, Sea and Air, are pittyful to man in comparison of man, for more
men are destroyed by men, than by them all. What scorns, wrongs, contumelys,
imprisonments, ^orments, poisons, receiv^th man of man? What engynes and new
works of death are daily found forth by man against man? What Laws to thrall
his liberty? fantasies and scarbugs, to inveigle his reason? Amongst the
Beasts is there any that has so servile a lot in another behalf as Man? yet
neither is content, nor he who raigne^h nor he who se^veth.

The half of our life is spent in Sleep, which has such a resemblance to
death, that often it seperats as it were the Soul from the body, and teaches
it a sort of being above it, making it soar beyond the Spear of sensual
delights, and attain Knowledge unto which while the body d^d awake it could
scarce aspire. And who would not, rather than abide chained in his loathsome
galey of the world sleep ever, (that is dye) having all things at one Stay be
free from those vexations, misadventers, contempts, indig^itys* and many many
anguishes, unto which, this life is invasseled and subdued? and when looking
unto our greatest contentment and happiness here, seems rather to consist in
the being released from misery, than in the ^njoying of any great good.

What have the most eminent of mortals to glory in? Is it Greatness? Who can be
great on so small a round as is this E^rth, and bounded with so short a course
of time? How like is that to Castles or imaginary Cities raised in the Sky by
Chance meeting Clouds? Or to Giants modelled (for a sport) of Snow, which at
the hoter looks of the Sun melt away, and ly drowned in their own moisture?
such an impetuous vicissitude towseth the estates of this World. Is it
knowledge? But we have not yet attained to a perfect understanding of the
smallest Flower, and why the Grass should rather be green than read. The
Element of Fire is quite put out, the Air is but water rarefied, the Earth
move^h, and is no more the Center of the Universe, is turned into a Magnes;
Stars are not sixed, but swim in the Etherial spaces, Comets are mounted above
the Planets, some assirm there is another world of men and creatures, with
Cities and Towers in the Moon, the Sun is lost, for it is but a cleft in the
lower heaven^, through which the light, of the high^st shines. Thus Sciences by
the diverse motions of this Globe of the brain of man are become opinions. What
is all we know, compared* with what we know not? We have not yet agreed about
the chief good and felicitye. It is (perhaps) Artificial Cunning, how many
curiosities be framed by the least Creatures of Nature, unto which the industry
of the most curious Artizanes does not again? Is it Riches? what are they but
the cas^ing out of Friends, the Snares of liberty, bands to such as have them?
poss^ssing rather, then possessed, metals which nature has hid (foreseeing the
great harm they should occasion) and the only opinion of man has brought in
estimation? like Thorns which laid on an open hand, may be blown away, and on
a closing and hard gripping, wound it, Prodigals mispend them, wretches miskeep
them: when we have gathered the greatest abundance, we our selves can enjoy no
more thereof, than so much as belongs to one man: what great and rich men do by
others* the meaner sort do themselves. Will some talk of our pleasures? it is
not (though in the fables) told out of purpose, that pleasure in have being
called up to Heaven, did here forget her apparel, which Sorrow thereafter
^inding (to deceive the world) attired her self with: And if we would say the
truth of most of our joies, we must confess that they are but disguised
sorrows; the drams of their Honey are ^owred in pounds of G^ll, remorse ever
enseweath them, nay in some they have no effect at all if some wakening grief
has not preceded and forewent them. Will some Ladies vaunt of their beauty?
that is but skin-deep, of two sen^^s only known, short even of Marble Statues
and Pictures, not the same to all eyes, dangerous to the B^holder, and hurtful
to the Possessor, an enemy to Chasti^ie* a thing made to delight others, more
than those which have it, a superficial luster hiding bones and the brains,
things fearful to be looked upon, growth in years does blaste it, or sickness,
or sorrow preventing them. Our strength matched with that of the urneasonable
Creatures, is but weakness: all we can set our eyes on, in these intricate
mazes of life, is but vain perspective and deceiving shadows, appearing far
otherwise afar off, than when injoied and gazed upon in a ne^r distance.

If death be good, why should it be feared? And if it be the wo^k of nature,
how should it not be good? for nature is an Ordinance and Rule, which God has
established in the creating this Universe (as is the Law of a king) which
cannot err. Since in him there is no impotency and weak^esse, by the which he
might bring forth what is unperfect, no perverseness of will, of which might
proceed any vicious action, no ignorance by the which he might go wrong in
working, being most powerful, most good, most wise, nay, all-wise, all-good,
all powerful; He is the first Orderer, and marshalleth every other Order, the
highest Ess^nce, giving essence to all other things, of all causes the cause,
he works powerfully, bounteously, wisely, and makes (his Artificial Organ)
nature do the same. How is not Death of Nature? since what is naturally
generate, is subject to corruption, and such an harmony (which is life) rising
from the mixture of the four Elements, which are the Ingredients of our body,
can not ever endure; the contrariety of their qualities (as a consuming Rust in
the bas^r Metals) being an inward cause of a necessary dissoution. Again, how
is not Death good? since it is the thaw of all those vanities which the frost of
life binds together* If there be a saciety in life, then must there be a
sweetness in Death? The Earth were not ample enough to contain her offspring
if none dyed: in two or three Ages (without death) what an unpleasant and
lamentable Spectacle, were the most flourishing Cities? for what should there
be to be seen in them, save bodies languishing and courbing again into the
Earth? pale disfigured faces, Skelitons instead of men? and what to be heard,
but the exclamations of the young, complaints of the old, with the pitiful
cries of sick and pining persons? there is almost no infirmity worse than age.

If there be any evil in death; it would appear to be that pain and torment,
which we apprehend to aris^ from the breaking of those strait bands which keep
the Soul and body together; which, since not without great struggling and
motion, seems to prove it self vehement and most extreme. The senses are the
only cause of pain, but before the last Trances of Death, they are so brought
under that they have no (or very little) strength, and their strength
lessening, the strength of pain too must be lessened. How should we doubt, but
the weakness of sense lesseneth pain, since we know that weakened and maimed
parts which receive not nourishment, are a great deal less sensible, than the
other parts of the body; And see that old decrepit persons leave this world
almost without pain, as in a sleep? If bodies of the most sound and wholesome
constitution be these which most vehemently feel pain? it must then follow,
that they of a distemperate and craisie constitution, have least feeling of
pain, and by this reason all weak and sick bodies should not much feel pain,
for if they were not dist^mpered and evil complexioned, they would not be sick.
That the Sight, Hearing, Taste, Smelling leave us without pain, and unawares,
we are undoubtedly assured, and why should we not think the same of the
Feeling? That which is capable of feeling, are the vital Spirits, which in a
man in a perfect health are spread and extended through the whole body, and
hence is it that the whole Body is cap^ble of pain; but in dying bodies we see
that by pauses and degrees the parts which are furthest removed from the heart,
become cold, and being deprived of natural heat, all the pain which they feel,
is that they do feel no pain. Now, even as before the sick are aware, the vital
spirits have withdrawn themselves from the whole extension of the body, to
succor the heart (like distressed Citizens which finding their walls battered
down, fly to the defense of their (ittadel) so do they abandon the heart
without any sensible touch: As the flame, the oil failing, leaves the wick, or
as light the Air, which it does invest. As to the shrinking motions, and
convulsions of sinews and members, which appear to witness great pain, let one
represent to himself the strings of an high tuned Lute, which breaking, retire
to their natural windings, or a piece of Ice* that without any outward violence
cracketh at a Thaw: No otherwise do the finews of the body; ^inding themselves
^lack and unbended from the brain, and their wonted labors and motions cease,
struggle, and seem to stir themselves, but without either pain or sense.
Swoning is a true Pourtrait of Death, or rather it is the same, being a
cessation from all action, and function of sense and life: but in Swoning there
is no pain, but a ^ilent rest, and so deep an^ (...) a sl^ep, that the natural
is nothing in compar^^on of it; wh^t great pain then can there be in death,
which is but a continued Swowning, and a never again returning to the works and
dolorous felicity of life?

Now although Death were an extreme pain, since it is in an inst^nt, what'can it
be? why should we fear it? for while we a^e, it comes not, and it being come
we are no more. Nay, though it were most painful, long continuing, and
terrible, ugly why should we ^ear it? Since fear is a foolish passion but where
it may preserve; but it cannot preserve us from Death, yea rather the fear of
it, banishing the comforts of present con^entments, makes death to advance and
approach the more near unto us. That is ever terrible which is unknown, so do
little children fear to go in the dark, and their fear is increased with tales.

But that perhaps which anguisheth thee most, is to have this glorious pageant
of the World, removed from thee, in the Spring and most delicious season of thy
life, for though to die be usual, to die young may appear extraordinary. If the
present fruition of these things be unprofitable and vain, what can a long
continuance of them be? Stranger and new Halcyon, why would thou longer nestle
admidst these unconstant and stormy Waves? Have thou not already suffered
enough of this world, but thou must yet endu^e more? To live long, is it not to
be long troubled? But number thy years which are now and thou shall find, that
whereas ten have overlived thee, thousands have not attained this age. One ye^r
is sufficient to behold all the magnificence of Nature, nay, even one day and
night for more is but the same brought again. This Sun, that Moon, these Stars,
the varying dance of the Spring, Summer, Autumn, winter, is that very same
which the golden age did see. They which have the longest time lent them to
live in, have almost no part of it at all, measuring it either by the space of
time which is past, when they were not, or by* that which is to come: why
should thou then care, whether thy days be many or few, which when prolonged
to the uttermost, prove, paralel'd with eternity, as a Tear is to the Ocean? To
die young, is to do that soon, and in some fewer days, which once thou must do;
it is the ^^ving over of a Game that after never so many hazards, must be lost.
When thou have lived to that age thou desire, (...) one of Plato's years, so
soon as the last of thy days rises ^bove thy Horizon, thou will then as now,
demand longer respit, and exspect more to come. It is Hope of long life, that
makes life seem short. Who will behold, and with the eye of advice behold the
many changes attending on humane affairs, with the after-claps of Fortune,
shall n^v^r lament to die young. Who knows what alterations and sudden
disasters, in outward estate or inward contentments* in this wildernefs of the
world, might have befallen him who dies young, if he had lived to be old?
Heaven fore-knowing imminent harms, takes those which it loves to it self
before they fall forth. Pure and (if we may so say) Virgin Souls, carry their
bodies with no small agonys, and delight not to remain long in the dregs of
humane corruption, still burning with a desire to turn back to the place of
their rest, for this world is their Inn, and not their Home. That which may
fall forth every hour, cannot fall out of time. Life is a Journey in a dusty
way, the furthest Rest is Death, in this some go more heavily burdened than
others: swift and active Pilgrims come to the end of it in the morning or at
Noon, which Tortoise^paced Wretches, clogged with the fragmentary rubbidge of
this world, s^arce with great travel cr^wl unto at Midnight. Dai^s are not to
be esteemed after the number of them, but after the goodness: more compass
makes not a Sphere more complete, but as round is a little as a large Ring;
nor is that Musician most praiseworthy who has longest played, but he in
measured accents who has made sweetest melody, to live long ^ath often been a
let to live well. Muse not how many years thou might have enjoyed life, but
now sooner thou might have lossed it, neither grudge so much that is no
better, as comfort thy self that it has been no worse: let it suffice that
thou have lived till this day, and (after the course of this world) not for
naught, thou have had some smiles of fortune, favors of the worthiest, some
friends and thou have never been disfavoured of the Heaven.

Though not for Life it self, yet that to after-worlds thou might leave some
monument that once thou wast, happily in the clear light of Reason, it would
appear that life were earnestly to be desired: for since it is denied us to live
ever (said one) let us leave some worthy Remembrance of our once here being,
and draw out this Spanne of life to the greatest length, and so far as is
possible. O poor ambi^ion? to what I pray thee may thou concreded ^t? Arches
and stately Temples, which one age does raise, does not another raze, Tombs and
adopted Pillars, ly buried with those which were in them buried: Has not
Avarice defaced, what Religion did make glorious? all that the hand of man can
uprear, is either overturned by the hand of man, or at length by standing and
continuing consumed* as if there were a secret opposition in fate, the
unevitable decr^e of the Eternal, to control our indust^y, and contercheck all
our devices and proposing. P^ssessions are not enduring, Children loose their
names, Families glorying (like Marigolds in the Sun) on the highest top of
Wealth and Honor (no better than they which are not yet born) leaving off to
be; So does Heaven confound what we endeavor by labor and art to destinguish.
That renown by Papers, which is thought to make men immortal, and which nearest
does approach the life of these eternal bodies above, how slender it is, the
very word of paper does import, and what is it when obtained, but a multitude
of words, which coming Times may scorn. How many millions never hear the names
of the most famous Writers, and amongst them to whom they are known, how few
turn over their pages, and of such as do, how many sport at their conceits,
taking the verity for a fable, and often a fable for verity, or (as we do
pleasants) use all for recreation? Then the ari^ing of more famous, does
darken, and turn ignoble the glory of the former, being held as garments worn
out of fashion. Now, when thou have attained what praise thou could desire,
and thy fame is emblazon'd in many Stories, it is but an Echo, a mere Sound, a
Glowworm, which seen afar, casts some cold beams, but approached is found
nothing, an imaginary happiness, whose good depends on the opinion of others:
Desert and Virtue for the most part want Monuments and memory, seldom are
(recorded in the Volumes of admiration, while Statues and Trophies, are erected
to those, whose names should have been buried in their dust, and folded up in
the darkest clouds of oblivion: So do the rank Weeds in this Garden of the
World choke and overrun the sweetest Flowers Applause whilst thou live,
serves but to make thee that fair mark against which Envy and Malice direct
their Arrows, at best is like that Syracusians Sphere of Crystal, as frail as
fair: and born after thy death* it may as well be ascribed, to some of those
were in the Trojan Horse, or to such as are yet to be born an hundred years
hereafter, as to thee, who nothing knows, and is of all unknown. What can it
avail thee to be talked of, whilst thou art not? Consider in what bounds our
fame is confined, how narrow the lifts are of humane Glory, and the furthest
she can stretch her wings. This Globe of the Earth which seems huge to us, in
respect of the Universe, and compared with that wide wide pavilion of Heaven,
is less than little, of no sensible quantity, and but as a point: for the
Horizon which boundeth our sight, divides the heaven as in two halfs, having
always six of the Zodiac signs above, and as many under it, which if the
Earth had any qantity compared to it, it could not do. More, it the Earth were
not as a point, the Stars could not still in all parts of it appear to us of a
like greatness, for where the Earth raised it self in Mountains, we being more
near to Heaven, they would appear to us of a greater quantity; and where it is
humbled in Valleys, we being further distant they would seem unto us l^sse; But
the stars in all parts of the Earth appearing of a like greatness, and to
every part of it the Heaven imparting to our sight the half of its inside, we
must avou^h it to be but as a point. Well did one compare it to an Ant-hill,
and men (the Inhabitants) to so many Pismires and Grasshoppers, in the toil and
variety of their diversifyed studies. Now of this small indivisible thing, thus
compared, how much is covered with Waters? how much not at all discovered? how
much unhabited and desert? and how many millions of millions are they, which
share the remnant amongst them, in languages, customs, divine rites differing,
and all almost to others unknown? But let it be granted that glory and Fame are
some great matter, and can reach Heaven it self, ^ith they are often buried with
the honored, and pass away in so fleet a revolution of time, what great good
can they have in them? How is not glory Temporal, if it increase with years and
depend on time? Then imagine me (for what cannot imagination reach unto?) one
could be famous in all times to come, and over the whole World present, yet
shall he ever be obscure and ignoble to those mighty Ones, which were only
heretofore esteemed famous amongst the Assyrians, Persians, Romans. Again the
vain aff^ctation of man is so suppressed, that though his Works abide some
space, the Worker is unknown: the huge Egyptian Pyramides, and that Grot in
Pausilipo, though they have wrestled with time* and worn upon the wast of
Days, yet are their Authors no more known, than it is known by what strange
Earthquakes, and deluges, Isles were divided from the Continent; or Hills
bursted forth of the Valleys^ Days, Months* and Years are swallowed up in the
great ^Gulf of time (which puts out the eyes of all their glory) and only a
fatal oblivion remains; of so many ages past, we may well figure to our selves
likely apparences, but can affirm little c^^^ainty.

B^t (my soul) what ailes thee to be thus backward and astonished at the
remembrance of Death, since it does not reach thee, more than darkness does
those far-shining Lamps above? Rowse thy self for shame; why should thou fear
to be without a body, since thy maker and the spiritual and super-celestial
Inhabitants have no bodies? Ha^t thou ever seen any Prison^r, who when the
(...) Ga^es were broken up, and he enfranchised and set loose* would rather
plain and sit still on his Fetters, than seek his freed^m? or any Mariner, who
in the midst of Storms arriving near the Shore, would launch forth again unto
the Main, rather than strike Sail and joyfully enter the leas of a safe
Harbor? If thou rightly know thy self, thou have but small cause of anguish;
for if there be any resemblance, of that which is infinite, in what is finite
(which yet by an infinite imperfection is from it dist^nt) if thou be not an
Image, thou art a shadow of that unsearch^b^e Trinity, in thy three essential
Powers, Understanding, Will, Memory, which though three, are in thee but one,
and abiding one, are distinctly three: But in nothing more come thou near
that Sovereign Good, than by thy perpetuity, which who strive to improve, by
that same do it prove: Like those that by arguing themselves to be without
reason, by the very arguing, show how they have some. For, how can what is
wholly mortal, more know what is immortal, than the eye can know sounds, or the
ear question about colors; if one had eyes, who would ever descant of light or
Sorrow? To thee nothing in this visible World is comparable; thou art so
wounderful a beauty and so beautiful a wonder, that if but once thou could be
gazed upon by bodily eyes, every heart would be inflamed with thy love, and
ravished from all servile baseness and earthly desires. Thy being depends not
on matter, hence by thine understanding, do thou dive into the being of
every other thing; and therein art so pregnant that nothing by place,
similitude, subject, time, is so conjoined, which thou can not separate; as
what neither is, nor any ways can exist, thou can fain, and give an abstract
being unto. Thou seem a World in thy self. containing Heaven, Stars, Seas,
Earth, Floods, Mountains, Forests, and all that lives: yet rests thou not
satiate with what is in thy self, nor with all in the wide Universe, until
thou raise thy self, to the contemplation of that first illuminating
Intelligence, far above time, and even reaching Eternity it self, into which
thou art transformed, for by receiving thou (beyond all other things) art made
that which thou receivest. The more thou know, the more apt thou art to
know, not being amated with any object that excels in predo^inance* as sense
by objects sensible. Thy Will is uncompellable, resisting force, ^aunting
Necessity, despising D^nger, triumphing over affliction, unmoved by pity, and
not constrained by all the toyls and disasters of life* What the Arts ^master
of this Universe is in governing this Universe, thou art in the body; and as he
is wholly in every part of it, so art thou wholly in every part of the body. By
thee man is that Hymen of e^ernal and mortal things, that chain together
binding unbodied and bodily substances, without which the goodly Fabric of
this World were unperfect. Thou have not thy beginning from the fecundity,
power, nor action of the elemental qualities, being an immediate master piece
of that great Maker. Hence have thou the forms and figures of all things
imprinted in thee from thy first Original. Thou only at once art capable of
contraries, of the three parts of time, thou make but one. Thou know thy
self so separate, absolute and diverse an essence from thy body, that thou
dispossessed of it as it pleases thee, for in thee there is no passion so weak
which mastereth not the fear of leaving it. Thou should be so far from
repining at this separation, that it should be the chief of thy desires; ^ith
it is the passage and means to attain thy perfection and happiness. Thou art
here but as an infected and leprous Inn, plunged in a flood of humors,
oppressed with cares, suppressed with ignorance, defiled and destained with
vice* retrograde in the course of virtue; small things seem here great unto
thee* and great things small, folly appears wisdom, and wisdom folly.
Freed of thy fleshly care, thou shall rightly discern the beauty of thy self,
and have perfect frui^ion of that all-sufficient and all-sufficing Happiness,
which is GOD himself; to whom thou owe thy being, to him thou owe thy well
being, he and happiness are the same. For, if GOD had not happiness, ^e were
not GOD, because Happiness is the highest and greatest good: If then GOD have
happiness, it cannot be a thing differing from him; for if there were any
thing in Him, differing from him, he should be an essence composed and not
simple, more what is differing in any thing, is either an accident or a part of
it self: In GOD Happiness can not be an accident, because he is not subject to
any accidents, if it were a part of Him (since the part is before the whole) we
should be forced to grant, that some thing was before God. Bedded and bathed in
these earthly, ordures thou can not come near this Sovereign Good, nor have
any glimpse of the afar-off dawning of his uncessable brightness, no, not so
much as the eyes of the Birds of the Night have of the Sun. Think then by
death, that thy shell is broken, and thou then but even ha^ched, that thou art
a Pearl, raised from thy Mother, to be enchaced in Gold, and that the death day
of thy body, is thy birthday to Eternity.

Why should thou be fear-stroken, and discom^orted, for thy parting from this
mortal Bride thy body, since it is but for a time, and such a time, as she
shall not care for, not feel any thing in, nor thou have much need of her? Nay,
since thou shall receive her again* more goodly and beautiful, than when in her
fullest perfection thou enjoied her; being by her absence made like unto that
Indian Crystal, which after some revolutions of ages, is turned into purest
Diamond. If the Soul be thee Form of the Body, and the form separated from the
Matter of it, cannot ever so continue, but is inclined and disposed to be
reunited thereinto: What can let and hinder this desire, but that some time it
be accomplished, and obtaining the expected end, rejoin it self again unto the
Body? The Soul separate has a desire, because it has a will, and knows it
shall by this reunion receive perfection: too as the matter is disposed, and
inclines to its form when it is without it, so would it seem that the Form
should be toward its matter in the absence of it. How, is not the Soul the
form of the body, since by it, it is, and is the beginning and cause of all the
actions and functions of it. For, though in excellency it pass every other
form, yet does not that excellency take from it the nature of a form? If the
abiding of the Soul from the body be violent, then can it not be everlasting,
but have a regress: How is not such an estate of being and abiding not violent
to the Soul, if it be natural to it, to be in matter, and (separate) after a
strange manner, many of the powers and facul^ies, of it (which never leave it)
are not duly exercised? This Union feemeth not above the Horizon of natural
Reason, far less impossible to be done by God, and though Reason c^nnot
evidently here demonstrate, yet has she a misty and groping notice. If the
body shall not arise, how can ^he only and Sovereign Good, be perfectly and
infinitely good? For, how shall he be just nay, have so much justice ^s Man, if
he suffer the evil and vicious, to have a more pro^perous and happy life, than
the followers of Religion and Virtue; which ordinarily uses to fall ^orth in
this life? For, (...) most wicked are Lords and Gods of this Earth, sleeping ^n
the lee port of honor, as if the spacious habitation o^ ^he World had been
made only for them; and the virtuous and good, are but forlorn cast-awaies,
floting in the surges of distress, seeming here either of the eye of providence
not pitied, or not regarded: being subject to all dishonors, wrongs, wracks,
in their best estate, passing away their days (like the Dazies in the field)
in silence and contempt. Since then he is most good, most just, of necessity
ther^ must be appointed by him another time and place of retribution, in the
which there shall be a reward for living well, and a punishment for doing evil,
with a life where into both shall receive their due; and not only in their
Souls divested, for, since both ^he parts of man did act a part in the right or
wrong, it carri^th great reason with it, that they both be a^raigned before
that ^igh justice, to r^c^ive their own: Man is not a Soul only, but a Soul
and body, to which ^ither guerdon or punishment is due. This seems to be the
voice of Nature in almost all the Religions of the world; this is that general
testimony, charactered in the minds of the most barbarous and savage people;
for, all have had some rovi^g ges^es at ages to come, and a dim duskish light
of another life, all appealing to one general Judgment Throne. To what else
could serve so many expiations, sacrific^s* prayers, solemnities, and mystical
Ceremonies? To what such sumptuous T^mples, and care of the Dead? to what all
Religion? If not to show that they expected a more excellent m^nner of being,
after the navigation of this life did take a^ end. And who does deny it, must
deny that there is a Providence, a God, confess that his worship, and all study
and reason of virtue are vain; and not believ that there is a world, are
creatures, and that He himself is not what He is*

As those Images were pourtraicted in my mind (the morning Star now almost
arising in the East) I found my thoughts mild and quiet calm; and not long
after, my fenses one by one forgetting their uses, began to give themselves
over to rest, l^aving mein a still and peaceable sleep; if sleep it may be
called, where the mind awaking is carried with free wings from ou^ fl^shly
bondage? For heavy lids had not long cov^red their lights, when I thought, nay,
sure I was where I might difcern all in this great All, the large compass of
the rolling Circles, the brightness and continual motion of those Rubies of the
Night, which (by their distance) he^e below cannot be perceived; the silver
countenance of the wandering Moon* shining by another light, the hanging of the
Earth as (environed with a girdle of Crystal) the Sun enthronized in the midst
of the Planets, eye of the Heavens* Gem of this precious Ring the World. But
whilst with wonder and amazement I gazed on those Celestial splendors, and the
beaming Lamps of that glorious Temple, there was presented to my sight a Man,
as in the Spring of his years, with that self same grace, comely feature,
Majestic look which the late () was wont to have; on whom I had no sooner set
mine eyes, when (like one Planet-stroken) I become amazed: But he with a mild
demeanor, and voice surpassing all humane sweetness, appeared (me thought) to
say;

What is it does thus anguish and trouble thee? Is it the remembrance of Death,
the last Period of Wretchedness, and entry to these happy places; the Lantern
which lightneth men to see the mystery of the blessedness of Spirits, and that
glory which transcendeth the Courtain of things visible? Is thy Fortune below
on that dark Globe (which scarce by the smalnesse of it appears h^re) so
great, that thou art heart broken and dejected to leave it? What if thou were
to leave behind thee a ( --) so glorious in the eye of the World (yet but a
Mote of Dust encircled with a Pond) as that of mine, so loving ( --) such great
hopes, these had been apparent occasions of lamenting, and but apparent? Do
thou think thou leavest Life too soon? death is, best young; things fair and
^xcellent, are not of long endurance upon Earth. Who ^iveth well lives long.
Souls most beloved of their Maker, are soonest relieved from the bleeding cares
of Life, and most swift^y wafted through the Surges of Humane miseries. Opinion
that Great Enchantresse and peiser of things, not as they are but as they seem,
has not in any thing more, than in the conceit of Death abused man: Who must
not measure himself, and esteem his estate, after his earthly being, which is
but as a dream: For, though he ^e borne on the Earth, he is not born for the
Earth, more than the Embryon for the Mothers Womb. It Plaineth to be delivered
of its bands, and to come to the light of thi^ World; and Man waileth to be
loosed from the Chains with which he is fettered in that valley of vanities.
It nothing knows whither it is to go, nor ought of the beauty of the visible
works of God, neither does man of the magnificence of the Intellectual World
above, unto which (as by a Midwife) he is directed by Death. Fools, which
think that this fair and admirable Frame, so variously disposed, so rightly
marshalled, so strongly maintained, enriched with so many excellencies, not
only for necessity, but for ornament and delight, was by that Supreme wisdom
brought forth, that all things in a circulary course, should be and not be,
arise and dissolve, and thus continue: as if they were so many Shadows cast
out and caused by the encountering of these Superior Celestial bodies, cha^ging
only their fashion and shape, or Fantastical Imageries, or prints of faces
into Crystal. No no, the Eternal Wisdom has made man an excellent creature,
though he fain would unmake himself, and return to nothing: And though he seek
his ^elicity among the reasonless Wights, he has fixed it above. Look how some
Prince or great King on the Earth, when he has raised any Stately City, the
work being achieved, is wont to set his Image in the midst of it, to be
admired and gazed upon: No otherwise did the Sovereign of this All, the Fabric
of it perfected, place man (a great Miracle) formed to his own pattern, in the
midst of this spacious and admirable City. God contains all in him as the
beginning of all; man contains all in him as the midst of all; inferior
things be in man more noble than they exist; superior things more meanly;
Celestial things favor him, earthly things are vassalled unto him, he is the
band of both; neither is it possible but that both of them have peace with him,
who made the Covenant between them and him? He was made that he might in the
Glass of the world behold the infinite Goodness, Power and glory of his
Maker, and beholding know and knowing Love, and loving enjoy, and to hold the
Earth of him as of his Lord Paramount; never ceasing to remember and praise
Him. It exceeds the compass of conceit, to think that that wisdom which
made every thing so orderly in the parts, should make a confusion in the whole,
and the chief Masterpiece; how bringing forth so many ^xcellencies for man, it
should bring forth man for baseness and misery. And no less strange were it,
that so long life should be given to Trees, Beasts, and the Birds of the Air,
Creatures inferior to Man, which have less use of it, and which cannot judge
of this goodly Fabric, and that it should not be denied to Man: unless there
were another manner of living prepared for him, in a place more noble and
excellent.

But alas! (said I) had it not been better that for the good of his native
Country a () endued with so many peerlesse gifts, had yet lived? How long will
ye (replied he) like the Ants, think there are no fairer Palaces, than their
Hills; or like to purblind Moles, no greater light, than that little which they
shun? As if the Master o^ a Camp, knew when to remove a Sentinel, and he who
places Man on the Earth, knew not how long he had need of him? Every one
comes there to act his part of this Tragi-Comedie, called life, which done,
the Courtain is drawn, and ^e removing is said to die. That Providence which
prescribes Causes to every event has not only determined a definite and
certain number of days, but of actions to all men, which they cannot go beyond.

Most () then answered I, Death is not such an evil and pain, as it is of the
Vulgar esteemed? Death said he) nor painful is, nor evil (except in
contemplation of the cause) being of it self as indifferent as birth: yet can
it not be denied, and amidst those dreams of earthly pleasures, the
uncouthnesse of it, with the wrong apprehension of what is unknown in it, are
noysom. But the Soul sustained by its Maker, resolved, and calmly retired in it
self, does find that death (since it is in a moment of Time) is but a short,
nay, sweet sigh; and is not worthy the remembrance compared with the smallest
dramm of the infinite Felicity of this Place. Here is the Palace Royal of the
Almighty King, in which the uncomprehensible comprehensibly manifests
Himself; in place highest, in substance not subject to any corruption or
change, for it is above all motion, and solid turns not; in quantity
greatest, for, if one Star, one Sphere be so vast, how large, how huge in
exceeding demensions, must those bounds be, which do them all contain? In
quality most pure and orient, Heaven here is all but a Sun, or the Sun all
but a Heaven. If to Earthlings the Footstool of God, and that Stage which he
raised for a small course of Time, seems so glorious and magnificent; What
estimation would they make, if they could see, of his eternal Habitation and
Throne? and if these be so wonderful, what is the fight of him, for whom and by
whom all was created; of whose Glory to behold the thousand thousand part, the
most pure Intelligencies are fully satiate, and with wonder and delight rest
amazed, for the beauty of his light, and the light of His beauty are
uncomprehensible? Here does that earnest appetite of the understanding content
it self, not seeking to know any more; For it sees before it, in the vision of
the Divine essence (a Miroir in the which not Images or shadows, but the true
and perfect essence of every thing created* is more clear and conspicuous, than
in it self) all that may be known or understood. Here does the Will pause it
self, as in the center of its Eternal rest, glowing with a fiery affection of
that infinite and all-sufficient good; which being fully known, cannot for the
infinite motives and causes of love which are in him) but be fully and
perfectly loved: As he is only the true and essential Bounty, so is he the
only essential and true beauty, deserving alone all Love and Admiration, by
which the Creatures are only in so much fair and excellent, as they
par^icipate of his Beauty and excelling Excellencies. Here is a blessed
Company, every one joying as much in another Felicity, as in that which is
proper, because each seeeth another equaly loved of God; thus their distinct
joys are no fewer, than the copartners of the Joy. And as the Assembly is in
number answerable to the large capacity of the place, so are the joys
answerable to the numberless number of the Assembly. No poor and pi^tiful
mortal* confined on the Globe of Earth, who has never seen bu^ so^row, or
interchangeably some painted superficial pleasures, can righly think on, or be
sufficient to conceive the termless delights of this place. So many Feathers
move not on Birds, so many Birds dint not the Air, so many leaves tremble not
on Trees, so many Trees grow not in the solitary Forests, so many waves turn
not in the Ocean, and so many grains of Sand limit not those Waves: as this
triumphant Court has variety of delights, and Joies exemp^ed from all
comparison. Happiness at once here is ^ully known and fully enjoyed, and as
infinite in con^inuance as extent. Here is flourishing and never-fading youth
without Age, Strength without Weakness, Beauty never blasting, Knowledge
without Learning, Abundance without Loathing, Peace without Disturbance,
Particip^tion without Envy, Rest without Labor, Light without rifing or
setting Sun* Perpetuity without moments, for Time (which is the measure of
Endurance) did never enter in this shining Eternity. Ambition, Disdain, Malice,
Difference of Opinions, cannot approach this place, and resembling those foggy
Mists, which cover those Lists of Sublunary things. All pleasure paragon'd with
what is here is pain, all Mirth mourning, all Beauty deformity. Here one days
abiding, is above the continuing in the most fortunate estate on the Earth many
years, and sufficient to countervail the extremest torments of Life. But,
although this bliss of Souls be great, and their joies many, yet shall they
admit addition, and be more full and perfect, at that long wished and general
meeting with their bodies.

Amongst all the wonders of the great Creator, not one appears to be more
wounderful (replied I) than that our Bodies should arise, having suffered so
many changes, and nature denying a return from privation to a Habit.

Such power (said he) being above all that the Understanding of Man can
conceave, may well work such wonders; For if Man's Understanding could
comprehend all the secrets and counsels of that Eternal Majesty, it must of
necessity be equal unto it. The Author of Nature is not thralled to the Laws
of Nature, but works with them or contrary to them* as it pleases him: What
he has a will to do, he has a power to perform. To that power which brought
all this All from naught, to bring again in one instant any substance which
ever was into it, unto what it was once, should not be thought impossible; for
who can do more can do less, and his power is no less after that which was by
him brought forth is deca^ed and vanished, than it was before it was produced;
being neither restrained to certain limits, or instruments, or to any
determinate and definite manner of working; where the power is without
restraint, the work admits no other limits, than the Workers will. This
world is as a Cabinet to God, in which the small things (however to us hid and
secret) are nothing less kept than the great. For, as he was wife and powerful
to creat, so does his knowledge comprehend his own Creation; yea every change
and varity in it, of which it is the very Source. Not any Atom of the scattered
Dust of mankind, though daily flowing under new forms, is to him unknown: and
his knowledge does distinguish and discern* what once his power shall waken and
raise up. Why may not the Arts-Master of the world, like a Molder, what he has
framed in diverse shapes, confound in one mass, and then severally fashion them
out of the same? Can the Spargirick by his Art restore for a space to the dry
and withered Rose, the natural purple and bluth; and cannot the Almighty r^ise
and refine the body of man, after never so many alterations on the Earth?
Reason her self finds it more possible for infinite power to cast out from it
self a finit world, and restore any thing in it; though decayed and dissolved,
to what it was first; than for man, a finit piece of reasonable misery, to
change the form of matter made to his hand; the power of God never brought
forth all that it can* for then were it bounded, and no more infinite. That time
does approach (O have ye times away) in which the dead shall live, and the
living be changed, and of all actions the Guerdon is at hand; then shall there
^e an end without an end, time shall finish, and place shall be altered, motion
yielding unto rest, and another world of an age eternal and unchangeable shall
arise; which when he had said (me thought) he vanished, and I all astonished
did awake.

To the Memory of the most Excellent Lady, JANE Countess of PERTH.
THis Beauty which Pale death in dust did turn,
And closed so soon within a Coffin sad,
Did, pass like Lightning, like to T hunder burn;
So little Life, so much of Worth it Had.
Heavens b^t to show their Might here made it shine,
And when admired, then in the Worlds, disdain
(O Tears, O Grief!) did call it back again,
Lest Earth should va^ut she kept what was Divine.
What can we hope for more? What more enjoy?
Since ^^irest Things thus soonest have their End,
And, as on Bodies shadows do attend,
Since all our bliss is followed with Annoy?
Yet she is not dead, she lives where she did love,
Her Memory on Earth, Her soul above.
To S. W. A.
THough I have twice been at the Doors of Death,
And twice found shut those Gates which ever mourn,
This but a lightning is, Truce taken to Breath,
For late-born Sorrows augurre fteet return.
Amidst thy sacred Cares, and Courtly toils,
Alexis, when thou shall hear wandering Fam^
Tell, Death bath triumphed over my mortal spoils,
And that on Earth I am but a sad Name;
If thou e're held me clear, by all our Love,
By all that Bliss, those Joys Heaven here us gave,
I conjure thee, and by the Maids of Jove,
To grave this short Remembrance on my Grave*
Here Damon lies, whose Songs did sometime grace
The murmuring Esk, may roses shade the Place.
On the Report of the Death of the Author.
I^ that were true which whispered is by Fame,
That Damons light no more on Earth does burn,
His Part on Phoebus physic would disclaim.
And clothed in clouds as erst for Ph^eton mourn.
Yea, Fame by this had got so deep a wound,
That scarce She could have power to tell his death,
Her Wings cut short; who could her Trumpet sound,
Whose blaze of late was nursed but by his Breath.
That Spirit of his which most with mine was free,
By mutual traffic enterchanging store,
If chased from him it would have come to me,
Where it so ost familiar was before.
Some secret Grief distempring first my Mind,
Had (though not knowing) made me feel this loss;
A Sympathy had so our Souls combind,
That such a parting both at once would toss.
Though such Reports to others terror give,
Thy Heavenly Virtnes who did never spy,
I know thou, that can make the dead to live,
Immortal art, and needs not fear to dye.
Sir WILL. ALEXANDER.
FINIS.

