THE Drunkard Forewarned, AND THE SWEARER CAUTIONED, IN A LATE JUDGMENT On the
Body of Dowee Sitses: Sent in a LETTER from Theodorus Paludamus Public
Preacher at Lewarden in Frizeland, to the Lady Habuerin.

Published for the Information of some, and Premonition to others, to Lead a
more Pious Life.

LONDON, Printed for William Sceates in Three-Diamond-Court in Hosier*Lane.
1682.

A True Copy of a Letter from Theodorus Paludamus, Public Preacher at Lewarden
in Frizeland, to the Lady Habuerin.
THe business of Dowee Sitses Mason of Bolsworth, was after this manner: I and
others at Lewarden hearing the Reports mixed with many Fabulous things, gave
little Credit to it: Whereupon the other day the Lord Procuror-general (to whom
I am Uncle) came to me, and told me, he had an Order from the Lords of the
Provincial-Court, to go and take an Information of the matter; and desired me
for the Strangeness thereof to go along with him, that we might be Eye
Witnesses thereof: I did willingly take hold of the opportunity offered me; we
came there in the Evening, and in the Morning, when the Patient was to be
Dressed, we went to him, where we found two Master Chyrurgions, and their two
Servants, busy in making Plasters and Dressing the Patient, and he in such a
Lamentable Condition, as we could not behold but with Amazement; his Hair Burnt
off his Head to his Ears; his whole Face Burnt except his Eyes, which were
scarce hurt; his Arms Burnt in several places; his Hands to the very end of
his Fingers, were like a Foot of a Roasted Fowl, but could move all his
Fingers; his Breast Burnt in several places, and also his Back, but one side
more than the other, though the Chyrurgions declared that his Shirt was whole;
His Belly under the Navel, for about the breadth of a Hand, was as Black as a
Stock in which place the Chyrurgions made several Incisions, and he felt it
not; his Privities were in like manner: My Lady, you must forgive me, that I
Write thus Homely; only am minded to give your Ladyship a perfect Account of
the matter. Further, his Hips, Thighs and Legs were Lamentably Burnt, although
his Stockings were on and Tied; when the Chyrurgions came to him, and one
Stocking was whole, except a little Hole in the Calf, but that Leg was most
Burnt; the Chyrurgions declared also that his Shirt Sleeves were whole; his
Feet also were Burnt. And in short, I know not one part of him that was free; I
looked narrowly into all, and a Loathsome and Lamentable sight it was. I went
to the Woman Hoyck Ankies, who gave me a substantial Account of all the
circumstances, and also her Husband; the Patient also after he was Dressed, and
had layna while and got a little Breath, gave us a full Account of the
Passages, with whom I willingly spoke, partly for the stirring up of his Soul,
and partly to have a certain Testimony of things concerning him, though it was
hard for him to speak by reason of his weakness; all which Information the Lord
Procuror-general took upon Oath from the Patient himself, from his Wife, and
the Chyrurgions, and all agreed as one person in the Relation.

The thing was thus, upon the 15/25 of June last at Evening, this Dowee Sitses
came Drunk into the House of Ruward Ipes Wigersure, a Tavernkeeper, where he
with the man of the House, and one Albert Roloofes, Drank 3 Quarts of Wine: And
about half an Hour past Ten, his Daughter-in-Law came to call him, and he went
home with her; and his Wife and he having been several days fallen out, he went
into the Kitchen and lay down to Sleep upon the Cushions, and fell in a Dream
about a Story he had Read in a Book of Simon De Vries, of a certain Company
that had Danced in Masquerade, with every one a Lighted Torch in their Hand,
wherewith they Burnt one another; whereupon he waked and stood up, thinking to
go into the Yard to make Water, and of a sudden he found himself of a
Light-flame in the midst of the Room, which Burnt him and a great part of his
Clothes so Lamentably, without seeing or hearing any thing but the Flame: While
this Burning lasted he cried out for help, but none came; then he began to
Faint, and in his Distress cried out, Oh! God be Gracious unto me a poor
Sinner, and thereupon the Flame ceased in the twinkling of an Eye; but he grew
Fainter and Fainter, and laid his Head upon a Cushion in a Corner of the
Kitchen.

About Two in the Morning his Wife looked through a Glass-Window to see for her
Husband, but being dark she could not see him; she opened the Door and went
into the Kitchen, where she found him in this miserable Condition, and as she
went, she felt something under her Feet, which after she got a Light, she found
to be a Parcel of Redashes, and Burnt-Rags, and Steping to her Husband, she
took hold of his Sleeve, and had only a Burnt piece thereof in her hand;
whereupon she cries out, Oh Lord! Dowee, Thou art grievously Burnt: He
Answered, The Devil has brought me into this Case: She being amazed, called in
the Neighbors, who were all astonished, and brought the Chyrurgions, etc.

He had a Bombazine-Coat with Brass-Buttons, which is quite Burnt up, Buttons
and all, and nothing of it can be found; the Tin Buttons of his Wastcoat are
Melted, and lay there in little crooked bits and pieces upon the Floor: I had
four or five pieces of them, I preserved two of them, and gave the Lord
Procuror-general the other. I was in the Kitchen, and in the midst of the Floor
where he stood; there are several of the Pavements as black as a Hearth that
had Fire kept a good while upon it; but though the Kitchen was very Low, there
was nothing to be seen of the Fire, one Cushion where he had lain, had a little
Hole Burnt in it; the Neighbors found the Fire on the Hearth well covered up,
and lay with White Ashes on it; the Ashes that lay on the Floor were Red, which
might come off of his Coat that was Burnt. One of the Chyrurgions finding him
thus Burnt, and that in an Unburnt Shirt and Stockins; said to him, This is no
Natural Fire; to which he Answered, Without doubt it was not.

His Wife said, she had caused their Ministers to reprove him for his
Drunkenness, but it had been in vain; so that the saying of Solomon is made
true in him, A man that is often Reproved and hardens his Neck, shall suddenly
be broken, and there shall be no Healing. His Wife said also, that he had been
very much given to Drink Brandy and other Strong Liquor, and that he had often
with Oaths bound himself from it, yet fell into it again; his manner of words
were, That if he were Drunk again with it, he wished the Devil might Tear him
Limb from Limb: So that God has made use of the Devil as an Executioner of his
Judgment to bring the miserable man's own Curse upon him, not one Limb or Member
is left whole upon him.

Surely it is a fearful Judgment of God, by which all Drunkards, Cursers, and
all Ungodly men may see much: What it was that did it I cannot tell, for the
Fire on the Hearth was safe covered; Lightning there was none in the Country
that night; Brandy could not burn his Clothes, so God knows how it came, we
may wonder at it, but cannot find any Natural Cause. So I have given your
Ladyship an Account of the Circumstances in Answer to your desire, according to
my Ability, and commit you to Gods Grace, wishing you all manner of Health and
Blessings, and am your Servant in the Lord,

Theodorus Paludamus Eccles. Lewarden.


