A SYNOPSIS OF QUAKERISM: OR, A Collection of the Fundamental ERRORS of the
QUAKERS: Whereof these are a Taste, Viz. 1. That there are not Three Persons in
the Godhead. 2. That Christ did not make Satisfaction for the Sin of Man. 3.
That Justification is not by imputed Righteousness. 4. That our good Works, are
the Meritorious Cause of our Justification. 5. That a State of Freedom from
Sin, is attainable in this Life. 6. That there is a Light in every Man,
sufficient to guide him to Salvation. 7. That the Scripture is not the Word of
God, nor a standing Rule of Faith and Life. 8. That there is no Resurrection of
the Body. 9. That there is no need nor use of Ordinances, Baptism, Lords
Supper, etc.
Collected out of their Printed Books. With a Brief Refutation of their most
material Arguments, (and particularly, W. Pens, in his late Sandy Foundation
Shaken) and an Essay toward the Establishment of private Christians, in the
Truths opposed by those Errors. By Tho. Danson, sometime Minister of the
Gospel at Sandwich in Kent.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1668.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THe late daring Pamphlet of W. P^n, Entitled, The Sandy Foundation Shaken,
wherein he has attempted (but with too Feeble an hand) to shake the Rock,
Christ Jesus in his Godhead, and Offices, has occasioned this Vndertakement.
Seeing God had left him to himself so far, as openly to vilify Three Grand
Truths, I judge it not amiss, to take this opportunity to mind the World, how
well he has Imitated the Leaders of his Party, in their respects to other like
Truths, that so the Christians of these Parts, may no longer be Imposed upon by
the Quakers seeming Innocence. The most referd civil Heathens were given over
to the most Fond and Beastly Errors, about the Nature of God. It was observed
of many of our English Heretics in Queen Elizabeth's days, that they were
Charitably Devout: And you know many that look well in the Face, have their
Inwards Tainted and Decayed. I presume Reader, thou have Read over the
Frontispiece of this Book, and then tell me what you think; Do those Principles
sound like Christian Doctrine? Do you not think your Heart would give your
Tongue the Lie, if (for fear of seeming riged) you should venture to sa^ of the
Teachers of those Doctrines; These are the Servants of the most High God, who
show unto us the way of Salvation, Acts 16. 17. Why then take heed how thou
harkenest unto them, unless thou art unconcerned in thy self, and art
indifferent whither Salvation or Damnation fall to thy share. I am prevented in
a serious Representation, of the danger of these Errors, by the Pains of my
Worthy Friend, Mr. Tho. Vincent. The mention of whose name, puts me in mind of
a Query, thou may make about my Answer to Pens Arguments, why I do actum
agere? The Answer is, I was Engaged in a little Conference with the said Pen,
and he has made some Reflections upon me, in the same Piece, which are not to
be wholly neglected: Again, Experience has shown, that there is a great
difference in Intellectval Gusts.

The Method, Phrafe, Notions of scarce any one man, are acceptable to all.

And a President is at hand. Biddles 12. Arguments against the Holy Ghost's
Deity, were first answered by the Learned Estwick and then by the Learned Pool,
and both to good purpose, and I hope not without success.

And if any Quaker shall demand, why I do not answer Sam. Fishers Book, against
me, instead of Writing against a new Man; I answer, that I am guided in my
Neglect by the Judgment of ubler Persons than my self, that that Book is but a
bundle of Impertinent Cavils, and none of my Arguments is shaken by his
Batteries and that to answer it, were but Horas bonas male collocare, to spend
time with Domitian, in catching of Flies. I shall only leave two words of
Advice with thee, and so we will part.

1. Be at some pains, to understand the positive Grounds, of the great Truths,
opposed by the Quakers. Remember that Wisdom is Silver, and a Treasure; not
only for its Excellency, but also for the difficulty of Attainment, Prove. 2. 4.
It was the Observation of Min. Fell. Multi ob^aedium investigandae veritatis,
divert^nt in proximos Errores, i. e. Many men, through Impatience of the Pains
they must be at, to find out the Truth, turn into the Errors next at hand. As
a weary Traveller takes up his Lodging, not at the best but at the nearest Inn.
Be not thou a new Instance, to confirm that unhappy Observation. For want of
some pains, many Christians are strangely Ignorant, and through Ignorance,
uncertain like Glasses, which may be blown into any shape you please; or
Weather-Cocks, that are indifferent to any Point of the Heavens. To lessen thy
pains somewhat, I have endeavored to give thee the most material Arguments, by
which those Truths are supported, in as plain and familiar a way as I could,
and as the Nature of the subjects would bear. Particularly, be at some pains,
to understand the right use of Reason, about these sacred Mysteries. Namely,
that it is not to judge of the Truth of the Propositions, contained in the
Scriptures, but of their Connection: Take an Instance, 1 Cor. 15. 13. If there
be no Resurrection from the Dead, then is Christ not risen. The Propositions,
that the dead shall be raised, and that Christ is raised from the dead, are de
fide, or matters of Faith: but the Connection, o^ Consequence of the Apostle, is
evident to reason, as depending upon that Maxim of Reason, Sublato effect^
tollicur causa; Deny the effect, and deny the cause, if it be necessary, and
not an accidential Cause, and like this, if it be not day, it is not Sunrise.

And therefore (...) Socinians, who pretend, that we are not to believe any
thing to be of Divine Revelation, which is not evident to our reason, do
discover but little of that reason, which they would be thought to have
Engrossed to themselves: For, does not Reason tell us, that the Nature and
Works of God are above our reach? And that God were not God, if he could be
comprehended by a Creature; nor are the Creatures ad aequate effects of God
their cause.

And indeed their Principle takes away the difference between Divine Knowledge
and Faith. Where is there any room for an assent to Truth, Propter authoritatem
revelantis, upon the credit of Gods word, if we are to believe nothing, but
what antecedently to Divine Revelation, is evident to reason in its next
causes, or proper Effects. Nor can I see what use Miracles can be of to a
Socinian; the Intendment of which, is to enforce a belief of those Doctrines,
which are inevident to Reason: It being a Principle, which no man will
contradict, that God will not put the Seal of his Immediate Power to a
Falsehood.

2. Improve the Knowledge which you have: I have often thought it a wise and
sober speech of Card. Pool, that when one asked him how be should do to
understand the former part of Paul's Epistle to the Romans, Replied, by
practicing the latter, [the former part being Doctrinical and hard, the latter
Practical and plain] In vita Card. Poli. The neglect of such Advice, has
provoked God to give men over to strong Delusions, to believe Lies, gross
Figments, such as I have here presented thee with. Reader, I shall not detain
thee any longer, but recommend thee and this small Piece to the Blessing of
God; by which, if thou art preferved from being led away with the Errors of
the Wicked, and falling from thy own stedfastness, I have obtained my end, and
shall therein rejoice for ever,

Thy Servant in the Gospel, Tho. Danson.
London. December. 13. 1668.
A Synopsis of Quakerisme.
1. Error. That One God does not subsist in Three Persons.
THree things I must necessarily premise before I come to the proof of the
Proposition; which the Quakers deny.

1. I must necessarily explain the word Person, the usual Definition is,
Rationalis naturoe individua Substantia; or an individual Substance of a
rational Nature, which Aquinas desends, sum. Par. 1. Q. 29. art. 2. but some
think it liable to some Exception, as whereby the humane Soul separated from
the Body, and the humane Nature of Christ, are made Persons, and therefore add
to it, Quoe nec est pars alterius, nec ab alio Sustentatur, i. e. which is
neither the part of an other, nor is upheld by an other. I shall not interpose
my Judgment in the case, as remembering, that I write for the Unlearned. I
shall choose to borrow that of the Learned Wottan, on John 1. verse. 1. 2. page
29. which is the plainest, and will not be gainsaid I suppose by any Learn^^
Man. A Person is an individual Subsistence [or Subsistent rather] in an
intellectual Nature; or a several or singular thing, that subsists by it self,
in a nature endued with Understanding.

1. The thing which we call a Person, is by nature endued with Reason and
Understanding. A man we call a Person, but we give not that name unto a bruit
B^ast [An individual or singular Creature of that kind, is called in the
Schools Suppositum.]

2. A Person notes some one endued with Reason and Understanding, which is
several and distinct by himself from another. And hereby we exclude, 1.
Qualities or Virtues, as Fortitude, Temperance, etc. from being Persons, though
found in a rational Nature, and distinct one from another, because they subsist
not by themselves, but in a subject. For a Person is entire of it self, and
must not depend on any thing as a property thereof. And hereby we exclude, 2.
The Soul separated from the Body; for the Soul is a part of the humane Species,
or of man's Nature, and Retinet naturam unibilitatis (as Aquin^s speaks, Sum. p.
1. Q. 29. art. 2.) is to be looked upon as a part still in its Separation (the
Separation of it from the Body being a violence offered to it) and therefore
can no more be called a Person, than the hand or foot ^ut off the Body, [or
then a part, the foot, for instance of a Beast can be called a Suppositum.]

2. That the word person, cannot properly be attributed to Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, because they do not subfist in a several and distinct Nature of the
same kind: for if each of them had a several, and not one individual Nature,
then they should be not only Three Persons, but Three God^, which need not be a
wonder; for, as Divines say, Deus and creaturae nihil habent commune praeter
nomen. God and the Creature have nothing common to them both, but names which
Rule must be understood, with the Limitation that other Rule suggests, Nomina
de De^, and creaturis non univoce nec pure aequivoce, Sed analogice dicuntur
secundum analogiam Creaturarum ad ipsum. Aquinas, Sum. par. 1. Q. 29. Art. 3.
That the names common to God and the Creatures, do not signify simply the same
thing, nor wholly different; but something wherein the Creature bears some
Analogy to God.

3. Yet may this word person be used by us (and it is used in the Scripture, of
the Father, Heb. 1. 3.) to express the distinction of Father, Son, and Spirit
in the Godhead, and one from another. And the reason why it may be used, is
this, because a person signifies that which is most excellent and perfect in
Nature; and what the Scripture has revealed to us, concerning that distinction
in the Godhead, cannot be apprehended by u^, under any other Notion, or
Resemblance, which therefore we Attribute to God, ye^ after a most excellent
manner.

For the nature of Man being finite, may be multiplied into many several Men or
Persons of the same kind or Nature. But the divine nature being infinite,
cannot possibly admit of a Multiplication. (For that there should be two
infinite Natures, implies a Contradiction) Therefore when Father, Son, and
Spirit are said to be Three, and yet but one God, we know not what to call
those three, but Persons; for there is that ascribed to them, (viz Properties
and Operations,) which cannot agree, but either to Three Gods, or Three
Subsistents (that is, persons, though not strictly, yet proportionably, or
Analogically so called) in the Godhead.

And thus I think I have in effect answered all the Arguments of the
Antitrinitarians, before I meddle with them. For their (...), or grand Error
is, that because the word person is not praedicated of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and of the Creature vnivoce; that is, the same word does not
signify wholly the same thing in God and the Creature.

Therefore they deny Personality of Son and Spirit: whereas, though the name
person does not agree to them in the sense of it is first Imposition, yet it
does, as to what we intend to signify thereby, answerable to the notion the
Scripture has Impressed on our minds, Vid. Aquin. Sum. Q. 29. art. 3. p. 1.

In the next place, I shall propose one Scripture, and from thence gather some
Conclusions, the proof whereof, will be all I shall offer, and as much as will
be needful for private Christian's Confirmation in the Doctrine of the Trinity
in Unity.

1. John 5. 7. For there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy-Gho^t; and these Three are One.

The causal Conjunction for, implies a reason of somewhat foregoing, (viz) That
Jesus Christ was the Son of God, verse. 5. And so these words contain an
Argument drawn from indubitable Testimonies. And from them we may deduce,

Prop. 1. That there is but one God, one in this verse is explained as meant of
God, verse. 9. The Witness of God is greater, referring to the Witness
concerning Christ, verse. 7. not to verse. 8. for none of those Witnesses are God.

Prop. 2. That Father, Word, and Spirit are Three Subsistents [or persons.]

1. He attributes the Act of bearing Record to them; now all Witnesses
[properly so call'd] are Persons.

2. That is not all, but the Apostle joins Word and Holy Ghost, with the Father
(whom all acknowledge a Person) as Witness of the same kind; so that if he be a
Person, then are they also Persons.

3. I add, that the attributes of God the Father, or instance Omniscience,
which cannot agree but to a Person, are also ascribed to the Word (or Son) and
to the Spirit. Jesus knew all things, Joh. 2. 22. Acts 5. 9. of which see the
Fifth Proposition: I know that this proves their Deity too, but I produce it
only to prove their Person^lity.

Prop. 3. That Father, Word, or Son, and Spirit, are Subsistants, or Persons of
the same Order, In Heaven, as to the Father; notes the Seat of his Glory and
Majesty (as appears by the use of that phrase in the Lords Prayer) and why not
then, as to Word and Spirit? And some stamp of Divinity more than ordinary is
intended, for otherwise there are many Witnesses and Persons in Heaven; the
Angels, who from Heaven bore Record of Christ, Luke 2. 10, 13.

Prop. 4. That the Father, Word (or Son) and Spirit, are distinct one from
another, appears from the Text, in Conjunction with the story to which they
refer Mat. 3. 17. where the Father and Spirit bear Record concerning the Son,
^^ one distinct from them both. And John 8. 18. the Word did bear Record of
himself: And these did bear Record in a different manner: The Father by a Voice
from Heaven; the Spirit by assuming the shape of a Dove; The Son by Word of
Mouth on Earth. Put all together, here were Testimonies given from distinct
places, Earth, Heaven; to distinct Senses, Ear, Eye; by distinct actions,
speaking, assuming a shape. Then these Witnesses must needs be distinct.

Again, it appears, the Father, Son, and Spirit, are distinct one from another.

1. From their Incommunicable Properties; The Father begets, and is not
begotten; the Son is begotten, and does not beget, Heb. 1. For unto which of
the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee,
verse. 5. The Apostle speaks of an Eternal Generation of the Son of God,
declared and made manifest in time, by the Resurrection of Christ from the
dead: see Acts 13. 33. compared with Romans 1. 4. John 1. 18. Christ is called
the only begotten Son of God. The spirit proceeds from the Father, John 15. 26.
and Christ says, I will send from the Father; a mission implies a pr^cession
from both.

2. From their Order, which may be collected from those properties: The Father
must needs be first in order of Original, (as in time also, a Father is among
men) and the Son next, for Relata sunt simul Naturae. The Father and Son are
together in Nature: and then the spirit proceeding from both, must needs in
order, be after both.

3. From their manner of Oper^tion, one place will suffice; ^ut when the
Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, etc. Joh. 16.
That Mission was but a manifestation of the presence of the Spirit, by a new
effect, viz. or a clearer Revelation of Christ, and the order, is, the Son
sends from the Father, or the Father sends by the Son, the Spirit, to testify
of Christ.

Prop. 5. To be proved is, that every one of these Three distinct Persons, are
truly God. verse. 9. He calls the Witness, given by Three in in Heaven, the
Witness of God; therefore each Witness is God, not to speak of the names God
given to them, which is more liable to cavil (as being sometimes given to
Creatures.

1. It appears by the properties of the Godhead, given to Son and Spirit (as
for the Father, he is acknowledged to be God, on all hands.)

1. From their Omnipresence, Lo, I am with you always to the end of the World,
Math. 28. ult. spoken of Christ, Psalm. 139. 7. Whither shall I go from thy
spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?

2. Omniscience, John 2. 24. Jesus knew all men, Acts 5. 9. Why have ye agreed
together to Tempt the spirit of the Lord, i. e. to try whither he could
discover your Hypocrisy. There are other Instances of Divine properties, but
let these suffice

2. By the Works or Operations proper to God, as 1. Creation, Eccles. 12. 1.
Remember thy Creators, so the He^. (...), Heb. 1. 2. By whom also he made the
World: It Is spoken of God the Father, with reference to Christ, and (...)
^implies, that the Son of God joined with his Father in making the World, as an
efficient Cause equal in Power; not as an Instrument, for there can be none in
Creation; because, to make something out of nothing, requires Infinite power;
and between a finite power and nothing, there is no proportion, Job 33. 4. The
spirit of God made me. 2. Preservation, Heb. 1. 3. Upholding all things by the
Word of his Power, spoken of the Son (or Christ) Genesis 1. 2. And the spirit of
God moved upon the face of the Waters, (...). Commovens in cubans, used of
Birds brooding their Young, Deuteronomy. 32. 11* and so applied me^aphorically to the
spirits Operation in conse^^ing the Chaos.

3. That Son and Spirit are truly God, Isa. ^^. 8. by the Right they have to be
Objects of Divine Worship: And let all the Angels of God Worship him. Spoken of
the Son, who is called God, and said to have a Throne or Seat of Majesty, to
the person whereon Worship is given, Heb. 1. 6, 8. and Rev. 1. Grace, Mercy,
and Peace from him, which is, and is to come, and from the seven spirits, (i.
e. the spirit that is manifested in Variety of Gifts) which are before the
Throne, and from Jesus Christ.

Though John speaks in the Third Person, yet ^t is a Prayer, and so in effect,
an add^ess to the Persons; as if he had said, O Father, (...), and spirit,
Grant these Churches Grace, Mercy, and P^^ce. Cant. 4. ult. Awake thou North
Wind, and come thou South, i. e. O Blessed spirit, bre^th into my heart; spirit
compared to Wind, Jo^n* 3. 8* the same Word signifies both (...). And to the
son, Acts 7. 59. Lord. Jesus receive my spirit.

Prop. 6. That these Persons are not divided on^ from another, so as to be
Three Gods; but on^ God* appears from the Text, in that, ^^ call^ the Witness
of Three, the Witness of one; viz* in nature or essence, which is verse. 9. said
to b^ God; not Three Divine natures, but one is predicated of the Three
Witnesses.

And thus a way is made to an Answer to W. P s. Arguments.

Arg. 1. If there be Three distinct Persons, then Thr^^ distinct Substances.

Ans. I deny the Consequence; because, as (...) showed before, the Word Person
is not p^^d^cated of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and (...) the Creature
univoce; that is, the same Wo^^ does not signify wholly the same thing in God
and the Creature* But in God, Three Person notes a subsisting of Three in one
Individu^^ Nature; in Man, a subsisting of (Three) Pet^^ James, and John;
suppose for instance, i^ Thr^e divided, or several Natures of the sam^ kind.

Arg. 2. Either the Divine Persons are Finite (...) Infinite; if Infinite, then
Three distinct Infinites, and so three Gods.

Ans. 1. We may deny the Disjunction, finit^ness and infiniteness are not
Personal, but Essential properties: For in the Notion of the Nature, these
properties are coutained, before you consider that Nature as in a Person. So
finiteness in respect of man, and infiniteness in respect of God. And hence,
though all the properties of the Divine Nature, whereof, infinit^ness is one,
agree to each Person subsisting in that Nature, yet will it not follow, that
there are three ^nfinites, but only one; because there are not three Divine
Natures, but only one; of which one Nature, Infiniteness is a property.

Ans. 2. Suppose we grant that these three Persons may be said to be Infinite,
it is no more in effect, than to ^ay, that these three Persons are God; we may as
well attribute to the Person, the property included in the Divine Nature, as
the Divine Nature, which includes the property (the Nature and Property b^ing
one, re, though not ratione.)

Ans. 3. Yet will it not follow, that Father, Son, and Spirit, be three
distinct Infinites; or which is all one, three distinct Gods (the property and
Nature being really one, though different, according to our way of
apprehension, as I said above) because those three subsist not in three
sever^l, but in one Individual Nature.

Arg. 3. If each Person be God, and that Go^ subsists in Three Persons; then in
each Person ar^ Three Persons, or Gods, and so from Three, they will increase
to nine.

Ans. 1. If he understands the Terms; God, (...) we do (in the Antecedent) of
God essentially no such consequence will follow, no more than i^ this instance.

If Peter, James, and John, each Person b^ Man, and that Man subsists in those
three Persons, then in each of those three Persons, (...) three Persons, or
Men, and so from three, the will increase to nine. Take Man here, not so a
Person, but the Nature as we do God, in the Antecedent of Pens Hypothetical
Syllogism^^ and it is evident that we mean no more, then the the name Man may be
attributed to Peter, Jame and John, because the same humane Nature ((...) mean
specifically) agrees to them, and so is the name God attributed to each Person,
because the same Divine Nature subsists in each of them, ((...) rather, each of
them subsists in the same (num^rically) Divine Nature.) There is no Cons^quence
in Pens Argument, unless we held, the each person in the Godhead, subsists in
(...) persons (which he goes about unworthily, to i^ finuate).

Ans. 2. I rather think he has catched at some what in our Writers, which he
did not well u^derstand, which he would represent as our Judgments, (and thence
deduce his absurd Conse quence) (viz) that Nature and Person in the Godhead,
or God, are one thing. For the Nature of God is so simple, that it admits of no
parts or Accidents. The three Persons are not three parts, either essential or
Integral of the Godhead; nor can the relative properties begetting, being
begotten, proceeding, be accidents, but substantial attributes, as the absolute
properties, Wisdom, Merey, Justice (for instance:) yet will it not follow, that
there are three Persons in each Person, that is, that the Persons includes each
other, any more, then that these, three absolute Attributes., include, each
other.

For the Conception or Notion that we have of the Father (suppose) as a
subsistent or Person, is in^dequatus conceptus, in respect of the Divine
Es^ence, considered as affecta Subsistentia, or subsisting in diverse manners,
and so does not include the Son and spirit, who subsist in two different
manners from him. And as we cannot say, that he Notion of Justice does include
Mercy, or the Notion of Mercy include Justice, though the Divine Essence, or
God, be the same with both those properties; so nor can we say, that the Notion
of the Father, as one Person in the Godhead, includes the Son; nor the Notion
of the Son, as one Person in the Godhead, includes he Father; though each of
those Persons are he Divine Essence, or God, [and so, nor does he Father nor
Son include the Spirit, or the Spirit include them by the like Reason] which w^
may thus Ill^st^ate, and indeed confirm, by comparing the Acts of those
absolute Attributes, and the properties of those relative Attributes. A^
punishing, is not an Act of Mercy; nor sparing, (...) Act of Justice; nor does
the one Act include the other: So, nor does the Attributes of Mercy and Justice
include each other. So as begettin^ is not being begotten, nor being begotten
is (...) begetting; so nor does the Notion of the Fath^^ include the Son, nor
of the Son, include the F^ther.

4. The fourth is answered in the answer to t^^ second; and we do not affirm
the Person in the Godhead, to be finite, but infinite.

5. If those three distinct Persons are one wit^ the Godhead, then are they
each one with another: That Is the sum, though he multiplie^ words.

Answ. That Argument is grounded (though (...) does not express, nor perhaps
understand it) upon that rule, Quae convenient in uno tertio, con^^niunt
inter^se Those things which are one (...) some third thing, are one among
themselv^^* And I answer, That rule is to be understood that they are one among
themselves, only in r^spect of that wherein they agree, not simply. (...) in
this plain instance, David was a Man, and S^lomon was a Man, they two agree in
a third thin^ viz. in the humane nature; Will it therefore f^^low, that they
are one Person? nothing les^* (...) though the Father be God, and the Son God,
it will not follow that they are one Person; for in personality, or manner of
subsistence, they differ; but only it will follow, that they are one God, or
one in that Divine nature, in which third these two meet.

And now I shall take notice of my Answer to his Question, mentioned p. 10. of
his Sandy Foundation shaken, and his reply thereto. Where first, the Reader is
to know, that W. P. conceals his ignorance or falsehood in denying that Person
was a Scripture term, and his front, in demanding an instance with that
eagerness, as if none could be given, when I gave him that, Heb. 1. 3. Again,
whereas he relates my Answer to his Question, of whom Christ was the express
Image; that Christ was the express image of Gods subsistence or manner of
being, he does me wrong: for, my answer was, that Christ was the express image
of God, the Fathers Person. That which I spoke of a subsistence or manner of
being, was in answer to his question: What a Person was* From whence he then
inferred, that if Christ was the image of his Fathers Person, he must be the
image of a mode or manner of being; to which, he received this reply, that
Christ was the image of the Father, subsisting in the divine nature, not of the
personality or manner of the Fathers being, nor yet of the divine nature in the
abstract, (which was illustrated by the Child's bearing the image of his
Father.) And so my answer to his two absurd consequences, will be needless. But
if he thinks them deducible from this answer I gave him, I reply thus to them.
To the first, It makes God a Father only by subsistence, that if he means, that
the relation of a Father arises from a personal, not an essential act, I see no
absurdity, the immanent act called begetting, is not an act of God absolutely,
but relatively considered; that is, of the first Person subsisting in that
Godhead. To the second, That Christ is then a Son without a substance. I
answer, that though the Son, as God, is from himself; yet as God the Son, he is
from the Father, the person and substance being inseparable. As for the place,
he refers me to Col: 1. 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, I see not
how it opposes my exposition. God is taken there personally for the Father, not
essentially for the Godhead, or divine nature, which I prove, because Christ
is said to be the Image of God; which if meant of God essentially, then Christ
must be the image of himself, which cannot be. And that Christ is God by
nature, appears by v. 16. where he is said to be the first cause, and last end
of all things. For the translation, it is good enough, (...) is used by the
Greek Philosophers for (...), which Aristotle uses for substantia prima and
secunda, the the former of which is, when the common nature expressed in the
definition, is restrained by certain proprieties to an individual, which is
called Person^, or a Person, when the nature is endued with reason. Suppositum,
when it is not. And so (...) may by a Metalepsis; yea, must be rendered, Person
or subsistent, or some word to that effect, because Christ, as God, is of
himself, and so is not the image of any other, there being no multiplication of
the divine nature, but of Persons in the nature three.

Vid. Amyrald. de mist. Trin. p. 462, etc. And he that reads Justin Martyr, who
flourished about A. D. 150. will find that he applies (...) and (...) to the
Father, Son, and Spirit, which answers W. P. s cavil, that it is (...), not
(...), which is used, Heb. 1. 3. and that the word (...) was not used in that
sense, till Athanasiu's time.

Error 2. The impossibility of God's pardoning sinners, without plenary
satisfaction, refuted. So Pen. Title page.
WHere I observe, that he argues against the impossibility of God's forgiveness
of sin without Satisfaction. Concerning which, stating of the Question, I shall
say, that either he did, or ought to have known, that many of us, who deny any
forgiveness without satisfaction, do not affirm any impossibility of
forgiveness without it. And for my own part, though I know some worthy persons
do deny W. P's affirmative, yet I cannot join with them therein. For to me it
seems evident, that God is free in his determinations, what attribute he will
manifest, and in what degree, and manner. Had Man stood, God had only
manifested remunerative justice (as he does in the elect Angels:) when Man
fell, God might only have manifested vindictive justice (as he does upon the
reprobate Angels or Devils:) or sparing mercy only (as he does in the Persons
of elect Men.) This variety gives ground to believe, that between these
properties, or attributes of justice and mercy (not to speak of others) and
their effects, an act of his mere will intervenes. And neither of these is
wronged by the manifestation of the other, and concealment of it self. For the
internal glory of none of the divine attributes, receives either addition or
diminution by the external glory or manifestation of them, in their proper
effects. And as for the way of redemption by Christ, we may well conclude it to
be a free choice, by those emphatical phrases, whereby it is set forth, The
counsel of Gods own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. The mystery of his will, his good
pleasure. v. 9. He that desires, may in my weak judgment receive much
satisfaction in this point, by that short, but scholastic Tract of the learned
Gilbert, entitled Vinditiae Supremi Dei Dominii, etc. In this we all agree,
that God does not pardon sin without satisfaction first made to his justice by
Christ; and he that can make clear proof of this assertion, has won the Goal
from the Socinians, and their partakers. As for the possibility, or
impossibility of forgiveness without satisfaction, we need not much contest,
seeing the cause does not depend upon either apprehension. It was a wise
observation of Aquinas, Cumquis ad probandam fidem Christianam inducit
rations, quae non sunt cog^ntes, cedit in irrisionem infidelium; credunt enim
quod hujusmodi rationibus innitamur, and propter eas credimus, etc. Sum. par.
1. Q. 32. art. 1. and Q. 46. art. 2. I need not English the passage, for they
who are concerned, understand the School-man without an Interpreter.

But because W. Pen does also oppose the fact, and affirms that God pardons
sin, without satisfaction made by Christ to his justice, I shall therefore
briefly explain the terms, and then give you my sense in answer to four
Questions. By pardon of sin, we understand a gracious absolution, or dissolving
of the obligation the sinner is under, to sustain punishment for his sin. That
absolution which is not some way gracious, cannot be called a pardon.
Satisfaction is not a Scripture phrase, but the thing is found there. viz. a
compensation or recompense made to God for the injury done him by our sin,
which may be by doing, or suffering, or both: Justice, that is, Vindictive, God
must be considered as a supreme Rector or Judge, and not as Pars Laes^, the
party offended only in the satisfaction made; and if any thing be done for
satisfaction, (when the letter of the Law requires suffering or undergoing of a
penalty therein expressed) it must in some respect or other have rationem
poenae, (as suppose in regard of the person by w^om) be penal, and in merit
equivalent to what the Law required, and so esteemed by the person, to whose
acceptance it is tende^'d. The Q^erys I shall answer to, are;

Qu. 1. What did Christ tender to God for Satisfaction?

Answ. His obedience or subjection to the Law in its penalties or curses.
Therefore he is said to be made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. And also to the Law
in its precepts, whence he is said to be made under the Law (ipso facto, upon
his being made of a Woman) to redeem them that were under the Law. Gal. 4. 4,
5. which subjection to the precepts of the Law, was penal, as being a
debasement of so great a person; a strange metamorphosis, of an absolute
Sovereign into a subject. And therefore it is spoken of, as a wonderful instance
of condescension, that he was not ashamed to call us brethren. Heb. 2. 11. that
is, fellow subjects; for being one in nature with us, he becomes one with us in
an obligation to the same Law. And (if it be weighed) the penal nature of what
we call penalties or curses, lies not barely in the smart of sense, but in the
brand of insamy, thereby set upon us, that we rec^ive the due reward of our
deeds (as the good thi^f gives us his sentiment of his own and fellows case,
Luke 23. 41.) And seeing that Satisfaction in the eye of the Law, is strictly
not solutio ejusdem, but tantidem; not of what the letter of the Law requires,
but of somewhat equivalent; therefore it may be made, as well agendo, as
patiendo; by doing, as by suffering. For some actions (as they, may be
circumstantiated) may be truly penal to the agent, and so equivalent to the
corporal punishment, which the letter of the Law ex^cts, and may be as proper
for demonstration of justice, maintaining the repute of the Law, and example to
others.

2. Qu. What causality, in respect of God's act of forgiveness, Christ's
obedience was capable of?

Answ. Christ's obedience could satisfy God, but in genere causae moralis sc.
impulsive vel meritoriae, as a meritorious cause; of which we say, that movet
aliquem ad talionem reddendam, which moves another to recompense the act done,
by good or ill offices; which we thus express popularly, One good turn requires
another. Which kind of cause works on an agent, and induces him to produce the
effect. And that it is such, appears by comparing the causality of his
obedience in respect of our impunity or freedom from punishment, with the
causality of sin, in respect of punishment; which in the latter induces God to
punish, in the sormer, induces God to pardon. I^ it be said, how can this be,
seeing nothing without God can be said to move him? for then somewhat in God
should b^ an effect of the Creature, and so the first cause should have some
dependence upon the second, which is absurd and impossible.

I answer, There is no cause indeed of the will of God, ex part actus volendi,
as to the act it self of his will: but there may be a cause, ex part
volitorum, as to the things willed: whence the Schools say, Deus vult hoc esse
propter hoc, sed non propter hoc vult hoc. i e. God wills one thing for
another; but why he Wills one thing for another, there is no cause to be
assigned, but his Will. God wills the preaching of the Word, for the production
of faith, as a means for its end: but why he wills that connection between them,
no reason can be given but his Will, for he can work faith without it. And so
Christ's obedience cannot properly work upon Gods will, but if it have the
causality of an impulsive cause attributed to it, we must understand, that
properly those terms note but a connection between means and end, Christ's
Obedience; and the Sinners Pardon, which having been joined together in God's
Decree, cannot be put asunder in the Execution.

Quest. How does it appear, that Christ's Obedience had the Efficacy of a
Meritorious Cause of our Forgiveness?

Answ, 1. Those places, which speak of the turning away of Divine Wrath, by
Christ's Obedience; which Wrath, is but an Inclination to punish: He [Christ] is
a Propitiator for our sins, (...), Propitiatio, 1 J^h. 2. 2. It notes the Act
of Appeasing, and the means whereby God is Appeased, Romans 3. 24. (...).
Propitiatorium, The Mercy Seat, so rendered, Heb. 2. the true, as that was the
Typical means of Atonement.

2. It appears by those Scriptures, which speak of Redemption or Freedom, from
deserved Punishment, purchased by a price of Christ's Laying-down, 1 Pet. 18.
19. Ye were not Redeemed with Corruptible things, as Silver, and Gold but with
the precious Blood of Christ. Where the Antithesis clearly imports, that
Christ's Blood is a True and Real Price, and of far greater Value than Silver,
and Gold, which, Yet answer all things, Eccles. 10. 19. And it has made a
purchase of Freedom from Punishment; for that is included in the Vain
Conversation spoken of, as an Effect in its Cause; and elsewhere it is spoken
of, as a parcel of Christ's purchase, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has Redeemed us from
the Curse of the Law.

3. By those Scriptures which speak of a Substitution of Christ, for us, Mat.
20. 28. The Son of Man came to give his Life a Ransom for many. (...), Res aut
factum, quo movetur qu^spiam, ut aliquam Incommodo alioqui (...) liberari
Patiatur* (...). Which Preposition, when applied to Persons, Imports the
Succession of one, into the room of another: so used Mat. 2. 22. and rendered in
the room [o^ his Father] 1 Timothy 2. 6. (...). Pret^^^ Redemptionis a caunter
Priae, (...), In Composition, notes, either Contrarietatem, as in the Word,
(...), Antichrist, i. e. one that opposes Christ: or it notes, commut ^tionem,
an exchange of one for another. (...), Notes, something, or Act, whereby, any
one is moved to let him go free, whom he has advantage against. (...), Notes,
such a kind of (...), or Compensation; as in which, the Deliver undergoes that
Evil in kind, or Equivalently, which, he that is delivered, should have
undergone. And if the Word imports an Exchange from one Life to another, then
we conclude, a Satisfaction from the Nature of the thing. Either justly or
unjustly, we were to die; not the latter, for we had well deserved Death,
therefore the former. And if Christ has freed us from that Death we were
justly obnoxious to, what is that; but what we call Satisfaction, in the sense
of the point in hand.

Quest. 4. Whence Christ's Obedience, had the Efficiency of a Meritorious Cause
of our Forgiveness.

1. It was a perfect Obedience, 2 Cor. 5. Last he knew no sin, (i e.) by
Experience of the working of it in himself, which Peter explains, when he says,
He did no sin, 1 Pet. 2. 22. Thence the Denomination given him,

An holy thing in his Conception, Luke 1. 35. An Holy Child, Acts 4. 27. After
his Birth, (...), (...) and puer in the Three Learned Languages, signify a
Child (and sometimes a Servant perhaps, because the Child is born a Subject to
the parent, Jure diving Naturali) The Holy one of God [^n his Manhood, even by
the Devils, from whom, that Consession was extorted by clear evidence] Luke. 4.
34. And Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, se^^rate from Sinners, Heb. 7. 26. since he
left the Earth.

2. Because Christ Obedience was not originally due to God; i^ it had, one debt
could not have paid another: I do not mean, that Christ as Man, was not subject
to the Law of God, because of the Union of the Humane Nature from the first
moment of it is existence to the divine Nature, in the Person os the Son of God
For this seems contrary to Scripture, Gal. 4. 4. Made of a Woman, made under
the Law, and the personal Union seems no more to dissolve the Obligation of
Christ, as Man to the Law, then to take away the Essential Properties, Parts,
or Faculties of Body and Soul (whereof his humane Nature did consist.)

And if that Union did dissolve the Obligation of Christ, as Man, to the Law;
then Christ, as Man, could not be Holy by a true Inherent Righ^eousness of the
humane Nature, which lies in the Conformity to the Law of God, given thereunto,
and so had not been capable of Meriting at all.

But in two respects, may Christ's obedience be said, not to be Originally due.

1. In that he being a Person, before he became Man, he was at his Election,
whither he would become Man, or not; that is, a rational Creature, which, of
course, or Ipso facto, (as we say) upon it is existence, becomes a Subject, as
the Connection imports, Made of a Woman, mad^ under the Law, Gal. 4. 4. and so
had the refusal of being under the Law^ and he becam^ Man, that he might come
under the Law.

2. When he was Man, he was not under an Obligation, to obey to any such ends,
as to satisfy divine Justice, and merit Life, for them who had demerited
Death. For it not being in the compa^^ of any mere Man's power, there was no
such Obligation upon any mere Man; as to obey or suffer, by way of
Satisfaction, for another man^ Disobedience; or to recover thereby the
happiness another man had lost, and make a new purchase of what he had
forfeited, and God had sei^ed into his own hands.

3. The third Ground of the merit of Christ Obedience, is the Dignity of the
Person: know not what other reason, but the Digni^^ resulting from the Divine
Nature, to the H^mane, that the Blood of the Son of man, is called the Blood of
God, Acts 20. 28. God purchas^ the Church with his own Blood. The action of o^^
Nature, is the action of the whole Person, [Act^ones sunt Suppositorum, we say
in the Schools, an^ we distinguish, between Principium quo, an^ quod.] A man is
said to think, and to speak, because they are both the acts of the Person,
though the one he does by virtue of his Soul, the there of his Body. And as
sense is dignified by being under the command of Reason, in a man, which it is
not under, in a Bruit, so is the Humane Nature by Union to the Divine. As for
the Cavil of Socinians, (whose Vomit, the Quakers have now licked up) that the
dignity of the Person comes not under Consideration, because it is not the
Godhead, or Divine Nature that suffers, it is very futilous. They might with
as much reason, say it is all one, whither I strike my Prince, or a private
Person, or an Enemy, or my Father, because my blows do not fall upon Authority,
or Relation, but on the person in Dignity, or related to me (as Grotius well
observes, De Satist. Chr. c. 8.)

And it contradicts the common sense of all Nations, who proportion their
Punishment to the digni^y or the Person injured. I shall answer one Objection,
though not in W. Pens Book.

Object. How can God be said to forgive freely, when he requires Satisfaction?
Are not these two Contradictory?

Answ. 1. There is no contradiction between Forgiveness, and Satisfaction,
because they are not ad idem, they respect not the same Persons. If
Satisfaction were required of us, we could not be said to be forgiven.

Answ. 2. There are diverse acts of Grace, whereby God makes way for
Satisfaction, and the benefits of it.

1. A Relaxation of the Law; which term in the Civil Law* notes an Act of a
Superior, whereby the Obligation of a Law in force, is taken away, as to some
Persons and things. In the case before us, there was such an act of Gods,
whereby he admits a surety, whereas the Law threatened the Sinner himself. A
relaxation of the Law, I say, there was, as that is opposed to an Abrogation,
which is not here, for then the Elect, whilst Sinners in state, were not under
the Curse of the Law, which to affi^m, were to contradict the Apostle, Gal. 3.
13. and as a Relaxation is opposed to a favorable Interpretation, (...), for
then the surety were in the primary Obligation, as when one Person enters into
a Recognisance with another, for his appearance in Court. But Christ was not
bound with Man in the Covenant of Works, to see the Law kept, or undergo the
penalty which Relaxation was an Act of Soveraign^y: to the exercise whereof,
his own grace and nothing foreseen in us did prompt him.

2. Another act of Gods Grace, is the Nomination and Appointment of a surety;
Christ was made a surety, Heb. 7. 21. and by the Father, Heb. 10. 7. I come to
do thy will, says Christ to his Father, of his undertakement as our surety;
which is an act of Grace, for the Debtor, not the Creditor; the Malefactor, not
the Judge, is to find a surety. A Representation of both these acts we have,
Genesis 22. 2. 13. where God admitted, and provided a, Ram for a Sacrifice,
instead of Isaac; though the Letter of the Command was to offer Isaac himself.

3. Gods Actual Acceptance, the Payment or Satisfaction, made and tendered by
Christ, which appears as otherwise, so especially

1. By his Resurrection, 1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifest in the Flesh, was justified
in the Spirit; that is, by his Godhead [so called, because it is in Nature
Spiritual, 1 John 4. 24.] compared with 1 Pet. 3. 18. where it is said of Christ,
That he was put to death in the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit; that is, his
Humane and Divine Nature* And they instruct us in this Truth, that Christ's
Resurrection, was not only an Effect of Divine Power, but also of Christ's
Justification from our sin, charged upon him in his Death; and so a Foundation
laid for our Actual Forgiveness, to be built on by Faith.

That passage also contributes some Assistance, Math. 28. verse. 3. where the
Angels of the Lord descended from Heaven, and rold away the St^ne from the Door
of the Sepulcher, which would have been an Impediment to his getting out. For
what can the Creditors release of the Surety out of Prison signify, but that
he is satisfied, and the Debt paid?

2. By his Intercession; which being grounded upon his Satisfaction, supposes
it to be what it pretends, full and complete; and being an Application to
Grace, supposes that satisfaction to be Solutio recusabilis, refusable payment;
for in Obligations which arise ex delicto, from an Offense committed, Dum alius
solvit, aliud solvitur, (as Grotius speaks, De Satis Chr. c. 7. when another
Person [then what was originally obliged] makes payment [of the Debt of
punishment, due to Justice] another thing is paid [then what the Law required,]
As suppose, for one man to offer to die for another, is no more in the Eye of
the Law, than to offer himself to be Whipped, to save the others Life; For the
Judge can no more admit of Exchange of Person, than of Penalty.

4. Another act of Grace is in the means of Application, of that Satisfaction
he exacts of Christ; I mean Faith in Christ: the formal Act whereof, as
Justifying seems best placed in an Acceptance of Christ, for Justification,
that being the correlate of the offer of Christ for that end in the Gospel.
Here appears a double act of Grace. 1. In the choice of this Means of
Application, an acceptance looking least like a Meritorious Act. 2. In the
bestowing of it, Faith being the gift of God. The Apostle suggests both, when
he says, We are saved by Grace, through that Faith, which is not of our selves,
Ephesians. 2. 8.

W. Pens Scriptures, from p. 16. to 20. proves only what we grant, (viz.) That
God does freely pardon Sin, but, not that he pardens Sin without Satisfaction;
only we may observe, how in the Enumeration of those Names of God which import
free Forgiveness, he leaves out that Name (which is sub-joyned to them as a
Limitation.) That will by no means clear the Guilty, Exodus* 34. 7. That is not
contrary to the order of Justice, which he has prescribed, which order, is to
require that Satisfaction of the su^ety, which is remitted to the Principal.
From Mat. 6. 12. Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors, he seems to
offer at an Argument.

Arg. If it be our duty to forgive without a Satifaction received, and God is
to forgive us, as we forgive them, then is a Satisfaction totally excluded, p.
18.

Answ. 1. There is an agreement between Gods Forgiveness and ours. 1. In
respect of the causae Proegumena, or inward moving Cause, called Kindness,
Tender-Heart^dness, Ephesians. 4. 32. 2. In respect of the Effect, which in both, is
the Offenders Impurity.

But it will not follow there must be a similitude every way. Pen might with as
much show of Reason, infer from Ephesians. 4. 32. Forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you: that seeing we are to ^orgive, as God does
us, therefore we are not to forgive another, but for the sake of some Third
Person, who has interest in us.

Answ. 2. We are not bound in all cas^s, to forgive another without
Satisfaction. I^ be repent, forgive him; if he t^rn again to thee, saying I
repent, thou shall forgive him, Luke 17. 3, 4. Man as a Judge, may not forgive
without Satisfaction to Law.

Arg. From Mat. 18. 27, 33. he infers, that it had been no fault in the
Servant, not to have forgiven his Brother without Satisfaction, if the Kings
Mercy had not been proposed for his Example.

Answ. 1. That wherein the Comparison lies, is the Forgiveness it self; not the
manner of Forgiveness: There is ground enough for a Co^p^rison, between
Persons, or things, if there be a likeness in any one respect: See verse. 35.

2. If we stick in the Letter of the Parable, God is represented under another
(...), habitude or Consideration than in the Doctrine of Satisfaction now under
debate. For, here he i^ considered as Rector, or Governor; but there as a
Creditor, and so as a private Person. In the Doctrine of Satisfaction, God
discharges from Obligations, Ex delicto, or debts due to Justice, by Offense
committed against the Law.

In the Parable, God discharges from an Obligation, Ex contractu, arising from
Covenant on Contract: So is a man made a debtor to a private Person. And
there is not the sam^ reason in many r^spect, for Forgiveness without
Satisfaction in both cases; not to Execute Penal Laws, is to disparage the
Legislative Authority. Hence the Rule in Politics, (...). not easily to relax
Laws once Established.

His first Absurdity, p. 20. I pass by, having declared my sense about the
possiblity of pardoning sin without Satisfaction.

Abs. 2. That the Creature is more capable of extending Forgiveness; than the
Creator.

Answ. All that will follow from our Doctrine, is, that there is great
difference between Gods condition and ours, his Majesty and our meannes^, that
we have no reason to stand so much upon our Terms, and to have such a Sentiment
of affronts done to us, there being an equality between us and our Brethren,
but an Infinite inequality between God and us.

Abs. 3. That God so Loved the World, as to give his only Son for to save it,
and yet, that God stood off in Displeasure, till Christ satisfied his Justice,
page 20.

Answ. To clear this, observe that Divines distinguish of Tria momenta Divinae
voluntatis, three s^eps or degrees of Divine Love to Mankind. 1. Before Christ's
Satisfaction, God is not wholly averse from Reconciliation on good Terms,
(though he be thoroughly angry with us.) For if he had been resolved to stand to
the Rigor of the Law, and not admit of any Satisfaction, there had been an end
of our Salvation.

2. Upon Christ's Satisfaction, he does not only determine, but promise to lay
his Anger aside.

3. Upon Actual Faith, he lays aside his Anger quite, and becomes our Friend.

W. Pens Reasons why Christ could not satisfy Gods Justice, as man, or as God
singly, I pass by, though I might except against some of them as not cogent,
though the thing be true, and owned by us.

But his reason; why Christ could not satisfy as God-man, is absurd in phrase
and sense. For, where two Mediums, or middle Propositions are singly
inconsistent, with the Nature of the end, for which they were at first
propounded, their Conjunction does rather Augment than lessen the difficulty of
its accomplishment.

His meaning is, I think, that where two things singly will not attain any end,
for which they are used as means, much less will they attain it together: As if
he should say, two men can much less bear a Burden, when joined together, which
neither of them alone can bear; or rather, as if he should say, Lazarus Soul
without his Body could not speak, nor his Body without the Soul in their
Separation; therefore in their Union or Conjunction, at his Resurrection, much
less could he speak. I refer you to what has been said before of the value of
Christ's Obedience, arising from the Dignity of his Person.

To his Consequences I^religious and Irrational, I shall say a little. In the
two first, I am not concerned, because they militate against the Impossiblity
of Forgiveness without Satisfaction, which I do not affirm.

Cons. 3. That it was unworthy of God to pardon, but not to ^nflict punishment
on the Innocent, or require a Satisfaction where there was Nothing due.

Answ. 1. I do not say (nor do we generally) that is was unworthy of God, to
pardon Sin without Satisfaction, because he did not think fit to do it. That
will be no better Consequence, than to say, if it had pleased God to Create the
World. Then it had been unworthy of God, not to have Created it.

For God proceeded on good Grounds, in reresolving the contrary.

1. For though his Love to Righteousness, and Hatred of Sin, had been never the
less; if he had not punished Sin, yet man might have been apt to have
mis-judged him. The sinner concluded God to be such an one as himself, (i. e.
one that made as light a matter of sin as he did) because of Gods patience
toward him, Psalm. 50. 21.

2. Impunity might have been abused sor an Encouragement to sin, Eceles. 8* 11.
and other reasons might be given.

3. The reason; why it was not unworthy of God to punish the Innocent, is,
because of his free consent, and Volenti non fit injuria; and because as God he
had a Sovereign, and as man, a special deputed Power over his life, and the
comforts of it, Joh. 10. 18. He had a commandment to lay down his Life.

3. According to Pen's Opinion; Christ, though Innocent, and but a meer-Man,
Suffered only for an Example, p. 19. and why not then for Satisfaction to
Divine Justice, that being a Nobler design?

4. Christ when he suffered, was not Innocent, and when God required
Satisfaction of him, it was due from him. Christ was guilty of our sin, when he
suffered for it. For Guilt is but Obligatio ad Poenam, an Obligation to
undergo Punishment, which Christ was under by Contract; Christ was a surety,
Heb. 7. 22. when our deb^ was demanded of him. And the surety is a truly a
Debtor as the Principal, though the manner of becoming such be different.

Cons. 4. It deprives God of the Praise of his Love.

Cons. 6. It Robs God of the Gift of his Son for our Redemption.

Cons. 8. Then we are not beholding to God.

Answ. I put these together, because he here contradicts himself; for if the
Son was Gods Gift for our Redemption, how are we not beholden to God? or how is
God deprived entirely of the prai^e of his Grace in our Redemption?

Cons. 5. It represents the Son more kind than the Father; whereas, if he be
the same God, then either the Father is as loving as the Son, or the Son as
^^gry as the Father.

Answ. 1. Consider, the Father and Son as God, they are equally kind to
Mankind, and equally angry at man's sin, as appears by their purposes of Mercy,
and Punishment, discovered in the Promises and Threatenings.

2. Our Doctrine represents not the Son kinder than the Father, but intimates a
distinct manner and order of Kindness or Operation, about our Salvation,
answerable to the order of their being; that as the Father is the first, so the
Contrivement of our Redemption, is more peculiarly his Act, the Undertakement
of our actual Redemption, peculiarly the Act of the Son. It is a rule in
Divinity, Vnum idemque opus: [or operatio vel actio rather Opus enim est
effectus actionis] ad extra diverso respectu Personale est, and essentiale.
External Actions of God are in a diverse respect, Essential and Personal. The
Decree of the Son of Gods Incernation, the Creation of his Body and Soul, the
parts of that Nature he subsisted in, were Acts ^ommon to Father and Son as one
God, or essential Acts; but the Election of the Son to be our Redeemer in our
Nature, is the peculiar Act of the Father^ The assumption of our Nature, the
peculiar Act of the Son, or personal Act.

Cons. 6. It Robs God of the Gift of his Son for our Redemption, in affirming,
the Son purchased that Redemption from the Father, by giving himself to God as
our Complete Satisfaction.

Ans. No such matter. The designation of the Son of God to be our Redeemer,
considered, as the Fathers personal act is a fruit of the mere love of God the
Father: yet the actual collation of Redemption in its effects and benefits,
depends on Christ's purchase: or as the Schools distinguish, the actus volendi,
or the Fathers gift of the Son for our Redemption (to use Pen's phrase) depends
on nothing without himself: but the res volita, or the Redemption it self, our
actual freedom from sin and wrath depends on what Christ did and suffered, as
an end upon its means.

Cons 7. By Christ's payment of our debt it is not forgiven, but transferd, we
owing that now to the Son, which was owing before to the Father.

Ans. He might as well say, when a surety pays the debt, the debtor owes that
to the surety, he owed before to his Creditor, and so he is no better provided
for than before, (to use W. P's words) which is not true, but when
countersecurity is given the surety by the principal.

Cons. 9. If Gods justice be satisfied for sins past, present, and to come, God
and Christ have lost their power of injoyning godliness, and punishing
disobedience.

Ans. 1. Christ's obedience was not intended to exempt us from a personal
obedience to the Law, but from it only as a condition of life. And we are only
so far made righteous by Christ's obedience, as we are unrighteous by our own
disobedience.

2. God cannot punish disobedience by virtue of the Covenant of works upon a
justified person, for then he should exact satisfaction of the Debtor, after he
had received it of the surety. And why may we not say, God cannot do, what were
unjust for him to do? A moral, though not a natural impotency may be ascribed
to God.

Error 3. That we are not justified by imputed righteousness, W. Pen.
THe word justify (...) and (...), and the Heb. (...) signifies justum facere,
and in the Scripture usage, it is a foren-sick word, and signifies to pronounce
righteous, and so is opposed to condemnation and accusation, Romans 8. 33. The
word impute (...) properly signifies the same with (...) supputo, to cast
account, and the Heb. (...) signifies to think, imagine, and reason, and hence
in Scripture it is applied to a legal act, whereby the righteousness of one,
viz. Christ is admitted for another, and so far accounted and esteemed that
others, as that he obtains the benefit of it, to all intents and purposes, as
if it had been his personal righteousness. I shall produce for the word and
thing but one Scripture, which is express for us, Romans 4. 6. As David describes
the blessedness of the Man, to whom the Lord imputes Righteousness without
Works, [that is the Righteousness of another, without Works of her own, else
there were contradictio in adjecto.] And observe, the Apostle gives us the sum
of David's Words, verse. 7. 8. which speak not of Imputation of Righteousness in
terms, but of Forgiveness, and not imputing Sin, which must be supposed to lie
in Imputation of Righteousness, as Effects in their Cause. Now in absolutely
free Forgiveness, there is no Imputation of Righteousness, but what is our own
inherently, according to Pen, and other Socinians.

Three Arguments will suffice to evince the Truth on our side.

Arg. 1. From the proportion which our Justification by Christ's Righteousness
bears to our Condemnation by Adam's Sin, but our Condemnation was by Imputation
of Aams Sin. Therefore our Justification is by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, Romans 5. 19. points us out to this Collation; As by one man's
Disobedience, many were made Sinners; so by the Obedience of one, shall many be
made Righteous.

Arg. 2. From the proportion, which our being made Righteous, bears to Christ's,
being made Sin. But Christ was made Sin by Imputation. Therefore so are we made
Righteous, 2 Cor. 5. ult, gives ground for Arguing from such Proportion; For he
was made Sin for us, who knew no Sin, [i. e. by an Experimental knowledge of
its Operation in himself, Peter therefore says, he did no Sin, 1 Pet. 2. 21.]
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him.

Arg. 3. From the proportion, which Imputation of Righteousness to us, bear to
the matter of our Justification, which (as we have shown before) being the
Righteousness of another, cannot be made ours any other way, than by
Imputation. So, and no otherwise, the sureties payment of the Debt becomes the
Act of the principal Debtor.

This last Argument suggests an Answer to W. P's Cavils about the word Impute,
that it is altogether used to express what is personally theirs, of whom it is
spoken, p. 29. For supposing it were so ordinarily, yet when it is applied to
the act of one person, by Operation of Law made another, it cannot be so meant.
For it is a good rule, Verba intelliguntur secundum Subjectam materiam, words
are to be interpreted, when ambigious, according to their Subject matter. I
shall propose, and answer one Objection of another Quakers, before I come to
Pens.

Obj. How can God account us to have done what we have not? So Whitehead, Voice
of Wisdom. 3. Head.

Sol. We must not fancy any misapprehension or false Judgment in God: God does
not (to speak strictly) account us to have done and suffered what we did not,
as the Creditor does not account the principal to have paid the debt, which he
knows the surety paid for him. But God admits of what Christ did for our
behoof, as if it had been our personal Act. As the Creditor Cancels the Bond,
lets the Debtor out of Prison, and gives him every way as Legal a Discharge
upon the sureties payment of the debt, as he could have done upon his Personal
Payments.

Next, I shall take notice of Pens Scriptures and Arguments.

As for Exodus 23. 1. Prove. 17. 15. one answer will serve both. God does not,
no^ allows he Man to justify the Wicked, In sensu composito, as we say whilst
he is such; nor does God justify the the Wicked, in justifying those to whom
Righteousness is Imputed, for by that Imputation, they are first made
Righteous, and then Justified, or Legally declared to be Righteous: So that
unless you will deny, that the Act of one Person may by contract, or Act of
Law, become the Act of another, as was above explained, there is no weight in
your Allegations. As for Ezekiel. 18. 20. The Son shall not bear the Iniquity of
his Father.

Answ. Exodus 34 7. One of God's names is, Visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers,
upon the ^hildren, etc. Thus then we collect, that this place signifies Gods
Perpetual and Immutable right, which to us seems to be equitable, in regard of
the near Conjunction between Parent and Child, (the Child being but the Parent
multiplied.) That in Ezekiel, Imports Gods gracious Recession from his right,
because of their more than ordinary a^dasity, in charging his ways with
inequality, verse. 25. verse. 3. he tells them they should not have occasion any
more to use that Proverb, verse. 2. the meaning whereof, was, verse. 19. The Son
bears the Iniquity of his Father; which implies, they had had occasion to use
it. See Josh. 22. 17. 2 Samuel 21. 9, 14. Instances of the Jews Children,
bearing the Iniquity of their Fathers.

But suppose that were Gods standing Rule, yet he might in Sovereignty, relax
his Law, so far as to admit of Christ, a surety, instead of the Malefactors:
and that he has done, I have proved before.

As for all the rest, they design to prove, we are justified by an Inherent,
and so not by an Imputed Righteousness. The chief, I answered before, on the
Head of Justification: The rest are obvious.

Arg. 1. God cannot Justify what is opposite to his pure Nature.

Answ. Nor does God justify what is opposite to his pure Nature, in justifying
a Person in himself impure, upon the Righteousness of another, imputed to him.
For, supposing the right of Sovereignty vested in God, to admit of Christ's
Righteousness, for our personal Righteousness, and an intimate Conjunction
between Christ and us, as one in Nature, and mystically by Faith, when God
justifies a Person for imputed Righteousness; he justifies one as truly (though
not in the same manner) Righteous, as if he had been per^onally Righteous.

Arg. 2. If man were justified by Innocence before the Fall, then so must he be
justifled after it.

Answ. We deny the Consequence, because man having broken the Covenant made
with him, God was at his free choice, how he would deal with him, (and that God
did not think fit to justify Man by a personal Innocence or Righteousness, I
shall prove, under the 4th. Head of Errors) which I presume Pen understands;
for otherwise, we are since the Fall, justified by Innocence, or a perfect
Righteousness, as before it, we should have been, only the manner of
Communication is different; the one by a Physical, the other by a Legal Act or
Operation.

Arg. 3. Sin came not by Imputation, but actual Transgression.

Answ. The Sin of Adam was made his posterities, Romans 5. 12, 14. by Imputation:
Adam was a Common Root to Mankind by Nature, but a Common Person by Divine
Constitution, in that positive Precept and Threat, Genesis 2. 17. and the Promise
therein inculded, in case of Obedience; whence as if he had stood, we had all
stood in him; so he Falling, we all Fell, or Sinned in him, as the Apostles
Phrase is, Romans 5. 12. And thence the Apostle argues, That as by one man's
Disobedience many were made Sinners* so by the Obedience of one, shall many be
made Righteous, Romans 5. 19.

Arg. 4. A man cannot be said to be actually Sinful, and Imputatively
Righteous: He may as well be said to be actually Damned, and Imputatively Saved.

Answ. Why not, as well as to say, a man is actually poor, not worth a Groat:
but imputatively Rich, as having by his Surety, paid his debt of Thousands; or
to say, the nine Men throughout a mutinous Army, are actually Guilty, and yet
imputatively Innocent, when the tenth man is admitted to sustain the punishment
due to the rest. Yet there is not the like reason to say, a man is actually
Damned, and imputatively Saved; no more th^n to say, a man is actually dead,
and imputatively alive: for Imputation is an act of Law, and makes only a
relative, not a real change, as from being condemned to be justified, not from
being dead, to be a alive.

W. P's Consequences, are some the same with his Arguments, as 1, 2, 3, 6. and
so answered already and the other three are co-incident upon the matter; and
the sum of them is, that if we be justified by imputed Righteousness, there is
no need of Inherent Righteousness.

Answ. There is no need of Inherent righteousness for Justification, but yet
there is need of it as to other ends, as to make us meet for Heaven, Col. 1.
12. The different use or need of imputed and personal Righteousness, may be
expressed by this Similitude, I egitimation gives ^ right in Law to our Parents
estate.

The use of reason, gives a natural capacity of enjoying it. Imputed
Righteousness, gives us a Title to the Heavenly Inheritance. Inherent, gives us
a fitness for the enjoying of it, (it lying in communion with God;) without
likeness of disposition, there can be no liking of each other.

Error, 4. That our Good Works (as they are wrought in the Spirit) are a
Meritorious (or deserving) Cause of our Justification. Geo. Whitehead, Voice of
Wisdom. p. 19. Printed 1659. The Arguments I urge against this Error, are
Three.
Arg. 1. OUr good Works fall short of the rule of Justification, which is the
whole Law. Romans 8. 3. What the Law could not do, in that it was weak, through
the Flesh, God sending his own Son, etc. The sum of the Verse is, that Christ
was sent to fulfull the Law for our Justification, which we could not do our
selves, through our corruption, which makes us as a verse, so impotent, to
Obedience of the Law.

Arg. 2. That we should be justified by our good Works, is inconsistent with
the professed end of God, in the way of our Justification; which is, that
whosoever Glories, may Glory in the Lord, verse. 31. Which Affirmative implies
the Negative, spoken of on another account, verse. 29. That no Flesh may Glory
in his presence. But if we be justified by our good Works, all Glorying is not
taken away from us: as appears by Romans 3. 27. Where is boasting then? it is
excluded: By what Law? of Works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith. I mean (and so
does the Apostle) such glorying or boasting, as the creature is capable of. The
Apostle tells us indeed, that if Abraham were justified by Works, he has
whereof to Glory, but not before God, Romans 4. 2. I suppose, partly because all
his strength (and so proportionably any of ours, so justified) to do those
Works, was originally from God (which consideration is suggested, to check our
boasting, either of Gifts or Graces;) What have thou, that thou did not
receive? now if thou did^t receive it, why do thou Glory, as if thou had
not received it? 1 Cor. 4. 7. And partly because we have an immediate
dependence upon God in our Operations, John 15. 5. Without me, ye can do
nothing, (...), Seorsima me, separate, or apart from me, rela^ing to that
mystical Union between Christ and his People, whereby their dependence upon him
in all the good they do, is as near and intimate, as that of the Branches upon
the Vine, by virtue of their natural Union, in the bearing any Fruit. So the 4
verse states the Comparison, As the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except
it abide in the Vine, no more can ^ee, except ye abide in me.

3. There is no natural Equivalency between our good Works, and a Reward, as
there seem^ to be between our Evil Works, and Punishment, though the Law had
expressed no penalty.

What boasting then you will ask, is the Creature capable of, and has he
ground for, in Justification by his own good Works or Righteousness? I answer,
That there comes nothing, as the reason or Me^itorious Cause of the reward
promised, between the promise of Reward to our Good Works, and the performance
of it; but the goodness of our Works, or their conformity to the rule, the Law
of God. The truth of this will appear, if we compare the Tenor of the Covenant
of Works, and Grace, Gal. 3. That no man is justified by the Law in the sight
of God, is evident; For the just shall live by Faith, and the Law is not of
Faith; but the man that does them, [i. e. the many things contained in the Law]
shall live in them. verse. 11. 12. It Is evident to any attentive Reader, that a
comparison is here made between the two Covenants in point of Justification;
and their difference lies in this* that in the one, the doe^ of the Law lives
in o^ by it; but the just [Evangelically] lives by Faith* not by Faith as a
Work (for, considered as such, Faith being opposed to the deeds of the Law, is
opposed to, and excludes it self) but Faith i^ metonymically put for its
object, Christ closed with for Justification, or Righteousness of Christ made
ours by Faith, called therefore, ^^ Righteousness through the Faith of Christ,
the Righteousness which is of God, by Faith, viz. in respect of the actual
Collation or bestowing of it, not of the Provision or Preparation of it, for
that is before Faith) Phil. 3. 9. And because God designs to take away glorying
in Justification, Faith in God through the Messiah, is called a Walking humbly
with God, Micah. 6. 8. That it does relate to the Law of Faith, and but only by
consequence, if at all, not di^ectly to the Law of Providence, or Submission to
afflictions, I am induced to believe upon these two grounds:

1. Because otherwise God returns no answer (which be seems plainly to design)
to the Query, what the Lo^d will be pleased with, or what Satisfaction shall be
given him for Isreal's sin, which is the sum of the Questions, verse. 7. Will the
Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of Oil?
Shall I give my Firstborn for my Transgression, the fruit of my Body for the
Sin of my Soul? But understanding it thus, there is a plain Answer, (viz.) I do
not expect any Righteousness of thy gift, but of thy acceptance: or thus, I
shall not be pleased with any Righteousness which thou bring, unless it be
what I have first bestowed on thee by Faith.

2. The Pride of man's heart makes him as loath to accept of a Righteousness
freely offered him, as to acce^t of the punishment of his Iniquity justly
afflicted. It makes him as loath to part with the privilege he had in the Old
Covenant, as he that has set up for himself some time, is to turn an
Apprentice: and therefore, it is as true an act of Humility, to accept of Gods
Righteousness, as of his Chastisments for Sin.

Arg. 3. If Righteousness were by the Law, (i e. by our personal Obedience to
it) then Christ died in vain; they (...).
are the Apostles own Words, Gal. 2, Gratis immerito, without sufficient Cause.
21. which we may make a perfect Hypothetical Syllogism, by adding the Minor.
But Christ died not in vain, and the Conclusion, therefore Righteousness comes
not by the Law* The reason of the Consequence in the Major, which the Apostle
affords us, is, because the end of Christ's Death was to provide us a
Righteousness, to be tendered to God; acceptance, and which (supposing the
Covenant of Grace) he neither would, nor could refuse: But if we have
Righteousness sufficient for the end of Righteousness, Justification; the
Righteousness provided by Christ, comes a day after the Fair, (as we say) too
late to bestead us. Christ's end in his Death, was to do that for us (in point
of Justification) which we could not do for our selves, (as may well be
inferred, from the place touched at above, Romans 8. 3, 4.)

The Scriptures they allege, are;

Arg. 1. James 2. 24. A man is justified by Works, and not by Faith only.

Answ. If we take Justification in a proper sense, for the Absolution or
Acquitting of a Sinner, this place would contradict that in Romans 3. 28.
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by Faith, and not by the Deeds
of the Law. But there is always a sweet consent, though sometimes a seeming
dissent between one Scripture and another.

I therefore distinguish between Justification, as it imports, the Absolution
of a Sinner, and as it imports, the Approbation of a Believer. I also
distinguish the word, Faith, as it is taken, for a living, or for a dead Faith;
that is, for the reality of Faith, or the bare Prosession. And then I answer,
that James tells us, how a Man is declared or manifested to be a justified
Person, (viz.) not by a profession of Faith only, but by Works also; we are
justified by Works, as our Faith is made perfect by Works, Jam. 2. 22. that is
declaratively. Faith is declared or evidenced to be perfect; that is, sincere
and true by Works. As the Tree is not made, but shown to be good by the Fruit
it bears. And hence it is said, that Faith without Works is dead, verse. 20. It is
so, and appears to be so, as the Tree that bears not at all. And the scope of
the place is to convince the Hypoc^ites, that said they had Faith, and had
none, as appears, verse. 14. and onward. Whereas Paul in the other place, Romans
3. 28. shows u^ how a Sinner is formally justified in the sight o^ God, viz. by
a True Faith in Christ, as will appear to him that observes verse. 25. 26. where
God is said to justify him that believes in Jesus; Whom God has set forth to
be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood.

Arg. 2. Romans 8. 2, 4. The Law of the Spirit of lif^ in Christ Jesus, has made
me free from the Law (...) Sin and Death. That the Righteousness of the La^ may
be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Fles^ but after the Spirit. From the
first of these verse^ they conclude, that we are made free Meritoriously by the
Law of the Spirit in us, from the Law of Sin and Death, because it is the same
Law of the Spirit of Life that is in Christ, and the Saints. From the second
they observe, tha^ the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in the Persons of
the Saints.

Ans. To the second Verse, theirs cannot b^ the meaning of the Text: For,
supposing a sta^^ of freedom from sin attainable in this life, an^ that by the
Law of sin and death, is meant only death, the fruit of sin: yet how can there
be an^ color for merit of justification, when the ver^ privilege of that
state adds to those obligations, by which all the service our capacity will
extend to, had been due to God, if we had never sinned? Two other Senses ind^ed
the word^ seem to learned Men not incapable of.

1. That the Apostle give^ a reason of the connection between justification and
sanctification, because the same Christ Jesus that justifies by his blood,
sanctifies by his spirit. So Calvin, etc. in loc. 2. That they contain the
meritorious cause of that justification, which is evidenced by an holy life,
viz the active obedience of Christ. So Beza. And to this I rather incline.

As for Ver. 4. some understand them to note this end of Christ's sending into
the World, viz. that Gods righteous Laws might not be absolutely contemned, and
so given in vain; but might be observed (though imperfectly) by believers.
Others, of the imputation of Christ's surety, righteousness, Fide jussoria
justitia. The Quakers to be sure mistakes; for I shall show under the next
head, no perfect personal righteousness is attainable in this life.

Arg. 3. If our evil works are the meritorious cause of our condemnation, then
our good works are the meritorious cause of our justification. But the
antecedent is true, therefore the consequent. S. Fishers dispute at Sandwich.

The consequence he proves from that Rule in Logic, Contraria contrariorum
ratio, of contraries there is a contrary reason or consequence.

Ans. We deny the consequence of the major.

1. Because our good, and our evil works, are not perfectly contrary. For our
evil works are perfectly evil; for malum fit ex quilibet defectu. Any one
defect makes our works evil: but ou^ good works are but imperfectly good. For,
Bonum fit ex integris causis. There must be a conformity in all respects to the
Law to make our work^ good. For that Rule on which Fisher ground^ his
consequence, holds only of immediate or perfect contraries, not of mediate. And
so his consequence is but like this. If cold Water will chil^ a Man's body,
lukewarm Water will scald it.

2. Because there is no condignity in our goo^ works, were they perfectly good;
There cannon be a proportion between a finite work, and infinite reward. It Is
true, the Apostle says, To him that works, the reward is reckoned not of
grace, but of debt. Romans 4. 4. But it is to be understood of a debt, Ex pacto
gratiae non ex operis dignitate, due by promise, not by any merit preceding the
promise.

Arg. 4. Romans 2. 13. Not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the
doers of the Law shall be justified. Pen. p. 26.

Ans. The words give the reason of their perishing, who had the Law, (viz.) the
Jews, because God cannot justify any on the terms of the old Covenant, that do
not perfectly fulfill it; which the Jews were far enough from being able to do,
or indeed from endeavoring it. They pleased themselves in their privileges,
and external acts of worship (for which, hearing is put by a Synecdoche) as
equivalent in merit to a perfect legal righteousness.

Error 5. That a siate of freedom from sin, is attainable in this Life.
AGainst this Error, I urge two Arguments: 1. If no mere Man ever attained to
any such state, then it is not attainable. But no mere Man ever did, etc.

The consequence carries great probability of truth. As for the minor, that no
Man ever did attain a state of perfection, we may prove by the instances of the
eminently holy Persons in the Scripture, who in all likelihood would have
attained it, had it been attainable. I know the Quakers do give instances of
mere Men in Scripture, that were perfect: but their mistake lies in the
different use of that word (as we shall see by and by.)

Arg. 2. If there be a continual need and use of faith, and repentance in this
life, then a state of freedom from sin is not attainable in this life. But
there is a continual need and use of faith, and repentance in this life;
Therefore a state of freedom from sin is attainable in this life. The
Consequence is evident; What need can he have of repentance for sin, that has
no sin to repent of? or of faith in Christ for pardon and power against sin,
who is already free from what contracts guilt and defilement? That there is
continual use of faith (and there is the like reason of repentance) appears from
1 Cor. 13. ult. Now abide, Faith, Hope and Charity, these three, but the
greatest of these, is Charity. See p. 33.

By Charity, (...), we are to understand love to God, as well as to our
Neighbor, as is evident by Ver. 3. between which, and faith, and hope, the
Apostle states the comparison in respect of their duration; that when the two
former shall cease, the latter shall abide. Charity, or love, suits our future
perfect, as well as our present imperfect state; but faith and hope suit only
our present and imperfect state.

The Quakers Arguments are drawn,

1. From the word perfect. Phil. 3. 15. and elsewhere applied to Saints on
Earth.

Ans. The word perfect is sometimes used absolutely, 1 Cor. 13. 10. opposed to
what is in part, and sometimes comparatively, Phil. 3. 15. Let us therefore, as
many as be perfect, be thus minded: Yet Ver. 12. he says, Not as though I had
already attained, or were already perfect. He denies in one Verse, what he
affirms in the other, and so contradicts himself, if the word perfect be in
both places understood in the same sense. But it is evident, that in the 15.
ver. perfect is not properly taken, for he exhorts to be minded a^ he was:
Following after the Resurrection of the Dead. Verse 11. That is, that state of
holiness, which the Saints shall be invested with at the resurrection (called
the resurrection of the dead metonymically) which will be in a proper sense
perfect; and in a word, to press after perfection, from a lively sense of their
own imperfection.

2. From the Exhortations, to press after perfection, Math. 5. 48. Be ye
therefore perfect.

Answ. Such commands are the measure of our duty, not of our seize: I
mean in this life. In the life to come indeed we shall be like God, in this
life we are Children that bear small resemblance to their Parent. See 1 John 3.
2. That which is now our rule, shall be then our reward.

3. 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin.

Answ. 1. We may interpret it, that as he is born of God, he does not sin.
Every Child of God is mixta persona (as our Law says of the King in another
sense) consists of an old and new nature; and so his new nature is the
principium quo, the Principle from which he acts graciously; and the old
nature, the principle from which he acts sinfully. As mortal or immortal,
^yable or not liable to Death, is truly assirmed of the same Man, in respect of
the diverse parts of his nature, Body and Soul.

2. It may intend the manner of sinning, So ^he 8. Verse seems to limit it. He
that commits in is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the ^eginning.
The comparison is not between the act ^imply, for then it should have been said
only, for ^he Devil sins; but from the beginning, implies ^ comparison
between the manner of Man's sins, and the Devils, in respect of which he is said
to be of the Devil, because he imitates his example, who from the Day he began,
never ceased to sin, nor ever did one truly good action.

Error 6. That Christ enlightens every Man to Salvation. George Whitehead 's
Voice of Wisdom.
WHere note, that the word Christ is a mee^ blind, to delude the ignorant; for
the Quakers denying Christ to be God, they cannot own him for the Author of
illumination. The Scriptures I urge against this Tenent, are Ephesians. 2. 12. That
at that time ye were without Christ, having no hope, etc. That last clause I
intend especially, which must needs be understood either of the act of hope, or
of the ground or warran^ of hope; not of the former, for having no hope is a
badge of distinction between Jew and Gentile, as appears by the connection with
the foregoing clause, Aliens from the Commonwealth o^ Isrdel, (that
Commonwealth and Church being commensurate;) but if we understand it o^ the
act of hope, the want of that did not distinguish the Gentile from the Jews;
for many o^ the Jews labored under the same want. Many of them were
unbelievers, and so had no hope (One difference between faith and hope being
this, that the former looks at the promise of the benefit; the latter at the
benefit in the promise.) Fides respicit verbum r^^, spes rem verbi. Luther. We
must understand the phrase then of having no ground or warrant of hope, and to
that interpretation the foregoing clause leads us, Strangers from the Covenants
of promises. And Gentiles thereby were distinguished from the Jews, whose the
promises are said to be. Romans 9. 4. viz. the promises of Christ and Salvation.
From the words thus explained ^argue:

Arg. They that had no promises of Christ, and Salvation by him, could know of
none. But the Gentiles for a time had none, therefore they knew of none, and
consequently had not a light or knowledge sufficient to bring them to Salvation.

The major is evident, every act supposes an object. I cannot know that which
is not. The minor is proved by 1 Timothy 3. last. where, God manifest in the
Flesh, and as such preached to the Gentiles, are made two parts of the mystery
of godliness: and by that pregnant place, the mystery of Christ, which in other
Ages was not made known unto the Sons of Men, as it is now revealed to his holy
Apostles, and Prophets, by the Spirit, that the Gentiles should be followheirs,
and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel, Ephesians
3, 4, 5, 6. The place may be its own Comment, it is so plain.

2. Luke 10. 21. Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto babes The Father is said to hide the Object, because he did
not inlighten the Subject, i. e. To hide the Gospel, which was then openly and
plainly preached, because he did not inlighten their minds with a saving
knowledge of it.

3. 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural Man receives not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishness to him: neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned.

1. Observe, here is an opposition between men and men, in respect of the
knowledge of the things of God. The spiritual man judges all spiritual things,
verss. 15. but the natural man knows not, nor judges them. Yea, he accounts the
Doctrine of the Gospel foolishness.

2. The natural man not only does not know them, but cannot, because they are
spiritually discerned, which imports a disproportion between the object and
faculty; (such for instance) as between since, and a rational object.

Whence the Apostle speaks of an understanding given to know Christ, 1 John 5.
20. implying, that our old understanding will not serve to apprehend Christ
after a spiritual, though it may, to apprehend him after a rational manner.

The Scriptures which carry any color for the Quakers Opinion, of all that I
have met with, are these.

1 John 1. 9. That was the true Light, which lights every Man that comes
into the World. Ans. Christ being spoken of before, as the Messiah, or Savior,
to whom John did bear witness, verse. 7. we must therefore understand the place,
I think not of natural Light, but supernatural; not of the Light of Reason,
wherewith as God, he indues men; but of the Light of the Gospel, with which, as
the Messiah, he inlightens Men: which light may admit of a double
consideration, according to the use of the word (...), which signifies, 1. To
shine, or to light; that is, afford light, by which the object is made visible,
whether there be an Eye to see it, or no; so it is used, Luke 11. 36. 1 Cor. 4.
5. 2. It Is used to inlighten the eye or faculty, Ephesians. 1. 18. That the eyes of
your understanding may be enlightened, etc. If you take it in the former sense,
Christ by his powerful preaching, and glorious miracles, did not shine on
every man. Many never heard his Doctrine, nor saw his Works. As some parts of
the World see not the Sun, when it shines brightly in our Horizon. So that the
meaning can be no more than this, that the Gospel is taught to all comers
without exception, by Christ and his Ministers; not that every particular
person has the benefit: Many in all ages never heard, (no nor perhaps heard
of) the Gospel. 2. If we take the word in the other sense, for inlightning the
Eyes of the mind, it is certain, that many who are lighted (as our phrase is,
when a Candle is carried before us) are not enlightened, but are like a blind
man so lighted, that sees never the better. And then the meaning can be no more
than this, that whosoever are enlightened, are enlightened by him, and answers in
sense to Jam. 1. 17. Every good gift is from above, and comes down from the
Father of Lights. And lest we may seem to impose upon the Objector, we will
turn to a parallel place, Psalm. 145. 14. The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and
raises up all them that be bowed down. It Is evident enough, that however the
words sound, the sense can be but this, that all that are upheld from falling,
or raised again after a fall, are in God's debt for the help of his hand.

2ly. Romans 2. 15. The Gentiles are said to have the Law in their Hearts.
Whitehead, Voice of Wisdom.

Answ. They are also said to be without Law, and are imposed to them that had
the Law, verse. 12. viz. of Moses, verse. 17. Called the Oracles of God, Chap. 3.
2. and made the Privileges of the Jews above the Gentiles, verse. 1. in this
respect, because hereby Salvation was of the Jews, John 4. 22. i. e. the
knowledge of the way of Salvation: therefore it cannot be understood of a
saving Knowledge without a Contradiction.

2. It is not the Law in their hearts, but the Work of the Law, viz. these two
effects mentioned, accusing and excusing. For though it is true, the Gentiles
having some knowledge of the Law, the Law may be said to be in their hearts,
me^ning their understandings; yet in the Apostles use of that Phrase, Heb. 8.
11. he seems to include, if not mainly intend a suitable disposition to the Law,
or a delight in the Law after the inner man, Romans 7. 22. Whereas the Gentiles
in this sense, had not the Law in their hearts; For they liked not to retain
God in their knowledge, Romans 1. 26. but as he was an unbidden, so an unwelcome
Guest to them; so that they could scarce forbear to say to God, Depart from us,
for we desire not the Knowledge of thy Ways, Job 21. 14.

3ly. Romans 1. 19. That which may be known of God is manifested in them, for God
has showed it unto them, [viz. the Gentiles.]

Answ. The next Verse suggests an answer, viz. that which might be known of God
by arguing from the Effects to the Cause, from the Creation to the being of
God, and his Eternal Power, the first Divine property that appeared in giving
Being to all things out of nothing; and the uniform event of this knowledge, is
said to be the leaving them without excuse, not the leading them to Salvation.

4ly. Isa. 49. 6. I have set thee for a Light to the Gentiles, etc. Spoken of
Christ.

Answ. That is but a Prophecy of the Gentiles mercy, in the time^ of Christ's
actual Exhibition in the flesh, which was not fulfilled till the Jews
rejection of Christ, as appears by Act. 13. 46, 47. And the same Apostle, Romans
11. The casting away of them [the Jewes] was the reconciling of the World
(viz.) the Gentiles, verse. 15.

Error 7. The Scriptures are not the Word of God, but only a true Declaration
of it; nor are they the only Rule of Faith and Life. G. Whitehead, Voice of
Wisdom, p. 20. Sam. Fisher, Quaker^ Folly, p. 28.
TO bring any testimony of Scripture, concerning it self, were Petitio
principii, a begging of the Question, and were insignificant for their
conviction, who deny it is Divine Authority. And to urge Arguments drawn from
the purity of Scriptures Precepts; Sureness of Principles of Trust; Excellency
of Rewards; Sublimity of Doctrine; Prediction of future Contingents; the
Secresy and Efficacy of it is Operation on the hearts of men, (being such as no
other Writing can give us a single instance of the like;) the Miracles
(whereof, multitudes of Adversaries were Eyewitnesses, able and willing to
discover the Impostures (if any had been) Wrought for the Confirmation of it: I
say, to urge these Arguments, were to launch into an Ocean of Discourse: I
shall therefore only give a taste of their Arguments, and so leave their Tenent
to the judgment of the Understanding.

The Quakers Arguments will discover their meaning, without any Explication of
the terms.

Arg. Your Scripture is without: but the Word of God is within, Romans 10. 8. The
word nigh thee, even in thy heart, Fisher, p. 31.

Answ. 1. Our Scripture is within as well as without. That Command, Let the
Word of God dwell within you, Col. 3. 16. is in a degree, obeyed by every
Saint. And therefore by this Argument, Scripture is the Word of God.

2. That very Scripture, Romans 10. 8. speaks not of the Light within, but of the
Scriptures; for the Apostle calls it the Word of Faith which he preached,
latter Clause of the Verse, which he tells us was the Doctrine contained in the
Writings of Moses and the Prophets, Acts 26. 22. [where we may observe, that
the Quakers urge the Scriptures for their Tenants against us, only as
Argumentum ad hominem, to confute us by our own Principles, not that they own
the Authority of Scripture.]

Arg. 2. If there was a rule before the Scripture wa^ ^ritten, then that is not
our rule. But there was, a rule before the Scripture. Fishers, Quakers Folly,
etc. p. 29. Whitehead, by way of Question to the same effect, what was their
rule who spoke forth the Scriptures? Voice of Wisdom. Quest. 4.

Answ. The matter contained now in the Scripture, was always the Rule, before
it was committed in Writing, though it was not always in the same manner, nor
degree, conveyed, and published. Since the Gospel preached to Adam, Genesis 3. 15.
there has not been any addition, quoad Essentiam, but only quoad
Explicationem; not in substance, but in cleerness of Discovery. In that
respect, God is said to have spoken to the Fathers by the Prophets at sundry
times, or (as the Greek Reads) by many parts, or peece-meal, (...). Heb. 1. 1.
And the way of conveyance has been different, in diverse manners. (...). In
the same Verse, (viz.) Visions, Dreams, etc. In opposition to both which, God
is said to have spoken to us by his Son in his Person, and Apostles, who have
left us a clear Comment on the old Testament. And we are not now to expect any
new Discovery of Truth, Ex part rei revelatae vel Objecti; as to the matter
revealed: but only, Ex part actus revelandi, vel subjecti, as to the Persons
whom God Inlightens gradually, to discern the evidence of what is revealed in
Scripture.

Arg. 3. What was the Gentiles Rule, who had not the Scripture?

Answ. 1. So much of the matter contained in the Scriptures, as is written on
their Hearts. For the Scriptures gives us a Copy of all that is Written there,
with many Additions; a new Object of Faith, God in Christ, Old Duties enforced
by New Arguments, Love to one another, pressed by the example of Christ's
redeeming Love, John 3. 34. Sins against Light of Nature (as Uncleanness)
dissuaded from, by Arguments drawn from Union between Christ, and our Bodies;
Christ's property in them by Redemption, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 14. to the end.

2. When we affirm the Scriptures to be the only rule, we must in reason be
supposed to intend, to them who have them, not who have them not.

3. We must understand this Point in Conjunction with the former, the Light
within: and so we say, that they who have not the Scripture, since it is
Publication, have not any other way, a Discovery of God sufficient to lead them
to him, and so to Salvation; which we intend, when we affirm the Scripture to
be the Word of God.

Arg. 4. What is their Rule who cannot Redd the Scriptures? Must they be
Condemned, who cannot Read them?

Answ. 1. The same Rule with thei^'s who can, (viz.) the Matter contained in
the Scriptures, however conveyed, whither by Eye or Ear.

2. They shall not be condemned for their natural Incapacity (unless
accidentally, as their neglect of Learning to Read, that they might be able to
Read the Scriptures, is their Sin) but for their Unbelief and Disobedience to
the Doctrine of the Scripture, by what means soever come to their Knowledge.

As for that Notion of the Quakers, in the Terms of the Question, that the
Scripture is but a true Declaration of the Word of God [in the Hearts of
Believers, as Whitehead explains, p. 16.] I say but this:

Answ. 1. The Scripture is a Declaration of what ought to be in the Hearts of
Believers, and not only of what is. 2. The Penmen understood not all they
wrote, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 12. And there are Prophecies and Histories of things done
before the Pen-mens Birth, as well as personal Experiences.

Error 8. That there is no need of any outward Teaching: Cease from your
outside lights, and return to the Light of Christ in you, and this Light is
not a Chapter without you in a Book. James Naylor, in his Glory of the Lord
shining out of the North. p. 2.
THe only Argument I shall urge, is from Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. He [Christ] gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, for the perfecting of
the Saints. Whence I draw this Argument, If Christ has settled Officers in his
Church, till it be made perfect in grace, then there is need of outward
teaching, during its whole state in this life. But he has made such
settlement, etc. The Antecedent is evident in the Text before us. The
consequence goes upon ^ supposition of what I have before proved. (viz.) that
no members of the Church arrive to a perfection of grace in this life, and
therefore cannot be said at any time not to stand in need of teaching.

The Scriptures which the Quakers urge against the need of outward Teaching,
are these:

Their first Scripture,

Heb. 8. 11. And they shall not teach every Man his Neighbor, and every Man
his brother, saying, know the Lord. Answ. That place cannot exclude outward
teaching, unless it could be no means of knowledge; or unless there could be no
knowledge of God, but what were of ^mmediate revelation to the subject in which
it is sound. For, compare this place taken out of Jer. 31. 34. with Isa. 2. 3.
(speaking of the times of the Gospel, in which the promise before us, was to
receive its full accomplishment) and we find, that Out of Zion was to go forth
the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. i. e. The knowledge of God to
be conveyed by Ordinances, for which, Zion ^he Hill whereon, Jerusalem the City
wherein, ^he Temple the Seat of Ordinances stood [See Psalm. 87. 2, 3. and Psalm.
122.] are often put. And the fulfilling of it, Christ and his Apostles did
frequently teach in Zion, or the Temple, and so in Jerusalem, Math. 26. 55. And
the great Commission Apostolical, was, To preach among all Nations, beginning
at Jerusalem, Luke 24. 47. It doe^ not then exclude the teachings of men. But
i^ we compare this part of the Verse with the la^^ Clause, For all shall know
me from the least to the greatest; the meaning is evident, (viz.) that Go^ does
not hereby exclude, but include the teachings of Men, and promise a greater
efficacy to them than formerly; so that the Christians (...) the New Testament
should be able to leave the Principles of the Dactrine of Christ, and to go on
to perfection. (As the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6. 1.) i. e. not to forget, or
unlearn them, but not to stick in them, without further progress; (as for a
Scholar to be always learning Grammar, and never proceed to Rhetoric, Logic,
etc.

Second Scripture is, 1 John 2. 27. Ye need n^^ that any Man teach you.

Answ. This is spoken in opposition to any o^ the seducers, verse. 26. whose
teaching the Christians needed not. In which sense the Colossian^ are said to
be complete in Christ, Col. 2. 10, 8. (...) opposition to Mosaical Ceremonies,
humane traditions, or Phylosophical Principles, which might pretend to discover
somewhat necessary to salvation, not revealed in the Gospel, or contrary to
that revelation: which interpretation of the tex^ before us, is favored by the
latter clause; but (...) the same anointing teaches you all things, and is
truth, and is no lie. 1 John 2. 27.

2. This place will bear another interpretation, (viz.) that they were grown
Christians, such as did not altogether depend upon others, but knew somewhat
themselves; (having an inward light, or spiritual judgment (called)
(metonymically an anointment.) That Character, ever learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3. 7. However it agreed to other
Christians, did not agree to them: so that in the Quakers interpretation, there
is the fallacy; a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter (as Logicians
speak;) that is, to take those words absolutely, which are intended in a
certain respect. And that theirs cannot be the meaning, will appear to any one,
that shall but remember, that after Christ's ascension, when the spirit was
poured out in most plentiful measure; (so that if at any time on Earth, then
might the teachings of Man seem needless) there was greatest plenty of Teachers
extraordinary, ordinary, (as we find in the Acts of the Apostles.)

Another Branch of the Quakers Error, as to Ordinances, refers to Baptism and
the Lord's Supper, of which they affirm, that they cease upon the appearance of
Christ within. A. P 's. several Papers, p. 19. Farnworth's Discovery of Faith.
p. 11.

Against which Error, I oppose two Arguments; one for both Ordinances, the
other for Baptism in particular.

Arg. 1. If Baptism and the Lord's Supper are standing Ordinances, [or such as
we are obliged to use, during this life] then they do not cease upon the
appearance of Christ within, [or are not made useless or unnecessary by any
degree of seize in this life.] But the former is true, therefore the
latter.

That they are standing Ordinances, appears, because no formal repeal can be
produced, either in terminis, or by any due consequence from Scripture; nor yet
any virtual repeal, as in Laws made for a time, and at the expiration thereof,
of course, ceasing to oblige.

That then they do not cease as to our need of them, follows evidently, because
it is not to be supposed consistent with Christ's wisdom, to continue an
obligation upon us, to the use of a means, when the end is obtained already.

All that can be said with any color, is, that they are of perpetual
obligation, till the appearance of Christ within; that is, a full appearance,
or state of perfection. But we having proved before, that there is no such
state attainable in this life; then if those Ordinances oblige, till we be
arrived at perfection, they oblige, and so are of use, during term of life.

Arg. 2 If Baptism be a Foundation-Doctrine, (as I may call it) then it is of
use during this life.

That it is such, appears by Heb. 6. 1, 2. where the Apostle calls the Doctrine
of Baptism a Foundation; by which phrase of the Apostle, the knowledge of the
use and intendment of that Ordinance by those, who had or were to receive it,
^eems to be meant. The consequence is good, If it be an Ordinance, all
Christians are to understand and improve, then they must receive it. Being
baptized into Christ's death, cannot be an argument to induce the unbaptized to
a mortification of sin, which the Apostle urges upon the baptized, Romans 6. 3, 4.

If it be said, that the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews to leave this Principle or
Foundation of Christian Doctrine, verse. 1. I answer, that by leaving it, the
Apostle cannot mean relinquishing the practice thereof. For then by force of
the same phrase, applied to Faith and Repentance, etc. These graces must also
be left, (the contrary whereto I have before proved) but the Apostle explains
himself, that they should not so stick in the foundation, as not to proceed to
the superstructure, or highest points of Christian doctrine. I could never meet
with any thing, that looked like an Argument, for their opinion, but that
place, which speaks of showing forth the Lord's Death, in the Supper, till he
come, which they interpret, till he come in the spirit. 1 Cor. 11. 26.

Answ. So Christ was come already to the believing Corinthians. The Apostle
speaking of them and himself, says, We have received not the spirit of the
World, but the Spirit which is of God, 1 Ep. chap. 2. v. 12. And yet that
hindered not the Apostles encouragement and direction in their use of the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 25, 26, 28.

Error 9. That there is no Resurrection from the Dead Rob. Turner in a Letter
of his to the Baptists, and George Whitehead, in his late Answer to W. Burnet,
and George Fox, Jun. in his Works bound up together.
THe Scripture is plentiful in asserting the Resurrection. I shall only single
out one Argument to evince it.

Arg. If the bodies that have done Good or Evil, must receive their reward
accordingly, then the same bodies that dye must rise again. But the Antecedent
is true, therefore also the Consequent.

That the bodies that have done Good or Evil, must receive their reward
accordingly (which Proposition is the ancecedent) is evident by 2 Cor. 5. 10.
And then the Consequence is firm, because those bodies receive not their
Reward, till the universal Judgment, and then they cannot receive it (having
been once dissolved) unless they rise again.

For the further proof of antecedent and consequent, I shall first explain the
Terms of Christ's Argument to prove the Resurrection from the ^ead, which to
ordinary Readers may seem inconsequent, and then show how the Argument is
^educed.

The place is Mat. 22. 31, 32. As touching their Resurrection from the Dead,
have ye not Read that which was spoken unto you by God, ^ Saying, I am ^^e God
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: God is not the God of
the Dead, but ^f the Living. And it is added, Luke 20. 38. For all ^^ve unto him.

To be a God to Abraham, notes, a Covenant^elation, and so an Obligation to
confer all the Blessings of the Covenant; among which, E^ernal Glory is, though
the last, yet not the least, Not the God of the Dead, that might be meant
^ither of them who are dead, simply, or of them that are so dead, as that they
shall never return ^o life: Not in the former sense, for God pro^laimed himself
the God of Abraham, etc. long after he was dead; therefore in the latter sense:
^ut of the living, that is of them whom God in^ends to restore to Life, or
whose bodies live Po^entially, not only of them, whose Souls live ^ctually: For
all live to him, that Clause seems to ^mport a reason of that Denomination
living, given to those that were truly dead, viz. That God calls the things
that are not as if they were, Romans 4. 19. Because of his Omnipotency, and
Immutability of his Counsel.

Concerning the Scope of these Words, the^ are different apprehensions, some
conceive tha^ Christ hereby proves the Immortality of the Soul, (which the
Sadduces denied, as appears by Acts 23. 8. For if there be no Soul of a
Spiritu^^ Nature in man, it must needs be Mortal, as hi^ body) and by
consequence only, the Resurrection of the body.

The Sadduces denying the Resurrection (...) the body, because they denied the
Immortali^^ of the Soul, (as these Interpreters conceive* others, that Christ
intends only to prove the Resurrection of the body, so Calvin. Other^ that
Christ intends both directly, so Be^ Diodati. And hence the Argument of our
Lord is somewhat differently framed. Either thus;

They whose God, God is, shall rise from the Dea^ God is Abraham's, Isaac's,
and Jacob's God.

Therefore they (and upon the same ground* all other Believers) shall rise
again. The consequence he proves, because God is the Go^ only of the Living,
and so seeing they live i^ Soul, they shall live in Body too. Or else thus*

They whose God, God is after death, shall rise again. But God is the God of
Abraham, etc. (an^ consequently of all Believers) after death; therefore
Abraham, etc. shall rise again.

The reason of the consequence is, because otherwise God were not the God of
Abraham's Isaac's, and Jacob's (and so other Believers) persons, but of their
Souls only; whereas to be ^he God of their Persons, is to be under a Co^enant
to give them (as other things, so) Glory; and so their bodies must be
glorified, as ^ell as their Souls (their Persons being con^^ituted or made up
of those two Essential ^arts:) or the Argument may be framed more ^lainly thus,
in the sense of Christ's Words:

If God be under a Promise to glorify the Persons of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, then their bodies must rise again; But God is under such a Promise,
therefore, their bodies must rise again.

The antecedent is evident by the Explication of the Terms above. The
consequence depends upon a double ground, partly Gods Fidelity in making good
his Promise, and partly because Abraham's, etc. body is incapable of the benefit
of the Promise of Glory, made to it, without (...) Resurrection. And the
Argument thus phrased, suggests a fuller answer to the Exception made against
it, as first laid down, (viz.) That God might be the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob after death, if there were no Resurrection; because their Souls live, in
respect of which, God were their God.

Answ. First, God is said to be the God of Abraham, that is, of his Person, for
his Soul is but part of his Person, not the whole; and to be the God of the
Person includes the glorifying of the whole Person, not only of a part.

2. God were not fully Abraham's God, o^ did not fully make good his Promise,
if h^ glorified one part of Abraham and not another.

3. Nor were the Promise to glorify Abraham^^ Soul, made good, without
glorifying his body too: for the Happiness of the Soul is not perfect without
the body, it is dear and belove^ Companion; (the Soul having a strong desi^^ and
Inclination to a reunion to the body (a^ the Schools not without good ground
determine) Vid Calvin. Harm. Evang. in Mat. 22. 31* 32. Luc. 20 38.

4. It whole Abraham be not the correlate i^ the Co^venant, or party Covenanted
with, ho^ is any thing (as in the Text a Resurrection) attributed to him, in
respect of a part of him* There cannot be a ground for a Limitation i^ respect
of a part, (as here; that ^braham should rise as to his body) unless the Whole
be in Being [either Actually as to his Soul, or Potentially as to his Body, in
respect of the Decree and Covenant of God] Vid. Vedel. Rationale Theolog^cum,
l. 2. c. 6.

To apply the sum of Christ's Argument, for the proof of the antecedent, and
consequent o^ my Argument for the Resurrection, which was this:

If the bodies that have done Good or Evil must receive their Reward
accordingly, then the same bodies must rise again, etc.

That the bodies that have done good must receive their reward, is evident,
because God is under a promise to reward them. And rise again they must,
because else God's Promise to the bodies must either not be made good at all,
or not to the same body to which it was made (which is contrary to the whole
Scope of Christ's Argument.)

If any shall say that Christ's Argument and my Application of it, proves but
the Resurrection of the good, and their Reward in their bodies. I answer two
things;

1. That the Sadduces and Quakers Proposition being, That there is no
Resurrection from the dead, which is an universal Negative, therefore a
particular Affirmative, that some [the good] shall rise again, is contradictory
thereto, and overthrows their Negative; and therefore to prove that all shall
rise again, is not strictly needful: for that were Oppositio contraria, not
Contradictoria (as the Logicians speak.) Yet Ex abundanti, I answer,

2. Christ's Argument suggests another to us, for the proof of the Resurrection
of the ba^. For by the same Reason, that the good must ^ise, because of God's
Promise to Glorify their Bodies; the wicked also must rise, because of God's
threatening to torment their Bodies. For God is not more bound to fulfill his
Promises, than his threats, when they have some stamp or character upon them;
(as an Oath for instance, Heb. 3. 18. Chap. 7. 21.) whereby they may be known
to be signa beneplaciti, discoveries of God's secret will or decree. Which
limitation I add, because it is evident, that some promises and threats have a
tacit condition, upon which, though not the act of Divine will, ye^ the things
willed depend, as 1 Sain. 2. 30. Jonah 3. 4, 10. and in the nonperformance of
them God does not cross, but comply with his secret will.

Turner's Argument against the Resurrection, are:

Arg. From Eccles. 3. 19, 20, 21. Whence he concludes, the fleshly Bodies of
Men rise not again, for if the fleshly Bodies of Men rise again, and not the
flesh of Beasts; then Men's Bodies have a pre-eminence over a Beasts Body: and
to affirm the Bodies of Men shall rise again, were to give Solomon the lie.

Answ. Men are said to be Beasts (...) not simply, but in a certain respect,
(viz.) in respect of the mortality of the Body, which being composed of the
same materials with bruit Beasts, is as liable to a dissolution. In respect of
the immortality of Man's Soul, and the Resurrection of his Body, He has
pre-eminence above a Beast. As for Verse 21. if they be the Atheists words,
personated by Solomon, they note the Reason of his Opinion, because the
difference between Man and Beast, as to their future state, is not visible, as
their agreement in their dissolution is, If they be Solomon's own words, he
cannot be supposed to mean any more, than that the different disposal of the
spirits of Man and Beast, is not visible to the eye of sense, and but dimly to
the eye of reason and faith; and so may be an occasion of the Atheists conceit,
that that difference in their future state, is but talk, and uncertain
conjecture. For Chapter 12. 7. Solomon tells us, that The Spirit of Man returns to
God that gave it, [viz. to be disposed of, as Justice, or Mercy shall see meet.]

Arg. 2. From Job 7. 8. The Fie of him that bath seen me, shall see me no more.
But if all rise again, then the Eye that has seen him, may see him again;
which Opinion gives Job the lie.

Answ. The meaning of Job can be, but that the Eye that had seen him, should
after his death see him no more in statu quo, not with such worldly comforts
about him, as now he had; Verse 10. he instances, in a return to his House.
They that had seen him and Inhabitant in the Land of Vz, should never see him
there again in that capacity. Verse. 7. He says his Eye should see no more good;
compare that passage with this in hand, and they amount to this, that Job
should after death no more in joy the accommodations of this life, and
therefore no Eye could be witness of any such in joyment. That Job did not
intend a denial of the Resu^^^ction of his Bod^, unless we will make Job give
himself the lie, is evident by Chap. 19. 26, 27. And though after my Skin,
worms destroy this body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for
my self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another, though my Reins be
consumed within me. Of which place, he that would see a full explication, let
him read the Learned Caryl Comm* on Job. All that I shall infer from the sum
of the words, discernable by an ordinary judgment, is, that if Job had the same
body after the Resurrection, that he had before, then he was as visible after,
as before it.

Arg. 3. From 1 Cor. 15. 50. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God;
then not the body of Man (says the Quaker) for that is flesh, and in it is
blood.

Answ. The latter Clause of this Verse explains the former, Neither does
corruption inherit incorruption; where the Apostle gives us to understand, that
a corruptible Body shall not inherit a state of immortality [the adjunct being
put for the subject, in both words:] And the Quakers interpretation crosses the
whole drift of the Apostle in a great part of the Chapter, which is to show
that the same Body shall rise, but with so different qualities, that it shall
be as unlike to what it was before, as the standing Corn, to the Seed p^t into
the Earth; or as one Star is to another in brightness and luster, Verse. 37, 38,
41. And the Apostle enumerates those qualities, Verse. 42, 43, 44. The sum
whereof is, that that body which was before mortal, i. e. liable to death,
natural, i. e. supported by food, rest, etc. dishonored by being used as an
Instrument of sin; and by weaknesses, blemishes, the fruits of sin, shall
become immortal, i. e. not liable to death; spiritual, i. e. not needing nor
using its former props; glorious, neither subject to sin or the punishment of
it.

I might have been much larger on these points; but I know great Books find
sew buyers, and fewer Readers, and therefore I resolved not to exceed Six
Sheets. I wish what I have done, may prove profitable. If my Answers seem not
so clear as the Objections (which I hope I need not fear, unless in the point
of the Trinity, that being a mystery so high, that it re^ates the sharpest edge
of humane understanding) I desire the Reader to ponder upon this grave saying
of a learned Man: It is easier to oppose, than to defend the Christian
Religion; for it having something in it above the capacity of Man's
understanding, it is no hard matter by reason to oppose such a Religion.
Villeroy, in his Counceller of State.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT.
ONe of W. Pens Arguments against the Trinity, I had almost omitted (it being
out of its proper Place, in his Book, viz. that in p. 10.) If the Godhead
subsist in Three distinct Manners or Forms, then one of them cannot be a
complete Subsistence without the other two, and so parts, and something sinite
would be in God; or if in finite, then Three distinct in finite Subsistences,
and by consquence Three distinct Gods.

Answ. Not to Quarrel at the Impropriety of Pens Phrase, nor at the
Coincidence, in effect of this with his Third Arguments. I answer, by denying
the consequence, For as every Person is complete, In esse quid ditativo, per
Essentiam; i. e. is truly God by having the Divine Nature: So is every Person
complete In esse Personali per Subsistentiam, (as the Schools speak;) i. e. is
a complete Subsistent or Person, by his proper manner of Subsisting. And I
wonder he should not see, that his Argument may be retorted upon him thus. If
the Godhead be in Three Manners or Forms, then the Godhead in one manner,
must needs be a complete Subsistent, and distinct from the Godhead in the
other two manners: Or more plainly thus; If the same Godhead be in Father,
Son, and Spirit, then they must needs be distinct one from another, and any one
complete without the other two. God the Father cannot be God the Son, nor can
God the Son be God the Father: Though both Father and Son are one God. For the
Persons are formally Constituted by their relative Properties, and so the
Godhead considered with its Three relative Properties, admits of a Three-sold
distinction from it self absolutely considered.

If any shall wonder at the Distance of Time, between the Date of the Epistle
and Publication, he may please to know, that the Whole Book (except the
Advertisement) was flnished before the Epistle; but by reason of some
intervening Accidents (not needful, nor altogether Convenient to be mentioned)
could not get through the Press till now.

ERRATA.
Title page, dele Collected. Ep. to Reader, p. 1. l. 15. for referd r. refined,
l. 19. for charitably devout, r. charitable and devout, p. 4. l. 4. for and
like this, r. as in this instance. Book. p. ^. l. 3. dele or, p. 14. l. 4. dele
the properties of, and after attributes, r. among themselves, and with their
Subjects, p. 17. l. 7. for of Persons in the nature Three, r. Three Persons in
the nature, p. 24. l. 1. far counterpriae r. counterprice. p. 35. l. 8. dele
had. The Literal Faults may easily be seen, and amended.


