A DEFENSE OF THE PAPERS Written by the Late KING Of Blessed Memory, AND
Duchess of York, AGAINST The ANSWER made to Them.

By Command.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty for
His Household and Chapel. 1686.

PREFACE.
IT IS acknowledged, that Sovereign Princes, when They enter into the Lists of
Disputation, may be answered, as well as Private Men: for then they Command
not, but only Argue, speak their Opinion, and Instruct. The Answerer is not
therefore blamed for appearing on the contrary Side to our late Sovereign of
Blessed Memory, whose Papers were for that Reason made Public, that every man
might have the liberty of considering them, and of making a free and upright
Judgment concerning them. Accordingly it has pleased Almighty God, by means of
them, to open the Understanding, and direct the Will of many sober and
well-meaning Readers, in the knowledge of his only True Church, and the desire
of being united to it. The great Success of them, as it is manifest to the
World, so in all probability has occasioned the Answer, by one who calls
himself a Son of the Church of England; and who gives it as the Reason of the
publishing his Pamphlet, That the Papers thus dispersed in Print, may fall into
many Hands, who, without some Assistance, may not readily resolve some
Difficulties started by them. Upon which Consideration, this Author thought it
not unbecoming his Duty to God and the King, to give a clearer Light to the
Things contained in them: Which not long after he explains, in relation at
least to the First Paper, wherein he could have been glad to have found as much
Reason to convince, as there was a fair Appearance to deceive. Now whether the
King intended to deceive his People, or that the Deceit might be occasioned by
His Writings, I leave our Author to expound. But in general, to clear
Difficulties, and discover a Cousenage, I freely grant, not to be unbecoming of
our Duty. An Answer then may be made, even to a King; but the Manner of
Answering is likewise to be considered. And surely there is somewhat more of
Respect to be given to a Sovereign Prince, than to a common or private
Disputant; especially if the Answerer be his Subject. The Cardinal of Peronne,
though a Forreigner, has observed this Decency in the Controversy managed
betwixt our King JAMES the First and him. Luther, on the other side, has made a
German Quarrel with HENRY the Eighth, without allowing Him so much as the Name
of King; but in the beginning of his Answer, calling Him barely by His
Christn'd Name, and using Him afterward as familiarly and scurrilously, as if
Martyn and Harry had been two Sophisters, set up to wrangle in the Schools, at
their two confronting Desks. After the same manner, and not without a
convenient share of Impudence, has Milton treated King CHARLES the First; but
he had cast off the Yoke of Dominion before he answered, and of a Subject was
become a Rebel. To speak evil of Dignities, is not much recommended to us in
the Holy Scriptures: and whether he be Catholic or Protestant, (Tros Rutulusve
fuat --) who manages a Dispute in this manner, neither Church ought to be
overproud of such a Champion. Now whether our Answerer has followed the Example
of Peronne, or whether he has not some little tincture of Luther's
Mannerliness, and the Civility of Milton, let the impartial Readers of his
Pamphlet, nay, let even all modest and dutiful Protestants be Judges. I name
not here the Passages, which are either disrespectful in relation to the Late
King, or to the Present, nor the Pedantique Cavils, nor the private Scoffs,
which have rendered our Author justly odious to the sober Men even of his own
Party: But if he will look upon this as a bare Accusation, without Proof, I
shall endeavor to make it good upon his Summons. In the mean time, though, as he
alleges, it be no Reflection on the Authority of a Prince, for a private
Subject to examine a Piece of Coin as to its just Value, notwithstanding that
it bears his Image and Superscription on it; yet the Answerer ought to be
cautious of decrying that Coin among his Fellow Subjects, unless he can fully
prove it to be Counterfeit: But he might have made a more proper, and less
invidious Similitude, by comparing the King's Paper to a Medal, rather than to
Coined Money; It bears the Figure of one Monarch, and is Distributed to the
People by another: It Is a Largess, not imposed on any Man; it may either be
taken, or refused. But both those Actions ought to be accompanied with Respect;
the Metal and the Weight may be examined, without phillipping it up into the
Air: for the Image, the Superscription, and the Donor, ought all to secure it
from Contempt.

To conclude, If the Answerer thinks it not unbecoming his Duty to God and the
King, to give a clearer Light to the Things contained in those Papers, I know
it not to be unbecoming mine, to defend the Honor of both our Princes, and the
Truth of that Religion professed by them, which has descended without
interruption from our Blessed Savior and his Apostles, even to us. In so
doing, I hope I shall discover the foul Dealing of this Author, who has
obscured, as much as he is able, the Native Luster of those Papers, and
recommended by a false Light his own sophisticated Ware; part of which may
certainly deserve the clearest Light which can be given it by the Hands of the
Undersheriff, or of somebody whom I will not name.

A DEFENSE OF THE PAPERS Written by The late KING of Blessed Memory, and
Duchess of York, AGAINST The Answer made to Them.
A Defense of the First Paper.
AS I think the Answerer may, with as little need of Apology, become the
Antagonist, as I the Champion of a King and Princess, and that the cowardice of
delaying Time, suits ill with the Presumption of entering into such a Quarrel; I
shall lose none in scanning the Preliminary Discourses of my Adversary, or
making any for my self.

His Majesty says in his first Lines, That it is as visible, as that the
Scripture is in Print, that none can be the One Church which Christ has here on
Earth, but that which is called the Roman Catholic Church; and that there is no
need to enter into the Ocean of Particular Disputes, when the main, and in
truth only Question is, Where that Church is.

The Answerer, who had a mind to flourish, before he offered to pass, says
first: That if particular Controversies could be ended, by a Principle as
visible as that the Scripture is in Print, all Men of sense would soon give
over Disputing. And what if they did? The sooner, the better, I should think.
For Christians, sure, might without any harm become unanimous in their
Sentiments, all of one Heart, and one Soul again, and lay Disputing aside: As
truly I believe they would, if the Apostle could prevail with them, to lay
aside all Anger, and Malice, and Indignation. For Disputes, alas! continue, not
because Truth is not visible, but because Men will not submit their Sense to
Grace, but strain it, in stead of ending Disputes, to keep them up, and render
invisible the most visible things in the World.

In our present Case, if His Majesty, in stead of as visible, had said, the
Church is more visible than Scripture, He would have had a very great Man to
take His part. For which does the Answerer think is the more visible of the
two, the thing which is seen, or that by which it is seen? And he knows who
said, (...) Authoritas. Aug. Cont. Epist. Fund. c. v.
I would not believe the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Catholic Church
had moved me. And this is, in truth, the Case of every Body. But evidently S.
Augustin's Eyes, as good as they were, did not see the Scripture, but by the
Catholic, that is, the Roman Catholic Church. For that, the Answerer knows, was
the Catholic Church with which he communicated.

Then he gives a Reason why Disputing would cease, viz. Because none who dare
believe what they see, can call Scriptures being in Print in question; which by
making nothing visible, which can be called in question, makes it not visible
that Scripture is in Print. For he knows the far greatest part of Mankind, all
Infidels and Mahumetans, do actually call Scripture in question at this day; he
knows many Christians have questioned diverse Parts of it heretofore; and He
himself still questions some, as visibly in Print as any of the rest. But to
question whether the Book in Print be Scripture, is manifestly to question
whether Scripture be in Print. And so in one breath he says it is, in the next
it is not visible that Scripture is in Print. But we will not fall out about
Matters which import not.

But, goes he on, what if the Church, whose Authority it is said they must
submit to, will not allow them to believe what they see? Why then that Church,
if he take Believing strictly, agrees with all Mankind. For as every body knows
that Faith is of things not seen, none can allow we properly believe (...) we
see. (...)
But if he take the Word largely, I know of no Church which allows not People
to believe all they see. I do indeed know of one, which would be glad People
would not believe they see, what they see not, nor by their Senses can see. An
Eye may see the Color of a thing, and an Ear hear the Sound it makes, etc. but
what this colored, or sounding thing is, often needs more than the Senses to
discover. For the What of a thing is not the Object of any Sense.

How then, says he, can this be a sufficient Reason to persuade them to believe
the Church, because it is as visible as that the Scripture is in Print? I am
sorry, that to know our Duty, is not with him sufficient reason to do it. We
all know by the Evangelist, that Christ left Commission to teach all Nations;
and by the Apostle, that there are Pastors and Doctors appointed to build us up
into the Unity of Faith, and prevent our being Circumvented by Error. And
whatever he does, I take it to be my Duty to learn of those, who are appointed,
and have Commission from Christ to teach, when it is visible who they are.

His following conceit of using and renouncing our Senses, and indeed, all
hitherto said, might have very well been spared: For there is nothing yet which
relates to our Business. If he thinks Kings and their Writings are not above
Sporting, the Matter I am sure is.

The substance of what he says, when he thinks to pass in earnest, is, 1. That
a Part is not the Whole, and the Roman he takes to be only a part of the
Catholic Church. 2. That Roman Catholic is an Expression found, neither in the
Creeds, nor Office of Baptism even at present. 3. That the Roman does not her
self believe she is the Catholic Church of the Creeds, because she admits the
validity of Baptism administered out of her Communion. And lastly, That there
may be different Communions of Christians, which may still continue parts of
the Catholic; Church; for instance, the Holy Bishops and Martyrs, who, he says,
were Excommunicated heretofore in Asia and Afric, and the Eastern Christians at
this Day.

For his first Riddle of a Part, and Whole, we may thank his Inadvertence. The
Paper does not say, that the Roman is the Catholic Church; but that the Roman
Catholic is the one Church of Christ. As Roman alone may signify the Diocese
under the immediate Government of the Bishop of Rome, which never did, nor can
more pretend to be the Catholic Church, than the Church of Laodicea, or
Ephesus, or any other particular Church; the Paper by joining Catholic to it,
shows it speaks of her, and all joined in Communion with her, and all who
believe as her Communion believes, whether they be joined in External Communion
or no. For it is apparent, by his Majesty's talking all along of matters of
Faith, and no where of any thing else; that he minded nothing but Faith, and
considered the Church with respect only to Faith. Now I beseech him, is this
Roman Catholic, ever the less visibly the one Church of Christ, because a Part
is not a Whole? Of what will he make that Whole, but of all the Parts? And does
not Catholic signify all the Parts? Or is it the less Catholic; is any part
taken out, because the particular Roman is put in? By the way, because He often
mentions the Roman Church, without adding Catholic, let me here, to avoid
Repetitions, declare once for all, That I shall understand him of the Roman
Catholic, wherever the Circumstances of the place determine not the Sense to
the particular Church of Rome. For he means not I suppose, to talk of one
Church, while His Majesty talks of another.

Upon the Second Head, he asks, If those who made the Creeds for our direction,
had intended the Roman Catholic Church, why was it not so expressed? He might
have answered himself. For he knows, as well as I, that the Reason was, because
Language always changes with Times. As there were no such Dreams of the Roman
Church, when the Creeds were made, as now, it had been a very superfluous, and
a very unaccountable piece of Care, to have said Roman in a Word by it self,
which was already said by the Word Catholic, and so by all the World
understood. Now there are who will have her, some a corrupt Part of the
Catholic Church, some none at all; who have a mind to let People know, they
take her for a Part, and a sound, and the principal Part, and yet would save
Words, have light on a thrifty way of saying all in short, by Roman-Catholic.

He says besides, That this Limitation, as he calls it, of the Sense of
Christ's Catholic Church to the Roman, was never put to Persons to be Baptized,
in any Age of the Church. And, That he finds not in the Office of Baptism, that
it is required that they believe the Roman Catholic Church. As if the Roman
Baptism* by requiring belief of the Catholic, did not require belief of the
Roman Catholic Church. If he think in earnest that it does not, let him present
a Man to this Baptism, who professes not to believe the Roman Catholic Church,
and try whether his professing to believe the Catholic Church will obtain it.
He reflects not that the Limitation, which is in this Expression, Roman
Catholic Church, comes not from Roman, but from Church. That Word indeed always
limits the Expression to those who believe, and sometimes to those who practice
the Doctrine of Christ. Roman neither makes nor marrs, as to Limitation, but
owns the Romans for such Christians. Taking in those, whom Injustice would keep
out, is, it seems, Limitation in his Language.

As it grieved him in likelihood, that this Expression, as visible as that the
Scripture is in Print, should be applied to the Roman Catholic Church, he had a
mind to retort it upon her; but very unluckily chooses to do it, in an Assertion
contrary to the sense of all the World, besides himself; and by an Argument
contrary to the sense of the whole Church, not excepting his own. He says then,
in his third Head, That it is to him equally visible, that the Church of Rome
it self does not believe that it is the one Catholic Church mentioned in the
two Creeds; and this every body, but he, plainly sees it does: And proves it by
this Argument, Because, if it did, it must void all Baptism out of its
Communion, which it has never yet done; when it is plain, that all the Church
agrees, it ought not to be voided. This he very well knows is a Plea overruled
by the whole Church many Ages ago, and which I little expected he would have
borrowed from Men, who, he says, were excommunicated, because they made, and
stood to it; especially wh^^^ he, I think condemns it himself. For he excludes
the Donatists, I suppose, and Novatians from the Catholic Church, because they
rebaptized. When he bethinks himself, he will not sure have the Church
heretofore not believe her self the Catholic Church, because she would not void
Baptism with the Re-baptizers; nor exclude the English from the Ca^ holic
Church, because she voids it not. The truth is to say in one breath, That the
Donatists were not Catholics, because they Rebaptized; and in the next, That
Roman Catholics cannot believe themselves Catholics, because they do not, is a
cross piece of Business, and much too hard for me. As far as I can understand,
the very Reason he gives why they should not, is one Reason why they should
believe themselves the Catholic Church. For, in not voiding the Baptism of
Heretics, they do as the Primitive Catholic Church did. And had I made such an
Argument for a Friend, I am afraid he would have thought I played booty.

The Answerer nevertheless strives to make it good by this Discourse: As long
as Baptism does enter Persons into the Catholic Church, it is impossible that
all who have the true Form of Baptism, though out of the Communion of the Roman
Church, should be Members of the Catholic Church, and yet the Communion of the
Roman and Catholic be all one; as it must be, if the Roman Church be the
Catholic and Apostolic Church professed in the Creeds. This, if I understand
it, is in short; Persons Baptized out of the Roman Communion, are Members of
the Catholic, but not of the Roman Catholic Church; and therefore the Catholic,
and Roman Catholic, are not the same Churches.

He was not, I perceive, aware, that he supposes what he should prove, and when
he has done, proves it by means of that Supposition: For he could not make a
Member of the Catholic, not to be a Member of the Roman Catholic, unless he
suppose that those are two different Churches. And this is the very Point in
Dispute, which he should prove, and which he puts for proved in his Conclusion.
But we are all subject to oversights.

I wonder more how it could escape him, that the Baptized Persons he speaks of,
are as much Members of both Churches, as of either. (I speak in his Language,
as if they were different Churches, that his Argument may go on.) Those Persons
are not truly Members either of the Catholic, or Roman Catholic Church; but as
far as Baptism makes Members, they are altogether as much Members of the Roman
Catholic, as of the Catholic. And He, if he will recollect himself, knows very
well, that both Points have been long since determined, and that by the whole
Catholic Church.

The old Contest, about Rebaptisation, puts it past Dispute, that they were not
truly Members of any Part of the Catholic Church. For the Contest was, How they
should be made Members? Whether by a new Baptism, or only by Imposition of
Hands? Both Sides therefore, that is* the whole Church, agreed, That they were
not Members of the Church, till, one way or other, they were received into it.
And to think they did not agree in this, is to make very wise Men of them; Men
who fell out with one another, even to Excommunication, if we will believe the
Answerer, how those should be brought into the Church, who were in already.
Again, That they were nevertheless as much Members of the Catholic Church, though
baptized out of its Communion, and so of the Roman, though baptized out of the
Roman Communion, as Baptism could make them, he knows too was carried against
the Re-baptisers by the rest of the Church, in whose Judgment the whole Church
ever since has acquiesced. And he stands single against that Judgment, when he
thinks a Man baptized out of the Roman Communion, is not a Member of the Roman
Communion, as much as Baptism makes a Member, and as much as if he were
baptized in her Communion.

In truth, there is nothing to dispute of, but Words. When he says, that
Baptism enters the Baptized into the Catholic Church, if he mean, that those
who are duly baptized by Men who are out of the Communion of the Catholic
Church, need no other Baptism to be brought into the Catholic Church, he says
very true, and no more than what the whole Church has long since said before
him. Neither do they need any other Baptism to be brought into the Roman. And
if he will have this called an entry, and the Baptized called Members, with all
my heart. For I think it time lost, to quarrel about the Names of things, when
we know what they signify. But if he mean, that their Baptism so enters them,
that they need nothing more, to be what every body understands by Members, Men
who believe and profess the Faith of the Catholic Church, he contradicts every
Member of the Catholic Church, and every Man in the World. For all Men see they
do not profess that Faith, but the Heresies of their Baptisers; and all
Christians know they need, notwithstanding their Baptism, to be received into
the Church; and that there goes Faith, as well as Baptism, to a Member of the
Body of Faithful. And as Faith signifies an Assent to the Doctrine of Christ,
the Answerer, sure, will not say, that they have Faith, who, far from
assenting, contradict the Doctrine of Christ; and so make the Church a
Congregation, no longer of Faithful, but of Faithful and not Faithful.

There is more ado about the last Head, and nothing all the while to the
Question. The substance is, That some have been cast out of Communion upon
particular Differences, which were not supposed to be of such a nature, as to
make them no Members of the Catholic Church: That therefore there may be
different Communions among Christians, which may still continue Parts of the
Catholic Church: And that consequently no one Member of such a Division ought
to assume to it self the Title and Authority of the One Catholic Church. And
what is all this, even supposing it all true, to the Question of the Paper,
Whether the Roman Catholic be the One Catholic Church of the Creeds?

Suppose his divided Christians do continue Parts still of the Catholic Whole;
cannot the Roman Catholic therefore be that Whole? Suppose no one Member of the
Division ought to assume to it self the Title and Authority of the One Catholic
Church; ought not therefore both, and all the Members to assume it? What is, or
can there be, to assume it besides? Or would he not have it assumed at all, but
the Name of Catholic Church banished out of the World by every such Division
which happens in it?

His Majesty, as I observed before, included in the Roman Catholic Church, of
which He speaks, all Christians whom a different Faith excluded not, and said
that this Church, or these All, are the One Catholic Church of the Creeds. The
Answerer, to show they are not, tells us, That among these All, there may be
Divisions, notwithstanding which, they may remain Parts still of the Catholic
Church. Why, if they remain Parts of the Catholic Church, they are of the
number of the All, who make it up, and remain Parts of His Majesty's Roman
Catholic Church, which takes All in. Is that Church ever the less Catholic, by
having never so many Members? Or ever the less One, because divided Christians
believe as she does? For if they do not, She and They both cannot be Members of
one Catholic Church, and the Answerer must needs exclude either Her or Them.

For it being as palpable Nonsense, that one Church can be with more than one
Faith, as that one Man can be with more than one Soul; the Churches, which make
up the Catholic Apostolic One Church, can have but one Faith among them All:
And who knows the Faith of any one, knows the Faith of all the rest. Now since
the Answerer, with his Compliment of Corrupt Faith, (which, as Compliments
often are, is Nonsense too) makes the Roman Catholic a Part, at least, of the
one Catholic Whole, all the other Parts must believe as she does, or cannot
themselves be Parts. And so his Reason, why All those who believe as she does
are not the Catholic Church, is because All believe as she does,
notwithstanding some Divisions.

As it is not to our purpose, I inquire not whether his divided Christians do
indeed, by continuing the same Faith, properly continue parts of the Catholic
Church; a Question which belongs to the propriety of Language; nor how far so
much Title to the Church avails to their Salvation. Since Divisions, especially
of long continuance, seem hardly consistent with Charity, and Charity is as
necessary to Salvation as Faith, I pray God of his Mercy to preserve me from
ever being divided, whether I be said to belong still to the Church or no, and
make them sensible of their condition who are. Neither will I examine how it is
with the Eastern Christians at this Day, or was with those of Afric and Asia,
whom he makes Excommunicated heretofore by the Bishops of Rome; a Point of
which if he have a mind to Dispute, he may choose his Man among those who deny
it. Whether the Roman Catholic, comprehending all of the same Faith with her,
be the one Catholic Apostolic Church of the Creeds, is our Question; not who
they are, who have the same Faith. And that this Roman Catholic Church is the
One Church which Christ has on Earth, or that he has none on Earth, is as
visible as that Scripture is in Print, or any thing more visible, if any thing
can be. For if it be not, we must look for Christ's Church, either among
Infidels, who believe not in Christ at all, or Heretics, who believe not his
Doctrine. And there, I for my part despair to find it.

The truth is, I suspect by his talking, that he would be content People should
think, that the one Catholic Church of the Creeds, required not any one Faith,
but were made up of as many Men as own Christ, whatever they believe of his
Doctrine: Except, perhaps, those who Rebaptise, and those who assume the Title
of the Catholic Church. By which means the notion of Catholic would be well
enough provided for, but One and Church left to shift for themselves. But he
does not directly say it, and it is not fair to put my suspicions to his account.

Diverse other Passages there are in his Discourse which relish not with me. He
by saying the Visible Church might have been easily shown in the first Blessed
Times, insinuates, she is less visible now, or rather invisible; for visible
things may be easily seen at all times: And I conceive the same marks, which
showed her then, will with as little difficulty show her now. Christians were
then admonished to mind those who abide in the Doctrine of Christ; who come and
bring not that Doctrine; and to contend for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints. And we have but to do so still.

Again, I comprehend not how his unheeded, and yet remarkable difference
between People cast out of Communion, viz. That some did, and some did not
challenge the Title of the Catholic Church, was the cause of any great
misapplication. It sounds as if he would have that Title never rightly applied,
but to those who do not challenge it, in likelihood because they have no
pretense to it. But I less understand how it comes to be Presumption and a
cause of Schisms in one part of a Division to assume it. It is not well
intelligible, when there is a Division, how more than one part can bear it. For
the Language of the World has always preserved that Title to one Part, and
given the name of Sect, or part cut off, to the other. And it is more
unintelligible, how it should be Presumption in that one Part, to take what all
the World gives, and that Presumption be the cause of Schisms, which happened,
and of necessity always must happen before the Presumption. For till there be
Schism, that is, Division, there cannot be Part of a Division to presume.

His account too of the breach betwixt the East and the West, is, I think, very
wide of the mark. He would have the Popes Supremacy bear the blame of all,
which, if my Memory fail me not, was not so much as made a Pretense, till near
Two hundred Years after the Schism began, nor any where more acknowledged than
in Greece, nor by any body more, than by him who began the Schism. When I read
the Story, I apprehended the cause of that breach was National Feuds, heightened
into violent hatred, by several Accidents which chopped unluckily in, and the
malicious Ambition of Men, who found their private Accounts in the Public
Calamity. Indeed I think they denied the Popes Supremacy at last, as all, who
will continue in Schism, at long run must; because to acknowledge and not
regard it, is self condemnation: Otherwise their Quarrel was to the Latin
Church, or perhaps more truly, Nation, not the Supremacy, of which they speak
so inconstantly, that I am persuaded it would break no squares even now, if
they could be brought on any terms to agree with Men whom they hate. I would be
more diligent in this Matter, if it concerned our Question. But as they are
parts of His Majesty's Roman Catholic Church, if they believe as she does, and
are not if they do not, and it is equal whether they do or no, I leave them to
Gods Mercy, and return from straying thus far, into our Road again.

This Principle being removed (which ought, he says, be taken for granted,
since it can never be proved) By the way, he does not, sure, mean this for a
bob to the King, as if he took his Principle, viz. That the Church is as
visible as Scripture, for granted, because he knew not how to prove it. Whether
the Person to whom he directed his Paper were satisfied before hand of this
Point by their former Discourses, or needed no Arguments to see a visible
thing, or however it were, the Answerer may perceive by the Paper, that his
Majesty thought it not to his purpose to press the Visibility of the Church,
but only submission to it; and means not, I suppose, to tell the King, he knew
not his own Design, or how to pursue it. His part is to answer what is said,
and not instruct the King what should have been said. He must therefore mean,
that it ought to be taken for granted, that he has removed that Principle,
which is just, Lend me your Hand, Neighbor, to remove my Block; I cannot stir
it my self. Alas! it is very visible he has done nothing toward removing it.
But he is in the right to play sure. Who have a flaw in their Title, do well to
get a Grant. By his saying it can never be proved, he has, I guess, a mind to
tempt somebody to prove over again, what has been proved a hundred and a
hundred times already. But as much as his positiveness tempts me to be doing,
and as easy as I think it to be done, I beg his Pardon at present: Parrying is
my business, not Thrusting now.

Whatever he mean, I do not think that what he concludes would follow, even
though the Principle which he dislikes were removed. The Principle is, That the
Roman Catholic is the One Church which Christ has here upon Earth; and the
Conclusion is, That we must unavoidably enter into the Ocean of particular
Disputes. Why so, I pray him? Why will not another Catholic Church serve turn?
If he will needs have it granted, that the Roman Catholic is not the One Church
of Christ, it is but showing us the other Catholic which is. Roman, or not
Roman, imports not. But believing the Doctrine of Christ, imports as much as
Salvation is worth; and the Commission which Christ gave to teach it the World,
is now in force, and shall be as long as there is a World. Let him but direct
us to the Men who have it in this Age, that we who live in this Age may learn
it of them; let him but tell us which is the One, not Roman Catholic Church,
which Christ has here upon Earth; and it will do our business every jot as well
as the Roman Catholic, and as much save us from being plunged into the Ocean of
particular Disputes. Otherwise, to tell us, the Roman Catholic is not that
Church, and not tell us which is, is as much as to tell us, that Christ has
none upon Earth. For evidently, She, or some other, must be that Church, if
there be any at all. But let him not send us to a Church, whereof the several
Parts agree not in one Faith. Besides that we should never understand how such
a Church, let it be never so Universal, could be One, and make account Christ
taught One determinate Doctrine, not the 1, and the No, both; it would be
otherwise useless. For if This Part teach one Faith, and the Next another, we
should not know which to believe, and in all likelihood believe neither.

But he knows no Reason any can have to be so afraid of the Ocean of particular
Disputes, since we have so sure a Compass as the Holy Scripture to direct our
Passage. I am sure there can be no Reason to venture to Sea, when we are
already safe in our Port; The Holy Scripture assures us, that the Church is the
Foundation and Pillar of Truth, and Truth is plainly the Port to which his
Compass should direct us. But pray what Compass can be sure, where the Needle
is not suffered freely to play? Wrangling is Iron to this Needle, and turns it
to all Points. It will indeed direct the humble, and docile, 2 Per. 1. ^ 0
and the sincere, who first know, that no Prophecy of Scripture is of private
interpretation, and we see it will, by the Third Paper. But it is not for the
bold and self-conceited Disputers. 1 Cor. 11. 16.
If any will be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Church of God, is
what the Scripture it self says to them. To contend with them at Scripture,
Quoniam nihil proficiat congressio Scripturarum, nisi plane ut aut stomachi
quis in^ at eversionem aut cerebri -- Non ad Scripturas provocandum est: nec in
his constituendum certamen, in quibus aut nulla aut incerta victoria est, aut
parum ^ erta. Tertull. de Praescrip. c. 17, 19.
Tertullian tells, us, is good for nothing, but to turn the Brain or the
Stomach; and that we ought not to try it this way, because the Issue will be
uncertain, or but little certain, or none. Alas! this Gentleman, with the
security he promises, errs all this while, not knowing the Scriptures, nor so
much as the End for which they were made. He would do well to remember what St.
Austin says to him in Words directed to another. If you will not have me
believe Catholics, Si dixeris, noli Catholicis credere, non recte facies per
Evangelium me cogere ad Manichaei sidem, quia ipsi Evangelio Catholicis
praedicantibus credidi. Quod si forte in Evangelio aliquid apertissimum de
Manichaei Apostolatu invenire poteris, infirmabis mihi Catholicorum
authoritatem, qui jubent ut tibi non credam. Qua infirmata, jam nec Evangelio
credere potero, quia per eos illi credideram, ita nihil apud me valebit, qui^
quid inde protuleris. Si inde aliquid manifestum pro Man^ chaeo legeris, nec
illis (credam) nec tibi, Aug. cont. Ep. Fund. ^ 5.
you are quite out, to think to draw me to you by Scripture, because it was for
their sakes that I believed Scripture. You would indeed, if you could evidently
prove your Doctrine by Scripture, invalidate the Authority of Catholics, who
bid me not believe you. And when you have done, neither shall I believe the
Scripture, which I had believed upon their Credit; and so what you allege out
of it, will be of no force with me. If you find it manifest for you, I shall
neither believe Catholics nor you. Here I will stop: For truly after so much
said of this Subject, and so long Experience of his sure Compass, I grieve too
much to dispute it farther, when I observe that neither Reason nor Experience
will do; and fear there are who more desire the Ocean of Controversies should
never be past, than truly think it will be past this way.

But he is merry, whatever I be. For sure he is in jest, when he talks of clear
Evidence of Scripture against us, and the Church of Romes notoriously deviating
from it. Under the Face he sets on this Matter, there is nothing in the World,
but that he has the Art to make the Words of Scripture bear a Sense of his own,
or Friends invention; no great matter to brag on, Alas! no not so much as for
Learning. 2 Pet. 3. 16
For even the Unlearned, he knows, have Wit enough to pervert the Scriptures to
their own Perdition. And because the Church of Rome has no mind his Word should
be past upon her for God's Word, he runs away with it, with a sure Compass, and
clear Evidence, and the infallible Rule; Words, which, as big as they sound,
signify nothing but the Whimsies of possibly a single, possibly an unlearned
Man; but yet who will needs be wiser than the Church. Si unaquae^^ c
disciplina, quamquam (...) lis and (...) percipi possit, doctorem aut magi^
trum requirit: quid temerariae superb^ ae before, quam ^^^^norum Sacramentorum
libros, and ab Interpretibus suis nolle cognoscere, and incognitos ve^^ e
damnare Aug. de Util. Cred. c. 17. tom. 6.
To take upon us to understand the meaning of the Books of Divine Mysteries,
otherwise than by learning it of their Interpreters, when no Trade, the most
trivial and easy, is learnt without a Master, and condemn what we understand
not, as we do when we will not embrace that Meaning, is, not to mince his
Words, rash Pride, in the Opinion of S. Austin.

But to go on, the Answerer knows very well, that the meaning of his Majesty's
next Paragraph, is not what his Question would put upon it, and yet he must
needs suppose it has another, as if he did him Grace. His Majesty asks no Grace
of him, but to put the Period entire; It is not left to every Fantastical Man's
Head to believe as he pleases, but to the Church, to whom Christ left the Power
on Earth, (where I think the Compositor has left out a Comma) to govern us in
matters of Faith, who made the Creeds for our direction; and then to understand
English. But he will needs suppose the meaning is, that those who reject the
Authority of the Roman Catholic Church, do leave every Man to believe according
to his own Fancy. Still he takes it not right. Not but that rejecting that
Authority infers setting up private Fancy. But as inconsequent as it is, there
are, who, for all their rejecting that greater Authority, are severe enough in
requiring punctual obedience to their own little or no Authority, and this too
visibly for his Majesty to say they do not. His words, I conceive, cannot
fairly be supposed to extend farther, than they were directed, to a single
Person in all likelihood, who had the honor of his Confidence, and whom he
thought fit to put in mind, That it is not left to every Fantastical Man's Head
to believe as he pleases. What has the Answerer to say to this? is it true? or
is it not true?

Certainly, says he, those of the Church of England cannot be liable to any
Imputation of this Nature. And who can tell by this, whether he say I, or no?
or what kind of Answer that should be which says neither? or what it serves
for, but to do the Church of England the same good Office which they do
themselves, who, when Vice is ridiculed on the Stage, fall out with the Actors
or Poet, and will needs be the Fools of the Play.

But if he will be (...), needless Apologies, why must he needs make one fifty
times worse than the attempt to make it? All Heretics since the first Four
General Councils, may say the very same which he says for the Church of
England, and all before them, the Equivalent. Arius himself could say, I
receive the Apostles Creed, and why should more be required of me, when that
has hitherto been thought sufficient for all Christians? Moreover, I embrace
all former Councils, but think I have very great reason to complain, that a
Party in the Church, the most corrupt and obnoxious, assuming the Title of a
General and Free Council, takes upon it self to define new Doctrine, which has
neither universal Tradition (diverse heretofore, and all the Orthodox, that is,
my Abetters, being on my side) and so plainly no Scripture, that because they
could find none there, they were fain to Coin a new Word for their new Faith.
Macedonius, Nestorius, and Eutiches might have said as much of the Creeds and
Councils before them, and all Heretics since of the Creeds and Councils
alleged by the Answerer, and all complain of the Villainous Factions, called
General Councils. He has plainly justified them all, if it be a justification
of a Doctrine, that it is not found condemned in Councils, held before it was
broached. For the Doctrine of none of them was condemned by any former Council
nor indeed well could. For as Councils seldom meddle with more than the
exigence, for which they were called, requires, it is not to be expected, that
more Faith should be found in their Creeds or Acts, than was Controverted when
they sat. Wherefore, unless one will fancy that every part of Christ's Doctrine
was denied so early, or that no body since can deny some part, which was not
denied then, it is as wild as unseasonable, to plead in behalf of a Doctrine
now, that it was not condemned by the first Four General Councils, or Three
Creeds, where there was no occasion to mention it. And yet he thinks this an
Apology fit to be made for the Church of England. Truly I have long thought,
and there are of her Members who know my Thoughts, that she has ill luck, when
she has much better things to say for her self, to have such things as these
said for her: things which fit the greatest Enemies she has, every jot as well
as her self; and which I therefore wonder not, when I see alleged by them, as
Pleas for her. For They have reason, when They will not be brought to Her, to
bring Her to Them, if they can. But to see them produced by those who will be,
even unseasonably zealous for her, is a Riddle, with which it is not for me to
meddle.

What he adds, of holding nothing contrary to any universal Tradition of the
Church from the Apostles Times, and putting it upon that Issue, (for professing
and offering, as he expresses it, is no great matter, unless they do what they
profess and offer) is indeed to purpose, and spoken like a Friend of the Church
of England, and a Lover of Peace. And I hea^ tily wish, and as earnestly, as I
can, pray to Almighty God, that this Trial may be brought speedily on; which I
can safely undertake shall neither be declined, nor delayed by the Church of
Rome.

Then he passes on to her, and says, That who believe her to be the Catholic,
believe, as they please, without any color of Scripture, Antiquity, or Reason.
This Ball has been tossed already, and in my Opinion enough. Only, lest he,
whoever believe, be thought to speak as he pleases, he would do well to show
what Scripture or Reason tells him, that the Roman Church, with the rest of her
Belief, (for sure he talks not of a Diocese) was not always believed the
Catholic Church. Antiquity I know he has, as much as since Luther. Any other
Color, from all these three, I see none. Diverse other Points he brings in, I
know not why, unless that he has perhaps a mind to be sailing on the Ocean of
particular Disputes. As I have not, I mean to stay on firm Ground, with S.
Austin, and content my self, that It was thought fit by the Catholic Church
spread throughout the World, Neque (...) parvi momen^ est, qu^ d cum etc. Hoc
per universam Catho^^^^, (...) ^^^fundit^ r, observari placuit, quod tenemus.
August. con^ r. Cre^^ on. l. 1. c 32.
to observe what we hold: And that, Because the things we hold are observed by
the Universal Church, they are believed not otherwise delivered and
recommended, than by the Apostles. Who has a mind to put to Sea with the
Answerer, will, I think, find the same Saint's Counsel good: When he has been
tossed enough, and has a mind to be at ease, to follow the way of Catholic
Discipline, which descended from Christ himself, Quam consuetudinem credo ex
(...) traditione venientem, sicut multa quae non inveniuntur in litteris eorum,
neque in (...) liis posteriorum; and tamen quia per universam custod^ untur
Ecclesiam, non (...) tradita, and commendata creduntur. Aug. de Bap. con^.
Donatist. l. 2. c. 7. Si jam (...) tibi jactatus videris, finemque hujusmodi
laboribus vis imponere, sequere viam Catho^^^^ disciplinae, quae ab ipso
Christo per Apostolos ad nos usque manavit, and abhin^ ad (...) manatura est.
Aug. de Util. Cred. c. 8.
by the Apostles, even to us, and shall to Posterity.

He shall, if he please, excuse me from rambling after him into the Authority
they allow the Church; which gay word, if it should signify no more, as I
suspect it sometimes does not, than that it does oblige People, whatever they
think, to hold their Tongues, and not to thwart her decisions in public, for
fear of losing their Benefices, it were great pity: Lik^ ^ e into free
Councils, and Factions, and what else he fills a Page with. For whatever he do,
I remember our Question all the while is, whether it be well or ill said, That
it is not left to every Fantastical Man's Head to believe as he pleases. And
when he pleases to speak to it, I am for him.

In the next Section he tells us, That all they plead for in this case, is the
right which Loyal Subjects have under an Usurper, so far to interpret the Laws
as to be able to understand their duty, etc. I will not ask him who the
Usurpers are, and who the Loyal Subjects? For he makes account, I find* that to
receive Faith from him, who thought it no Usurpation to be equal to God, and
keep it when People have it, and tell other folks what it is, is Usurpation;
and that who is so bold, as to deny it, stands in danger of being hurried into
the Ocean of Controversies, with the Answerers fancy of Scripture, for a sure
Compass to direct him out again. All this while we have other Business in hand.
We have an Assertion, and an Answer to mind. The Assertion is, That it were a
very irrational thing to make Laws for a Country, and leave it to the
Inhabitants to be Interpreters and Judges of those Laws. And the Answer is,
That it is as irrational to allow an Usurper to Interpret the Laws to his own
advantage. Is this, I, or No, again? or what does it say? That both are
Irrational? which is to say, that the Assertion is true: Or that both are
Rational? or one Rational, the other not? Let him say, if he please, what he
would be at, and leave Usurpers till we have Business with them.

His Majesty supposes next, that the goodness of (...) would not leave Men
uncertain of the way to Heaven, which they would be, if Scripture were the
Rule, and every Man his own Judge.

He by way of Question says first, That the Rule is capable of being understood
by those to whom it was given, in order to the great end of it, Salvation.
Which is next to saying, that it is not capable of being understood, by those
to whom it was not given, that is, by any but the Church, to whom alone it was
given. In which he may be sure I shall not contradict him. But is it understood
with certainty, by every Man who will be his own Judge? or are we left to
uncertainty? These are our Questions, to which, how this which he says, should
be any step toward an Answer, I cannot imagine.

Next he tells us, That the main end of the Rule was to direct us in the way to
Heaven, and not merely to determine Controversies. Here is work enough for him
that needs it. For who shall understand what other end there is of a Rule to
determine Controversies, but determining Controversies? Heaven is indeed the
end for which it is necessary Controversies should be determi^ 'd; but that is
to be the end of the Determination, not the Rule. How a Rule made to determine
Controversies should have any end besides determining them, when the end of a
thing is what it was made for; or why directing to Heaven, and determining
Controversies, should here be separated, where the Determination is the very
direction of a Rule to determine them, they may Dispute who love Disputing. All
shall pass for me, till I find something which concerns our Question; certain
or uncertain.

His next words suppose Scripture is the Rule, a little odly me thinks for an
Answerer. For when it is objected against its being a Rule, that we should be
left at uncertainties, it would have showed better, to have taken some notice
of the Objection, before he take for granted, the thing which is in Dispute.
But I shall not stop him. What will he do with his Rule, now he has supposed it?

Why, It is fit to examine and compare Controversies with this Infallible Rule;
and then we shall determine them Infallibly, I hope. I expected this should
follow, but was much mistaken. What he says, is, That when that is done, to
help us in our way to Heaven, is that which it was chiefly intended for. He
may, if he please, keep his Intended till some body doubt what was intended in
every thing which God does for Man, and tell us in the mean time, what his
examining and comparing will do. Whether it will determine Controversies, or
no? and whether certainly, or no? or whether it be no matter whether they be
determined or no? but we shall get to Heaven by ^ are examining, which side
soever of the Controversy examined we choose, and whether any or none. Whatever
was chiefly intended, determining Controversies sure was intended by a Rule to
determine them, and our comparing them with that Rule. Pray let him tell us how
we shall succeed, whether hit or miss, in compassing that Intenti^ n. 'Twill be
afterward time enough to talk of his other chief Intention.

He says further, That no Man can think it of equal consequence to him, not to
be mistaken, and not to be damned. As if mistakes in our case would not damn a
Man. For who can hope to be saved without pleasing God, and every body knows,
that without Faith it is impossible to please him. But whether does he mean to
lead us? All hitherto seems quite out of the way to our Question. For what has
the chief end for which a Rule was made, to do with, whether it will guide us
certainly, or no? Hi^ refusing to Answer, is, in truth, confessing that
Scripture, after all, is not the Rule of Controversi^ s. For they are not
ended, till one side or other be certain. But let us go no farther than we
needs must.

In Matters of Good and Evil, every Man's Conscience, he says, is his immediate
Judge; and why not in Matters of Truth and Falsehood? Unless we suppose Men's
involuntary Mistakes to be more dangerous, than their wilful Sins. How! Are we,
before we were aware, come to Conscience at last? and all his Magnificent Talk,
his Evident, his Sure, and his Infallible, his Care in examining and comparing,
for nothing, but to establish this Maxim; Do every one what seems good in his
own Eyes, and believe what seems true? Is this the clearer light he will give
to the things contained in His Majesty's Papers? and the loss of such a
Liberty, the great danger they run of being deceived with their fair
appearance, whom he will secure with his safe Instructions of trus^ ing their
Conscience, both for Good and for True? Doctrine, or not Doctrine of Christ, is
no such idle Circumstance sure, that hitting or missing is equal, so the
Conscience be strait, and the Mistake involuntary. By the way, I see not how
this involuntary can thrust in here: For, who forces any Body to mistake? or
take the deceitful ways which lead them to it?

But to say nothing to that matter, and but little to his Plea of Conscience,
as copious as the Theme is, I only ask, what Conscience can do more than secure
a Man from being judged for sinning against his Conscience? But if it lead him
to do ill things, or embrace a wrong Faith, what can he answer for the Sin of
having that Conscience? Reason certainly never ^ ramed such a Conscience, and
there is nothing besides which could frame it, but Passion, that is Affections
wrong set, or, in plain English, very wilful Sin. Shall he, who has this to
answer for, be safe, because he has nothing to answer for the Sin against
Conscience? As if that were the only Sin to be accounted for in the next World.

For the rest, This, to say the truth, is an Answer. For Uncertainty does not
prove that Scripture is not the Rule, if it be no matter whether we be
uncertain or no; nor indeed, whether there be a Rule, or Faith. For if
Conscience will carry those to Heaven who believe wrong, Faith, I think, may be
spared, and a Rule for it. But as it is an Answer which I believe would not
have taken with His late Majesty, because he had too much Experience of the bad
Eff^ cts of mistaken Conscience, to think it would (...) at the Tribunal of
God, more than it did at His, I am confident it will take as little with the
Reader. At least I will venture it without more words.

For I m^ an not to stay at a new Apology of his (...) of England, as
unseasonable as the ^ orm^ r, (...) something were objected to her, and as
little (...). At the rate he talks, one would (...) does, what he undertakes
She does not, (...) every Man to ^ e his own Judge. For this he (...) in what
concerns his own Salvation, that is, in all Faith; for Faith concerns
Salvation. Who believes not, every body, who believes Scripture, knows, shall
be damned. Then his Seducers, with their dangerous Mistakes, as such there are,
it seems, for all his Conscience-security; And his Spiritual Guides with their
assistance, would make work till Doomsday. Nor can Quarrels about them be
ended, till those about Faith be settled. For till then, who shall know which
is the Guide, and which the Seducer? As Christ appointed no body to teach other
Doctrine than he taught, They are plainly no Guides of his appointing who do.
The Ancient Creeds too are brought in again, as if they would be serviceable to
the Church of England, and no Liberty of Conscience allowed to judge against
them, or any Doctrines as universally received; as if any part of universal
Christian Doctrine were lost, and all had not been always as universally
retained as the Creeds. But I have my Answer, and will be going.

In the next Section the King asks, Whether it be not the same thing to follow
our own Fancy, or to interpret Scripture by it? And he answers, There might be
some color for such a Question, if They did not do so and so. Pray what color
has he ^ or such a Reply? Might not the King have color to say what he thought
fit to be said, to him to whom he spoke, whether there be, or be not color, to
say the same to the Church of England? He w^^ t not to her, nor were His
Writings published with any relation to her, but to satisfy the Curiosity of
those who desired to see them, and could not come by written Copies, and to
assure them they were His.

In stead of concerning her, where she is not concerned, let him, if he please,
answer the Question, and tell us whether it be or be not the same, to follow
(...) own Fancy, or interpret Scripture by it. Till he say I, or N^, all
besides is leaving the Work ^ ut out for us, to cut out new of our own, which
twenty to one we shall never make up. For which Reason. I will pray him to keep
his many Questions, t^ ll the Dispute be between the two Churches, and I appear
for the Church of Rome. Till then, he cannot rationally expect an Answer from
me. He perhaps may be able to manage two Disputes at a time or think the best
way to end one is to begin another; I think it too much for me to defend a King
and a Church at once. And so, much good may his pleasant Fancies do him, about
a Rule and its Interpretation, which he talks as if he would have belong to
those who do not know the Sense of it; about the Intention of Almighty God, as
if we knew not what he intended, and did make the Pillar and Ground of Truth;
about reforming Disorders, which he makes unreformable, even in Commonwealths,
where the Supreme Judge has the ill luck to be principally accused; about
Oaths, as if any were taken to defend an unjust Authority, or could bind, though
they were; about a Judge of Tradition, as if a Man who sees Pictures in one
Church, and none in another, needed a Judge to pronounce to him, that those
Churches practice differently. His Usurpers, and all, shall do what he would
have them for me. I wish, in stead of all this, he would have minded his
Business, but mean however to mind mine.

What he replies to the next Section, shows more like an Answer, than any thing
said yet. I would have any Man show me, says the King, where the Power of
deciding Matters of Faith is given to every particular Man. He distinguishes,
and says, The Power of Deciding so as to oblige others, is not given to every
particular Man; the Power of Deciding so as to satisfy the particular Decider,
is. Denial is a fair Answer; and this seems to deny what His Majesty says, and
yet in truth says nothing to it. Deciding of particular Men; being our own
Judges; following our own Fancy, or private Spirit; believing as we please, and
the like Expressions, signify all the same. And the King, as Men use to do,
who mind Sense more than Words, and have Language at will, takes now one, now
another, as they come in His way. As it could not escape an ^ ye less piercing
than His, that he judges every jot as much who believes upon the Authority of
the Church, as he who believes upon his own Fancy of Scripture; and that every
Assent is a Judgment, and so the Assent of Faith, as well as the rest: it
cannot be imagined that He would have Men not judge at all. But He meant, as
all the World means by those Phrases, that they should not judge unreasonably.
For as they are blamed, who will be their own Judges; and no body blames
another for doing well* and Judging is of it self a good thing, an Exercise of
a Faculty planted in us by God; there is nothing to be blamed, but the ill use
of that Faculty, by suffering Passion to (...) it, which should only be guided
by Reason. That Men (...) mean thus by those Expressions, we see by the (...)
to which they apply them. He who being (...) by (...), or Conceit of (...)
(...) the Advice of his unpassionate and (...) or he, who has no skill in
Physic or (...) will commence and prosecute Suits, (...) against the Advice of
able Lawyers and Doctors, is said to be his own Judge: He is not, who
understanding Jewels, or Pictures, buys them at his own Rate, though never so
many, of less (...) than himself, persuade him to the contrary; (...) is said
to be his Judge. Now the King (...), because Christ taught his Apostles and
(...), who, with those that believed his Doctrine (...) Preaching, and their
Successors through (...), are called the Church, that he could not (...)
reasonably, who would pretend to find out that Doctrine by his own Wit, or
Study, or any (...), but by learning it of the Church, which (...) at first
from Christ, and preserved it ever (...). And this unreasonable Judgment, made
on their own Heads or Fancy, against the Judgment of those whose Profession it
is, His several Expressions strike at. The Answerer reflected not on the
meaning of them, but would persuade us, That to say particular Men must be
satisfied of the Reasons why they believe, is an Answer to the Question,
Whether there be indeed any Reasons why they should believe, besides the
Authority of the Church?

To go forward, Christ, says his Ma^^ sty, left his Power to his Church, even
to forgive Sins in Heaven, and left his Spirit with them, which they exer^^^^ d
after his Resurruction. He answers, as if he were at (...) purposes, where then
was the Roman (...) What has where was she? to do (...) left to her? It Is a
strange Qu^ stion (...), and he, I believe, the first, who ever asked, where a
Church was, before she was. The Roman was a part of the Catholic, as soon as
she was a Church; till then she was where all the Churches (...) the World
besides were, except that of ^ jerusalem, and where the Church of ^ jerusalem
too was, before Christ was born, in the order of Providen^^ But how can it be
hence inferred, that these Power^ are now in the Church of Rome (...) Roman
Cath^^^^ Church, I suppose, he means* exclusive to all others, unless it be
made appear that it was Heir-General to all the Apostles? As if there needed
Logic to infer* that Powers left for the Salvation of Mankind, remain in being
as long as there remains a Man^^^^ to be saved; or Powers left to the Church of
Christ, are in the Church of Christ; and those excl^ ded from the Powers, who
are not incl^ ded ^ n the Church; or to make appear She is Heir-General to all
the Apostles, who as visibly as that the S^ ripture is in Print, is the One
Chur^ h (...) he could be content to be (...) Point: but since his Majesty
(...) purpose to do more than barely mention it; I (...) it not to mine, to
stray from the Papers I (...).

In the process of his Discourse, he would (...) the ordinary Power of the Keys
out of the (...); and shall with all my heart, so he remove it not out of the
Church. For since it was, with the (...), given only to her, I do not see what
(...) Title there can be to it, but (...) Her. He is, by his good favor, (...)
removing Miraculous Power out of the (...) God, who slights not the Roman (...)
so much as he, continues (...) her. And would he be content to (...) (...) on
Miracles, I would be content to undertake the Proof. But alas! I fear there
needs a Miracle to make People willing that Differences of Religion should have
any Issue.

He would have it questioned, What part of the Promise of the Infallible Spirit
was to expire with the Apostles; what to be continued to the Church in all
Ages? And how f^ r that Promise extends? Strange Questions for Christians to
dispute, after they have been answered by Christ himself. When Christ has
extended the Assistance of that Spirit to All his Doctrine, and All Time; for
us to ask which part of that Assistance shall cease? or to (...)? is to ask,
Which is the Part of Christ's Promise which he will not perform? Neither indeed
are these Questions, with his Distinction between Sin and Error, and subtle
Speculations upon it, for any thing, but to bring in Deposing Doctrine, a Com^
on-place banged in every Book of late.

It is a Theme, than which, as much as it is (...) upon, I do not think a worse
can be taken (...) an Invective against Infallible Assistance, pick a^ d choose
through the whole Bundle. When I con^^^ er what has past, and reflect there
wanted neither Power nor Propension in Men, and nevertheless that the
Persuasions about Deposing were never settled, as those in other Matters which
displease the Answerer, what he takes for an Argument against Infallible ^^^^
tance, I take for a strong Argument for it. For (...) else could be the Cause
of that Effect, but that (...) Power even of willing Men was directed by an
(...) Assistance of the Divine Spirit? He may (...) show he pleases, with the
Errors of (...), who will not reflect they never exercised the Power of
Church-Guid^^ upon (...) Errors, or, in his Language, so as to (...); which
yet he knows very well no Council, of (...) he had in his eye, ever did. As the
Church to (...) the Promise of Assistance was made, should (...) know what it
means, none in the Roman Cathol^^ Church ever understood it would always
preserve, even those who by their Functions are Church-Guides, from Error any
more than Sin, save when they perform the Office of Church-Guides; or expected
more, than that They should not Authoritatively declare that to be Christ's
Doctrine, which (...) not; or that not to be, which is. Since it is undeniably
certain, that our Church-Guides have never made any such Declaration, in stead
of profiting by their Pains, we stand wondering what Protestants mean, by
repeating so often a Tale which has nothing in it. Whoever errs among us,
Church-Guide, or not Church-Guide, errs on his own Head, and not misguided now,
or at any time, by the Church or her Gnides. And so long it is as wildly
unreasonable to impute those Errors to the Church* or any but the erring
Particulars, as to bring Peter in guilty for the Faults of Paul.

(...) imper^ ect, as half-periods use to be: but who read the whole, will, I
believe, understand it perfectly enough, and if he had no mind to speak to this
part of it, he might have said so, without imputing to it an Imperfection of
his own making, by severing it from its fellows. As imperfect as it is, I find
by it, that the Power, of which his Majesty speaks, was the Power of deciding
Matters of Faith; and so, that when he talks of the Gi^ t of Tongues, and the
like, he talks of what his Majesty did not. It informs us too, that, as great
Prerogatives as the Apostles had above other Men, subsequent Councils took upon
them to make Creeds as well as they; Creeds which declare they will undoubtedly
perish eternally, who believe not entirely what they contain: And so might have
put us in mind, that those who do as much in latter Ages, have Precedents for
what They do: Matters, which it seems, he takes no delight to speak of.

As it had been something rugged to have said this Part, for all it was left
out, deserved no consideration, he smoothly passes to that which next does. And
that is, That the Church was the Judge even of Scrip^^ re it self, many Years
after the Apostles, which Books were Canonical, and which were not. To which he
replys, That there is a Judge of Law, and a Judge of Fact, and that the Church
Judges of Fact, (...) Law. Let him call it how he pleases, if the Church Judges
whether a Book be Canonical or no, the Church is the Judge of that Matter, and
the King said true; and it is but so much erudition lost, to Dispute by what
name Her Judgment shall go. He says besides that, The Church of Rome has no
(...) privilege in this Matter, but gives its Judgment as other parts of the
Christian World do. (...) if the Clause he answers, spoke of any (...) Church,
or Privilege. It says, the Church, that (...), the whole, made up of the
Roman, and the (...), whose same Faith intitles them to the same App^ ll^tion,
was the Judge of Scripture, which Books were Canonical, and which were not. One
may perc^^ ve the Answerer thinks this is true, and he m^ ght (...) said, what
he thought, in two words. But he thought fit to spin it out into a Section, and
(...) the Matter so, that one Member of his Division is not included in the
Matter divided; he alone knows, why.

And if They had this Power then, I desire to know, says his Majesty next, how
They came to lose it* And the Answerer desires to know who are meant by They,
and what is understood by This Power. He had not the Paper by him sure, when he
asked these Questions. For it is there as plain, as words can make it, that by
They is meant the Church, and by this Power, the Power of deciding Matters of
Faith, exercised in making Creeds, and judging of Canonical Boo^^. Then he
falls to his D^ stinctions again, and tells us, It is one thing for a part of
the Church to give Testimony to a matter of Fact, and another to assume the
Power of making Books Canonical, which were not so. Pieces of Learning, which
he may, if he please, keep in reserve till he have to do with some body, who
talks of a Part of the Church, or making Boo^^ Canonical which were not. By the
way, he means, I suppose, making Books not written by (...) I^spiration, to be
written by Divine Inspiration. For if he mean making it appear, and (...), and
with obligation of (...) that a Book, of which it is doubted whether it were
(...) (...) that truly Catholic and Apostolic Church, (...) which, by separting
from the Roman, they keep (...) their stricter Union, and with which the Roman
(...) none. For sure he does not talk of a strict Union with nothing. Let him
tell us in what Countr^^^ the Men live, that People may go to them, and lear^
of them what their Faith is, and see whether it (...) be all one with that of
the Answerer and his (...) and have something, more than his word (...)
stricter Union, which he says, is between (...).

What He, and those who take his part, do, (...) separating of themselves, he
tells us, but being (...) out by an Usurping Faction in the Church; and (...)
the Conditions of Communion imposed by t^ at F^ction, and required by him who
is owned ^ or Hea^ of that Church, are unjust and unreasonable, and (...)
Authority ^ e challenges a mere Usurpation; and t^ at They are not to be
condemned for such a Separation, which was unavoidable. Why unavoidable, I
beseec^ him, even supposing Usurpation, and whatever (...) would have? Cannot
they who are, let ^ t he (...) so unjustly, separated from the Communion, avoi^
being separated from the Faith of a Church, if they please? Is there any
Church, or Power on Earth, which could hinder them from believing, (...) they
were out of Communion, what they did (...) they were in it? Which if (...) had
done, Excommunication it self had not (...) them from the Church, of which
these Papers speak. (...) (...) their voluntary Change of Faith. And that
Change indeed casts them unavoidably out; because to be of the same Faith with
a Church, and of a (...) Faith from her, is inconsistent. Other casting (...),
by which he means, I suppose, Excommunication, there is none that I know. It Is
true, there is a general Excommunication of those who ha^ e changed their Faith
into Heresy: And some are particularly named; but not a word of the Church of
England, or any relating to England, but the Wickli^ ists. If any of his We be
included in it, it is because they have voluntarily thrust themselves in, by
embracing the Anathematized Heresies. And yet he, with his Flourishes and big
Talk, would have their casting off the Church, pass for the Churches casting
them out; and their voluntary Act be called, a being cast unavoidably out.
Cross Language, in my Opinion, and a very sorry Justification of Separation.

But what has he in reserve (I see what he alleges to justify his confident
Reproach of Usurpation? The Sacred Head of the Church, on whom he cries out for
an Usurper, has showed, by his reiterated Approbation of the Bishop of Meaux
Book, that he is content with that Submission and Obedience which the Holy
Councils and Fathers have always ^ aught the Faithful. Pray with what propriety
of Language, or what Sense, does he call challenging of so much, Usurpation?
What Scripture, or Ancient Ch^ rch, or Part of the Christian World, (...) with
him that it is so? not excepting the (...) of England her self. For there is
more reason to take the Expositor's word, who speaks in her (...), than his,
for the Sense of the Church of England. And from him I learn, it sticks not at
(...) Point, since she will be content to yield the Pope that Authority which
the Ancient Council^ of the Primitive Church have acknowledged, and (...)
Fathers have always taught the Faithful to (...) And She* I suppose, would not
yield to (...) ^^^^pation, nor the ^ xpositor for her.

But pray for what is this Harangue ^ pon U^^^ pation, and a Spiritual Kingdom?
(...) would know, how People come to separate from the (...), that is, vary
from the Common ^ aith of (...). And the Answerer tells him, There is an Us^
rper set up in the West. Why, suppose there be, m^ st P^^ple therefore needs
believe otherwise than they (...) before? needs believe there is no Change
(...) ^^^stance, no Purgatory, no more than two Sacraments, and the rest? This
Western Usurpation has no I^fluence upon the East, to make the Christians there
change their Faith. Why cannot the Refor^ ation believe of these Points as they
believe, and as (...) Christians, besides themselves, ever have, and (...) do?
So all Differences would be reduced to a sing^ e Point, and that, if we may
believe the Expos^ t^ r, either no Difference, or easily reconcilable. But t^
go about to make us believe, we must needs differ about a hundred things, and
can by no means (...) it lawful to pray to a Saint, or set up an Image* as long
as a certain Man takes more than c^ mes to ^ is share, shows the Answerer was
either in a very ^ leasant Humor, or hard put to it for something (...) say.

I have followed him, (...) my way. To return again. (...) do Men separate from
(...) Church? says the Question. We own no Separation from that, but are
disjoined from the Roman, says the Answerer. Since that Church is nothing but
the Roman, and the rest united in the same Faith, as a Man's Body is nothing
but the several Members animated by the same Soul; and no Part can be cut off
from any of the Members, no Part of a Finger, for example, from the Finger,
without being cut off from the whole Body: This is in truth to say, We are not
separated, we are only disjoined; or, We are not separated, but separated. But
to let this pass, and not stray further after him into the many Questions which
his Reply would start; As, Whether there be any Catholic, besides the Roman
Catholic Church? Whether there can be Reason for being disjoined from any Part
of it? Whether Disjoyning, and Union, be not ^ lat Contradiction? since
Disjoyning signifies a different Faith, and Union the same? And the like, in
which, whatever concern his We have, I do not believe he has Authority from the
Church of England to concern her. All these things apart, I observe the
Answerer does here as elsewhere, appears himself, and leaves his Answer behind.
For who they are that separate, and what they own, and from what part they
profess to be dis-joyn'd, is nothing to what Authority they have to separate
from the whole, who do? The Kings Qu^ stion is a step to an end of
Controversies: For let People once know, that they, whoever they be, are in a
deplorable condition, who live separated from the one Church of Christ upon
Earth, those among them, who ha^ e any care of their Souls, will bethink
themselves, and be glad to find ^ er out, and by piecing with her, if they be
broken off, help to make that One, the only Church on Earth, and all Christians
of a mind again. And I wish the Answerer had gone that one step without
staggering. It had been a safe step for every body, who is sure he does not
separate. For it takes off no weight from any Reason, by which he can show that
he does not. But I am afraid, the youngest Man in Christendom shall never live
to see one step made toward an end of differences in Religion; at least, if
the Answerer were inclined that way, he might, me thinks, without boggling,
have frankly owned there is, or there is not Authority to separate.

The last Paragraph asks, when pretenses are made of separating from the
Church, Who shall judge of them? the whole Church, or particular Men? He
answers, That the whole force of this Paragraph depend^ upon a Supposition,
which is taken for granted, but will never be yielded by Them, and they are
sure can never be proved by the Church of Rome. Let the Paragraph and its
force, depend on what it will, (...) not have answered a plain Question
plainly, and told us whether the Judgment of pretenses do, or do not belong to
the Church, and if not, to whom else^ He pretends here, that things are taken
for granted (...) one side, which can never be proved, and will (...) be
yielded by the other. Let him tell us if he please, before he proceed, who
shall judge of thus much* Who pronounce whether those of the Ch^ rch (...) Rome
can prove or no, and before whom they (...), when it comes to their turn,
produce their (...) Who likewise, whether the other side oug^ t to yield. (...)
(...) (...) why he drives all to the Judgment of a particular Church, unless he
think all sa^ e there, and the Judgment of that Church not to be submitted to
any farther Judgment. Which if he do, he plainly thinks there is no Judge
between Churches whatever may be, betwixt Churches and particular Men. This
indeed is a full Answer, and which takes the Question quite away. For it can no
longer be asked, who is the Judge, if there be none at all. But he does not
explain himself, and it is not for me to make him say more than he does. This I
see; that either this is his Answer, or he gives none. For there is nothing
besides, but what pretenses they make, and who made them, and upon what
account. All which is nothing to, who is the Judge of them?

His Usurper is a strange importunate fellow to thrust in so often, where he
has nothing to do, and I have no more to say to him. At the last consideration
I am as much surpised as the Answerer. For I thought no Interest should have
been remembered in our Case, but One, what it avails a Man to gain the whole
World and lose his Soul. I see no great cause he has to wonder, that Princes
and the Clergy should be of different minds in Matters of Religion. He knows
the Case has happened heretofore, and that there had been no change of Religion
in England, if the whole Body of the Clergy, and their Advice had been
regarded. But not to pry into Men's Hearts, to see what Interest sways them,
This is certain, that those Princes, who prefer their Eternal, before their
Temporal Interest, when they are for the Church of Rome, (...) good example;
And I cannot conclude better, (...) praying God to give every body the Grace to
follow it; and in behalf of Princes, thanking him (...) minding his Reader,
that they are not all drawn (...) of Rome by Interest.

A DEFENSE OF THE Second Paper.
THE first Paragraph, as the Answerer has handled it, concerns the Church of
England more than me. If She, when the King talks of Heresies, and Heresies
crept in, think her self obliged by the Answerers thinking presently of her: or
when she is brought in, by his turning immediately to justify the Dissenters,
and that by an Argument alleged formerly in her behalf, with something more
favor to them too than her; ^ for he allows Them Six Councils, and but Four to
Her^ I have nothing to do with it. They are Matters between themselves. Are
there Heresies in England, or are there not? Is it a sad thing there should, or
is it not? These are the Questions at present; and 'twill be time enough to
talk of the Church of England and Dissenters, when they are answered. What
Power the Church of Rome has to define Hereti^^^ Doctrines, will keep cold too.
For it is not asked, How Heresies come to be, or are known to be Here^^^ (...)

^

That (...) should lay the stress of his Answer on a (...) This Expression, as
competent as the (...) is b^ t an ordinary way of saying very compe^^^^ As when
we say, This Man is as strong as Sam^^ (...) as wise as Solomon; we mean no
more (...) that they are very strong and wise. And he can (...), that Not just
so competent as the Apostles, is an (...) to, Whether Competent or no? and to
(...) at a Word, fit matter in a Dispute with a King. (...) us see. The
Apostles, for what concerned (...), could do no more with their Infallible
(...), than judge for themselves, and act in order (...) Salvation according to
that Judgment. And (...) the Answerer contends is the right of every (...). Why
then, every body is in rigor as competent (...) for himself, as the Apostles.
And he (...) to (...) His Majesty affirmed, by (...) himself: ^ or His Majesty
only said, (...) there understand, nor mean to inquire. It concerns those
Guides, and it is not for me to thrust my self into the Concerns of other Folks.

And it is no wonder, says the third Paragraph, it should be so, since that Part
of the Nation, which looks most like a Church, dares not bring the true
Arguments against the other Sects, for fear they should be turned against
themselves, and confuted by their own Arguments. To this he says first, That it
is directly levelled against the Church of England. As if an Arrow were the
sharper, or blunter, for the Mark at which it is aimed. Let him tell us whether
the Assertion be true, or not true, and talk of Levelling, when Levelling is in
question. He is out even in that too. For the Paragraph is in truth levelled,
not against the Church of England, but her Misfortune. It is an Expression of
Compassion, not Reproach, that she has been overaw'd from using the true
Arguments against Sectaries.

Then he answers, That if there can be no Authority in a Church, without
Infallibility; or no Obligation to submit to Authority, without it; then the
Church of England does not use the best Arguments against Sectaries. But if
there be no ground for Infallibility, as if his won Goodness were not Ground
enough for God to give it to a Nature which needs it, and his Word not Ground
enough to believe he has given it; then, for ought he can see, the Church of
England has wisely disowned the Pretense of Infallibility, and made use of the
best Arguments against Sectaries, from a just Authority, and the Sinfulness and
Folly of the Sectaries refusing to submit to it.

I take for granted, he speaks of Authority to guide Souls to Heaven, such as
was in the Primitive Church, when the Civil Laws were all against her. And pray
him, if he please, to instruct us how such Authority can be in a Church,
without Infal^^ bility. We see no body will believe a Man, who, after he has
told his Story, should add, It may be all fal^ e, for any thing he knows; nor
lend his Money upon a Promise to be repaid, which the Borrower declares
beforehand he knows not whether he can keep or no. And we are persuaded there
should be better Security for our Souls, than for our Money, or unconcerning
Opinions. To say a Church is fallible, is to say she may be deceived; and if
she may be deceived her self, They may be deceived who follow her. Wherefore to
tell us, that such a Church has notwithstanding Authority to guide us, and that
we ought submit to it, is to tell us, we ought be led by a Guide, who cannot
answer he knows the way we should go, and venture eternal Happiness or Misery
on a Security, which he who gives, tells us plainly beforehand may fail us.

Pray let us consider. Christians, every body knows, are obliged to lose all
things; their Goods, their Liberty, their Lives, rather than their Faith. Can
it be reasonable to do this for a Faith, of which they are conscious to
themselves, that it may be false, for any thing they know? And does not his own
Heart tell him, who knows nothing of it but by the Relation of a fallible
Relator, that it may be false, for ought he can tell? Wherefore, to make the
Faith of Christians depend on a fallible Authority, is to make Christianity,
with its obliging Duties, the most unreasonable thing in Nature.

What do I say, unreasonable? It is to make it absolutely impossible. For, can
I be a Christian without believing? Is not Belief a judgment that the thing is
true which I believe? Can I have such a Judgment without a cause able to
produce it? And is a fallible Authority able to make me judge more than that
the thing is fallibly true? When Christianity therefore obliges me to believe
the thing absolutely true, it there be nothing to make me believe but a
fallible Authority, it obliges me to an Effect without a Cause, that is, to a
downright impossibility. And indeed to flat Contradiction. For as a thing
cannot possibly be true, and not true at once, to judge it is true, is to judge
it cannot at the same time be false. But I must of necessity judge both, if I
judge upon a Motive which I know is fallible: That it is true by the Judgment
to which Christianity obliges me; and that it may be false, by the same
Judgments being grounded on my fallible Authority. For by judging it fallible,
I judge it may deceive me, that is, that what it recommends to me for true, may
be false. At which rate he is the only good Christian who contradicts himself.

When the Answerer shall make out, that such things can be, we may hope to see
his Church Authority without Infallibility. Till then he will permit us to be
persuaded that Infallibility is the true Argument, which he confesses has not
been used against Sectaries.

If it be true, that the Church of England cannot pretend to this Argument,
which if she did, Sectaries, he says, might justly turn it against her, it is
so much the worse, and the Kings Discourse is indeed levelled against her. But
I see no such matter. Why may not she, if she please, pretend to her share in
the Infallibility of the Whole, by remaining, as I think, her best Advocates
plead she does, a part of the Whole? Because, says he, though Church Authority be
asserted, infallibility is denied in her Articles. Where I beseech him? for I
cannot find infallibility denied, save to particular Churches, whereof any one
undoubtedly may forfeit her pretense to Infallibility, by changing her former
Faith, and so ceasing to be a Member of the Body, to which it was promised. But
this is her concern not mine. I^ it be so with her, she may thank those against
whom the Kings Discourse is truly levelled; those who have pulled this Argument
out of her Hands, and reduced her to have nothing to urge against Sectaries,
but the sinfulness and folly of their Separation: as if she could take it ill
of other folks that they separate from her, if she be brought to separate from
other folks: Or, as if there were any sin, or folly in Peoples desiring to make
their Salvation sure, and when they cannot find security in a Fallible
Authority, seeking it elsewhere.

There follows that the Church of England, as ^ is cal^^ d. This as ' it is
called makes him teachy; and he would fain know what she wants to make her as
good a Church as any in the Christian World; she that wants neither Faith, if
the C^ eed contain it, nor Sacraments, nor Succession of B^^^ ps, nor a Li^^^^
Never so little Indulgence for a King, would (...) suffered him to speak as he
thought fit, espec^^^^ when he had applied the Word, which offends the
Answerer, to the Church of Rome too. For he (...) of the Roman, the Church
which is (...) the R^^^ Catholic. But if the Answerers Zeal for the Church of
England be so very nice, it might have been employed much more (...) something
material for her, than in picking a needless Quarrel.

If the Church of England really be not what she is called, it is long of her
self, and the influence she suffers those to have, who will needs possess the
World, that she sets up Separately for her self with a different Faith, from
that of the great Body. As the Whole is but One Church, made up of as many
Members, as there are particular Churches which profess the same Faith; it is
unintelligible how there can be a particular Church otherwise, than by being a
Member of this Body. If the Answerer have a mind to show she is a Church, he
should show she is a Member, and believes as the rest, not allege for her
things common to as very Heretics as ever were in the World. For how many of
them received the Creed, had Sacraments, Succession of Bishops, and Liturgies?
Not to touch the rest (in which, for all the Answerers confidence, there are
difficulties more than he or any Man will be able to clear.) Is it not palpable
that Christians are as much obliged to believe every thing which Christ taught,
when it is known he taught it, as what is contained in the Creed? And is it not
as certainly known he taught much more, as that he taught what is there
contained? Is it not palpable, that she her self believes more? I for my part,
understand not the Zeal of talking, as if she quitted her only sure hold, to
stand upon Ground which will certainly founder under her, and upon which arrant
Heretics are forced to stand, because they have no better. But this again is
her concern. Our business is with the remaining part of the Paragraph, which
says, that she would have it thought, that she is the judge in matters
Spiritual, yet dares not say positively, there is no appeal from her.

His Answer, dilated with several Examples, is, That They are ture Judges, from
whom there lies an Appeal. Still catching at Words, and saying nothing to the
Thing! His Majesty was solicitous of freeing the Nation from the Heresies crept
in, and convincing the Sects by Arguments, to which there could be no return.
Till the Church of England can determine Spiritual, as a Judge does Temporal
Differences, by a final Sentence, conclusive to the Parties, He thought so
great a Benefit could not be expected from her. The Answerer, with his Zeal,
never thinks of showing which way she can conclude any body, but, as if the
Name of a thing were All, tells us, There are true Judges, who nevertheless
cannot conclude the Parties which come before them. Why, His Majesty, and every
body else, knew this, without needing to trouble his Rhetor^ and Erudition for
the Matter. But what are those Judges to our purpose? What Benefit shall we get
by them? And how much the nearer will our Differences be to an end? If there
were no other in the World, Suits would be endless in a Nation, and
Controversies in a Church; as I pray God there be not who desire no better. In
short, His Majesty talks of Judges, from whom there lies no Appeal; He, of
Judges, from whom there does; and gives us this for a satisfactory Answer.

He might peradventure have made something a better show, by saying, That His
Majesty, by expecting the Church of England should judge without Appeal,
expects more than can be had from a particular Church; because Appeals must
needs lie from all such. But every particular Church may judge as the rest of
the Body do; and it is to our purpose all one, to judge without Appeal, and to
judge as they judge from whom there is none. For that Judgment is without
Appeal, though not purely in virtue of the Authority of the particular Church. So
the Church of England may judge without Appeal; and if she do not, may thank
those who will not let her.

His Majesty goes on, proving what he had said: For either they must say, that
They are Infallible, (which they cannot pretend to, that is, otherwise than by
giving the right hand of Fellowship to those who are) or confess, that what
they decide in Matters of Conscience, is no farther to be followed, than it
agrees with every Man's private Judgment. If Christ did leave a Church here upon
Earth, and We were all once of that Church, How, and by what Authority, did we
separate from that Church? If the Power of Interpreting Scripture be in every
Man's Brain, what need have we of a Church, or Churchmen? To what purpose then
did our Savior, after He had given his Apostles Power to bind and loose in
Heaven and Earth, add to it, That He would be with them, even to the end of the
World? These Words were not spoken Parabolically, or by way of Figure: Christ
was then ascending into his Glory, and left his Power with his Church, even to
the end of the World.

All this the Answerer leaves out; what relates to the Churches Authority, and
every Man's following his own Judgment, having, he says, been answered already.
I wish he had told us where. For, though I remember some Speech of Persons who
separate from the Church, and of their Pretenses, I cannot call one Word to
mind, of the Authority by which they separated. If this be the Answer he means,
he compliments His Majesty's Papers; For to insist upon it, is to consess he
has none. He said too, and that too often to be forgotten, That every Man is to
judge for himself, though not for others. What need then of a Church, or Church
men, says His Majesty, when every body is provided without them? It seems he
thinks they are indeed needless, but had no mind to say so.

He takes the matter of Appeals more to heart, in which he takes occasion to
proceed from these words: What Country can subsist in peace or quiet, where
there is not a Supreme Judge, from whence there can be no Appeal? From whence,
the natural Consequence, he says, appears to be, That every National Church
ought to have the Supreme Power within it self. In the Comparison here made, a
National to the Whole Church, is as a Shire to a Kingdom. And a very natural,
and very consistent Consequence it is, That every Sheriff should be a King.

But how come Appeals to a Foreign Jurisdiction, to tend to the Peace and
Quiet of a Church? He would peradventure, if one should press him, be hard
enough put to it, to make Sense of his Foreign Jurisdiction in our Case. For
how can any thing be Foreign, but by not belonging to that Aggregate, whether
Civil or Spiritual, in respect whereof they are said to be Foreigners.
Foreign, I think, comes from Foris, and signifies out. So that unless the
ultimate Jurisdiction of the Church be out of the Church, it seems as hard to
understand how it can be Foreign to any part of the Church, as how a Native of
any part of England, can be a Forreigner in England. The several Nations, which
make the Church, are Foreigners to one another in respect of the several
Temporal Bodies, which they compose too, but Fellow-Citizens All in respect of
the Ecclesiastical.

But let this pass, and the Answerer, if he please, inform us, how the Appeals,
of which we talk, can be made, but to what he calls Foreign Jurisdiction. The
King aimed at an end of Differences in Religion, and as he thought every one
ought believe as the Catholic Church believes, which Christ has here on Earth,
calls their Agreement in Faith, a Decision; and knowing or searching what it
is, an Appeal. As no Particular can be the Catholic Church, let him make it
intelligible, who can, how the Faith of a Church, composed of many Nations, can
be known, without knowing the Faith of the Nations which compose it; that is,
of those Churches which he calls Foreign. It is therefore so far from hard, to
comprehend how Appeals to Foreigners tend to the Peace and Quiet of a National
Church, that when that Peace is disturbed by Dissentions in Matters of
Religion, it is absolutely impossible to resettle it without them.

We, says the King in the Period before, which the Answerer, I know not why,
puts after, have had these hundred years past, the sad Effects of denying to
the Church that Power in Matters Spiritual, without an Appeal. And our
Ancestors, says the Answerer, for many hundred years last past, found the
intolerable Inconveniences of an Appeal to Foreign Jurisdiction. Which after
he has a little dilated, by reckoning up the Particulars, he tauntingly adds,
But these were slight things, in comparison to what we have felt these hundred
years, for want of it. This Taunt is unexpected, and, by his good favor, might
have been spared, for more Reasons than one. For what? Does he in earnest
think, that the Incoveniences he has thought of, and may think of hereafter,
hold comparison with the Inconvenience of Heresy? Are not all temporal
Concerns, let them be what they will, slight things in respect of the eternal
Ruin of so many as Heresy has swallowed up in Perdition? Will he compare the
gain of the whole World, to the loss even of a single Soul?

For the rest, it is strange a Man should toss a Word so long, and never mind
what it means. The King used the Word Appeal with respect to the Allegory, in
which he speaks: The Answerer will needs understand it in the Law-sense, and
talks all the while of another matter. For the Impoverishment, the Obstruction
of Justice, and what else he mentions, are Consequences all of Legal Trials
betwixt Plaintiff and Defendant, according to the Methods of Courts. In which,
wherever those Courts be, Princes can, and, when they see fit, do preserve
their own Prerogatives from diminution, and their Subjects from Oppression,
without shocking their Religion. There is nothing of all this in the Appeals of
which the King speaks, no feeing of Lawyers, nor need to travel from home. Who
will but step to St. James's, and see what they do, and hear what they say, has
appealed as much as the King desired he should. To his Conclusion, That it is a
very self-denying Humor for those to be most sensible of the want of Appeals,
who would really suffer the most by them; I shall say no more than that it is
very unreasonable, because no body dreams of such Appeals as he understands,
and I wish that no body may think worse of it, and of him and other Folks for
it.

Can there be any Justice done, says the next Paragraph, where the Offenders
are their own Judges, and equal Interpreters of the Law, with those that are
appointed to administer Justice? He cross interrogates, and asks, Whether there
be any likelihood Justice should be better done in another Country, by another
Authority, and proceeding by such Rules, which in the last resort are but the
arbitrary Will of a Stranger? I have already observed, That another Country,
and another Authority is un^ ntelligible where all are Countrymen; and
arbitrary Rules are altogether as unintelligible, where the Law is ^ ixt and
known. At present I pray him to tell us how he answers the Question. Can
Justice be done? Or, which is the same, Is there a Judge without Appeal?
signifies, he knows, Can Controversies be ended? And he knows the Answer is,
They can, or They cannot. And yet he will not say either the one or the other,
but amuses us with his Descant upon the Metaphor, never touching the Plain-song
Question. Subordinate Judges may be as true Judges, and Appeals do as much harm
as they will; Justice too may be as well administered at home as abroad, for any
thing we are the wiser, or the better. For what is it to us, what becomes of
those Matters? We can inform our selves time enough of Lawyers, and those who
understand Government, how they go, when it imports us to know. At present let
the Answerer tell us, whether Controversies can or cannot be ended? Whether we
can be secure that we are in the right way to Heaven, or must live on at a
venture, never knowing whether we live as we should, till we come into the next
World, and find perhaps by a sad Experience, how we have lived in this?

We are all Travelers to the Country of Happ^^^ and as a wrong way can never
lead right, it imports us, as much as Happiness imports, to travel in t^^ right
Road. He who undertakes to assist us in the ^^^ficulties started by these
Papers, acquits himself by taking an Allegorical Expression in a Literal sense,
and then by showing Erudition upon it, turning our Thoughts from the Moral. For
while we are entertained with literally true Judges, and Appeals, and Justice,
unless we think of two things at once, there is no minding Differences in
Religion. So that the Assistance, which it seems he meant, was his Assistance
to remove those Difficulties out of sight; and the Danger he apprehended, the
Danger lest people should once perceive how it is with those who are out of the
Catholic Church; that they have no accountable Means to end a Controversy, or
satisfy a Difficulty, save by cleanly conveying it out of the way, if it
become importunate. But for any Assistance toward the only difficulty which
imports, Whether People be in the right way to Heaven, or no? Whether
Controversies can, or cannot be ended? we have none from the Answerer; but may
guess from his silence, he either thinks They cannot, or wishes They would not.

He asks again, Whether such a one, pretending to a Power he has no right to,
must be Judge in his own Cause, when he is the greatest Offender* This Such a
one, if he take it, as in all rea^ on he should, as His Majesty does, signifies
Him, or Those who are appointed to administer Justice. Does such a one, in his
conceit* pretend, without right, to the Power of Administering Justice? And if
they be appointed to administer it in all Causes, must they not administer it
in their own? Pray turn this Doctrine to another Subject, and suppose a
Question started in England about the king's Prerogative* By what Authority
should, or could this Question be judged, but the king's? As much his own Cause
as it is, we must not have another Authority set up in His Kingdom to judge of
Differences belonging to His Kingdom. For, deciding Differences being one Part
of the Kingly Office, it would be to set up another King. It is palpable, that
to apply the Exception of ones own Cause to Supreme Powers, is to make them not
Supreme; and yet as irrational and as destructive as it is, People take the
confidence to do it.

But if the Answerer mean by his Such a one, a Stranger proceeding by his
arbitrary Will, there neither is nor can be such a one. No Member of the Church
can be more a Stranger in the Church, than an Englishman in England. And for
arbitrary Will, in our Case, there cannot be a wilder Fancy. Christ commanded
his Apostles to teach his Doctrine to all Nations. They obeyed his Command, and
their sound is gone forth through the whole earth. Can the arbitrary Will of
any Mortal, stretch it to the utmost extent of Imagination, alter, or conceal,
or disguise a Doctrine known and practiced by a great many Nations, some very
remote, and those which are Neighbors agreeing in few things besides that
Doctrine? Then as the king would have his Appeal for Justice made to the
Catholic Church, so many Millions, as make up that Church, are a very pleasant
arbitrary such a one.

This, says His Majesty, is our Case here in England in matters Spiritual. For
the Protestants are not of the Church of England, as it is the true Church, from
whence there can be no Appeal, but because t^^ Discipline of that Church is
conformable at that present to their Fancies, which as soon as it shall
contradict, or vary from, They are really (he out of an uncorrect Copy says
ready) to embrace or join with the next Congregation of People, whose
Discipline and Worship agrees with their Opinion at that time. His Copy has
whose Discipline or Worship agrees with the Opinion of that time. Here is the
Moral of the Allegory, which we find by Justice to be done, understood deciding
differences in Matters Spiritual, that is, in Faith: By those who are to
administer Justice the Church from which there is no Appeal. Because
Protestants do not think themselves concluded by the Decisions of the Church of
England, but adhere to her because they like them at present; The king infers
there is no Authoritative deciding of Spiritual Differences in England, no
thrusting out the Heresies crept in; but every one, in consequence of his
Principles, is to leave the Church of England as often as she decides against
his Persuasions, and take up with the next Congregation which is more to his
humor. What says the Answerer to this.

Why, that the Sense of this Period is not so clear, but that one may easily
mistake about it. Very easily without question. For there is not an easier
thing in the World, than to mistake, when one will give his mind to it. He is
the first, though, I believe, who thought his late Majesty did not speak
intelligible English. But the Answerer will help him out, and tell us what is
aimed at. As if what a Man says, and what he aims at by saying it, were not two
things, as dif^ ere^ t as End and Means. But let him set the Cart before the
Horse for me, and tell us what was aimed at. That we of the Church of England
have no (...) upon us, but that of our own Judgments; ^ nd when that changes,
we may join with Independents or Presbyterians, as we do now with the Church of
England. For one half, His Majesty, I believe, did think the Church of England,
as things go, has no tie upon her Members; but his aim was, she might; and it
depends on her self whether she will or no. The other half was not only aimed
at, but directly said, and more; that who adhere to Day to the Church of
England in virtue of their own Fancies, not only may, but ought, quit her for
the next Congregation which is more agreeable to those Fancies. How does the
Answerer avoid that Consequence.

Why truly by talking of another Matter. For he asks, What security can be
greater than that of our own Judgments? As if it pinched there. His Majesty
talks of those who do not believe, as the Church of England does, for this
reason, because they are taught by a Church from which there is no Appeal, that
is, who have not that Motive for their Judgments which he took for the only,
truly reasonable Motive. And while he is speaking of Motives, the Answerer
falls a talking of Judgments. The difficulty is not whether Judgment affords
Security: (A Judgment grounded on true Reason, can no more change than Reason:)
but whether there be any security in those Judgments, which are made on
unsecure Motives. Or if you will, what Security there is in that Judgment,
which the Answerer offers for Security. It Is as in Land. The Security is good,
where the Title is unquestionable; but if that be doubtful, there is no Money
to be borrowed on the Land. And he will have us take for Security the Judgment
of which we are not satisfied* that it is it self secure.

Once again, His Majesty thought Church-security the only Security in this
Matter. And it rests with the Answerer to show that Protestants either have
this or other true Security; to show what other Foundation and Pillar of Truth
there is, besides the Church; how it can be a Foundation without Infallibility,
and People have reason to trust their Souls to what may deceive them; In short,
what good account they can give of the Hope which is in them, who learn the
Faith by which they think to please God, otherwise than from those whom he
appointed to teach it. Till he do this, as obscurely as his Majesty speaks,
People will see, they have nothing to trust to for their Salvation, but Fancy,
nor the Church of England for their company.

But He dares appeal to the World, whether They have not made it appear, that
it is not Fancy, but Judgment which has made them firm to the Church of
England? Dares he, in earnest, put it to the Catholic World, any more than we
to the Protestant? To what purpose these great words, when he knows
beforehand, nothing will, nor can come of them? It had been a great deal more
to purpose, since Fancy and Judgment, in this place, signify a rational or not
rational Persuasion, to have showed, that they truly have Reason, who are firm
to the Church of England, and that They are indeed firm. For that Firmness may
as well be pretended, as Reason for it^^ and they may desire to pass for firm
to Her, (...) make her not firm to her self. But for big (...), none are better
at it than Cowards out of Gunshot.

Might it not, asks he on, as well have been said, That the P^^^^ tants of the
Church of England adhered to the Crow^ in the Times of Rebellion, out of (...),
and not out of Judgment? His Zeal for the Church of England is wondrou^
unlucky. As no body thought of detracting from the just Praises of the Church
of England, and every body must acknowledge her Doctrine in this Point is very
Orthodox, and her Practice in the Times of Rebellion conformable to it, there
was no need to mention this matter. And yet he will by all means bring it in
against himself. Many, he knows, did desert her, and her Doctrine in this
Point, at that time; so many, that the Rebellion peradventure was indebted for
its Success to those Deserters. For had not the ill-affected Rabble been
countenanced and headed, by Men who had, perhaps, all their Life before
conformed to the Church of England, the Rebellion either would not have been at
all, or not so unfortunately prosperous. Now, as it is plain, that if those who
deserted, had ever adhered to her, with a persuasion, that they were obliged to
believe what she ^ aught, They could not have deserted her in this Point, who
always taught Loyalty; This very Case proves what the King asserts, That till
they do so, there is no security of their adhering to her. For they may desert
her in any other Point of Christ's Doctrine, as well as they did in this, and
for ought appears will, when they meet with the same Interest, or whatever
Motive They had to desert her then.

In the last place, He tries to turn the Argument ^ pon the Church of Rome, to
which, he asks, why any adhere, but because it is agreeable to their Judgment
so to do? This Actor went off the Stage but now, and needed not return so soon,
with (...) a Part. For what does he mean by Adhering^^ Believing, I suppose,
that the Church of (...) right. For he talks not sure of acting (...)
conformity to our inward (...) but Hypocrites, do in all their Actions. (...)
he mean it of the inward Persuasion, to ask, why They adhere, but because they
judge they ought, is in other words, Why do they adhere, but because they
adhere* For their Judgment is their Adhesion. To (...) People adhere to a
Church, with every body (...) signifies, What Reason or Motive have they (...)
adhering?

To which Question, with respect to the ^ oman Catholic Church, the Answer, in
the words of the Paragraph, is, That People are of her, as it is the true
Church, from whence there can be no Appeal; or because she is the Church which
Christ has now on Earth, with whom his Doctrine was deposited, and from whom
only it can be learned. In the words or St. Austin; (...)
I am kept in the Bosom of the Catholic Church, by the consens of People and
Nations; by an Authority begun by Miracles, (...) by Hope, increased by
Charity, (...) by Antiquity; by a Succession of Bishops from St. Peter, to whom
(...) (...) where Catholics meet, none of them have the (...) him to their
Congregations. The Answerer will tell us when he thinks sit, what Answer he
thinks proper to be made for other Churches. In the mean time, let us reslect
what he has answered to the Paragraph.

He has told us, That there is no Security greater than that of our Judgments:
That theirs is Judgment not Fancy, and particularly was so in the times of
Rebellion: And that they Judge in the Church of (...) too. What is all this to
the Paragraph, which says in short, That because Protestants have no firm
Motive for their adhering to the Church of England, they cannot be firm to her.
Does he make it appear their Motive is firm? Or how They will be firm without
one* This little is all there was before him; is their Judgment solidly
grounded, or is it not? the only and whole business. What need was there to
talk of Judgment in common, when the Question is of their Judgment in this
Particular? Or what serves it for, but to make a show, and fill up a Page?
There may be as much Security in the Judgment as there will, and Protestants be
never the better, unless there be Security in their Judgment. They will, I
hope, since their Souls are at stake, consider what (...) do to venture them,
where those, who write (...) are not able to show they have any (...). It is
enough to my purpose to have (...) that his Majesty asks for a secure Motive,
and (...) no Answer.

(...) to see, by his Objections against (...), what he takes for Fancy, and
(...). According to him, They (...) and They Judge, who to be sure of a right
(...) ^^^^^rences in Religion, look out for a Fallible Judge, and hazard their
Salvation, on what may deceive them. They Fancy, who are for an Unwritten Word;
They Judge, who think the Word of God is made by Writing. Giving Honor to God
by the Worship of Images, is Fancy; and Judgment, that giving Honor to God, is
not giving Honor to God. For giving Honor any way, is plainly giving Honor.
Mediators of Intercession besides the Mediator of Redemption are Fancy; and so
to think, because only one could Redeem us, no body besides can Pray for us, is
Judgment. The Doctrine of Concomitancy, Fancy; and true Christian Judgment,
that the Body and Blood of Christ can n^^ ^ e sep^ rated, and he die again. A
Substantial change in the E^^ments, Fancy; and right Judgment, that the
Apostles did not understand what Christ said to them, or not instruct the
Church as they believed themselves. So it is with his last instance of
Pargatory, and all the rest. Our Judgment is the Judgment of the Church from
which there is no Appeal, and it rests with the Answerer to show, how any other
Judgment can be more than mere Fanc^^ or (...), to dispatch the next Paragraph
under one. Men are giddy, or settled, as they are guided or not (...) by
Reason; and he should show (...) Reason besides can settle them, (...)

I desire to know therefore, says His Majesty, of every serious Considerer of
these things, whether the great Work of our Salvation ought to depend on such a
sandy Foundation as this? That is, says the Answerer, the Private Judgment. Can
a Man expect there should be any Answer to this, but that our Salvation ought,
or ought not depend on Sand; or that the Foundation of Private Judgment is, or
is not Sandy? And yet the Answerer makes a shift to spin out a Paragraph,
without one word of either.

I, says he, have seriously considered this matter, and must declare, That I ^
ind no Christian Church built on a more sandy Foundation, than that, which
pretends to be settled on a Rock, as to part of her Faith. If that Church build
on Sand too, she will, I suppose hear on it in due time. At present, he who
considers so much, might consider, that he is not asked what he has considered,
or what he has found; but, whether any Church* That, if he will, among the rest
ought to build on Sand? and whether Private Judgment be more than Sand? Plain
I, or No, if it please him first, and then a l' autre.

Then he tells us That no understanding Man builds upon his own Judgment. He
takes, I suppose, the Advice of his Friends in Compliment: For after all, he is
to be his own Judge. But is his Judgment, and their Advice, and what you will,
besides the Judgment of the Church without Appeal, a Foundation to build upon?
There is the Knot which the Answerer should now untie.

But no Man of understanding can believe without his Judgment. Sure enough; nor
no Man of notunderstanding neither: for his Belief is his Judgment. But I am
cloyed with this Dish. What Stand there is to set it upon, is now the Question.

I appeal, says the Answerer, to any ingenuous Man, whether he does not as much
build upon his own Judgment, who chooses, the Church, as he that chooses
Scripture for his Rule? Every ingenuous Man, who reads these Papers, will tell
him, that to build upon ones own Judgment, is the same with following ones own
Fancy, being ones own Judge, and what other Terms a Master of English, in all
Senses, used, to express, in variety of Phrases, Judging unreasonably. Let the
Answerer, in stead of telling us what we all know as well as he, That every one
Judges, who Judges, tell's what we do not know, what Reason they have to choose
the Scripture, not the Church, for their Rule.

He that chooses the Church, has many more Difficulties to conquer, than the
other has. How so? For this sounds like a Paradox. Those many more
Difficulties, to my thinking, must be conquered, before one can come at
Scripture. For unless we first choose the Church for a Rule to find out
Scripture, by whom alone St. Austin has told us we know it, there will be no
assurance of Scripture for us to choose. And then in the choice of the Church,
there is but one thing to mind, and that no difficulty neither, where, or which
the Church is? When that is settled, a Man has no more to do, but believe as he
is taught, and live as he believes. Who thinks he has conquered the
difficulties about the Letter of Scripture, as which Books belong to the Canon,
which not? which is a right Translation or Reading, which wrong? and whatever
falls in his way; has at least as many remaining, as he has past, and which if
he find not insuperable, he is, I believe, the more beholding to his Will. For
I know not how to have any Opinion of his Judgment, who, only because such
words will bear his Sense, as they will, it may be twenty others, all abetted
by Men of Name, ventures his Soul upon it that his is just the Sense meant by
the Holy Ghost. But let us hear his Reason.

For the Church can never be a Rule without the Scriptures, Quid autem si neque
Apostoli quidem Scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne opportebat ordinem sequi
Traditionis, quam tradiderunt iis quibus committebant Ecclesias? cui
ordinationi a^ lentiunt multae Gentes Barbarorum, eorum qui in Christum
credunt, sine charta and atramento scriptam habentes per spiritum in cordibus
suns salutem, and veterem Traditionem diligenter custodientes. (...) advers.
Haere^. Lib. 3. col.
but the Scriptures may, without the Church, that is, without Faithful. For a
Congregation of them is a Church. Will he persuade us there were no Faithful in
the World before Moses? No Christians before the New Testament, which was
written by Christians? and no part of it till several Years after the
Resurrection. Does not St. Irenaeus inform us, that more than one Nation had
the Doctrine of Christ and no Scriptures? And will he make us believe, that all
these were Faithful without any Rule for their Faith? and that the Church
depends on Writing, which if it should be lost in the World, there would be an
end of the Church? Again, of what, and to whom should Scripture be a Rule, if
there were no Faith, nor Faithful? Paradoxes a part, and the attempt to
unriddle one by another, let the Answerer tell us, if he please, whether our
Salvation ought to stand upon Sand; and to deal plainly, whether he think that
they who stand, whether on the Church, or Scripture, do not build both on Sand?
For by saying nothing for Scripture, and yet making it worse on the Churches
side, one would guess he is of Opinion, there is no steadiness in either. And
it would be well to speak plain, that People may leave off dealing, where there
is no Security, and troubling themselves no longer with the uncertainties of
Religion, turn their Thoughts to more solid things.

Whether it be easy or no to find the Churches Infallibility in the Scripture,
has been answered by Her Royal Highness; and I will not presume to answer where
she has, especially when the Question has no relation to our Business.

In the last place, who has found the Churches Infallibility, has yet, says the
Answerer, a harder Point to get over, viz. How the Promises relating to the
Church in general, came to be appropriated to the Church of Rome? By the way,
the Promises of which he talks, are they not in Scripture? and no harder to be
found there by another, than by him? How comes the Churches Infallibility to be
easily found there in this Period, which was not easy to find in the last? For
who has found the Promise, has foun^ Infallibility, as certainly as that the
Promises of Christ never fail. But why are we not all agreed now? That there
are Promises of Infallibility made to the Church in general he agrees, and
doubts not, I suppose, but that those Promises are made good. I suppose, too,
he will allow that the Church in General, and the General Church are all one,
and that the General, and the Catholic Church* are but two Names for the same
thing. And so we are arrived at Infallibility in the Catholic Church. Yes; but
it must not be appropriated to the Church of Rome* Why, it shall not, if that
will content him. We ask no more, than what he allows. That the Catholic Church
be Infallible, and the Church of Rome, with all her faults, one of the many
Churches which make it up. To allow so much, is to allow the Roman Catholic
Church is Infallible. For Roman Catholic is nothing but the Catholic with the
Roman in. What remains then, but to take the Infallibility promised to this
Catholic Church for the Foundation of our Salvation, inquire and believe what
she teaches, and leave off disputing? For they are undoubtedly firmly grounded
who build on the Promises of God.

It is true, the Answerer has not all this while answered the Question. For he
says not, whether Salvation ought to depend on a Sandy Foundation; or whether
the private Judgment be a Sandy Foundation. But he has done much better, by
instructing People the Catholic Church is Infallible, and shall for me keep his
Thoughts of that Matter to himself, since he has no mind to reveal them.
People, I hope, will profit by his Instructions, and for their own sakes choose
Infallible, rather than Fallible Security for their Souls, now they know where
it is to be had.

There follow several lines in his Majesty's Paper, which are not transcribed
by the Answerer, because they are, he says, as effectual for the Church of
England, as Rome. And truly I am of his mind, that the Church of England has
her share in those favors as much as any particular Church, if she be, as they
are, incorporated into the General. For neither do they claim otherwise; nor
can the Favors granted by God to the Faithful, be imagined extended to the
not-faithful. It is for this Reason I have always thought them no Friends of
hers, who make her of a d^ fferent Faith from all, or indeed any part of the
Catholic Church, that is, no part her self. For evidently there is no
pretending to the Privileges of a Body, but by being a Member; nor pretending
to be of the Body of Faithful, but by Faith.

And pray consider, says the King, on the other side that those who resist the
Truth, and will not submit to his Church, draw their Arguments from
Implications, and far fetched Interpretations, at the same time that they deny
plain and positive words; which is so great a disingenuity, that it is not
almost to be thought, that they can believe themselves.

Here are two particulars mentioned; drawing Arguments from Implications, and
denying plain words. In answer to the first, out of the whole heap of
Controversies, the Answerer chooses Three, in which they have, he says, plain
and positive words on their side. Now it had been altogether as easy, and as
short, to have produced those plain and positive words, if there had been any,
as to have past his word that there are such. Besides that People love to see
with their own Eyes, and plain things may easily be seen; He is a Party, and
even Supreme Powers, according to him, must not judge in their own Cause. It
rests then with him, to show where the Scripture says No, of what the Roman
Catholic Church says I, or contrariwise. For this is what People understand by
plain and positive, and all besides is Implication. And by the favor of his
Confidence, I affirm to him, that who argue against the Roman Catholic Church,
out of Scripture, argue always from Implications: though it be more than needs to
justify His Majesty's Assertion. For if they draw their Arguments from
Implications at any time, they draw Arguments from Implications.

In answer to the Second, he pitches upon a point wherein he acknowledges the
words of Scripture seem plain and positive on our side, and their Sense to be
from Implications and far-fetched Interpretations, and alleges what he has to
say, why, notwithstanding, they are not plain and positive. As if there were
any other way of denying plain Words of Scripture, but by denying them to be
plain. No Christian has the confidence to deny what Scripture plainly teaches;
but who has no mind to believe what it teaches, denies that it teaches contrary
to him, and for a Pretense to deny That, raises some Mist or other, to obscure
the Clearness of every Text alleged against him. The Answerer then is far
enough from showing, that they do not deny plain Words of Scripture, by
pretending that they are not plain, not did not could His Majesty mean they
denied them otherwise, who knew very well that there is no other way to do it,
and that no Words are so plain, but who will make it his business, may find
something to say against them. This which the Answerer alleges, was far from a
Secret to Him.

In short, the Answerer would have them cleared from arguing from Implications,
by saying, they have, in three Points, plain Words, which he thought it
needless to produce; and from denying plain Words, by denying that they are
plain. And this is all his Answer. What he says of Implications in the Pope's
Bulls, might, if he could show the Church of Rome builds her Faith on those
Implications, be an Argument against her, but none for himself. For Paul is not
a just the less a Thief, because Peter is caught stealing too. But, some in the
Church of Rome argue from Implications, upon which they do not build their
Faith, therefore others may build their Faith upon Implications, seems to me
but an odd Argument.

The King's Conclusion is; Is there any other Foundation of the Protestant
Church, but that, if the Civil Magistrate please, he may call such of the
Clergy as he thinks fit for his turn at that time, and turn the Church either
to Presbytery, or Independency, or indeed what he pleases? This was the way of
our Pretended Reformation here in England. And by the same Rule and Authority,
it may be altered into as many Shapes and Forms, as there are Fancies in Men's
Heads.

This, says the Answerer, looks like a very unkind Requital to the Church of
England, for her Zeal in asserting the Magistrates Power against a Foreign
Jurisdiction; to infer from thence, That the Magistrate may change the Religion
here which may be pleases. I need not observe, that this is no Answer, because
I suppose it was not meant for one. It seems rather a kind of Complaint, to my
thinking very unreasonable. For he is a great deal more justly to be complained
of, who takes a concerning Truth unkindly, then he who speaks it. Religion, I
think, should not depend on Compliments; and I pray God preserve me from the
Kindness, which, not to fail in the Punctilio's of nice Civility, forbears to
tell me what may be useful to my Salvation. Again, Zeal against Foreign
Jurisdiction very well might, and, much more according to knowledge, actually
did appear in England, without any alteration in Religion: a thing to which I
am persuaded neither Magistrate not Church have reason to think themselves
beholding; because it was the Gap at which the Heresies crept in, of which His
Magesty complains, and which not long since ruined Both. Neither is any
inference made from that Zeal; but a plain Question asked, to which a plain
Answer would much better become the Part he now acts, and show much more Zeal
to Truth, and to the Church of England, than talking of her Zeal unseasonably.

But although we attribute the Supreme Jurisdiction to the King, yet we do not
question, but there are inviolable Rights of the Church, which ought to be
preserved against the Fancies of some, and Usurpations of others. Rights! and
Fancies! and Usurpations! Pray let him keep these things till their time come,
and tell us at present, why the Protestant Church may not be altered, as it was
made, by the Authority of the Magistrate, and Concurrence of such of the Clergy
as are for his turn? This, if he have forgot it, is the Question. For the
Rights of the Church, his Care will be more seasonable, when he has settled the
Foundation.

We do by no means make our Religion mutable according to the Magistrates
Pleasure. But only according to the Pleasure of other Folks, perhaps. If it be
immutable, let us see the immutable Foundation, which makes it so, and have
some Reason to think it so. There it sticks. Barely to say it is immutable,
costs nothing; nor was there ever so great a Criminal, who could not say, Not
guilty.

For the Rule of our Religion is unalterable, being the Holy Scripture. Not to
turn our present Question into a Dispute about the Rule of Faith, I pray him to
make it appear that the Holy Scripture is such a Foundation as makes the
Protestant Church unalterable. The Letter of Scripture is common to all, who
bare the name of Christians, and may be as much a Foundation to every, as to
any one. The Sense is not a Foundation of Religion, but Religion it self. As
Protestants build Protestancy upon Scripture, the Presbyterians build
Presbytery, the Independents Independency, and every one his own Religion.
Their several Religions are nothing but their several Expositions of the same
words. Why now, is this Foundation more unalterable, in respect of the
Protestant Church, than any other? It sustained a Catholic Building heretofore;
It sustains a Protestant now. Why may not the same Hands which removed the
Catholic, and set up the Protestant in its, place, remove the Protestant, and
set up the Presbyterian, the Independent Building* or what you will; this is
the Question, to which a Body would have expected an Answer from an Answerer.
But he in stead of thinking of that Matter, gives us for an unalterable
Foundation of Protestant Religion, a Foundation upon which all the Alterations
of Religion, which are, and perhaps ever have been, pretend to stand as much as
the Protestant.

But the exercise of Religion is under the Regulation of the Laws of the Land.
Must the Laws which regulate the Exercise of Religion be obeyed, not only for
Wrath but for Conscience, or must they not? If they must, People are obliged to
exercise a new Religion, as often as the Laws appoint a new Exercise. For they
cannot exercise one Religion, and be of another. And then they are obliged in
Conscience to alter their Religion, as the Laws alter, from Protestant to
Presbyterian or Independent, or as the Law pleases. If such Laws are not to be
obeyed, that the exercise of Religion is under the Regulation of the Laws,
signifies, that People may be punished for not doing what in Conscience they
are not obliged to do. So Christianity is under the Regulation of Pagan, or
Turkish Laws, and every weaker Man under the Regulation of a stronger; which to
may Ears sounds odly. But take it which way you will, the Case is equal. If
there be an Obligation from the Laws, there may be an Obligation to the
Presbyterian, or Independent Exercise and Religion when the Law pleases: And if
there be none, Presbytery indeed, and Independency cannot be imposed upon our
Consciences by Law; but they may be as much settled as Protestancy is now. For
all are under the same Regulation, with the same either Obligation, or not
Obligation from that Regulation.

He concludes with a Prayer, with which it is as with Scripture. Take it right,
and it is a good Prayer: but yet they may join in it, who will be Good
Christians, and Loyal Subjects no longer, than their King is a Nursing Father
to their Church.

But now he is parting from His Majesty, it will not be amiss to reflect how it
stands between them. His Majesty, as he had perhaps more reason than other Men,
was deeply sensible of the sad effects of Differences in Religion, which he saw
must needs last, till an effectual course be taken to compose them. Wrangling
about particular Points, that is, turning Religion into Ergotery, He had reason
to think would never do it. For there never came so bad a Cause into
Westminster Hall, nor ever will into the Church, for which no Argument can be
made. As long as Men have Tongues, they will never want something to say, which
it is but dressing up in handsome Language, and it may take with those who
distinguish not the Plausible from the Solid. The bare name of an Answer, is
enough to make a show, and keep up the Reputation of not being overcome, and so
much is Victory to one side. In short, Men die, and Disputes live, and all that
comes of them is what was long since observed, There is no end of writing many
Books. He saw besides, that it agrees not with the Goodness of God, and His
care of Man, to leave us at uncertainties, which without Infallibility he saw
unavoidable. And therefore wished People, in stead of floating uncertainly up
and down in the Ocean of Disputes, to take Port in that one Church which Christ
has upon Earth, and to which Power was given to govern us in Matters of Faith,
and a promise of perpetual assistance. Which Church, he says, is vibsily the
Roman Catholic.

The Answerer flatly denies the Roman Catholic to be the one Church of Christ,
for Reasons, ever since St. Cyprians Days, condemned by all Christians; and
never minds that he denies two terms the same with a third, to be the same
between themselves. For Church of Christ, and Catholic Church, are the same,
both signifying all the particular Churches which believe the Doctrine of
Christ. Again, Roman Catholic, is the same too with Catholic: for both signify
likewise all the same Churches, with the Roman for one of the number, which the
Answerer acknowledges she is. Catholic, says All, and who says All says Roman,
if she be one; And who says Roman Catholic, says those very All, neither more
nor less; And yet the Answerer can fancy a difference. For the rest he gives no
direct Answer, that I remember to any one Question, yet hovers so about it,
that one must keep his thoughts very attentive, not to have them diverted quite
another way. As for Certainty or Uncertainty, they are Matters which he seems
not to mind. Not but that he talks of a sure Compass, and Infallible Rule: but
he never tells us, whether, or how a Man shall be sure, that he does indeed
steer by that Compass, or is guided by that Rule. Those great sounds vanish
into Conscience at last, and that Conscience may be right or wrong, for any
care he takes; as perhaps he thinks it equal, whether the one, or the other.
The King desired People should have sure hold, and shows them where they may:
He is only solicitous to keep them from fastening there, and leaves them to find
another, if they can of themselves, or be content, if they will, without any.
If he have a Pique to the Roman Catholic, he may show them another Catholic
Church, or, if a Church be needless, on what they may rest securely without a
Church. If on Scripture, he may show them, how they may safely stake their
Souls, that they do not mistake it: If on Conscience, how they may securely
trust it. Let People be but safe, and I ask no more. But as there is, after all
but one way to Heaven, the King shows it, and he imputes deceit to him for his
pains; and then sets up for the faithful Friend himself, who will neither let
them go that way, nor show them that there is any other. And thus it stands
between them.

It is for the Reader to consider, which of the two gives him better Counsel,
and where he can find better Security, than what His Majesty offers, or whether
Security be needless. One would think is not like to take up much Consideration
in our Country, whether, in a concern of infinite more value than all the
Money, which troubles so many Lawyers and Scriveners, one should deal without
looking after Security. And yet, by whatever charm it happens, there needs a
great deal of Grace, to make People sensible in this Case, of what in all
others they are but too much, their greatest concerns. God of his Mercy grant
it to all who ask it, and to all, who by not asking it, show they more need it.

A DEFENSE OF THE Third Paper.
I Dare appeal to all unprejudiced Readers, and especially to those who have
any sense of Piety, whether upon perusal of the Paper written by Her late
Highness the Duchess, they have not found in it somewhat which touched them to
the very Soul: whether they did not plainly and perfectly discern in it the
Spirit of Meekness, Devotion, and Sincerity, which animates the whole
Discourse; and whether the Reader be not satisfied, that she who writ it has
opened her Heart without disguise, so as not to leave a Scruple that she was
not in earnest. I am sure I can say, for my own particular, that when I read it
first in Manuscript, I could not but consider it as a Discourse extremely
moving, plain, without Artifice, and discovering the Piety of the Soul from
which it flowed. Truth has a Language to it self, which it is impossible for
Hypocrisy to imitate: Dissimulation could never write so warmly, nor with so
much life. What less than the Spirit of Primitive Christianity could have
dictated her Words? The loss of Friends, of worldly Honors, and Esteem, the
Defamation of ill Tongues, and the Reproach of the Cross, all these, though not
without the struglings of Flesh and Blood, were surmounted by her; as if the
Saying of our Savior were always sounding in her Ears, What will it profit a
man to gain the whole world, and lose his Soul!

I think I have amplified nothing in relation either to this Pious Lady, or her
Discourse: I am sure I need not. And now let any unbias'd and indifferent*
Reader compare the Spirit of the Answerer with hers. Does there not manifestly
appear in him a quite different Character? Need the Reader be informed, that he
is disingenuous, soul-mouth'd, and shuffling; and that, not being able to
answer plain Matter of Fact, he endeavors to evade it, by Suppositions,
Circumstances, and Conjectures; like a cunning Barreter of Law, who is to
manage a sinking Cause, the Dishonesty of which he cannot otherwise support,
than by defaming his Adversary? Her only Business is* to satisfy her Friends
of the inward Workings of her Soul, in order to her Conversion, and by what
Methods she quitted the Religion in which she was educated. He on the contrary,
is not satisfied, unless he question the Integrity of her Proceedings, and the
Truth of her plain Relation, even so far as to blast, what in him lies, her
Blessed Memory, with the imputation of Forgery and Deceit; as if she had given
a false Account, not only of the Passages in her Soul, and the Agonies of a
troubled Conscience, only known to God and to her self, but also of the
Discourses which she had with others concerning those Disquiets. Every where
the Lie is to be cast upon her, either directly, in the Words of the Bishop of
Winchester, which he (...) * or indirectly, in his own, in which his spiteful
Deligence is most remarkable.

In his Answer to the two former Papers there seems to have been some restraint
upon the virulence of his Genius, though even there he has manifestly past the
Bounds of Decency and Respect: But so soon as he has got loose from disputing
with Crowned Heads, he shows himself in his pure Naturals, and is as busy in
raking up the Ashes of their next Relations, as if they were no more of kin to
the Crown, than the New Church of England is to the Old Reformation of their
Great-Grandfathers. But God forbid that I should think the whole Episcopal
Clergy of this Nation to be of his Latitudinarian Stamp; many of them, as
Learned as himself, are much more Moderate: And such, I am confident, will be
as far from abetting his Irreverence to the Royal Family, as they are from the
juggling Designs of his Faction, to draw in the Nonconformists to their Party,
by assuring them they shall not be prosecuted (as indeed, upon their
Principles, they cannot be by them); but in the mean time this is to wrest the
Favor out of the King's Hands, and take the Bestowing it into their own; and
to reassume to themselves that Headship of the English Church, which their
Ancestors gave away to King Henry the Eighth. And now let any Loyal Subject but
consider* whether this new way of their Proceeding does not rather tend to
bring the Church of England into the Fanatics, than the Fanatics into the
Church of England.

These are the Arts which are common to him and his Fellow Laborers; but his
own peculiar Talent is that of subtle Calumny and sly Aspersion, by which he
insinuates into his Readers an ill Opinion of his Adversaries, before he comes
to Argument; and takes away their Good Name rather by Theft than open Robbery.
He lays a kind of accumulative Dishonesty to their Charge, and touches 'em here
and there with Circumstances, in stead of positive Proofs, till at last he
leaves a bad Impression of 'em; like a Painter who makes Blotches of hard
Coloring in several Parts of the Face, which he smooths afterward into a
Likeness. After this manner he, or one of his Brethren in Iniquity, has used
Monsieur de Condom, by picking up Stories against him in his Preface, which he
props up with little Circumstances, but seldom so positive that he cannot come
off, when their Falsity shall be detected. In the mean time, his Cause go's
forward with the Common Reader; who, prepossest by the Preface, is made partial
to his Answer. The same kind of Artifice, with some little variation, has been
used in other of their Books, besides this present Libel against the Duchess.

But, the Cloven-foot of this our Answerer, appears from underneath the
Cassock, even in the first step he makes toward his Answer to the present
Paper: Which, he tells us, is said to be written by a great Lady. How
doubtfully he speaks, as if there were no certainty of the Author. But surely
it is more than barely said; for it is Published by the same Authority, which
ordered the two other Papers written by His late Majesty to the Press; and the
Original of it, is still remaining in the Hands of the present King* Indeed the
Bishop of Winchester may seem to have given him some encouragement for this in
the Preface to his Treatises, where he tells us, That Maimbourg the Jesuit
recites something which he says was written by the late Duchess; and which he
afterward calls the Papers pretended to be written by Her. But if that Bishop
had lived to see what our Answerer has seen, Her Paper Printed and Published by
His Majesty, I cannot think he would have been so incredulous as to have made
that doubt. It may be allowed him to suspect a Stranger of Forgery; but with
what face can this Son of the Church of England suspect the Integrity of his
King? In the mean time, observe what an excellent Voucher he has got of this
dead Bishop, and what an excellent Argument he has drawn from him. Because he
would not believe what he did not think she said, we must not believe what he
know the did say. Let our Author therefore come out of his Mists and
Ambiguities, or give us some better Authority for his unreasonable Doubts: For,
at this rate, if it be already suspected, whether what she writes be Matter of
Fact, and indeed, whether she writ it at all; it may be doubted hereafter,
whether she changed, and perhaps, whether there were ever such a Woman.

After he had thus begun, That this Paper was said to be written by a Great
Lady, for the satisfaction of her Friends; he shuffles in commodious Words for
an Answerer, and which afford him Elbow-room: For he talks of the Reasons and
Motives which she had, for her leaving the Communion of the Church of England,
etc. and of the Right which all Readers have to judge of the strength of them.
Now, as Luck will have it, none of those Motives and Reasons are to be found in
the Paper of her Highness: She expresses her self clearly to write for the
Satisfaction of her Friends, not as to the Reasons she had her self for
changing, but as to the Censures which she might expect from them for so doing:
and her whole Paper shows this was only her Design. So that, against the Law of
all Romances, he first builds the Enchanted Castle, and then sets up to be the
Doughty Knight who conquers it. It seems he found, that a bare Denial, which is
the proper Answer to Matter of Fact, was a dry Business, and would make no
sport; and therefore he would be sure to cut himself our sufficient Work. But
it is not every Man's Talent to force a Trade; for a Customer may choose whether
he will buy or not.

This Great Person changed not lightly, nor in haste; but after all the
Endeavors which could be used, by a Soul which was true to it self, and to its
Eternal Interest. She was sensible, as I before hinted, that she should lose
her Friends and Credit, and what to her Condition at that time was more sharply
piercing, expose the Catholics of England to the danger of suffering for her
sake. On these Considerations she makes a plain Relation of all the Passages in
her Change; and expecting severe Censures from the World, took care to satisfy
her Friends concerning it. As for the Reasons of it, they were only betwixt God
and her own Soul, and the Priest with whom she spoke at last. What a wonderful
Art has this Gentleman, to turn a bare Narrative into Motives and Inducements?
When he is arrived to the Perfection of calling down a Saint from Heaven, he
may examine her concerning them; in the mean time he must be content with the
Relation which she has left behind her here on Earth; and if he will needs be
mistaking her Scruples for her Motives, who can help it?

His Design, as he tells us a little after the beginning, is to vindicate the
Honor of the Church of England, so far as it may be thought to suffer by the
Paper of her late Highness. I might here tell him, that he has on Obligation
antecedent to the Honor of his Community, which is that to God and his own
Conscience. But the Honor of the Church of England is no farther concerned in
the Paper of her Highness, than in relation to the Persons of two or there
Prelates; and those he leaves at last to shift for themselves as they are able,
with this melancholy Farewell, That God be thanked, the Cause of our Church
does not depend upon the singular Opinion of one or two Bishops in it, wherein
they apparently recede from the established Doctrine of it.

In the next place, he is sensible how nice and tender a thing it is to meddle
in a Matter wherein the Memory of so Great a Lady is concerned.

Here he is sensible, once for all; for after this one Civility, you hear no
more of his Good Manners to the end of the Chapter; but the Honor of the
Church of England so wholly takes up his thoughts, that he forgets the Respect
which is due to her Sex, her Quality, her Memory, her Relations, and confutes
her as coursly as the Parson did Bellarmine.

He go's on to inform us, how hard a Task he has undertaken in answering these
Papers, wherein such Circumstances are mentioned as cannot fully be cleared,
the Parties themselves having been many years dead; yet he shall endeavor to
keep within due Bounds, etc.

These due Bounds either are, or ought to be, Respect to the Great Lady, and
Caution in regard of Circumstances, which I hope he will not put upon his
Readers for Arguments, the Parties being dead so long ago.

But let the Reader here take notice, that in this very Place he is clapping
his Cups together, and shuffling his Balls from Hand to Hand, to lay the
Foundation of his Juggling, and to prepare the way for all the Tricks which he
is to play hereafter.

For the Parties being dead long since, that is, the Duchess, in the first
place, not being alive to justify the several Conferences which she had with
the Bishops; not they, in the second, to answer as in the sight of God, whether
she had such Discourse with them, the Field is open for him, as he vainly
imagines, by laying Circumstances of Time and Place together, and racking her
own Paper till it seemingly speaks against her, to render it suspected to his
good Friends the Rabble, that she has falsified the whole Matter.

Well, we shall see what he builds upon this Foundation: Let him speak for
himself.

The way of her Satisfaction was very extraordinary; for toward the Conclusion
she confesses she was not able, nor would she enter into Disputes with any body.

Commend me to him for a Man of quick dispatch. At the first dash he is
bringing the two Ends of her Paper together; for he says, Toward the
Conclusion she confesses. 'Twas well searched of him, however, to hunt counter,
and run to the End of her Discourse for the Beginning of his own. He will lose
no Advantages, I warrant him. Press that home, Doctor. She modestly owns, that
she was neither able nor willing to enter into Disputes; therefore she had no
other way to satisfy her self: When the whole drift of this Pious and sincere
Discourse is to inform her Friends of the Methods by which God Almighty brought
her into his Church; her Paper being a plain and short History of her
Conversion.

The Answerer is of Opinion, there is nothing to be done, no satisfaction to be
had in Matters of Religion without Dispute; that is his only Receipt, his
Nostrum for attaining a true belief. But Doctors differ in this Point. For
another Sir. Her. Wootton.
Witty Gentleman of his Church desired no other Epitaph upon his Tomb than
this; Here lies the Author of this Sentence, Disputandi pruritus, scabies
Ecclesiae -- The itch of Disputation is the Scab or Tetter of the Church. Now
if the Learned avail themselves so little of Dispute, that it is as rare as a
Prodigy for one of them to convince another, what shall become of the
Ignorant, when they are to deal with those fencers of Divinity? Who can hit
them in Tierce and Quart at pleasure, while they are ignorant how to stand upon
their guard. And yet such poor People have Souls to save as precious in the
sight of God as the grim Logicians. Must they be damned unless they can make a
regular approach to Heaven, in Mood and Figure? Is there no entering there
without a Sillogism? or Ergoteering it with a nego, concedo, and distinguo? The
best on it is, Our Saviors Disciples were but poor Fishermen, and we read but
of one of his Apostles who was bred up at the Feet of Gamaliel. I would beseech
our Answerer to consider whether he has argued. upon his own Principles, in
affirming, that none can be satisfied as to the grounds of leaving one Church
and going to the other without entering into Dispute? Has he not allowed, that
every Man is to Interpret the Scripture for himself, in reference to his own
Salvation? With what Face then can he positively say, That this Lady, who had
not only read the Scriptures, but found them in her Judgment plainly to decide
the great Controversy betwixt Catholics and Protestants, might not leave his
Church, and enter into that of Christ, by Interpreting this is my Body, in the
Litteral and Obvious meaning? If from a Catholic she had become a Protestant by
expounding those Words in a Figurative Sense, he would have applauded her for
not discerning the Lords Body, and said she was in the right to interpret for
her self. But she, it seems, must be an exception to his General Rule, and not
have that privilege allowed her which he dare not deny to any Sectary of the
Nonconformists. The Phanatics think the Scripture is clear in all Matters of
Salvation, and if so, what need, say they, of those Spiritual Directours? Even
the Pillars of the Church by Law established, from their own Concessions are
found to be but broken Staffs: For after all their undertaking to heal a
wounded Conscience, when the Arrows of the Almighty are stuck into it, they
leave their Proselytes finally to the Scripture; as our Physicians, when they
have emptied the Pockets of their Patients without curing them, send them at
last to Tunbridge Waters, or the Air of Montpelliers.

But if Persons be resolved before hand what to do, says our Answerer, there is
no such way as to declare they will not enter into Dispute.

Here he would make us believe, that she swallowed a new Religion without
chewing it, because she Disputed not, I have showed already what is the common
fate of Disputation: But had she no other way of satisfying her Conscience? (as
he immediately infers she had not.) If he were not obstinately blind, or rather
had not an intention to blind his Reader, he might have observed the Methods
and Gradations of her change, and that though she Disputed not; yet she
Discoursed (which is entering into Matter of Dispute) with some of the ablest of
the English Clergy, even with him particularly who was left by the Bishop of
Winchester to be her Spiritual Directour; by which it plainly appears,
notwithstanding all the jugglings and glosses of our Answerer, that the better
part even of his own Prescription was put in practice by her, though without
effect, as to her satisfaction. Why then does he ask so many idle Questions?
Had she no Divines of the Church of England about her? none able and willing to
afford her their utmost assistance, when she takes care to inform the World,
that she had such Divines, that she imparted her Scruples, and after all,
remained unsatisfied with their Answers.

Persons of Learning, indeed he says, may possibly be satisfied without entering
into Disputes of Matters which she had neither the leisure to examine, nor the
capacity to judge of.

Then as I said before, the Kingdom of Heaven is chiefly, if not only for the
Wise and Learned of this World, though our Savior was not of this Judgment.
But is not every Man to be satisfied pro modulo suo? according to the measure
of his own Understanding? Can an ignorant Person enter into the Knowledge of
the Mysteries of our Faith, when even the most Learned cannot understand them?
Can the Answerer himself unriddle the secrets of the Incarnation, fadom the
undivided Trinity? Or the Consubstantiality of the Eternal Son with all his
Readings and Examinations? From whence comes it then that he believes them?
since neither the Scripture is plain about them, nor the Wit of Man can
comprehend them? As for her comparing the Doctrines of both Churches, no
question she did it to the best of her Ability; for if he will believe her in
any thing, she both read the Scriptures, and conferred with the most Learned
Protestants before she had any Discourses with a Catholic Priest: But if she
had not, as he rudely says, the capacity of judging in deep Controversies, it is
very probable she might want that of understanding the instructions of her
Guides: For if I may similize in my turn, a dull fellow might ask the meaning
of a Problem in Euclide from the Bishop of Salisbury, without being ever the
better for his Learned Solution of it: So then, her Capacity will break no
squares, at least from the Doctrine of the English Church, and the
Presbyterians, put them both together as they now stand united; for either the
Scriptures are clear, and then a mean Capacity will serve to understand them,
or though they are never so obscure, yet the upshot of all is that every Man is
to Interpret for himself.

What farther quarrel he can have against the Lady in this particular I know
not, unless it be upon the Bishop of Winchesters account; namely, That she
refused to advise with him, and admitted the two others to a Conference, and
what reason she had for so doing, if I were as penetrating as my Author I
should undertake to demonstrate by the Infallible Evidence of Circumstances and
Inferences; but since the parties are dead, and so long since, I will not give
my own Opinion why she refused him, and of what Principles she might possibly
have thought him: At present I will not trouble my self farther with that
Prelate of rich Memory, whom I warrant you our Author would not commend so much
for his great Abilities and willingness to resolve the Ladies doubts, if he had
not some Journeywork for him to do hereafter: neither will I meddle much with
the long Impertinent Story of his Letter to the Duchess, and her silence at
Farnham, where she would not consult him in any of her doubts: Whatever great
matters are made of these by our Answerer, she had a very sufficient reason for
not asking his Advice, as will instantly be made appear: but now our Author is
at another of his dodging tricks, comparing Times and Dates of Letters, the
Bishops bearing Date the Twenty fourth of January, that very Year in which she
changed; but that he may not puzzle himself too much in reckoning, I will
unriddle the Matter of Fact to him, which I have from a most Authentic Hand;
the Duke and Duchess were at Farnham in the beginning of September, where they
continued about three Days, in the Year 1670. Her Highnesses Paper bears Date
the Twentieth of August 1670. by which it is manifest, that it was written
twelve or fourteen Days before her visit to the Bishop. Now where, I beseech
your, is the wonder, that she spoke nothing to him concerning any points of a
Religion in which she was already satisfied? Would any Man ask another what is a
Clock, after he had been just looking upon a Sun-dial? So that all his
aggravations, dwindle at length into this poor inference, that it is evident
she did not make use of the ordinary means for her own Satisfaction; at least
(mark how he mollifies for fear of being trap'd) as to those Bishops who had
known her longest.

Now this is so pitiful, that is requires no Answer: for it amounts to no more
than that she liked not the Bishop, and therefore, from the beginning concealed
her Scruples from him; and she changed her Religion the same Year (though before
he writ to her) because she was satisfied of another; but does it follow from
hence, as he infers, that in the mean while she did not use the ordinary means
for her satisfaction? supposing she had liked the other two Bishops, as little
as she did him, had she no other ordinary means but by those two, or even by
any other Bishops? Satisfied, to be sure, she was, or she had not changed; and
if the means had been wholly extraordinary from the Inspirations of Gods Holy
Spirit only, she had thereby received the greater favor; but not omitting to
give God thanks for his Supernatural Assistance, she used also, the ordinary
means.

It appears that her first Emotions were from her observing the Devotions of
the Catholics in France and Flanders, and this is no news to any Traveller; ask
even our Protestant Gentlemen at their return from Catholic Countries, and they
cannot but confess, that the Exercises of their Devotion, their Mortifications,
their Austerities, their Humility, their Charity, and in short, all the ways of
good living are practiced there in a for greater measure than they are in
England: But these are the Virtues from which we are blessedly reformed by the
Example and Precept of that Lean, Mortified Apostle, St. Martin Luther.

Her first Scruples were raised in her by reading Doctor Heylins History of the
Reformation, and what she found in it we shall see hereafter; it appears, that
History had given her some new apprehensions, and to satisfy them, she
considered of the Matters in difference betwixt the Catholics and Protestants,
and so considered them as to examine them the best she could by Scripture,
which she found to speak clearly for the Catholics, and she upon our Authors
Principles, was Judge of this: after which she spoke with two of the best
Bishops in England, and their doubtful, or rather favorable Answers did but
add more to the desire she had to be a Catholic: All these ordinary ways she
took, before she could persuade her self to send for a Priest, whose endeavors
it pleased the Almighty so to bless that she was reconciled to his Church, and
her troubled Conscience was immediately at rest.

I have been forced to recapitulate these things, and to give them the Reader
at one view; for our Answerer is so cunning at this Trade, that he shows them
only in Parcels and by Retail, that it might not be thought she used the
ordinary Means. One thing I had omitted, which was, that the Bishop affirms in
his letter to her Highness, that she had made him a Promise, in case any
Writing were put into her Hand by those of the Roman Church, she would send it
either to him, or the Bishop of Oxford.

Why does our Author put down that Promise thus at large? If he means any thing
more by it, besides a Justification of his Bishop for having done his part,
which signifies just nothing, he would tacitly insinuate, that she broke he
Word, by not sending any such Writing to him. If so, he is at his Legerdemain
again. He would have it thought, she kept not her Promise, but does not
positively affirm it: But since it is manfsest, by the order of time in her
Paper, that she neither sent for any Priest, nor conferred with any Learned
Catholic, till after she had done with the two Bishops, it may, and ought to be
supposed, that she received no Writings from any of that Religion; for if she
had she would certainly have mentioned them.

If then the Bishop of Winchester would insinuate, that she had such Papers,
which she sent not to him, according to her Engagement, I may at least answer
with my Author, That the Lady was dead long before the Bishop published his
Letter, so that the Circumstances therein mentioned cannot be so fully cleared.

But to return to our Answerer: He has brought us at length to the several
Discourses which her Highness had with the two Bishops, his Grace of
Canterbury, and the Bishop of Worcester; and since he has thought fit to put
all that concerned this Matter into one long Paragraph, quoted from the
Duchess, I must follow his Example. These are her Words. After this, I spoke
severally to two of the best Bishops we have in England, who both told me,
there were many things in the Roman Church which it were very much to be wished
we had kept; as Confession, which was no doubt commanded of God; that Praying
for the Dead was one of the ancient things in Christianity; that for their
parts, they did it daily, though they would not own it: And afterward pressing
one of them very much upon the other Points, he told me, That if he had been
bred a Catholic, he would not change his Religion; but that being of another
Church, wherein he was sure were all things necessary to Salvation, he thought
it very ill to give that Scandal, as to leave that Church wherein he had
received his Baptism. All these Discourses did but add more to the desire I had
to be a Catholic, and gave me the most terrible Agonies in the world, etc,

This, he confesses, seems to be to the purpose. And where he confesses the
least Advantage on our side, the Reader may swear there is somewhat more than
ordinary in the matter: But he retrenches immediately, and kicks down the Pail,
by adding this Restriction, If there were not some Circumstances and
Expressions very much mistaken in the Representation of it. Yet in the next
Line again, as if he were ashamed of his own fearfulness, he is for making a
bold Sally, and putting all to the push: For, supposing the utmost to be
allowed, says he there could be no Argument from hence drawn for leaving the
Communion of our Church: But he restrains that too with this Caution, If the
Bishops Authority and Example did signify any thing with her. Thus from
yielding at first he comes to modifie his Concession, and from thence to strike
out magnanimously.

But then he retreats again with another ( if.) It Is a sign he is uneasy, when
he tosses and turns so often in a Breath; and that he is diffident of his
Cause, when he shifts his Plea. It Is evident that the Duchess laid a great
stress on these Concessions; and well she might: for what a startle would it
give to a doubting Soul, which already had taken the Alarm, to hear two
Bishops, whereof one was Primate of All England, renouncing and condemning two
of the established Articles of their Church? But it is well known, that those
two Prelates were not, nor, if they were now living, would be the only
Clergymen of the Church of England who are of opinion they have over-reform'd
themselves, in casting off Prayers for the Dead, and consequently, the Doctrine
of a Third Place: But these are Church of England Men of the old stamp, betwixt
whom, and the Faction of this Answerer, there is just as much difference, as
betwixt a true Episcopal Man, and a Latitudinarian: and this latter, in plain
terms, is no otherwise different from a Presbyterian, then by whatsoever Titles
and Dignities he is distinguished. So that our Answerer was much in the right,
to skip over the first half of this Paragraph without answering in this place,
and to gallop to the last Sentence of it, which begins with Bishop Blandford's
saying That if he had been bred in the communion of the Roman Church, he would
not change his Religion: Whither, as in Duty bound, I follow him.

To overbalance the weight of these Concessions, our Author would have us
think, that the subsequent Words of the Bishop ought to have had greater force
to have kept her in the Communion of the Protestant Church, than the former to
have drawn her from it; for the Bishop comes off with this Excuse, That being
of another Church, wherein he was sure were all things necessary to Salvation,
he thought it very ill to give that Scandal, as to leave that Church wherein he
received his Baptism.

First, take notice, That the Duchess says, the Bishop was pressed by her very
much, before he made the Concession; That if he had been bred a Catholic, he
would not have changed: which shows, that a Truth was forced out of him, which
he would willingly have concealed. For, both in regard to his own Credit, and
the retaining of so Great a Person in his Church, it was not his Interest to
have yielded that a Catholic might be saved, at least on as easy Terms as
Protestant. But he goes farther, when he confesses, That if he had been bred a
Catholic, he would not have altered his Religion: For therein he seems even to
regret his being bred a Protestant; at least he yields, that all things
necessary to Salvation were in the Roman Catholic Church; for otherwise, had he
been educated in it, he ought in conscience to have changed, which he owns he
would not have done. Now this is manifestly more than what he said for the
Church of England; for his following Words are rather an Excuse for his
Continuance in his Church, than Argument to dissuade her Highness from turning
Catholic. He thought it very ill to give that Scandal to leave the Church,
wherein he was Baptized. Now the Word Scandal plainly relates to his own
Person, and signifies no more, than that he was ashamed to change: For it was
impossible for him to think he should sin against his Conscience in changing,
who had declared, That he would not have changed, in case he had been bred a
Catholic. And the Reason he gives is made of the same yielding Metal, ( viz.)
That he had his Baptism in the Protestant Church; for that Argument in it self
is of no weight, since the Right Reverend well knew, that the Baptism even of
Heretics is good; so that if he had been Christn'd in the Lutheran, the
Abyssine, or the Russian Church, he must for that reason have continued in it:
But he timerously pleads his fear of giving Scandal; which is, as I said, no
Justification of himself, no Dissuasive to Her, but only a mean, interessed
Apology for his not changing.

As for his intimating, That all things necessary to Salvation were to be had
in the Church of England, let any reasonable Man be Judge, whether he could
possibly have said less in defense of himself, for continuing in it: For this
only showed, that he thought Salvation was to be had in both Churches, as even
this Author himself is forced to confess afterward, in these words: The utmost
that can be made of this, is, That a certain Bishop of our Church (who in the
mean time has proved himself an uncertain one) held both Churches so far Parts
of the Catholic Church, that there was no necessity of going from one Church to
another.

That which he calls the utmost we can make of it, is in truth the least which
the Bishop's Words will naturally bear; and I may safely put the Cause upon
this Issue, Whether such a Discourse might not reasonably add more to the
desire she had to be a Catholic?

Let us hear now what he has to answer; and I will reply briefly, because I
have taken away the Strength of his Argument already.

First, He says in effect, That the Bishops Authority and Example ought to have
prevailed with her on the one side, more than his Concessions on the other.

I reply; Not his Authority, because he spoke more for the Church of Rome, than
against it: Nor his Example; for he gave her no encouragement to follow it, by
saying, That if he had been bred a Catholic, he would not have changed. His
Example of Praying daily for the Dead, showed his Opinion at the bottom; but
his not publicly owning that he did so, has proved him little better than a
Black Bishop, who was entered privately into the White ones Walk.

Our Author asks in the second place, Why any Person should forsake the
Communion of the Protestant Church, wherein the Bishop affirmed were all things
necessary to Salvation? And I enquire, How she could be bound to believe him,
since Confession, and Prayers for the Dead are wanting in it; one of which he
had before acknowledged to be commanded of God; the other, to be one of the
ancient things in Christianity?

Thirdly, He urges, That the Bishop had told her it was an ill thing to leave
the Church of England. And I reply, That the Answerer has falsified his Words.
The Bishop only thought it very ill to give that Scandal, as to leave the
Church wherein he was Baptized. First, he spoke of himself only, not of her.
Mark that Fallacy. And then he said not, It was ill to leave the Church; but,
very ill to give that Scandal, as to leave the Church; relating again to his
own particular.

Fourthly, He says, It Is evident that the Bishops Concessions could have no
influence upon her (though she positively says, those Discourses, in which were
those Concessions, did but add more to the desire she had to be a Catholic.)
This is full upon the Vizor; but the Dead are to take all things patiently.
Well! How if he can convince her of Falsity from her own Words? Why, then he
will carry his Argument, as well as his Good Manners, to the height; and how
broad soever the Word may be which he has slily given her, yet he will tell
you, That Freedom ought to be permitted him, as sustaining the Honor of the
Church of England.

His Argument is this: She declares afterward, That she would not have
changed, if she had thought it possible otherwise to have saved her Soul: But
the Bishop had told her, That all things necessary for Salvation were in the
English Church: Therefore the Bishop contributed nothing to her Change.

So the Miter be safe in its Reputation, no matter what becomes of the Ducal
Coronet. Now I can be very well content that the Bishop should have no part in
the Honor of her Conversion; for, it is plain, that he desired it not: and why
should he do good against his will?

I wish my Author would have furnished me with an Argument to have brought him
wholly off; but I will bring him on his way as far as by the help of the
Answerer's Scarf I can fairly drag him. I say therefore, That though her Highness
changed not her Belief upon the Concessions of the Bishop, yet his Concessions
were an occasion of her farther Scruples, in order to her Change: For, she
says, they added to the desire she had to be a Catholic.

The Bishop did indeed tell her, That all things necessary to Salvation were in
the English Church; but tell me, Sir, I beseech you, was that all he told her?
By your favor, you have left out the better half of what he said: for he told
her also, That if he had been bred a Catholic, he would not have changed. And
she had reason to believe what he said to the advantage of a Church of which he
was no Member, as being sure he would say no more than scanty Truth. And he
acknowledges into the Bargain, That Confession was commanded of God; and, that
Praying for the Dead was one of the ancient things in Christianity. What a
shameful way of arguing is this, to make a general Negative Conclusion from
half the Premises? Or, in other Words, to maintain that the Bishops Concessions
could have no influence upon her, because they had not the greatest influence?
And you in a manner confess it before you were aware, in the close of your
Argument, where you say, There must therefore have been some more secret
Reason, which increased her desire to be a Catholic after these Discourses. Now
some more secret Reason does not hinder the Bishops Concessions from being one;
nay, it argues, that they were one of the Reasons, though not the most
prevalent, because there was one more secret. You have now contradicted your
self so plainly, that you have wholly justified the Duchess, and the broad
Word, without naming it, is fairly brought back to your own door.

After this, our Answerer does but piddle, and play at small Game, as if her
Highness might possibly take encouragement from the Bishop's calling the Church
of Rome the Catholic Religion: But she was too much in earnest to lay hold upon
a Word. Neither is more advantage to be taken from his calling the Church of
Rome the Catholic Religion, than we receive disadvantage from the playing upon
the Word of Roman Catholic.

Next, for want of a Quarrel, he is falling on his late dear Friend the Bishop:
Was he, says our Answerer, so weak, to mean the Word Catholic in the strictest
sense, he must then have contradicted himself, there was an inconsistency in
his Words, and so forth.

From the inconsistency of the Bishop's Words, in this and other Places, our
Answerer, perhaps, would make a secret Inference, That he never said them; and
obliquely draw the Duchess into the Statute of Coining: So that the two
Spiritual Hectors may make a Sham-duel of it, for ought we know. For it is a
common trick with Robbers to clash their Swords together in the dark, to draw
Company together, and then some third Person pays for it. Take it in this
manner, and then the Argument against her Highness will stand thus: The Sayings
which she relates are inconsistent, and therefore she must not be believed,
though she affirms she heard them. Why, do not as many as have Ears hear
inconsistent things said every day? and must every body needs lie who reports
them again? That Inconsistency of the Words is, in truth, an Argument that the
things were said: For what bids fairer for adding to the desire she had of
being a Catholic, and of giving her the terrible Agonies she felt? But after
all, if the Answerer's Quarrel be in earnest with the Bishop, it is pity they
should fall out for such a Trifle: As weak as the Bishop was, and as strong as
our Answerer makes his Inconsistencies appear, I dare answer for him, he meant
nothing less than to convert her.

You do ill therefore to play the Bully with a peaceable Old Gentleman, who
only desired to possess his Conscience and his Bishopric in peace, without
offense to any Man, either of the Catholic Church, or that of England.

But if he held, that both Churches were so far Parts of the Catholic, that
there was no necessity of going from one Church to another to be saved if he
asserted that you say, he must overthrow the Necessity of your Reformation; and
then down go's his Belief of your Homilies and Articles (Thirty nine at a Tip),
and consequently he could be no true Member of the Church of England.

And now what can I do more for the poor Bishop? For most certainly he did
imply thus much in saying, That if he had been bred a Catholic, he would not
change his Religion. Therefore, Take him Topham; there is no help, but he must
be turned out of the Church of England, even so long after he has been dead.

In the mean time, let us a little examine this Proposition. Our Answerer
affirms, That he cannot be a true Member of the Church of England, who asserts
both Churches to be so far Parts of the Catholic Church, that there is no
necessity of going from one Church to another to be saved. If this be true,
then, to be a Member of the Church of England, one must assert, That either
both Churches are not Parts of the Catholic, or, That they are so Parts, that
there is a necessity of going from one to another. Of these two, the first is
not for the Honor of one of the Churches, and the second is direct Nonsense. A
Necessity of Change consists not with their being both Parts; for Parts
constitute one Whole, and leave not one and another, to go to or from. There is
no Church in France or Italy, to which a Spanish Catholic can go, but what he
left in Spain; nor can he leave his own, by going to either of them. He may be
under other Governors in the same Church; but let him go wheresoever he shall
please, he cannot be of another, so long as he remains a Catholic. In short,
Necessity of Change makes it absolutely impossible for both Churches to be
Parts of the Catholic, and forces the Church of England to maintain, either
that she is a Part, and the Roman Catholic none; or else, that it is no matter
whether she be a Part or no; to which, I wish, they may not, with the Pretense
of Zeal for her Honor, desire to drive her, who have nothing better to say in
their own behalf.

But though our Answerer has laid one Bishop slat, I warrant you he has another
in reserve: For now the Bishop of Winchester (who, as I said formerly, was not
commended so much for nothing) is brought back in Triumph from his Palace of
Farnham, to make a short end of the Dispute. At first he doubts, whether ever
there were any such Bishops who made such Answers; and then affirms, that he
believes there never was in rerum natura such a Discourse as is pretended to
have been betwixt this Great Person, and two of the most Learned Bishops in
England.

This is downright indeed; for our Answerer, to do him Justice, has often
collaterally accused the Duchess for her good Invention at making Stories: but
here is plain English upon the Point. What pity is it in the mean time, that my
Lord of Winton gives not so much as one single Reason either for his Doubt, or
his contrary Belief? So that having only his Lordship's Opinion, and her
Highness's Affirmation before me, I might say, with at least as much Good
Manners as that Prelate, That I believe as little of his pretended Letter sent
to the Duchess so long after her Decease, as he does of her pretended Discourse
with the two Bishops.

In the mean time, what use would my Gentleman here make of his Lordships
doubts, his belief, or his affirmation? Are the Embers too hot for him, that he
uses the Bishops Foot to pull out the Chestnut? Suppose our Prelate had believed
there were no Antiphodes, is this a time of Day to give him credit? But I
wonder the less, why our Author attributes so much to his ipse dixit upon all
occasions; for the whole body of his Answer, to this Paper, is in effect a
Transcript from the Bishops Preface: He purloyns his Arguments, without
altering, sometime, so much as the property of his words. He has quoted him
five times only in the Margent, and ought to have quoted him in almost every
line of his Pamphlet. In short, if the Master had not eaten, the Man (saving
Reverence) could not have vomited. But it is easy to be seen through all the
grimaces of that Bishop, that he found himself aggrieved, he has not thought
on, when her Highness spoke of the two best, or most Learned Bishops of
England; and that his Opinion was not consulted, when, indeed, he had offered
it, though unasked.

I know his Defender will reply, That his Lordship has modestly disclaimed any
such Pretense to Learning, in his Preface, where he says, No, I am not, I know
I am not, I am sure I am not the most Learned Bishop. See how he mounts in his
Expressions at three several Bounds. It Is true, all these Asseverations, like
his three Nolo's, needed not; for any reasonable Man, who had read his Works,
would have taken his bare word, without Repetition. Yet this notwithstanding,
he might have some inward grudgings, that his Pupil thought him not so great a
Doctor.

But it is not fit that a Matter of such importance should end in a bare Ay and
No on either side; for though the Parties have been so long dead, yet there is
a Witness still alive, and such a one, that all Loyal Subjects are bound to
join with me in Prayers for the long continuance of His Life, and even for His
continuance in the True Religion, as far as the English Liturgycan oblige them.

The Duchess thought her self bound to make his Royal Highness acquainted with
every one of these several Conferences, which she had either with Archbishop
Sheldon, or Bishop Blandford, and that account was the very same in substance
with what she communicates to her Friends in this present Paper, as he is
pleased to permit me to assure the World after having had the Honor to hear
him solemnly affirm it which puts an end to the whole Matter of Dispute, and
this which follows is as Authentic.

The Day it pleased Almighty God to call her Highness to his Mercy, some
Relations of hers, who are yet living, were desirous that she should speak with
the Bishop of Worcester; which the Duchess did not absolutely refuse upon their
importunity; but requested the then Duke to stop the Bishop a little in the
Antichamber and prepare him, according to her directions, before he entered
the Bedchamber: accordingly His Highness having met the Bishop acquainted him,
That she was actually reconciled to the Catholic Church; he then inquired,
Whether she were fully satisfied in all Points of the Doctrine which she had
embraced, and the Duke answered, that she was entirely satisfied in the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church; at length the Bishop asked, Whether she had
already received the last Sacraments of the Church, naming particularly those
of the Blessed Eucharist, and the Extreme Unction; and it being replied by the
Duke that she had received them, the Bishop answered, That then he doubted not
but that her Soul was in a very safe condition; before they parted, His Royal
Highness told him, That it was the desire of the Duchess, he would not trouble
her with any Matter of Dispute, nor offer to Pray with her, but if he had any
Spiritual Counsel fitting for a Person in her condition, in order to prepare
her for her Death, he might freely tender it; upon this he was admitted to her
Bedchamber, and made her a brief Exhortation; after which, his stay there was
very short.

This being matter of Fact, and of unquestionable Truth, I hope the Answerer
will acquiesce in it, What he will think of his Bishop concerns not me, but as
a Protestant he has reason for his thanking God, that the Cause of his Church
does not depend on the singular Opinion of one Bishop in it. It appears plainly
by this Relation, that the Bishop of Worcester was ignorant, almost to the
last, of her Conversion; so that, if that will serve our Authors turn, he is
acquitted from intending any such Act of Charity, but that he contributed to it
without any such intention is apparent.

Yet our Author will not so sit down; he will condemn her Highness from her own
words again; and prove from her saying, that she owed the Blessing of her
Conversion to God Almighty, that therefore the Bishop could have no hand in it.

What obligation has he to defend the Honor of his Church by a piece of
Sophistry? she owed it wholly to Almighty God; for of our selves we can do
nothing: but as the Answerer confesses this excluded not her own endeavors;
God inspired her with a desire of being reconciled to his Church, in answer to
her frequent Prayers, not by immediate illumination, or showing her the right
belief miraculously, but by affording her the ordinary means, and conducting
her by his good Spirit in the use of them: If she had been immediately
enlightn'd she needed not to have recourse to any of the Bishops, but it
pleased God, who often works Good out of Evil, that the Arguments they used, or
rather, the Answers which they made, produced a contrary effect, and added more
to the desire she had to be a Catholic; in this sense, therefore it may be
said, that the Bishops sent her to the Priest; for an unresistable, overruling
Power, made them contribute to her change by opposing it; and the very hands
which labored to hold her fast in the Protestant Persuasion, carried her half
Seas over, and put her into other Hands, which carried her the other half.
Truly they would have received hard measure, if they had been found guilty on
the Statute of Persuasion, who far from endeavoring to make her change,
dissuaded her from changing, though the Protestant Flints happened to strike
Catholic Fire: So that I cannot but think there was an extraordinary Hand of
Providence in her Case; and of which she had reason to be extraordinary
sensible. But we must have, I perceive, a care of Praying, and owning benefits
from God; for that, or nothing made her pass for an Enthusiast with the
Answerer: She did nothing besides Praying, which our Author does not
acknowledge it her duty to have done. She read the History which was put into
her Hands, to confirm her in her first belief; she examined the Scripture, she
conferred with her Divines; and yet he can make an obstinate Woman of her for
doing that very thing, to which he would advise her. But, says our Author, All
pretenders to Enthusiasm do as solemnly and wholly ascribe the Blessing to
Almighty God, and look on it as the effect of such Prayers, as she made to him
in France and Flanders.

They ascribe it indeed wholly to God in our Authors Sense, but not in hers;
for she meant not immediate illumination by the word wholly, as I have already
proved; they may look on their false light, as the effect of their Prayers, but
she looks on her Conversion as the effect of hers, after having used the means.

He had thought, he says, that the pretense to a private Spirit, or Enthusiasm
(for he joins them both afterward) had not been at this time allowed in the
Church of Rome.

Somebody once thought otherwise, or he had never diverted the young Gallants
of the Town, with his merry Book concerning the Fanaticism of the Church of
Rome.

He next enquires what need she had of an infallible Church, if she owed her
Change so wholly to Almighty God?

Wholly is already explained to him, and then his Argument is of no more force
against her, then against all Catholics who have once been Protestants; which
is a new Subject of Dispute, and foreign to the Argugument in hand.

Her Conclusion, as he tells us, is, That she would never have changed, if she
could have saved her Soul otherwise; Whereupon he infers, If this were true,
she had good reason for her change; if it were not true (as most certainly it
was not) she had none.

But her words (which he has falsifi'd in this place) are these, I would never
have changed, if I had thought it possible to have saved my Soul otherwise. He
never misquotes without design. Now by altering these words, If I had thought
it possible to save my Soul, into these, If I could have saved my Soul, he
would shuffle off her true meaning; which was, That her Conscience obliged her
to this change. And that is a Point he would not willingly have touched: for he
cannot deny upon his own Principles, but that after having examined the
Scriptures, as she professes to have done as well as she was able, concerning
the Points in dispute, and afterward using the assistance of her Spiritual
Guides, the two Bishops, she was to judge for her self, in the last resort; and
the Judgment she made according to her Conscience, was, That the Scripture
spoke clearly in behalf of the Catholic Church, (or Church of Rome, as he calls
it:) Therefore according to his Principles, and her Conscience, she was to be
of that Church, of whose Truth she was thus convinced; so that whether she
could be otherwise saved or no, was not the Proposition to be advanced, but
whether she thought it possible to be otherwise saved. And therefore though it
were true, that she could otherwise be saved, yet she had a sufficient reason
for her change* (though he says she had none) which was her Conscience; and
supposing that were erroneous, yet upon his Principles she must be the Judge of
it without appeal.

Her Scruples began upon reading Dr. Heylin 's History of the Reformation; and
there she found such abominable Sacrilege upon Harry the Eighth's Divorce,
King Edward 's Minority, and Queen Elizabeth's Succession, that she could not
believe the Holy Ghost could ever be in such Councils. Thus he compendiously
quotes her Paper, as being it seems ashamed of the Particulars therein
mentioned; but for once I will follow him his own way.

To read Dr. Heylin's History in order to settle her, he confesses, was none of
the best Advices given to such a Person. He is much in the right on it, as
appears by the success; and I add, nor any other, either Protestant or Catholic
Writer then extant: for no Paint is capable of making lovely the hideous Face
of the pretended Reformation. But, says he, there are two distinct Parts in the
History of it, the one Ecclesiastical, the other Political; the first built on
Scripture, Antiquity, and the Rights of particular Churches; the other on such
Maxims as are common to Statesmen at all Times, and in all Churches, who labor
to turn all Revolutions and Changes to their own Advantage.

But why might not her Highness consider it her own way, which is that of
Nature, in the Causes which produced it, and the Effects which it produced;
though I doubt not but she considered it his way too, because a Child could not
have mist it, that very Distinction being inserted into the History by the
Author himself. Now the immediate Cause which produced the Separation of Harry
the Eighth from the Church of Rome, was the refusal of the Pope to grant him a
Divorce from his first Wife, and to gratify his Desires in a Dispensation for
a second Marriage. Neither the Answerer, nor I, nor any Man, can carry it so
high as the original Cause with any certainty: for the King only knew whether
it was Conscience and Love, or Love alone, which moved him to sue for a
Divorce: But this we may say, that if Conscience had any part in it, she had
taken a long Nap of almost Twenty years together before she awakened, and
perhaps had slept on till Doomsday, if Anne Bullen, or some other fair Lady,
had not given her a Jog; so the satisfying of an inordinate and a brutal
Passion cannot be denied to have had a great share at least, in the production
of that Schism which led the very way to our pretended Reformation: for
breaking the Unity of Christ's Church was the Foundation of it.

I pass over the manner of those first Proceedings, and the Degrees by which
they came to terminate in Schism, though I doubt not but her Highness was
sufficiently scandalized in both, and could not also but observe some of the
concomitant Causes, as Revenge, Ambition, and Covetousness; all which, and
others, drew with a strong Biass toward it. But the immediate Effects even of
this Schism, were Sacrilege, and a bloody Persecution of such as denied the
King's Supremacy in Matters wholly Spiritual, which no Layman, no King of
Israel ever Exercised, as is observed by my Lord Herbert. Herbert Hen 8. page
402.
As for the Reformation it self, what that produced is full as obvious in the
Sequel of History, where we find, that Chanteries and Hospitals undevour'd by
Henry the Eighth, were left only to be Morsels for Edward the Sixth, or rather
for his Ministers of State; and the Reason was given, That the Revenues of them
were fruitlesly spent on those who said Prayers for the Dead. Now this was as
naturally produced from the Reformation, as an Effect is from the Cause; so
that as it is observed by some, had that young King Reigned any considerable
time longer, the Church of England had been left the poorest of any one in
Christendom; the rich Bishopric of Duresme having been much retrenched by him,
and it is probable those of Rochester and Westminster. Harry the Eighth had
indeed eaten so much of the Churches Bread out of his Son's Mouth beforehand,
that even Calvin complains of it in a Letter to Cranmer, (concerning the
paucity of good Pastors in England) in these words: Vnum apertum obstaculum
esse intelligo quod praedae expositi sunt Ecclesiae redditus; One open obstacle
I find to this, (he means the increase of good Pastors) is, That your Church
Revenues are exposed to Rapine.

Besides these things, what an Usurpation this change of Religion caused, is
most notorious; that of the Lady Jane Gray being evidently grounded on the
Testament of Edward the Sixth, by which she was made his Successor, because she
was of the Protestant Religion.

As for the Title of Queen Elizabeth to the Crown, the Histories lie open, and
I shall not be over forward to meddle with the Rights of Princes, especially
since the Answerer has avoided that Dispute. It Is enough in general to say,
that her Interest carried her against the Pope, whose Power, if good, she was
Illegitimate: She had also been informed by the English Resident at Rome, that
the Pope expected she should acknowledge her Crown from him, and not take upon
her to be Queen without his leave. These were strong Solicitations in a new
unse^^ led Succession, for her to shake off a Religion, whereof his Holiness is
Head on Earth. What matter of Conscience was in the case, I say not, but her
Temporal Interest lies barefaced and uppermost to view, in reassuming of the
Supremacy, and to make the Breach yet wider) in subverting the Foundations of
the Faith. For the Affront is the same to turn round a man's Hat, and to strike
him on the Face; but the advantage is the greater in a lusty Blow.

But the Handle by which our Answerer would have the Reformation taken, is not
by the Causes and Effects, the Means and Management, and indeed the whole
Series of History; these are nothing to concern his present Enquiry, though
they raised such Scruples in the Duchess, and will do in any other
conscientious Reader; he will have the Reformation considered his own way, that
is, in the Political part of it, and the Ecclesiastical. Now the Political part
(if you observe him) he gives for gone at the first dash; It was grounded (he
says) on such Maxims as are common to Statesmen at all Times, and in all
Churches, who labor to turn all Revolutions and Changes to their own Advantage.

That is, it is common for Statesmen to be Atheists at the bottom; To be
seemingly of that Religion which is most for their Interest; To crush and ruin
that from which they have no future prospect of Advantage, and to join with its
most inveterate Enemies, without consideration of their King's Interest; and
this was the Case of the Duke of Somerset. All which together amounts to this*
That it is no matter by what Means a Reformation be compassed, by what
Instruments it be brought to pass, or with what Design, though all these be
never so ungodly, it is enough if the Reformation it self be made by the
Legislative Power of the Land. The matter of Fact then is given up, only it is
faced with Recriminations; That Alexander the Sixth (for example) was as wicked
a Pope as King Henry was a King: As if any Catholic denied that God Almighty,
for Causes best known to his Divine Wisdom, has not sometimes permitted impious
Men to sit in that supreme Seat, and even to intrude into it by unlawful Means.
That Alexander the Sixth was one of the worst of Men, I freely grant, which is
more then I can in Conscience say of Henry the Eighth, who had great and Kingly
Virtues mingled with his Vices. That the Duke of Somerset raised his Estate out
of Church Lands, our Author excuses no other ways than by retorting* that Popes
are accustomed to do the like in consideration of their Nephews, whom they
would greaten. But though it is a wicked thing for a Pope to mispend the Church
Revenues on his Relations, it is to be considered he is a Secular Prince, and
may as lawfully give out of his Temporal Incomes what he pleases to his
Favorite, as another Prince to his. But as our Author charges this Miscarriage
home upon some late Popes of the former, and the present Age; so I hope he will
exempt his present Holiness from that Note. No Common Father of God's Church,
from St. Peter even to him, having ever been more bountiful, in expending his
Revenues for the Defense of Christendom; or less interessed, in respect of his
Relations, whom he has neither greatn'd, nor so much as suffered to enter into
the least Administration of the Government.

But, after all, what have these Examples to do with this Ladies Conversion?
Why, our Author pretends that these bad Popes, and their ill Proceedings, ought
as reasonably to have hindered the Duchess from entering into the Catholic
Church, as the like Proceedings under Henry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and
Queen Elizabeth, might move her Highness to leave the Protestant.

The Subject in hand was the Pretended Reformation; The Duchess observed the
scandalous and abominable Effects of it; that an inordinate Lust was one
principal Cause of the Separation; that the Reformation it self was begun by
worldly Interests in the Duke of Somerset, and carried on by the Ambition of
Queen Elizabeth. Have the Examples produced by our Author on the contrary side
any thing to do with a Reformation? Suppose in the first place, that she had
never read nor heard any of those things concerning Pope Alexander, or the
advancing of Nephews by profusion of the Church-Treasure; the first is very
possible, and she might interpret heartily the latter. But make the worst of
it; on the one side there was only a Maladministration of a settled
Government, from which no State, either Spiritual or Temporal, can always be
exempt; on the other side, here is a total Subversion of the Old Church in
England, and the setting up a New; a changing of received Doctrines, and the
Direction of God's Holy Spirit pretended for the Change; so that she might
reasonably judge, that the Holy Ghost had little to do with the Practices of
ill Popes, without thinking the worse of the Established Faith: but she could
never see a new one erected on the Foundations of Lust, Sacrilege, and
Usurpation, without great Scruples whether the Spirit of God were assisting in
those Councils.

As for his Method of Enquiry, Whether there was not a sufficient Cause for the
Reformation in the Church? Whether the Church of England had not sufficient
Authority to reform it self? and, Whether the Proceedings of the Reformation
were not justifiable by the Rules of Scripture and the Ancient Church? I may
safely join Issue with him upon all three Points, and conclude in the Negative.
That there was no sufficient Cause to reform the Church in Matters of Faith,
because there neither were, nor can be, any such Errors embraced and owned by
it. The Church of England has no Authority of Reforming her self, because the
Doctrine of Christ cannot be reformed, nor a National Synod lawfully make any
Definitions in Matters of Faith, contrary to the Judgment of the Church
Universal of the present Age, shown in her Public Liturgies; that Judgment
being equivalent to that of a General Council of the present Age. And for the
third Point, The Proceedings of the Reformation were not justifiable by the
Rule of Scripture, according to the right Interpretation of it by the Fathers
and Councils, which are the true Judges of it; nor, consequently, by the Rules
of the Ancient Church. But Calvin's Excuse must be your last Refuge, Nos
discessionem a toto mundo facere coacti sumus: We are compelled to forsake the
Communion, or to separate from all the Churches of the World.

These (says our Author) She confesses were but Scruples. According to his
mannerly way of arguing with the King, I might ask him, These what? Does he
mean, these Scruples were but Scruples? For the Word ( these) begins a
Paragraph. But I am ashamed of playing the Pedant, as he has done. I suppose he
means these Passages of Heylyn only raised some Scruples in her, which
occasioned her to examine the Points in difference by the Holy Scripture. And
now (says he) she was in the right way for Satisfaction, provided she made use
of the best Helps and Means for understanding it, and took in the Assistance of
her Spiritual Guides.

That she did take in those Guides, is manifest by her own Papers; though both
of them (the more the Pity) did but help to mislead her into the Enemies
Country: But then, for our comfort, neither of them were true Church of England
Men, though they were both Bishops, and one of them no less than Primate of All
England.

And now for a relishing bit before we rise, he has kept in store for us, the
four Points, which about the midst of her Paper, the Duchess told us, she found
so easy in the Scripture, that she wondered she had been so long without
finding them. He will needs fall into Dispute with her about them, tho he knows
before hand, that she will not Dispute with him. This is a Kind of Petition to
her, that she will permit him to make that difficult, which she found easy:
for every thing becomes hard by chopping Logic upon it. I am sure enough, that
the Wall before me is White, and that I can go to it: but put me once upon
unriddling Sophisms, I shall not be satisfied of what color the Wall is, nor
how it is possible for me to stir from the place in which I am. Alas, if People
would be as much in earnest as she was, and read the Scriptures with the same
disposition, the same unprejudiced sincerity in their Hearts, and docility in
their Understanding, seeking to bend their Judgments to what they find, not
what they find to their Judgments, more I believe would find things as easy as
she did, and give the Answerer more frequent occasion for his derision of a
willing mind.

But not to dilate on that matter, I presume he will not pretend by his
Disputing, to make any thing plainly appear against her: If he can, let him do
it, and end Controversy in a moment; for every one can see plain things, and
all Christians must be concluded by the Scripture. But he knows well enough
there is no such thing to be performed. A Mist may be raised, and interposed,
through which the Eye shall not discern what otherwise it would, if nothing but
the due medium were betwixt, and the Object before it. And that is all the
fruit of this sort of Disputation, and all the Assistance, for which the
Answerer was so earnest. Upon the whole, his mortal quarrel to the Duchess, is
that she would not become an Experiment of the perfection to which the Art of
Learned Obscurity is improved in this our Age. And the Honor he has done to
the Church of England, is, that he has used her Name to countenance the
Defamation of a Lady, I suspected whether he would bring it, when I saw that
Honor pretended, in the beginning of his Pamphlet: If he thinks his Bishops
have reflected a Scandal on his Church by their Discourses with the Duchess, he
ought to have proceeded a more reasonable way, than to insinuate that she
forged them, without proving it. If she had been living, and he had subscribed
his Name to so infamous a Libell, he knows the English of a Scandalum Magnatum;
for an Innuendo is considered in that case: and three indirect insinuations,
will go as far in Law, toward the giving a downright Lie, as three Foils will
go toward a Fall in Wrestling.

To Conclude, I leave it to the Judgment of the Impartial Reader, what occasion
our Answerer has had for his Song of Triumph at the end of his Scurrilous,
Saucy Pamphlet; I have treated him as one single Answerer, though properly
speaking his Name is Legion; but tho the Body be possessed with many evil
Spirits, it is but one of them who talks; let him disguise his defeat by the
ringing of his Bells: 'Twas an old Dutch Policy when the Duke had beaten them
to make Bon^ ires, for that kept the Populace in Heart. Our Author knows he has
all the Common People on his side, and they only read the Gazetts of their own
Writers; so that every thing which is called an Answer is with them a
Confutation, and the Turk and Pope are their Sworn Enemies ever since Robin
Wisdom was Inspired to join 'em together in a Godly Ballad: In the mean time
the Spirit of Meekness and Humble Charity would become our Author better than
his boasts for this imaginary Victory, or his Reflections upon Gods Anointed;
but it is the less to be admired that he is such a Stranger to that Spirit,
because, among all the Volumes of Divinity written by the Protestants, there is
not one Original Treatise, at least, that I have seen, or heard of, which has
handled distinctly and by it self, that Christian Virtue of Humility.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 25. l. 24. for, not the read, not of the. p. 39. l. 7. it will be, r. it
be p. 79. l. 1. bare. r. bear. p. 81. l. 17. for vibsily r. visibly. p. 98. l.
22. that r. his p. 111. l. 11 has r. was. p. 113. l. 22. Conversion to r.
Conversion wholly to.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, for his Household and Chapel, 1686. And are to be Sold next
door to his House in Blackfriars, at Richard Cheese's.
REflections upon the Answer to the Papist Misrepresented, etc. Quarto. Price
stitched 2d.

Papists Protesting against Protestant-Popery. Quarto. Price stitched 4d. 29.

Copies of Two Papers Written by the late King Charles II. Together with a
Paper Written by the late Duchess of York. Folio. Price 2d.

The Spirit of Christianity. Twelves. Price bound 9d in Quires 7d.

Six Sermons Preached before their Majesty's in English, by the Reverend Father
Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of the English
Congregation. Chapin Ordinary to His Majesty Quarto. Price stitched 2s. 3d.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in Matters of
Controversy. By the Right Reverend James Benign Bossuet, Counselor to the
King, Bishop of Meaux, formerly of Condom. Done into English with all the
former Approbations, and others newly Published in the Ninth and Last Editions
of the French. Quarto. Price stitched 9d.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in Their Majesty's Chapel at St.
James's, upon the Annunciation of our Blessed Lady, March 25. 1686. By Io.
Beth^ m Doctor of Sorbon. Quarto. Price stitched 4d. 2q.

An Abstract of the Douay Catechism, for the Use of Childrer and Ignorant
People. Now Revised, and much Amended Twenty fours. Price 2d. stitched in Blew
Paper and cut.

A Pastoral Letter from the Lord Bishop of Meaux, to the New Catholics of his
Diocese. Quarto. Price stitched 4d. ob.

The Answer of the New Converts of France, to a Pastoral Letter from a
Protestant Minister. Quarto. Price 1d. 2q.

The Ceremonies for the Healing of them that be Diseased with the Kings Evil,
used in the time of King Henry VII. Quarto in Latin, Price 4d. 2q. English in
Twelves, Price 2d 2q.

A Short Christian Doctrine. Composed by the R. Father Robert Bellarmin, of the
Society of Jesus, and Cardinal, in Twelves. Stitched in Blew Paper and cut 2d.

A Vindication of the Bishop of Condom's Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church. In Answer to a Book Entitled, An Exposition of the Doctrine
of the Church of England, etc. With a Letter from the said Bishop. Quarto.
Price stitched 1s. 2d.

Two Sermons Preached before the King and Queen. By the Reverend Father John
Persall, of the Society of Jesus. Professor of Divinity. Quarto. Price stich'd
9d.

The Life of St. Ignatius, Founder of the Society of Jesus. In Octavo. Price in
Quires 1s. 8d. bound 2s* 4d.

An Amicable Accommodation of the Difference between the Representer and the
Answerer, in Return to the Last Reply against the Papist Protesting against
Protestant Popery. Quarto. Price stitched 4d. 2q.


