His Majesty's DECLARATION DEFENDED: In a LETTER to a Friend. BEING AN ANSWER
TO A Seditious Pamphlet, CALLED A LETTER from a Person of Quality to his
Friend: CONCERNING The Kings late Declaration touching the Reasons which moved
him to Dissolve THE TWO LAST PARLIAMENTS AT WESTMINSTER and OXFORD.

LONDON: Printed for T. Davies, 1681.

THE Kings Declaration DEFENDED.
SIR,
SINCE you are pleased to require my Opinion of the Kings Declaration, and the
Answer to it, which you write me word was sent you lately, I shall obey you the
more willingly, because I know you are a lover of the Peace and Quietness of
your Country; which the Author of this seditious Pamphlet, is endeavoring to
disturb. Be pleased to understand then, that before the Declaration was yet
published, and while it was only the common news, that such an one there was
intended, to justify the Dissolution of the two last Parliaments; it was
generally agreed by the heads of the discontented Party, that this Declaration
must be answered, and that with all the ingredients of malice which the ablest
amongst them could squeeze into it. Accordingly, upon the first appearance of
it in Print, five several Pens of their Cabal were set to work; and the product
of each having been examined, a certain person of Quality appears to have
carried the majority of Votes, and to be chosen like a new Matthias, to succeed
in the place of their deceased Judas.

He seems to be a man cut out to carry on vigorously the designs of the
Phanatique Party, which are manifestly in this Paper, to hinder the King, from
making any good impression on his Subjects, by giving them all possible
satisfaction.

And the reason of this undertaking is manifest, for if once the goodness and
equity of the Prince comes to be truly understood by the People, the Authority
of the Faction is extinguished; and the well meaning crowd who are misled, will
no longer gape after the specious names of Religion and Liberty; much like the
folly of the Jews, expecting a Messiah still to come, whose History has been
written sixteen hundred years ago.

Thus much in general: I will now consider the Cavils of my Author against the
Declaration.

He tells us, in the first place, That the Declaration seems to him as
aforerunner of another Parliament to be speedily called: And indeed to any man
in his right senses, it can seem no other; for it is the business of its three
last Paragraphs to inform the People, that no irregularities in Parliament can
make the King out of love with them: but that he looks upon them as the best
means for healing the distempers of the public, and for preservation of the
Monarchy.

Now if this seems clearly to be the Kings intention, I would ask what need
there was of the late Petition from the City, for another Parliament; unless
they had rather seem to extort it from his Majesty, than to have it pass for
his own gracious action? The truth is, there were many of the Loyal Party
absent at that Common Council: and the whole strength of the other Faction was
united; for it is the common failing of honest men to trust too much in the
goodness of their cause; and to manage it too negligently. But there is a
necessity incumbent on such as oppose the established Government, to make up
with diligence, what they want in the justice of their undertaking. This was
the true and only reason why the majority of Votes was for the Petition: but if
the business had not been carried by this surprise, My Lord Mayor might have
only been troubled to have carried the Addresses of Southwark, etc. of another
nature: without his offering them with one hand, and the City Petition with the
other; like the Childrens play of, This Mill grinds Pepper and Spice; that Mill
grinds Ratts and Mice.

In the next place he informs us, That it has been long the practice of the
Popish and Arbitrary Party, that the King should call, frequent, short, and
useless Parliaments, till the Gentry grown weary of the great expenses of
Elections, should sit at home, and trouble themselves no more but leave the
People exposed to the practices of them, and of their Party; who if they carry
one House of Commons for their turn, will make us Slaves and Papists by a Law.

Popish and Arbitrary, are words that sound high amongst the multitude; and all
men are branded by those names, who are not for setting up Fanaticism and a
Commonwealth. To call short and useless Parliaments, can be no intention of
the Government; because from such means the great end of Settlement cannot be
expected. But no Physician can command his Physic to perform the effects for
which he has prescribed it: yet if it fail the first or second time, he will
not in prudence lay aside his Art, and despair of his Patient: but reiterate
his Medicines till he effect the cure. For, the King, as he declares himself,
is not willing to have too hard an Opinion of the Representatives of the
Commons, but hopes that time may open their eyes, and that their next meeting
may perfect the Settlement of Church and State. With what impudence can our
Author say, That an House of Commons can possibly be so packed, as to make us
Slaves and Papists by a Law? for my part I should as soon suspect they would
make themselves Arbitrary, which God forbid that any Englishman in his right
senses should believe. But this supposition of our Author, is to lay a most
scandalous imputation upon the Gentry of England; besides, what it tacitly
insinuates, that the House of Peers and his Majesty, (without whom it could not
pass into a Law,) would suffer it. Yet without such Artifices, as I said
before, the Fanatique cause could not possibly subsist: fear of Popery and
Arbitrary power must be kept up; or the St. Georges of their side, would have
no Dragon to encounter; yet they will never persuade a reasonable man, that a
King, who in his younger years, when he had all the Temptations of power to
pursue such a Design, yet attempted it not should now, in the maturity of his
Judgment, and when he sees the manifest aversion of his Subjects to admit of
such a change, undertake a work of so much difficulty, destructive to the
Monarchy, and ruinous to Himself, if it succeeded not; and if it succeeded, not
capable of making him so truly Great as he is by Law already. If we add to
this, his Majesty's natural love to Peace and Quiet, which increases in every
man with his years, this ridiculous supposition will vanish of it self; which
is sufficiently exploded by daily experiments to the contrary. For let the
Reign of any of our Kings be impartially examined, and there will be found in
none of them so many examples of Moderation, and keeping close to the
Government by Law, as in his. And instead of swelling the Regal power to a
greater height, we shall here find many gracious privileges accorded to the
Subjects, without any one advancement of Prerogative.

The next thing material in the Letter, is the questioning the legality of the
Declaration; which the Author says by the new style of his Majesty in Council,
is ordered to be read in all Churches and Chapels throughout England, And
which no doubt the blind obedience of our Clergy, will see carefully performed;
yet if it be true, that there is no Seal, nor Order of Council, but only the
Clerks hand to it, they may be called in question as publishers of false news,
and invectives against a third Estate of the Kingdom.

Since he writes this only upon a supposition, it will be time enough to answer
it, when the supposition is made manifest in all its parts: In the mean time,
let him give me leave to suppose too, that in case it be true that there be no
Seal, yet since it is no Proclamation, but only a bare Declaration of his
Majesty, to inform and satisfy his Subjects, of the reasons which induced him
to dissolve the two last Parliaments, a Seal in this case, is not of absolute
necessity: for the King speaks not here as commanding any thing, but the
Printing, publishing and reading. And it is not denied the meanest Englishman,
to vindicate himself in Print, when he has any aspersion cast upon him. This is
manifestly the case, that the Enemies of the Government, had endeavored to
insinuate into the People such Principles, as this Answerer now publishes: and
therefore his Majesty, who is always tender to preserve the affections of his
Subjects, desired to lay before them the necessary reasons, which induced him
to so unpleasant a thing, as the parting with two successive Parliaments. And
if the Clergy obey him in so just a Design, is this to be named a blind
Obedience! But I wonder why our Author is so eager for the calling them to
account as Accessaries to an Invective against a third Estate of the Kingdom,
while he himself is guilty in almost every sentence of his discourse of
aspersing the King, even in his own Person, with all the Virulency and Gall
imaginable. It appears plainly that an House of Commons, is that Leviathan
which he Adores: that is his Sovereign in effect, and a third Estate is not
only greater than the other two, but than him who is presiding over the three.

But, though our Author cannot get his own Seditious Pamphlet to be read in
Churches and in Chapels, I dare secure you, he introduces it into
Conventicles, and Coffee-houses of his Faction: besides, his sending it in Post
Letters, to infect the Populace of every County. It Is enough, that this
Declaration is evidently the Kings, and the only true exception, which our
Answerer has to it, is that he would deny his Majesty the power of clearing his
intentions to the People: and finds himself aggrieved, that his King should
satisfy them in spite of himself and of his party.

The next Paragraph is wholly spent, in giving us to understand, that a King,
of England is no other thing than a Duke of Venice; take the Parallel all
along: and you will find it true by only changing of the names. A Duke of
Venice can do no wrong; in Senate he can make no ill Laws; in Council no ill
Orders, in the Treasury can dispose of no Money, but wisely, and for the
interest of the Government, and according to such proportions as are every way
requisite: if otherwise all Officers are answerable, etc. Which is in effect,
to say he can neither do wrong nor right, nor indeed any thing, quatenus a
King. This puts me in mind of Sancho Panca in his Government of the Island of
Barataria* when he was disposed to eat or drink, his Physician stood up for the
People, and snatched the dish from him in their right, because he was a public
person, and therefore the Nation must be Judges to a dram and scruple what was
necessary for the sustenance of the Head of the Body politic. Oh, but there
is a wicked thing called the Militia in their way, and they showed they had a
months mind to it, at the first breaking out of the Popish Plot. If they could
once persuade his Majesty, to part graciously with that trifle, and with his
power of making War and Peace; and farther, to resign all Offices of Trust, to
be disposed by their nomination, their Argument would be an hundred times more
clear: for then it would be evident to all the World, that he could do nothing.
But if they can work him to part with none of these, then they must content
themselves to carry on their new Design beyond Seas: either of engaging the
French King to fall upon Flanders, or encouraging the States General to lay
aside, or privately to cut off the Prince of Orange, or getting a War declared
against England and France conjoyntly: for by that means, either the King can
be but a weak Enemy, and as they will manage matters, he shall be kept so bare
of Money, that Twelve Holland Ships shall block up the River, or he shall be
forced to cast himself upon a House of Commons, and to take Money upon their
Terms, which will sure be as easy, as those of an Usurer to an Heir in want.
These are part of the projects now afoot: and how Loyal and conscionable they
are, let all indifferent persons judge.

In the close of this Paragraph, he falls upon the King for appealing to the
People against their own Representatives. But I would ask him in the first
place, if an Appeal be to be made, to whom can the King Appeal, but to his
People? And if he must justify his own proceedings to their whole Body, how
can he do it but by blaming their Representatives? I believe every honest man
is sorry, that any such Divisions have been betwixt the King and his House of
Commons. But since there have been, how could the King complain more modestly,
or in terms more expressing Grief, than Indignation? or what way is left him to
obviate the causes of such complaints for the future, but this gentle
admonishment for what is past?

It Is easily agreed, he says, (and here I join issue with him) That there were
never more occasions for a Parliament, than were at the opening of the last,
which was held at Westminster. But where he maliciously adds, never were our
Liberties and Properties more in danger, nor the Protestant Religion more
exposed to an utter extirpation both at home and abroad, he shuffles together
Truth and Falsehood: for from the greatness of France, the danger of the
Protestant Religion is evident; But that our Liberty, Religion, and Property
were in danger from the Government, let him produce the instances of it, that
they may be answered; what dangers there were and are from the Antimonarchical
Party, is not my present business to enquire. As for the growing terror of the
French Monarchy, the greater it is, the more need of a supply to provide
against it.

The Ministers tell us in the Declaration, That they asked of that Parliament
the supporting the Alliances they had made for the Preservation of the general
peace in Christendom, and had desired their advice and assistance for the
preservation of Tangier: had recommended to them, the farther examination of
the Plot; and that his Majesty had offered to concur in any Remedies for the
security of the Protestant Religion, which might consist with the preserving
the Succession of the Crown, in its due and legal course of descent, but to all
this they met with most unsuitable returns.

Now mark what the Gentleman infers, That the Ministers well knew, that their
demands of Money for the ends abovesaid, were not to be complied with, till his
Majesty were pleased to change the hands and Councils by which his Affairs were
managed. -- that is, nothing must be given but to such men in whom they could
confide, as if neither the King, nor those whom he employed were fit any longer
to be Trusted. But the supreme power, and the management of all things, must be
wholly in their Party, as it was in Watt Tyler, and Jack Cade of famous memory,
when they had got a King into their possession: for this Party, will never
think his Majesty their own, till they have him as safe, as they had his
Father. But if they could compass their Designs, of bringing the same Gentlemen
into play once more, who some years since were at the Helm; let me ask them,
when the Affairs of the Nation were worse managed? who gave the rise to the
present greatness of the French? or who counseled the dissolution of the
Tripple League? It Is a miracle to me that the People should think them good
Patriots, only because they are out of humor with the Court, and in disgrace.
I suppose they are far other principles, than those of Anger and Revenge, which
constitute an honest Statesman. But let men be what they will before, if they
once espouse their Party, let them be touched with that Philosophers stone, and
they are turned into Gold immediately. Nay, that will do more for them, than
was ever pretended to by Chemistry; for it will raise up the shape of a worthy
Patriot, from the ashes of a Knave. It Is a pretty juggle to tell the King they
assist him with Money, when indeed they design only to give it to themselves;
that is, to their own Instruments, which is no more, than to shift it from one
hand into another. It will be a favor at the long run, if they condescend to
acquaint the King, how they intend to lay out his Treasure. But our Author very
roundly tells his Majesty, That at present they will give him no supplies,
because they would be employed, to the destruction of his Person, and of the
Protestant Religion, and the inslaving the whole Nation, to which I will only
add, that of all these matters next and immediately under God, he and his
Party, constitute themselves the supreme Judges,

The Duke of York, the Queen. and the two French Dutchesses are the great
support and protectors of the Popish interest in these Kingdoms.

How comes it to pass that our Author shuffles the two French Dutchesses
together? of which the one is an Italian, the other a French Woman, and an
English Duchess? Is he grown so purblind, that he cannot distinguish Friends
from Foes? Has he so soon forgotten the memory of past benefits, that he will
not consider one of them as her, to whom all their applications were so lately
made? Is she so quickly become an old acquaintance, that none of the politic
assignations at her Lodgings are remembered? After this, who will trust the
gratitude of a Commonwealth? or who will blame the Conduct of a silly Court,
for being over-reached by the whole French Council, when the able part of the
Nation, the designing heads, the gray wisdom, and the Beaux Garcons* are all
foiled by a single French Woman, at their own Weapon, dissimulation? for the
other French Duchess, since I perceive our Author is unacquainted with her
Character, I will give it him; she is one who loves her ease to that degree,
that no advantages of Fortune can bribe her into business. Let her but have
wherewithal to make Merry adays, and to play at Cards anights, and I dare
answer for her, that she will take as little care to disturb their business, as
she takes in the management of her own. But if you will say that she only
affects idleness, and is a grand Intriguer in her heart, I will only Answer,
that I should show you just such another as I have described her Grace, amongst
the heads of your own Party: indeed I do not say it is a Woman, but it is one
who loves a Woman.

As for the Duchess of M. either she is a very sincere lover of downright
idleness, or she has cousen'd all parts of Christendom, where she has wandered
for these last Ten years. I hope our solid Author will pardon me this
digression; but now we have had our dance, let us to our serious business.

While these, and their Creatures are at the Helm, what can we expect for the
security of the Protestant Religion, or what opposition to the ambitious
designs of France?

I suppose more reasonably on the other side, that no such persons are at the
Helm, and that what he has assumed is but precarious. But I retort upon him,
that if some of his Party were the Ministers, the Protestant Religion would
receive but very cold assistance from them, who have none at all themselves.
And for the growth of the French Monarchy, I have already told you, to whose
Counsels we are beholden for it.

He goes on; you will tell me that the supplies so given may be appropriated,
to these particular ends of supporting our Alliances, and the relief of
Tangier: And it may be so limited by Act of Parliament, that it cannot be
diverted to other uses. But he answers that Objection by a Story of Monsieur de
Sully's telling of H. 4th of France: let the States raise the Money, and tie it
as they please; when they are dissolved, you may dispose of it as you please.

All this is to confirm his first unalterable principle, that the King must be
sure to finger nothing; but be used as Fishers do their Cormorant, have his
mouth left open, to swallow the prey for them, but his throat gagged that
nothing may go down. Let them bring this to pass, and afterward they will not
need to take away his Prerogative of making War: He must do that at his own
peril, and be sent to fight his Enemies with his hands bound behind him. But
what if he thinks not their Party fit to be entrusted, least they should employ
it against his Person? why then, as he told you they will give him nothing. Now
whose will be the fault in common reason, if the Allyances be not supported,
and Tangier not relieved? If they will give him nothing, before they bring him
to a necessity of taking it upon their terms, as much as in them lies they
dissolve the Government: and the Interest of the Nation abroad must be left in
the Suds, till they have destroyed the Monarchy at home. But since God, and the
Laws have put the disposing of the Treasury into his Majesty's hands, it may
satisfy any reasonable Englishman, that the same Laws have provided for the
mispending of the Treasury, by calling the public Officers into question for
it before the Parliament. For God be thanked we have a House of Commons, who
will be sure, never to forgo the least tittle of their Privileges, and not be
so mealy-mouthed as the States of France, of whom neither Monsieur Sully, nor
any of his Successors, have never had any cause of apprehension. But since the
wisdom of our Ancestors have thought this Provision sufficient for our
security, What has his present Majesty deserved from his Subjects, that he
should be made a Minor at no less than fifty years of age? or that his House of
Commons should Fetter him beyond any of his Predecessors? where the Interest
goes, you will say, there goes the power. But the most ingenious of your
Authors, I mean Plato Redivivus, broaches no such principle as that you should
force this Prerogative from the King, by undue courses. The best use which can
be made of all, is rather to support the Monarchy, than to have it fall upon
your Heads. If indeed there were any reasonable fear of an Arbitrary
Government, the adverse Party had somewhat to allege in their defense of not
supplying it; but it is not only evident, that the Kings temper is wholly
averse from any such Design, but also demonstrable, that if all his Council,
were such as this man most falsely suggests them to be, yet the notion of an
absolute power in the Prince is wholly impracticable, not only in this Age, but
for ought any wise man can foresee, at any time hereafter. It Is plain, that the
King has reduced himself already to live more like a private Gentleman than a
Prince; and since he can content himself in that condition, it is as plain, that
the supplies which he demands are only for the service of the public, and not
for his own maintenance, Monsieur de Sully might give what Council he thought
convenient for Henry the Fourth, who was then designing that Arbitrary power,
which his Successors have since compassed, to the ruin of the Subjects liberty
in France; but I appeal to the Consciences of those men, who are most averse to
the present Government, if they think our King would put his Peace and Quiet at
this time of day, upon so desperate an issue. What the necessities, which they
are driving him into, may make him part with on the other hand, I know not. But
how can they answer it to our Posterity, that for private Picques, self
Interest, and causeless jealousies, they would destroy the foundation of so
excellent a Government, which is the admiration and envy of all Europe?

The rest of my Authors Paragraph, is only laying more load upon the Ministers,
and telling us, that if a sum of Money sufficient for those ends were given,
while they were Managers of Affairs, it would be only to set them free from any
apprehensions of account to any future Parliament. But this Argument having
only the imaginary fear of an Arbitrary power for its foundation, is already
answered, he adds in the close of it, That the Prince has a cheap bargain, who
gives Paper-Laws in exchange of Money and Power. Bargains, he tells us, there
have always been, and always will be, betwixt Prince and People, because it is
in the Constitution of our Government, and the chief dependence of our Kings is
in the love and liberality of their People.

Our present King, I acknowledge has often found it so; though no thanks I
suppose to this Gentleman and his Party. But though he cry down Paper and
Parchment at this Rate, they are the best Evidence he can have for his Estate,
and his friends the Lawyers will advise him to speak with less contempt of
those Commodities. If Laws avail the Subject nothing, our Ancestors have made
many a bad Bargain for us. Yet I can instance to him one Paper, namely, that of
the Habeas Corpus bill; for which the House of Commons would have been content
to have given a Million of good English money, and which they had Gratis from
his Majesty. It Is true, they boast they got it by a Trick; but if the Clerk of
the Parliament had been bidden to forget it, their Trick of telling Noses might
have failed them. Therefore let us do right on all sides: The Nation is obliged
both to the House of Commons for asking it, and more especially to his Majesty,
for granting it so freely.

But what can we think of his next Axiom, that it was never known that Laws
signified any thing to a People, who had not the sole guard of their own
Prince, Government and Laws?

Here all our Forefathers are Arraigned at once for trusting the Executive
power of the Laws in their Princes hands. And yet you see the Government has
made a shift to shufflle on for so many hundred years together, under this
miserable oppression; and no man so wise in so many ages to find out, that
Magna Charta was to no purpose, while there was a King. I confess in Countries,
where the Monarck governs absolutely, and the Law is either his Will, or
depending on it, this noble maxim might take place; But since we are neither
Turks, Russians, nor Frenchmen, to affirm that in our Country, in a Monarchy
of so temperate and wholesome a Constitution, Laws are of no validity, because
they are not in the disposition of the People, plainly infers that no
Government but that of a Commonwealth can preserve our Liberties and
Privileges: for though the Title of a Prince be allowed to continue, yet if
the People must have the sole guard and Government of him and of the Laws, it is
but facing an whole hand of Trumps, with an insignificant King of another suit.
And which is worst of all, if this be true, there can be no Rebellion, for then
the People is the supreme power. And if the Representatives of the Commons
shall Jarr with the other two Estates, and with the King it

It would be no Rebellion to adhere to them in that War: to which I know that
every Republican who reads this, must of necessity Answer, No more it would
not. Then farewell the Good Act of Parliament, which makes it Treason to Levy
Arms against the present King, upon any pretenses whatsoever. For if this be a
Right of Nature, and consequently never to be Resigned, there never has been,
nor ever can be any pact betwixt King and People, and Mr. Hobbs would tell us,
That we are still in a state of War.

The next thing our Author would establish, is, That there is nothing in Nature
or in Story so ridiculous, as the management of the Ministers, in the
Examination of the Popish Plot. Which being proved by Coleman's and others
Letters, and by both Houses by declaring the King's Life to be in danger, etc.
Yet they have persuaded the King to believe nothing of this danger; but to
apprehend the Plot to be extremely improved, if not wholly contrived by the
Presbyterians. And to think it more his concernment to have an end of all; then
to have it searched to the bottom: and that this was the true reason, why four
Parliaments, during the Examination of the Plot have been dissolved:

Reasonable People will conclude, that his Majesty and his Ministers have
proceeded, not ridiculously, but with all that caution which became them. For
in the first heat and vehemence of the Plot, the Avenues of White Hall were
more strictly Guarded: His Majesty abstaining from Places of public
Entertainment, and the Ministers taking all necessary Care in Council, both to
discover Conspiracies and to prevent them. So, that simply considered, the
Popish Plot has nothing to do with the Dissolution of Four Parliaments. But the
Use which has been made of it by the House of Commons to Dis-inherit the Duke,
to deny the King Supplies, and to make some Votes, which the King declares to
be illegal, are the real and plain occasions of dissolving those Parliaments.
It Is only affirmed, but never will be proved by this Author, that the King or
his Ministers have ever been desirous to stifle the Plot, and not to have it
searched into the bottom. For to what end has his Majesty so often offered the
Popish Lords to be brought to their Trial, but that their innocence or guilt,
and consequently, that of the whole party might be made manifest? Or why, after
the execution of the Lord Stafford, did the House of Commons stop at the other
Lords, and not proceed to try them in their turns? Did his Majesty stifle the
Plot when he offered them, or did they refuse to sound the depth of it, when
they would not touch upon them? If it were for want of Witnesses, which is all
that can be said, the case is deplorable on the part of the accused; who can
neither be bailed, because impeached in Parliament, nor admitted to be tried,
for fear they should be acquitted for want of evidence. I do not doubt but his
Majesty, after having done what in him lies for the utmost discovery of the
Plot, both by frequent Proclamations of Indemnity, and Reward, to such as would
come in, and discover more, and by several others too long to repeat, is
desirous (for what good man is not?) that his care and trouble might be over.
But I am much deceived, if the Antimonarchical Party be of the same opinion; or
that they desire the Plot should be either wholly discovered, or fully ended.
For it is evidently their Interest to keep it on foot, as long as possibly they
can; and to give it hot water, as often as it is dying; for while they are in
possession of this Jewel, they make themselves masters of the people. For this
very reason I have often said, even from the beginning of the Discovery, that
the Presbyterians would never let it go out of their hands, but manage it to
the last inch upon a Save-all. And that if ever they had tried one Lord, they
would value themselves upon that Conquest, as longas ever it would last with
the Populace: but whatever came on it, be sure to leave a Nest Egg in the Tower:
And since I doubt not, but what so mean a Judge as I am could so easily
discover, could not possibly escape the vigilance of those who are at the Helm;
I am apt to think, that his Majesty saw at least as great a danger arising to
him from the discontented spirits of the popular Faction, as from the Papists.
For is it not plain, that ever since the beginning of the Plot, they have been
lopping off from the Crown whatever part of the Prerogative they could reach?
and incroaching into Sovereignty and Arbitrary Power themselves, while they
seemed to fear it from the King? How then could his Majesty be blamed, if he
were forced to dissolve those Parliaments, which instead of giving him relief,
made their Advantages upon his Distresses; and while they pretended a care of
his Person on the one hand, were plucking at his Scepter with the other?

After this, the Pamphleteer gives us a long Bead-roll of Dangerfield's Plot,
Captain Ely, young Tongue, Fitz-Gerard, and Mr. Ray, rails at some, and
commends others as far as his skill in Hyperbole will carry him. Which all put
together, amounts to no more than only this, that he whom they called Rogue
before, when he comes into their party, pays his Garnish, and is adopted into
the name of an honest man. Thus Ray was no Villain, when he accused Colonel
Sackvile, before the House of Commons; but when he failed of the reward of
godliness at their hands, and from a Wig became a tearing Tory in new Clothes,
our Author puts him upon the File of Rogues, with this brand, Than whom a more
notorious and known Villian lives not.

The next thing he falls upon, is the Succession: which the King declares, He
will have preserved in its due descent. Now our Author despairing, it seems,
that an Exclusion should pass by Bill, urges, That the Right of Nature and
Nations will empower Subjects to deliver a Protestant Kingdom from a Popish
King. The Law of Nations, is so undoubtedly, against him, that I am sure he
dares not stick to that Plea: but will be forced to reply, that the Civil Law
was made in favor of Monarchy: why then did he appeal to it? And for the Law
of Nature, I know not what it has to do with Protestants or Papists, except he
can prove that the English Nation is naturally Protestant; and then I would
enquire of him what Countrymen our Forefathers were? But if he means by the Law
of Nature, self-preservation and defense; even that neither will look but a
squint upon Religion; for a man of any Religion, and a man of no Religion, are
equally bound to preserve their lives. But I answer positively to what he would
be at; that the Law of self-preservation impowers not a Subject to rise in Arms
against his Sovereign, of another Religion, upon supposition of what he may do
in his prejudice hereafter: for, since it is impossible that a moral certainty
should be made out of a future contingency, and consequently, that the
Sovereign may not extend his Power to the prejudice of any man's Liberty or
Religion: The probability (which is the worst that they can put it) is not
enough to absolve a Subject who rises in Arms, from Rebellion, in foro
Conscientiae. We read of a divine Command to obey Superior Powers; and the Duke
will lawfully be such, no Bill of Exclusion having past against him in his
Brother's life: Besides this, we have the Examples of Primitive Christians,
even under Heathen Emperors, always suffering, yet never taking up Arms, during
ten Persecutions. But we have no Text, no Primitive Example encouraging us to
rebel against a Christian Prince, tho of a different Persuasion. And to say
there were then no Christian Princes when the New Testament was written, will
avail our Author little; for the Argument is a Fortiori: if it be unlawful to
rebel against a Heathen Emperor, then much more against a Christian King. The
Corollary is this, and every unbiassed sober man will subscribe to it, that
since we cannot pry into the secret Decrees of God, for the knowledge of future
Events, we ought to rely upon his Providence, for the Succession; without
either plunging our present King into necessities, for what may never happen;
or refusing our obedience to one hereafter, who in the course of nature may
succeed him. One, who if he had the will, could never have the power to settle
Popery in England, or to bring in Arbitrary Government.

But the Monarchy will not be destroyed, and the Protestant Religion will be
preserved, if we may have a Protestant Successor.

If his party had thought, that this had been a true Expedient, I am confident
it had been mentioned in the last Parliament at Westminster. But there, altum
silentium, not one word of it. Was it because the Machine was not then in
readiness to move! and that the Exclusion must first pass? or more truly was it
ever intended to be urged? I am not ashamed to say, that I particularly honor
the Duke of Monmouth: but whether his nomination to succeed, would, at the
bottom be pleasing to the Heads of his Cabal, I somewhat doubt. To keep him
fast to them by some remote hopes of it, may be no ill Policy. To have him in a
readiness to head an Army, in case it should please God the King should die
before the Duke, is the design; and then perhaps he has reason to expect more
from a Chance Game, than from the real desires of his party to exalt him to a
Throne. But it is neither to be imagined, that a Prince of his Spirit, after the
gaining of a Crown, would be managed by those who helped him to it, let his
engagements and promises be never so strong before, neither that he would be
confined in the narrow compass of a Curtailed Mungril Monarchy, half
Commonwealth. Conquerors are not easily to be curbed. And it is yet harder to
conceive, that his pretended Friends, even design him so much as that. At
preset, it is true, their mutual necessities keep them fast together; and all
the several Fanatic Books fall in, to enlarge the common stream* But suppose
the business compassed, as they designed it, how many, and how contradicting
Interests are there to be satisfied! Every Sect of High Shoes would then be
uppermost; and not one of them endure the toleration of another. And amongst
them all, what will become of those fine Speculative Wits, who drew the Plan of
this new Government, and who overthrew the old? For their comfort, the Saints
will then account them Atheists, and discard them. Or they will plead each of
them their particular Merits, till they quarrel about the Dividend. And, the
Protestant Successor himself, if he be not wholly governed by the prevailing
party, will first be declared no Protestant; and next, no Successor. This is
dealing sincerely with him, which Plato Redivivus does not: for all the bustle
he makes concerning the Duke of M. proceeds from a Commonwealth Principle: he
is afraid at the bottom to have him at the Head of the party, lest he should
turn the absolute Republic, now designing, into an arbitrary Monarchy.

The next thing he exposes, is the project communicated at Oxford, by a worthy
Gentleman since deceased. But since he avowed himself, that it was but a rough
draught, our Author might have paid more respect to his memory, than to
endeavor to render it ridiculous. But let us see how he mends the matter in
his own which follows.

If the Duke were only banished, during life, and the Administration put into
the hands of Protestants, that would establish an unnatural War of Expediency,
against an avowed Right and Title. But on the other hand exclude the Duke, and
all other Popish Successors, and put down all those Guards are now so illegally
kept up, and banish the Papists, where can be the danger of a War, in a Nation
unanimous?

I will not be unreasonable with him; I will expect English no where from the
barrenness of his Country: but if he can make sense of his Unnatural War of
Expediency, I will forgive him two false Grammars, and three Barbarisms, in
every Period of his Pamphlet; and yet leave him enough of each to expose his
ignorance, whenever I design it. But his Expedient it self is very solid, if
you mark it. Exclude the Duke, take away the Guards, and consequently, all
manner of defense from the Kings Person; Banish every Mothers Son of the
Papists, whether guilty or not guilty in particular of the Plot. And when
Papists are to be banished, I warrant you all Protestants in Masquerade must go
for company; and when none but a pack of Sectaries and Commonwealths-men are
left in England, where indeed will be the danger of a War, in a Nation
unanimous? After this, why does not some resenting Friend of Marvel's, put up a
Petition to the Sovereigns of his party, that his Pension of four hundred
pounds per annum, may be transferred to some one amongst them, who will not so
notoriously betray their cause by dullness and insufficiency? As for the
illegal Guards, let the Law help them; or let them be disbanded; for I do not
think they have need of any Champion.

The next twenty Lines are only an Illustration upon his Expedient: for he is
so fond of his darling Notion, that he huggs it to death, as the Ape did her
young one. He gives us his Bill of Tautology once more; for he threatens, that
they would not rest at the Exclusion; but the Papists must again be banished,
and the Dukes Creatures put out of Office both Civil and Military. Now the
Dukes Creatures, I hope, are Papists, or little better; so that this is all the
same: as if he had been conning over this ingenious Epigram; There was a man
who with great labor, and much pain,
Did break his neck, and break his neck, and break his neck again.
At the last, to show his hand is not out in the whole Paragraph, when the Duke
is excluded, his Creatures put out of Office, the Papists banished twice over;
and the Church of England-men delivered to Satan, yet still he says the Duke is
the great Minister of State; and the Kings Excellent Qualities give his Brother
still opportunities to ruin us and our Religion. Even excluded, and without
Friends and Faction he can do all this; and the King is endued with most
excellent Qualities to suffer it.

Having found my man, methinks I can scarce afford to be serious with him any
longer; but to treat him as he deserves, like an ill Bouffoon.

He defends the sharpness of the Addresses of which his Majesty complains: but
I suppose it would be better for him, and me, to let our Principals engage, and
to stand by our selves. I confess, I have heard some members of that House,
wish, that all Proceedings had been carried with less vehemence. But my Author
goes further on the other hand; He affirms, that many wise and good men thought
they had gone too far, in assuring, nay, in mentioning of money before our
safety was fully provided for. So you see he is still for laying his hand upon
the penny. In the mean time I have him in a Praemunire for arraigning the House
of Commons; for he has tacitly confessed, that the wise and good men were the
fewer; because the House carried it for mentioning money in their Address. But
it seems they went too far, in speaking of a Supply; before they had consulted
this Gentleman, how far the safety of the Nation would admit it. I find plainly
by his temper, that if matters had come to an accommodation, and a bargain had
been a bargain, the Knights of the Shire must have been the Protestant Knights
no longer.

As for Arbitrary Power of taking men into custody, for matters that had no
relation to Privileges of Parliament, he says they have erred with their
Fathers. If he confess that they have erred, let it be with all their
Generation, still they have erred: and an error of the first digestion, is
seldom mended in the second. But I find him modest in this point; and knowing
too well they are not a Court of Judicature, he does not defend them from
Arbitrary Proceedings, but only excuses, and palliates the matter, by saying,
that it concerned the Rights of the People, in suppressing their Petitions to
the Fountain of Justice. So, when it makes for him, he can allow the King to be
the Fountain of Justice; but at other times he is only a Cistern of the People.
But he knows sufficiently, however he dissembles it, that there were some taken
into custody, to whom that crime was not objected. Yet since in a manner he
yields up the Cause, I will not press him too far, where he is so manifestly
weak. Tho I must tell him by the way, that he is as justly to be proceeded
against for calling the Kings Proclamation illegal, which concerned the matter
of Petitioning, as some of those, who had pronounced against them by the House
of Commons, that terrible sentence, of Take him, Topham.

The strange illegal Votes declaring several eminent persons to be Enemies to
the King and Kingdom, are not so strange, he says, but very justifiable. I hope
he does not mean, that illegal Votes are now not strange in the House of
Commons: But observe the reason which he gives: for the House of Commons had
before addressed for their removal from about the King. It was his business to
have proved, that an Address of the House of Commons, without Process, order of
Law, hearing any Defense, or offering any proof against them is sufficient
ground to remove any person from the King: But instead of this he only proves,
that former Addresses have been made, Which no body can deny. When he has
thoroughly settled this important point, that Addresses have certainly been
made, instead of an Argument to back it, he only thinks, that one may affirm by
Law, That the King ought to have no person about him, who has the misfortune of
such a Vote. But this is too ridiculous to require an Answer. They who will
have a thing done, and give no reason for it, assume to themselves a manifest
Arbitrary Power. Now this Power cannot be in the Representatives, if it be not
in the People: or if it be in them, the People is absolute. But since he wholly
thinks it, let him enjoy the privilege of every Free Born Subject, to have the
Bell clinck to him what he imagines.

Well; all this while he has been in pain about laying his Egg: at the last we
shall have him cackle.

If the House of Commons declare they have just Reasons to fear, that such a
person puts the King upon Arbitrary Councils, or betrays His and the Nations
Interest, in such a Case, Order and Process of Law is not necessary to remove
him; but the Opinion and Advice of the Nation is enough; because bare removing
neither fines him, nor deprives him of Life, Liberty, or Offices, wherein State
Affairs are not concerned.

Hitherto, he has only proved, according to his usual Logic, that bare
removing, is but bare removing; and that to deprive a man of a Public Office
is not so much as it would be to hang him: all that possibly can be inferred
from this Argument, is only that a Vote may do a less wrong, but not a greater.
Let us see how he proceeds.

If he be not removed upon such Address, you allow him time to act his Villainy;
and the Nation runs the hazard.

I answer, if the House have just Reasons on their side, it is but equitable
they should declare them; for an Address in this Case is an Appeal to the King
against such a man: and no Appeal is supposed to be without the Causes which
induced it. But when they ask a Removal, and give no reason for it; they make
themselves Judges of the Matter, and consequently they appeal not, but command.
If they please to give their Reasons, they justify their Complaint; for then
their Address is almost in the nature of an Impeachment: and in that Case they
may procure a hearing when they please: But barely to declare, that they
suspect any man, without charging him with particular Articles, is almost to
confess, they can find none against him. To suppose a man has time to act his
Villainies, must suppose him first to be a Villain: and if they suspect him to
be such, nothing more easy than to name his Crimes, and to take from him all
opportunities of future mischief. But at this rate of bare addressing, any one
who has a public profitable Employment might be removed; for upon the private
Picque of a Member he may have a party raised for an Address against him. And
if his Majesty can no sooner reward the Services of any one who is not of their
party, but they can vote him out of his Employment; it must at last follow,
that none but their own party must be employed, and then a Vote of the House of
Commons, is in effect the Government. Neither can that be called the Advice and
Opinion of the whole Nation, by my Author's favor, where the other two
Estates, and the Sovereign are not consenting*

It Is no matter, says this Gentleman; there are some things so reasonable, that
they are above any written Law: and will in despite of any Power on Earth have
their effect; whereof this is one.

I love a man who deals plainly; he explicitly owns this is not Law, and yet it
is reasonable; and will have its effect as if it were. See then, in the first
place the written Law is laid aside: that fence is thrown open to admit reason
in a larger denomination. Now that reason which is not Law, must be either
Enthusiasm, or the headstrong will of a whole Nation combined: because in
depite of any Earthly Power it will have its effect: so that, which way soever
our Author takes it, he must mean Fanaticism, or Rebellion: Law grounded on
reason is resolved into the Absolute Power of the People; and this is Ratio
ultima Reipublicae.

Furthermore; The King is a public Person: in his private capacity, as we are
told, he can only eat and drink; and perform some other acts of nature which
shall be nameless. But his actings without himself, says my grave Author, are
only as a King. In his politic capacity he ought not to marry, love, hate,
make war, or peace, but as a King; and agreeable to the People, and their
Interest he governs.

In plain terms then, as he is a man he has nothing left to do; for the Actions
which are mentioned, are those only of an Animal, or which are common to Man
and Beast. And as he is a King he has as little Business, for there he is at
the disposing of the People: and the only use that can be made of such a
Monarch, is for an Innkeeper to set upon a Sign-Post to draw custom. But these
Letters of Instruction how he should behave himself in his Kingly Office,
cannot but call to mind how he was schooled and tutored, when the Covenanters
made just such another Prince of him in Scotland. When the terrible fasting day
was come, if he were sick in bed, no remedy, he must up and to Kirk; and that
without a mouthful of Bread to stay his Stomach; for he fasted then in his
Politic Capacity. When he was seated, no looking aside from Mr. John; not a
whisper to any man, but was a disrepect to the Divine Ordinance. After the
first Thunderer had spent his Lungs, no Retirement, the first is reinforced by
a second and a third: all chosen Vessels, dieted for Preaching, and the best
breathed of the whole Country. When the Sun went down, then up went the
Candles, and the fourth arises to carry on the work of the night, when that of
the day was at an end.

It Is true what he says, that our greatest Princes have often hearkened to the
Addresses of their People, and have removed some persons from them; but it was
when they found those Addresses reasonable themselves. But they who consult the
manner of Addresses in former times, will find them to have been managed in the
House of Commons, with all the calmness and circumspection imaginable. The
Crimes were first maturely weighed, and the whole matter thoroughly winnow'd in
Debates. After which, if they thought it necessary for the public welfare,
that such a person should be removed, they dutifully acquainted the King with
their opinion, which was often favorably heard; and their desires granted. But
now the Case is quite otherwise; Either no Debate, or a very slight one
precedes Addresses of that nature. But a man is run down with violent
Harangues; and it is thought sufficient, if any member rises up, and offers that
he will make out the Accusation afterward: when things are carried in this
heady manner, I suppose it is no sign of a Great Prince, to have any of his
Servants forced from him. But such Addresses will insensibly grow into
Presidents: you see our Author is nibbling at one already. And we know a House
of Commons is always for giving the Crescent in their Arms. If they gain a
point, they never recede from it, they make sure work of every concession from
the Crown* and immediately put it into the Christmas Box: from whence there is
no Redemption.

In justification of the two Votes against lending or advancing Money to the
King, he falls to railing, like a Sophister in the Schools, when his Syllogisms
are at an end. He arraigns the Kings private manner of living, without
considering that his not being supplied has forced him to it. I do not take
upon me to defend any former ill management of the Treasury; but, if I am not
deceived, the great grievance of the other party at present, is, that it is
well managed. And, that notwithstanding nothing has been given for so many
years, yet a competent provision is still made for all expenses of the public;
if not so large as might be wished, yet at least as much as is necessary. And I
can tell my Author for his farther mortification, that at present no money is
furnished to his Majesty's Occasions, at such unconscionable Usury as he
mentions. If he would have the Tables set up again, let the King be put into a
condition, and then let eating and drinking flourish, according to the hearty,
honest and greasy Hospitality of our Ancestors. He would have the King have
recourse to Parliaments, as the only proper Supply to a King of England, for
those things which the Treasury in this low Ebb cannot furnish out: but when he
comes to the Conditions, on which this money is to be had, they are such, that
perhaps forty in the Hundred to a Jew Banquer were not more unreasonable. In
the mean time, if a Parliament will not give, and others must not lend, there
is a certain story of the Dog in the Manager, which out of good manners I will
not apply.

The Vote for not prosecuting Protestant Dissenters upon the Penal Laws; which
at this time is thought to be a Grievance to the Subject, a weakening of the
Protestant Religion, and an Encouragement to Popery, is a matter more tenderly
to be handled. But if it be true what has been commonly reported since the
Plot, that Priests, Jesuits, and Friars, mingle amongst Anabaptists, Quakers,
and other Sectaries, and are their Teachers, must not they be prosecuted
neither? Some men would think, that before such an uniting of Protestants, a
winnowing were not much amiss; for after they were once sent together to the
Mill, it would be too late to divide the Grist. His Majesty is well known to be
an indulgent Prince, to the Consciences of his dissenting Subjects: But whoever
has seen a Paper called, I think, An intended Bill for uniting, etc. which lay
upon the Table of every Coffee-House, and was modelling to pass the House of
Commons, may have found things of such dangerous concernment to the Government,
as might seem not so much intended to unit Dissenters in a Protestant Church,
as to draw together all the Forces of the several Fanatic Parties, against the
Church of England. And when they were encouraged by such a Vote, which they
value as a Law; (for so high that Coin is now inhaunc'd) perhaps it is not
unreasonable to hold the Rod over them. But for my own part, I heartily wish,
that there may be no occassion for Christians to persecute each other. And
since my Author speaks with some moderation, candor, and submission to his
Mother Church, I shall only desire him and the dissenting Party, to make the
use they ought, of the King Gracious Disposition to them, in not yet proceeding
with all the violence which the penal Laws require against them. But this calm
of my Author, was too happy to last long. You find him immediately transported
into a storm about the business of Fitz-Harris, which occasioned the
Dissolution of the Parliament at Oxford: and accusing, according to his saucy
Custom, both his Majesty, and the House of Lords, concerning it. As for the
House of Lords, they have already vindicated their own right, by throwing out
the Impeachment: and sure the People of England ought to own them as the
Assertors of the public Liberty in so doing; for Process being before ordered
against him at Common Law, and no particular Crime being laid to his Charge by
the House of Commons, if they had admitted his Cause to be tried before their
Lordships, this would have grown a President in time, that they must have been
forced to judge all those whom the House of Commons would thrust upon them,
till at last the number of Impeachments would be so increased; that the Peers
would have no time for any other business of the Public: and the Highest Court
of Judicature would have been reduced to be the Ministers of Revenge to the
Commons. What then would become of our ancient Privilege to be tried per pares?
Which in process of time would be lost to us and our posterity: except a
proviso were made on purpose, that this judgment might not be drawn into
farther President; and that is never done, but when there is a manifest
necessity of breaking rules, which here there was not. Otherwise the Commons
may make Spaniels of the Lords, throw them a man, and bid them go judge, as we
command a Dog to fetch and carry. But neither the Lords Reasons, nor the King
first having possession of the Prisoner, signify any thing with our Author. He
will tell you the reason of the Impeachment was to bring out the Popish Plot.
If Fitz-Harris really know any thing but what relates to his own Treason, he
chooses a fine time of day to discover it now, when it is manifestly to save his
Neck, that he is forced to make himself a greater Villain; and to charge
himself with new Crimes to avoid the punishment of the old. Had he not the
benefit of so many Proclamations, to have come in before, if he then knew any
thing worth discovery? And was not his fortune necessitous enough at all times,
to catch at an impunity, which was baited with Rewards to bribe him? it is not
for nothing that Party has been all along so favorable to him: they are
conscious to themselves of some other matters than a Popish Plot. Let him first
be tried for what he was first accused: if he be acquitted, his Party will be
satisfied, and their strength increased by the known honesty of another
Evidence: but if he be condemned, let us see what truth will come out of him,
when he has Tyburn and another World before his Eyes. Then, if he confess any
thing which makes against the Cause, their Excuse is ready; he died a Papist,
and had a dispensation from the Pope to lie. But if they can bring him silent
to the Gallows, all their favor will be, to wish him dispatched out of his
pain, as soon as possibly he may. And in that Case they have already promised
they will be good to his Wife, and provide for her, which would be a strong
encouragement, for many a woman, to persuade her Husband to digest the Halter.
This remembers me of a certain Spanish Duke, who commanding a Sea-Port-Town,
set an Officer of his, underhand to rob the Merchants. His Grace you may be
confident was to have the Booty, and the Fellow was assured if he were taken to
be protected. It fell out, after some time, that he was apprehended: His
Master, according to Articles, brought him off. The Rogue went again to his
vocation, was the second time taken, delivered again, and so the third. At last
the matter grew so notorious, that the Duke found, it would be both scandalous
and difficult to protect him any longer; But the poor Malefactor sending his
Wife to tell him that if he did not save him he must be hanged to morrow, and
that he must confess who set him on: His Master very civilly sent him this
Message; Prithee suffer thy self to be hanged this once to do me a Courtesy,
and it shall be the better for thy Wife and Children.

But that which makes amends for all, says our Author, is the Kings resolution
to have frequent Parliaments. Yet this, it seems, is no amends neither: for he
says Parliaments are like Terms, if there be Ten in a Year, and all so short to
hear no Causes, they do no good.

I say on the other hand, If the Courts will resolve beforehand to have no
Causes brought before them, but one which they know they cannot dispatch; let
the Terms be never so long, they make them as insignificant as a Vacation.

The King 's Prerogative, when and where they should be called, and how long
they should sit, is but subservient, as our Friend tells us, to the great
design of Government; and must be accommodated to it, or we are either denied
or deluded of that Protection and Justice we are born to.

My Author is the happiest in one faculty, I ever knew. He is still advancing
some new Position, which without proving, he slurs upon us for an Argument:
though he knows, that Doctrines without proofs will edify but little. That the
Kings Prerogative is subservient, or in order to the ends of Government is
granted him. But what strange kind of Argument is this, to prove that we are
cheated of that Protection to which we are born. Our Kings have always been
endued with the power of calling Parliaments, nominating the time, appointing
of the Place, and Dissolving them when they thought it for the public good:
And the People have wisely consulted their own welfare in it. Suppose, for
example, that there be a Jarring between the three Estates, which renders their
sitting at that time Impracticable; since none of them can pretend to Judge the
proceedings of the other two, the Judgment of the whole must either reside in a
Superior power, or the discord must terminate in the ruin of them all. For if
one of the three incroach too far, there is so much lost in the Balance of the
Estates, and so much more Arbitrary power in one; It Is as certain in
Politiques, as in Nature; That where the Sea prevails the Land loses. If no
such discord should arise, my Authors Argument is of no farther use: for where
the Sovereign and Parliament agree, there can be no deluding of the People; So,
that in short, his quarrel is to the constitution of the Government.

And we see what nettles him, That the King has learnt from the unhappy example
of his Father, not to perpetuate a Parliament. But he will tell you, that they
desire only a lasting Parliament, which may dispatch all causes necessary and
proper for the public: And I Answer him, that it lies in themselves to make it
so. But who shall Judge when it shall be proper to put an end to such a
Parliament? there is no farther Answer left him; but only, that the Reason of
things is the only Rule: for when all necessary causes are dispatched, then is
the proper time of Dissolution. But if you mark it, this Argumentation is still
running in a Circle. For the Parliament, that is the House of Commons, would
constitute themselves Judges of this reason of things; and of what causes were
necessary to be dispatched. So that my Author had as good have laid down this
Position barefaced, that a Parliament ought never to be Dissolved, till an
House of Commons would fit no longer.

My Author goes on scoffingly, That he has nothing to say for those angry men
(he means of his own Party) whose particular Designs are disappointed; only
that they might have kept their places; and that he can find no difference
betwixt them who are out, and those who are put in, but that the former could
have ruined us, and would not: and these cannot if they would.

I am willing to let them pass as lightly as he pleases: Angry they are, and
they know the Proverb. I hope I may have leave to observe transiently, that
none but angry men, that is, such as hold themselves disobliged at Court, are
the Pillars of his Party. And where are then the principles of Virtue, Honor
and Religion, which they would persuade the World, have animated their
endeavors for the public? What were they before they were thus Angry? or what
would they be, could they make so firm an Interest in Court, that they might
venture themselves in that bottom? This, the whole Party cannot choose but
know; for Knaves can easily smell out one another. My Author, an experienced
man, makes but very little difference, betwixt those who are out, and those who
are put in. But the Nation begins to be awake: his party is mouldring away, and
as it falls out, in all dishonest Combinations, are suspecting each other so
very fast, that every man is shifting for himself, by a separate Treaty: and
looking out for a Plank in the common Shipwreck, so that the point is turned
upon him; those who are out, would have ruined us, and could not; and those who
are in, are endeavoring to save us if they can.

My Adversary himself, now drawing to a conclusion, seems to be inclining to
good opinions: and as dying men, are much given to repentance, so finding his
cause at the last gasp, he unburthens his Conscience and disclaims the
principles of a Commonwealth, both for himself, and for both Houses of
Parliament, which is indeed to be over-officious: for one of the Houses will
not think they have need of such a Compurgator. But he wisely fears no change
of Government from any, but the Papists. Now I am of a better heart, for I fear
it neither from Papists nor Presbyterians. Whether Democracy will agree with
Jesuitical principles in England I am not certain; but I can easily prove to
him, that no Government but a Commonwealth is accommodated to the Systeme of
Church-worship invented by John Calvin.

The Declaration concludes, that the King is resolved to govern in all things
by the Laws: And here the Author of the Answer, is for frisking out into a fit
of Joy, which looks as awkward with his gravity, as ever was King David's
dancing before the Ark. This similitude I hope has pleased hin; if it does not,
Esop's Ass stands ready Sadled at the door. But a melancholic consideration
has already poured cold water in his Porredge, for all promises he says, are
either kept or broken: welfare a good old Proverb. I could find in my heart
to cap it with another, that the old Woman had never looked for her Daughter in
the Oven, if she had not been there her self before. But if the King should
keep his word, as all but his Enemies conclude he will, then we shall see
Annual Parliaments sit longer I hope; when they meddle only with their proper
business. They will lose their time no more, in cutting off the Succession,
altering the course of Nature, and directing the providence of God, before they
know it. We shall have no uniting of Sects against the Church of England, nor
of Counties against the next Heir of the Crown. The King shall then be advised
by his Parliament, when both Houses concur in their advice. There shall be no
more need of Declarations about the dissolving of Parliaments; and no more need
of factious Fools to answer them; But the People shall be happy, the King shall
be supplied the Alliances shall be supported, and my supposed Author be made a
Bishop, and renounce the Covenant. That many of these things may happen, is the
wish of every loyal Subject, and particularly of

Sir, Your most humble Servant


