OF Dramatick Poesy, AN ESSAY.

By JOHN DRYDEN Esquire

-- Fungar vice cotis, acutum
Reddere quae ferrum valet, exors ipsa secandi.
Horat. De Art Poet. LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Sign of the
Anchor, on the Lower-walk of the New- Exchange. 1668.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES LORD BUCKHURST.
My Lord,
AS I was lately reviewing my loose Papers, amongst the rest I found this
Essay, the writing of which in this rude and indigested manner wherein your
Lordship now sees it, served as an amusement to me in the Country, when the
violence of the last Plague had driven me from the Town. Seeing then our
Theaters shut up, I was engaged in these kind of thoughts with the same delight
with which men think upon their absent Mistresses: I confess I find many things
in this discourse which I do not now approve; my judgment being a little
altered since the writing of it, but whither for the better or the worse I know
not: Neither indeed is it much material in an Essay, where all I have said is
problematical. For the way of writing Plays in verse, which I have seemed to
favor, I have since that time laid the Practice of it aside, till I have more
leisure, because I find it troublesome and slow. But I am no way altered from
my opinion of it, at least with any reasons which have opposed it. For your
Lordship may easily observe that none are very violent against it* but those
who either have not attempted it, or who have succeeded ill in their attempt.
It Is enough for me to have your Lordships example for my excuse in that little
which I have done in it; and I am sure my Adversaries can bring no such
Arguments against Verse, as the fourth Act of Pompey will furnish me with, in
its defense. Yet, my Lord, you must suffer me a little to complain of you, that
you too soon withdraw from us a contentment, of which we expected the
continuance, because you gave it us so early. It Is a revolt without occasion
from your Party, where your merits had already raised you to the highest
commands, and where you have not the excuse of other men that you have been ill
used, and therefore laid down Arms. I know no other quarrel you can have to
Verse, then that which Spurina had to his beauty, when he tore and mangled the
features of his Face, only because they pleased too well the lookers on. It
was an honor which seemed to wait for you, to lead out a new Colony of Writers
from the Mother Nation: and upon the first spreading of your Ensigns there had
been many in a readiness to have followed so fortunate a Leader; if not all,
yet the better part of Writers. Pars, indocili melior grege; mollis and expes
Inominata perprimat cubilia.

I am almost of opinion, that we should force you to accept of the command, as
sometimes the Praetorian Bands have compelled their Captains to receive the
Empire. The Court, which is the best and surest judge of writing, has generally
allowed of Verse; and in the Town it has found favorers of Wit and Quality. As
for your own particular, My Lord, you have yet youth, and ^^ime enough to give
part of it to the divertisement of the Public, before you enter into the
serious and more unpleasant business of the world. That which the French Poet
said of the Temple of Love, may be as well applied to the Temple of the Muses.
The words, as near as I can remember them, were these: La jeunesse a mauvaise
grace.
N' ayant pas adore dans le temple d' Amor:
Il faut qu'il enter, and pour le sage
Si ce nest son vray sejour
Ce'st un giste sur son passage.


I leave the words to work their effect upon your Lordship in their own
Language, because no other can so well express the nobleness of the thought;
And wish you may be soon called to bear a part in the affairs of the Nation,
where I know the world expects you, and wonders why you have been so long
forgotten; there being no person amongst our young Nobility, on whom the eyes
of all men are so much bent. But in the mean time your Lordship may imitate the
course of Nature, who gives us the flower before the fruit: that I may speak to
you in the language of the Muses, which I have taken from an excellent Poem to
the King.

As Nature, when she fruit designs, thinks ^^it
By beauteous blossoms to proceed to it;
And while she does accomplish all the Spring,
Birds to her secret operations sing.
I confess I have no greater reason, in addressing this Essay to your Lordship,
then that it might awaken in you the desire of writing something, in whatever
kind it be, which might be an honor to our Age and Country. And me thinks it
might have the same effect upon you, which Homer tells us the fight of the
Greeks and Trojans before the Fleet, had on the spirit of Achilles, who though
he had resolved not to engage, yet found a martial warmth to steal upon him, at
the sight of Blows, the sound of Trumpets, and the cries of fighting Men* For
my own part, if in treating of this subject I sometimes dissent from the
opinion of better Wits, I declare it is not so much to combat their opinions,
as to defend my own, which were first made public. Sometimes, like a Scholar
in a FencingSchool I put forth my self, and show my own ill play, on purpose to
be better taught. Sometimes I stand desperately to my Arms, like the Foot when
deserted by their Horse, not in hope to overcome, but only to yield on more
honorable terms. And yet, my Lord, this war of opinions, you well know, has
fallen out among the Writers of all Ages, and sometim^^s betwixt Friends. Only
it has been prosecuted by some, l^^ke Pedants, with violence of words, and
managed by others like Gentlemen, with ^^andour and ciuility. Even Tully had a
Controversy with his dear Atticus; and in one of his Dialogues makes him
sustain the part of an Enemy in Philosophy, who in his Letters is his confident
of State, and made privy to the most weighty affairs of the Roman Senate. And
the same respect which was paid by Tully to Atticus, we find returned to him
afterward by Caesar on a like occasion, who answering his Book in praise of
Cato, made it not so much his business to condemn Cato, as to praise Cicero.
But that I may decline some part of the encounter with my Adversaries, whom I
am neither willing to combat, nor well able to resist; I will give your
Lordship the Relation of a Dispute betwixt some of our Wits upon this subject,
in which they did not only speak of Plays in Verse, but mingled, in the
freedom of Discourse, some things of the Ancient, many of the Modern ways of
writing, comparing those with these, and the Wits of our Nation with those of
others: it is true they differed in their opinions, as ^^tis probable they
would: neither do I take upon me to reconcile, but to relate them: and that as
Tacitus professes of himself, Sine studio partium aut ira: without Passion or
Interest; leaving your Lordship to decide it in favor of which part you shall
judge most reasonable, and withal, to pardon the many errors of,

Your Lordships most obedient humble Servant, JOHN DRYDEN.

TO THE READER.
THe drift of the ensuing Discourse was chiefly to vindicate the honor of our
English Writers, from the censure of those who unjustly prefer the French
before them. This I intimate, least any should think me so exceeding vain, as
to teach others an Art which they understand much better then my self. But if
this incorrect Essay, written in the Country without the help of Books, or
advice of Friends, shall find any acceptance in the world, I promise to my self
a better success of the second part, wherein the Virtues and Faults of the
English Poets, who have written either in this, the Epique, or the Lyrique way,
will be more fully treated of, and their several styles impartially imitated.

AN ESSAY OF Dramatick Poesy.
IT was that memorable day, in the first Summer of the late War, when our Navy
engaged the Dutch: a day wherein the two most mighty and best appointed Fleets
which any age had ever seen, disputed the command of the greater half of the
Globe, the commerce of Nations, and the riches of the Universe. While these
vast floating bodies, on either side, moved against each other in parallel
lines, and our Country men, under the happy conduct of his Royal Highness, went
breaking, by little and little, into the line of the Enemies; the noise of the
Cannon from both Navies reached our ears about the City: so that al men, being
alarmed with it, and in a dreadful suspense of the event, which we knew was
then deciding, every one went following the sound as his fancy led him; and
leaving the Town almost empty, some took toward the Park, some cross the
River, others down it; all seeking the noise in the depth of silence.

Amongst the rest, it was the fortune of Eugenius, Crites, Lisid^^ius and
Neander, to be in company together: three of them persons whom their wi^^t and
Quality have made known to all the Town: and whom I have chose to hide under
these borrowed names, that they may not suffer by so ill a relation as I am
going to make of their discourse.

Taking then a Barge which a servant of Lisideius had provided for them, they
made haste to shoot the B^^ridge, and left behin^^ them that great fall of
waters which hindered them from hearing what they desired: after which, having
disengaged themselves from many Vessels which rode at Anchor in the Thames, and
almost blockt up the passage toward Greenwich, they ordered the Watermen to
let ^^all their Oar^^ mo^^e gently; and then every one favoring his own
cu^^iosity with a strict silence, it was not long ere they perceived the Air
break about them like the noise of distant Thunder, or of Swallows in a
Chimney: those little undulations of found, though almost vanishing before they
reached them, yet still seemng ^^o retain somewhat of their first horro^^r
which they had betwixt the Fleets: after they had attentively listened till such
time as the sound by little and little went from them; Euge^^ius lifting up his
head, and taking notice of it, was the first who congratulated to the rest that
happy Omen of our N^^tions Victory: adding, we had but this to desire in
confirmation of it, that we might hear no more of that noise which was now
leaving the English Coast. When the rest had concurred in the same opinion,
Crit^^s, a person of a sharp judgment, and somewhat too delicate a taste in
wit, which the world have mistaken in him for ill nature, said, smiling to us,
that if the concernment of this battle had not been so exceeding great, he
could scarce have wished the Victory at the price he knew must pay for it, in
being subject to the reading and hearing of so many ill verses as he was sure
would be made upon it; adding, that no Argument could escape some of those
eternal Rhimers, who watch a Battle with more diligence then the R^^vens and
birds of Prey; and the worst of them surest to be first in upon the quarry,
while the better able, ei^^her out of modesty writ not at all, or set that due
value upon their Poems, as to let them be often called for and long expected!
there are some of those impertinent people you speak of, answered Lisideius,
who to my knowledge, are (...) so provided, either way, that they can produce
not only a Panegirick upon the Victory, but, if need be, a funeral elegy upon
the Duke: and after they have crown^^d his valor with many Laurels, at last
deplore the odds under which he fell; concluding that his courage deserved a
better destiny. All the company smiled at the conceit of Lisideius; but
Crites, more eager then before, began to make particular exceptions against
some Writers, and said the public Magistrate ought to send betimes to forbid
them; and that it concerned the peace and quiet of all honest people, that ill
Poets should be as well silenced as seditious Preachers. In my opinion, replied
E^^genius, you pursue your point too far; for as to my own particular, I am so
great a lover of Poesy, that I could wish them all rewarded who attempt but to
do well; at least I would not have them worse used then (...) the Dictator did
one of their brethren heretofore: Quem in concione vidimus (says Tully speaking
of him) cum ei lib^^llum malus poeta de populo subjecisset, quod epigramma in
^^um fecisset tantummodo alternis versibus longi^^culis, statim ex iis rebus
quae tunc vendebat jubere ei praemium tribui, sub ea condi^^ione ne quid postea
scriberet. I could wish with all my heart, replied Cri^^es, that many whom we
know were as bountifully thanked upon the same condition, that they would never
trouble us again. For amongst others, I have a mortal apprehension of two
Poets, whom this victory with the help of both her wings will never be able to
escape; it is easy to guess whom you intend, said Lisideius; and without naming
them, I ask you if one of them does not perpetually pay us with clenches upon
words and a certain clownish kind of raillery? if now and then he does not
osser at a Catecresis or Clevelandism; wresting and torturing a word into
another meaning: In fine, if he be not one of those whom the French would call
un mauvais buffon; one that is so much a well-willer to the Satire, that he
spares no man; and though he cannot strike a blow to hurt any, yet ought to be
punished for the malice of the action; as our Witches are justly hanged because
they think themselves so; and suffer deservedly for believing they did
mischief, because they meant it. You have described him, said Crites, so
exactly, that I am afraid to come after you with my other extremity of Poetry:
He is one of those who having had some advantage of education and converse,
knows better then the other what a Poet should be, but puts it into practice
more unluckily then any man; his style and matter are every where alike; he is
the most calm, peaceable Writer you ever read: he never disquiets your passions
with the least concernment, but still leaves you in as even a temper as he
found you; he is a very Leveller in Poetry, he creeps along with ten little
words in every line, and helps out his Numbers with For to, and Unto, and all
the pretty Expletives he can find, till he draggs them to the end of another
line; while the Sense is left tired half way behind it* he doubly starves all
his Verses, first for want of thought, and then of expression; his Poetry
neither has wit in it, nor seems to have it; like him in Martial: Pauper
videri Cinna vult, and est pauper:

He affects plainness, to cover his want of imagination: when he writes the
serious way, the highest flight of his fancy is some miserable Antithesis, or
seeming contradiction; and in the Comic he is still reaching at some thin
conceit, the ghost of a Jest, and that too flies before him, never to be
caught; these Swallows which we see before us on the Thames, are the just
resemblance of his wit: you may observe how near the water they stoop, how many
proffers they make to dip, and yet how seldom they touch it: and when they do,
it is but the surface: they skim over it but to catch a gnat, and then mount
into the air and leave it. Well Gentlemen, said Eugenius, you may speak your
pleasure of these Authors; but though I and some few more about the Town may
give you a peaceable hearing, yet, assure your selves, there are multitudes who
would think you malicious and them injured: especially him who you first
described; he is the very Withers of the City: they have bought more Editions
of his Works then would serve to lay under all their Pies at the Lord Mayor's
Christmas. When his famous Poem first came out in the year 1660, I have seen
them reading it in the midst of Change-time; nay so vehement they were at it,
that they lost their b^^rgain by the Candles ends: but what will you say, if he
has been received amongst the great Ones? I can assure you he is, this day, the
envy of a great person, who is Lord in the Art of Quibbling; and who does not
take it well, that any man should intrude so far into his Province. All I would
wish, replied Crites, is, that they who love his Writings, may still admire
him, and his fellow Poet: qui Bavium non odit, etc. is curse sufficient. And
farther, added Lisideius, I believe there is no man who writes well, but would
think himself very hardly dealt with, if their Admirers should praise any thing
of his: Nam quos contemnimus eorum quoque lauds contemnimus. There are so few
who write well in this Age, said Crites, that methinks any praises should be
welcome; they neither rise to the dignity of the last Age, nor to any of the
Ancients; and we may cry out the Writers of this time, with more reason than
Petronius of his, Pace v^^stra licea^^ dixisse, primi omnium ^^l^^quentiam
perdidistis: you have d^^bauched the true old Poetry so far, that Nature, which
is the soul of it, is not in any of your Writings.

If your quarrel (said Eugenius) to those who now write, be grounded only upon
your reverence to Antiquity, there is no man more ready to adore those great
Greeks and Romans than I am: but on the other side, I cannot think so
contemptibly of the Age I live in, or so dishonourably of my own Country, as
not to judge we equal the Ancients in most kinds of Poes^^e, and in some
surpass them; neither know I any reason why I may not be as zealous for the
Reputation of our Age, as we find the Ancient^^ themselves in reference to
those who lived before them. For you h^^ar your H^^race saying, Indignor
quidquam reprehendi, non quia crasse
Composi^^um, illepideve putetur, sed quia nuper.
And after, Si meliora dies, ut vina, poemata reddit,
S^^ire velim pretium chartis quotus arroget annus?


But I see I am engaging in a wide dispute, where the arguments are not like to
reach close on either side; for Poesy is of so large extent, and so many both
of the Ancients and Moderns have done well in all kinds of it, that, in citing
one against the other, we shall take up more time this Evening, than each man's
occasions will allow him: therefore I would ask Crite^^ to what part of Poesy
he would confine his Arguments, and whether he would defend the general cause
of the Ancients against the Moderns, or oppose any Age of the Moderns against
this of ours?

Crites a little while considering upon this Demand, told Eugenius he approved
his Propositions, and, if he pleased, he would limit their Dispute to
Dramatique Poesy; in which he thought it not difficult to prove, either that
the Ancients were superior to the Moderns, or the last Age to this of ours.

Eugenius was somewhat surpised, when he heard Crites make choice of that
Subject; For ought I see, said he, I have undertaken a harder Province than I
imagined; for though I never judged the Plays of the Greek or Roman Poets
comparable to ours; yet on the other side those we now see acted, come short of
many which were written in the last Age: but my comfort is if we are overcome,
it will be only by our own Countrymen: and if we yield to them in this one
part of Poesy, we more surpass them in all the other; for in the Epique or
Lyrique way it will be hard for them to show us one such amongst them, as we
have many now living, or who lately were so. They can produce nothing so
courtly writ, or which expresses so much the Conversation of a Gentleman, as
Sir John Suckling; nothing so even, sweet, and flowing as Mr. Waller; nothing
so Majestique, so correct as Sir John Denham; nothing so elevated, so copious,
and full of spirit, as Mr Cowley; as for the Italian, French, and Spanish
Plays, I can make it evident, that those who now write, surpass them; and that
the Drama is wholly ours.

All of them were thus far of Eugenius his opinion, that the sweetness of
English Verse was never understood or practiced by our Fathers; even Crites
himself did not much oppose it: and every one was willing to acknowledge how
much our Poesy is improved, by the happiness of some Writers yet living; who
first taught us to mould our thoughts into easy and significant words; to
retrench the superfluities of expression, and to make our Rhyme so properly a
part of the Verse, that it should never mis-lead the sense, but it self be led
and governed by it.

Eugenius was going to continue this Discourse, when Lisideius told him it was
necessary, before they proceeded further, to take a standing measure of their
Controversy; for how was it possible to be decided who writ the best Plays,
before we know what a play should be? but, this once agreed on by both Parties,
each might have recourse to it, either to prove his own advantages, or discover
the failings of his Adversary.

He had no sooner said this, but all desired the favor of him to give the
definition of a Play; and they were the more importunate, because neither
Aristotle, nor Horace, nor any other, who writ of that Subject, had ever done
it.

Lisideius, after some modest denials, at last confessed he had a rude Notion
of it; indeed rather a Description then a Definition: but which served to guide
him in his private thoughts, when he was to make a judgment of what others
writ: that he conceived a Play ought to be, A just and lively Image of Humane
Nature, representing its Passions and Humors, and the Changes of Fortune to
which it is subject; for the Delight and Instruction of Mankind.

This Definition, though Crites raised a Logical Objection against it; that it
was only a genere and fine, and so not altogether perfect; was yet well
received by the rest: and after they had given order to the Watermen to turn
their Barge, and row softly, that they might take the cool of the Evening in
their return; Crites, being desired by the Company to begin, spoke on behalf of
the Ancients, in this manner:

If Confidence presage a Victory, Eugenius, in his own opinion, has already
triumphed over the Ancients; nothing seems more easy to him, than to overcome
those whom it is our greatest praise to have imitated well: for we do not only
build upon their foundation; but by their modells. Dramatique Poesy had time
enough, reckoning from Thespis (who first invented it) to Aristophanes, to be
born, to grow up, and to flourish in Maturity. It has been observed of Arts and
Sciences, that in one and the same Century they have arrived to a great
perfection; and no wonder, since every Age has a kind of Universal Genius,
which inclines those that live in it to some particular Studies: the Work then
being pushed on by many hands, must of necessity go forward.

Is it no^^ evident, in these last hundred years (when the Study of Philosophy
has been the business of all the Virtuosi in Christendom) that almost a new
Nature has been revealed to us? that more errors of the School have been
detected, more useful Expe^^iments in Philosophy have been made, more Noble
Secrets in Optics, Medicine, Anatomy, Astronomy, discovered, than in all those
credulous and doting Ages from Aristotle to us? so true it is that nothing
spreads more fast than Science, when rightly and generally cultivated.

Add to this the more than common emulation that was in those times of writing
well; which though it be found in all Ages and all Persons that pretend to the
same Reputation; yet Poesy being then in more esteem than now it is, had
greater Honors decreed to the Professors of it; and consequently the Rivalship
was more high between them; they had Judges ordained to decide their Merit, and
Prizes to reward it: and Historians have been diligent to record of Eschylus,
Euripides, Sophocles, Lyc^^phron, and the rest of them, both who they were that
vanquished in these Wars of the Theater, and how often they were crowned: while
the Asian Kings, and Grecian Commonwealths scarce afforded them a Nobler
Subject then the unmanly Luxuries of a Debauched Court, or giddy Intrigues of a
Factious City. Alit aemulatio ingenia (says Paterculus) and nunc invidia, nunc
admiratio incitationem accendit: Emulation is the Spur of Wit, and sometimes
Envy, sometimes Admiration quickens our Endeavors.

But now since the Rewards of Honor are taken away, that Ver^^uous Emulation
is turned into direct Malice; yet so slothful, that it contents it self ^^o
condemn and cry down others, without attempting to do better: It Is a Reputation
too unprofitable, to take the necessary pains for it; yet wishing they had it,
is incitement enough to hinder others from it. And this, in short, Eugenius, is
the reason, why you have now so few good Poets; and so many severe Judges.
Certainly, to imitate the Ancients well, much labor and long study is
required: which pains, I have already shown, our Poets would want encouragement
to take, if yet they had ability to go through with it. Those Ancients have
been faithful Imitators and wise Observers of that Nature which is so torn and
ill represented in our Plays, they have handed down to us a perfect resemblance
of her; which we, like ill Copyers, neglecting to look on, have rendered
monstrous and disfigured. But, that you may know how much you are indebted to
those your Masters, and be ashamed to have so ill requited them: I must
remember you that all the Rules by which we practice the Drama at this day,
either such as relate to the justness and symmetry of the Plot; or the
Episodical Ornaments, such as Descriptions, Narrations, and other Beauties,
which are not essential to the Play; were delivered to us from the Observations
that Aristotle made, of those Poets, which either lived before him, or were his
Contemporaries: we have added nothing of our own, except we have the confidence
to say our wit is better; which none boast of in our Age, but such as
understand not theirs. Of that Book which Aristotle has left us (...), Horace
his Art of Poetry is an excellent Comment, and, I believe, restores to us that
Second Book of his concerning Comedy, which is wanting in him.

Out of these two has been extracted the Famous Rules which the French call,
Des Trois Vnitez^^, or, The Three Unities, which ought to be observed in every
Regular Play; namely, of Time, Place, and Action.

The unity of Time they comprehend in 24 hours, the compass of a Natural Day;
or as near it as can be contrived: and the reason of it is obvious to every
one, that the time of the feigned action, or fable of the Play, should be
proportioned as near as can be to the duration of that time in which it is
represented; since therefore all Plays are acted on the Theater in a space of
time much within the compass of 24 hours, that Play is to be thought the
nearest imitation of Nature, whose Plot or Action is confined within that time;
and, by the same Rule which concludes this general proportion of time, it
follows, that all the parts of it are to be equally subdivided; as namely, that
one act take not up the supposed time of half a day; which is out of proportion
to the rest: since the other four are then to be straightned within the compass
of the remaining half; for it is unnatural that one Act, which being spoke or
written, is not longer than the rest, should be supposed longer by the
Audience; it is therefore the Poets duty, to take care that no Act should be
imagined to exceed the time in which it is represented on the Stage; and that
the intervalls and inequalities of time be supposed to fall out between the
Acts.

This Rule of Time how well it has been observed by the Ancients, most of their
Plays will witness; you see them in their Tragedies (wherein to follow this
Rule, is certainly most difficult) from the very beginning of their Plays,
falling close into that part of the Story which they intend for the action or
principal object of it; leaving the former part to be delivered by Narration:
so that they set the Audience, as it were, at the Post where the Race is to be
concluded: and, saving them the tedious expectation of seeing the Poet set out
and ride the beginning of the Course) you behold him not, till he is in sight
of the Goal, and just upon you.

For the Second Unity, which is that of place, the Ancients meant by it, That
the Scene ought to be continued through the Play, in the same place where it
was laid in the beginning: for the Stage, on which it is represented, being but
one and the same place, it is unnatural to conceive it many; and those far
distant from one another. I will not deny but by the variation of painted
Scenes, the fancy (which in these cases will contribute to its own deceit) may
sometimes imagine it several places, with some appearance of probability; yet
it still carries the greater likelihood of truth, if those places be supposed
so near each other, as in the same Town or City; which may all be comprehended
under the larger Denomination of one place: for a greater distance will bear no
proportion to the shortness of time, which is allotted in the acting, to pass
from one of them to another; for the Observation of this, next to the Ancients,
the French are to be most commended. They tie themselves so strictly to the
unity of place, that you never see in any of their Plays, a Scene changed in
the middle of an Act: if the Act begins in a Garden, a Street, or Chamber, it is
ended in the same place; and that you may know it to be the same, the Stage is
so supplied with persons that it is never empty all the time: he that enters
the second has business with him who was on before; and before the second quits
the Stage, a third appears who has business with him.

This Corneil cal^^ La Liaison des Scenes, the continuity or joining of the
Scenes; and it is a good mark of a well contrived Play when all the Persons are
known to each other, and every one of them has some affairs with all the rest.

As for the third Unity which is that of Action, the Ancients meant no other by
it then what the Logicians do by their Finis, the end or scope of any action:
that which is the first in Intention, and last in Execution: now the Poet is to
aim at one great and complete action, to the carrying on of which all things in
his Play, even the very obstacles, are to be subservient; and the reason of
this is as evident as any of the former.

For two Actions equally labored and driven on by the Writer, would destroy
the unity of the Poem; it would be no longer one Play, but two: not but that
there may be many actions in a Play, as Ben. Johnson has observed in his
discoveries; but they must be all subservient to the great one, which our
language happily expresses in the name of under-plots: such as in Terences
Eunuch is the difference and reconcilement of Thais and Phaedria, which is not
the chief business of the Play, but promote* the marriage of Chaerea and
Chremes's Sister, principally intended by the Poet. There ought to be but one
action, says. Corneile, that is one complete action which leaves the mind of
the Audience in a full repose: But this cannot be brought to pass but by many
other imperfect ones which conduce to it, and hold the Audience in a delightful
suspense of what will be.

If by these Rules (to omit many other drawn from the Precepts and Practice of
the Ancients) we should judge our modern Plays; it is probable, that few of
them would endure the trial: that which should be the business of a day, takes
up in some of them an age; instead of one action they are the Epitomes of a
man's life; and for one spot of ground (which the Stage should represent) we are
sometimes in more Countries then the Map can show us.

But if we will allow the Ancients to have contrived well, we must acknowledge
them to have writ better; questionless we are deprived of a great stock of wit
in the loss of Menander among the Greek Poets, and of Ca^^cilius, Affranius and
Varius, among the Romans: we may guess of Menanders Excellency by the Plays of
Terence, who translated some of his, and yet wanted so much of him that he was
call^^d by C. C^^sar the Half- Menander, and of Varius, by the Testimonies of
Horace Martial, and Velleius Paterculus: It Is probable that these, could they
be recovered, would decide the controversy; but so long as Aristophanes in the
old Comedy, and Plautus in the new are extant; while the Tragedies of
Eurypid^^s, Sophocles, and Seneca are to be had, I can never see one of those
Plays which are now written, but it increases my admiration of the Ancients;
and yet I must acknowledge further, that to admire them as we ought, we should
understand them better then we do. Doubtless many things appear flat to us,
whose wit depended upon some custom or story which never came to our
knowledge, or perhaps upon some Criticism in their language, which being so
long dead, and only remaining in their Books, it is not possible they should
make us know it perfectly. To read Macrobius, explaining the propriety and
elegancy of many words in Virgil, which I had before passed over without
consideration, as common things, is enough to assure me that I ought to think
the same of Terence; and that in the purity of his style (which Tully so much
val^^ed that he ever carried his works about him) there is yet left in him
great room for admiration, if I knew but where to place it. In the mean time I
must desire you to take notice, that the greatest man of the last age (Ben.
Johnson) was willing to give place to them in all things: He was not only a
professed Imitator of Horace, but a learned Plag^^ary of all the others* you
^^rack him every where in their Snow: If Horace, Lucan, Petronius Arbiter,
Seneca, and Iuvenal, had their own from him, there are few serious thoughts
which are new in him; you will pardon me therefore if I presume he loved their
fashion when he wore their clothes. But since I have otherwise a great
veneration for him, and you, Eugenius, prefer him above all other Poets, I will
use no farther argument to you then his example: I will produce Father B^^n. to
you, dressed in all the ornaments and colors of the Ancients, you will need no
other guide to our Party if you follow him; and whether you consider the bad
Pl^^ys of our Age, or regard the good ones of the last, both the best and worst
of the Modern Poets will equally instruct you to esteem the Ancients.

Crites had no sooner left speaking, but Eug^^nius who waited with some
impatience for it, thus began:

I have observed in your Speech that the former part of it is convincing as to
what the Moderns have profitted by the rules of the Ancients, but in the latter
you are careful to conceal how much they have excelled them: we own all the
helps we have from them, and want neither veneration nor gratitude while we
acknowledge that to overcome them we must make use of the advant^^ges we have
received from them; but to these assistances we have joined our own industry;
for (had we s^^te down with* a dull imitation of them) we might then have lost
some what of the old perfection, but never acquired any that was new. We draw
not therefore after their lines, but those of Nature; and having the life
before us, besides the experience of all they knew, it is no wonder if we hit
some airs and features which they have miss^^d: I deny not what you urge of
Arts and Sciences, that they have flourished in some ages more then others; but
your instance in Philosophy makes for me: for if Natural Causes be more known
now then in the time of Aristotle, because more studied, it follows that Poesy
and other Arts may with the same pa^^ns arrive still nearer to perfection, and,
that granted, it will rest for you to prove that they wrought more perfect
images of humane life then we; which, seeing in your Discourse you have avoided
to make good, it shall now be my task to show you some part of their defects,
and some few Excellencies of the Moderns, and I think there is none among us
can imagine I do it enviously, or with purpose to detract from them; for what
interest of Fame or Profit can the living lose by the reputation of the dead?
on the other side, it is a great truth which Vell^^ius Paterculus affirms,
Audita visis libentius laudamus; and praesentia invidia, praeterita
admiration^^ prosequimur; and his nos obrui, illis instrui credimus: That
praise or censure is certainly the most sincere which unbrib'd posterity shall
give us.

Be pleased then in the first place to take notice, that the Greek Poesy,
which Crites has affirmed to have arrived to perfection in the Reign of the old
Comedy, was so far from it, that the distinction of it into Acts was not known
to them; or if it were, it is yet so darkly delivered to us that we cannot make
it out.

All we know of it is from the singing of their Chorus, and that too is so
uncertain that in some of their Plays we have reason to conjecture they sung
more then five times: Aristotle indeed divides the integral parts of a Play
into four: First, The Protasis or entrance, which gives light only to the
Characters of the persons, and proceeds very little into any part of the
action: 2ly, The Epitasis, or working up of the Plot where the Play grows
warmer: the design or action of it is drawing on, and you see something
promising that it will come to pass: Thirdly, the Catastasis, or Counterturn,
which destroys that expectation, imbroyles the action in new difficulties, and
leaves you far d^^stant from that hope in which it found you, as you may have
observed in a violent stream resisted by a narrow pass^^ge; it runs round to an
eddy, and carries back the waters with more swiftness then it brought them on:
Lastly, the Catastrophe, which the Grecians called (...), the French le
denouement, and we the discovery or unravelling of the Plot: there you see all
things settling again upon their first foundations, and the obstacles which
hindered the design or action of the Play once removed, it ends with that
resemblance of truth and nature, that the audience are satisfied with the
conduct of it. Thus this great man delivered to us the image of a Play, and I
must confess is so lively that from thence much light has been derived to the
forming it more perfectly into Acts and Scenes; but what poet first limited to
five the number of the Acts I know not; only we see it so firmly established
in the time of Horace, that he gives it for a rule in Comedy; Neu brevior
quinto, neu sit productior actu: So that you see The Grecians cannot be said to
have consummated this Art; writing rather by Entrances then by Acts, and having
rather a general indigested notion of a Play, then knowing how and where to
bestow the particular graces of it.

But since the Spaniards at this day allow but three Acts, which they call
Iornad^^s, to a Play; and the Italians in many of theirs follow them, when I
condemn the Ancients, I declare it is not altogether because they have not five
Acts (...) every Play, but because they have not confined themselves to one
certain number; it is building an House without a Model: and when they
succeeded in such undertakings, they ought to have sacrificed to Fortune, not
to the Muses.

Next, for the Plot, which Aristotle Called (...) and often (...), and from him
the Romans Fabula, it has already been judiciously observed by a late Writer,
that in their Tragedies it was only some Tale derived from Thebes or Troy, or
at least some thing that happened in those two Ages; which was worn so thread
bare by the Pens of all the Epique Poets, and even by Tradition it self of the
Talkative Greeklings (as Ben Johnson calls them) that before it came upon the
Stage, it was already known to all the Audience: and the people so soon as ever
they ^^eard the Name of Oedipus, knew as well as the Poet, that he had killed
his Father by a mistake, and committed Incest with his Mother, before the Play;
that they were now to hear of a great Plague, an Oracle, and the Ghost of
Laius: so that they sat with a yawning kind of expectation, till he was to
come with his eyes pulled out, and speak a hundred or two of Verses in a
Tragic tone, in complaint of his misfortunes. But one Oedipus, Hercules, or
Medea, had been tolerable; poor people they escaped not so good cheap: they had
still the Chapon Bouille set before them, till their appetites were cloyed with
the same dish, and the Novelty being gone, the pleasure vanished: so that one
main end of Dramatique Poesy in its Definition, which was to cause Delight,
was of consequence destroyed.

In their Comedies, the Romans generally borrowed their Plots from the Greek
Poets; and theirs was commonly a little Girl stolen or wandered from her
Parents, brought back unknown to the same City, there got with child by some
lewd young fellow; who, by the help of his servant, cheats his father, and when
her time comes, to cry Juno Lucina fer opem; one or other sees a little Box or
Cabinet which was carried away with her, and so discovers her to her friends,
if some God do not prevent it, by coming down in a Machine, and take the thanks
of it to himself.

By the Plot you may guess much of the Characters of the Persons. An Old Father
that would willingly before he dies, see his Son well married; his Debauched
Son, kind in his Nature to his Wench, but miserably in want of Money; a Servant
or Slave, who has so much wit to strike in with him, and help to dupe his
Father, a Braggadochio Captain, a Parasite, and a Lady of Pleasure.

As for the poor honest Maid, whom all the Story is built upon, and who ought
to be one of the principal Actors in the Play, she is commonly a Mute in it:
She has the breeding of the Old Elizabeth way, for Maids to be seen and not to
be heard; and it is enough you know she is willing to be married, when the
Fifth Act requires it.

These are Plots built after the Italian Mode of Houses, you see through them
all at once; the Characters are indeed the Imitations of Nature, but so narrow
as if they had imitated only an Eye or an Hand, and did not dare to venture on
the lines of a Face, or the Proportion of a Body.

But in how straight a compass soever they have bounded their Plots and
Characters, we will pass it by, if they have regularly pursued them, and
perfectly observed those three Unities of Time, Place, and Action: the
knowledge of which you say is derived to us from them. But in the first place
give me leave to tell you, that the Unity of Place, how ever it might be
practiced by them, was never any of their Rules: We neither find it in
Aristotle, Horace, or any who have written of it, till in our age the French
Poets first made it a Precept of the Stage. The unity of time, even Terence
himself (who was the best and most regular of them) has neglected: His
Heautontimoroumenos or Self-Punisher takes up visibly two days; therefore,
says Scaliger, the two first Acts concluding the first day, were acted
overnight; the three last on the ensuing day: and Eurypides, in tying himself
to one day, has committed an absurdity never to be forgiven him: for in one of
his Tragedies he has made Theseus go from Athens to Thebes, which was about 40
English miles, under the walls of it to give battle, and appear victorious in
the next Act; and yet from the time of his departure to the return of the
Nuntius, who gives the relation of his Victory, Aethra and the Chorus have but
36 Verses; that is not for every Mile a Verse.

The like error is as evident in Terence his Eunuch, when Laches, the old man,
enters in a mistake the house of Thais, where betwixt his Exit and the entrance
of Pythias, who comes to give an ample relation of the Garboyles he has raised
within, Parmeno who was left upon the Stage, has not above five lines to speak:
C'est bien employe un temps si court, says the French Poet, who furnished me
with one of the observations: And almost all their Tragedies will afford us
examples of the like nature.

It Is true, they have kept the continuity, or as you called it, Liaison des
Scenes somewhat better: two do not perpetually come in together, talk, and go
out together; and other two succeed them, and do the same throughout the Act,
which the English call by the name of single Scenes; but the reason is, because
they have seldom above two or three Scenes, properly so called, in every act;
for it is to be accounted a new Scene, not every time the Stage is empty, but
every person who enters, though to others, makes it so; because he introduces a
new business: Now the Plots of their Plays being narrow, and the persons few,
one of their Acts was written in a less compass then one of our well wrought
Scenes, and yet they are often deficient even in this: To go no further then
Terence, you find in the Eunuch Antipho entering single in the midst of the
third Act, after Chremes and Pythias were gone off: In the same Play you have
likewise Dorias beginning the fourth Act alone; and after she has made a
relation of what was done at the Soldiers entertainment (which by the way was
very inartificial to do, because she was presumed to speak directly to the
Audience, and to acquaint them with what was necessary to be known, but yet
should have been so contrived by the Poet as to have been told by persons of
the Drama to one another, and so by them to have come to the knowledge of the
people) she quits the Stage, and Phoedria enters next, alone likewise: He also
gives you an account of himself, and of his returning from the Country in
Monologue, to which unnatural way of narration Terence is subject in all his
plays: In his Adelphi or Brothers, Syrus and Demea enter; after the Scene was
broken by the departure of Sostrata, Geta and Canthara; and indeed you can
scarce look into any of his Comedies, where you will not presently discover the
same interruption.

But as they have failed both in laying of their Plots, and managing of them,
swerving from the Rules of their own Art, by mis-representing Nature to us, in
which they have ill satisfied one intention of a Play, which was delight, so in
the instructive part they have erred worse: instead of punishing Vice and
rewarding (...), they have often shown a Prosperous Wickedness, and an Unhappy
Piety: They have set before us a bloody image of revenge in Mede^^, and given
her Dragons to convey her safe from punishment. A Prian^^ and Astyanax
murdered, and Cassandra ravished, and the lust and murder ending in the victory
of him that acted them: In short, there is no indecorum in any of our modern
Plays, which if I would excuse, I could not shadow with some Authority from
the Ancients.

And one farther note of them let me leave you: Tragedies and Comedies were not
writ then as they are now, promiscuously, by the same person; but he who found
his genius bending to the one, never attempted the other way. This is so plain,
that I need not instance to you, that Aristophanes, Plautus, Terence, never any
of them writ a Tragedy; Aeschylus, Eurypides, Sophocles and Seneca, never
meddled with Comedy; the Sock and Buskin were not worn by the same Poet: having
then so much care to excel in one kind, very little is to be pardoned them if
they miscarried in it; and this would lead me to the consideration of their
wit, had not Crites given me sufficient warning not to be too bold in my
judgment of it; because the languages being dead, and many of the Customs and
little accidents on which it depended, lost to us, we are not competent judges
of it. But though I grant that here and there we may miss the application of a
Proverb or a Custom, yet a thing well said will be wit in all Languages; and
though it may lose something in the Translation, yet, to him who reads it in
the Original, it is still the same; He has an Idea of its excellency, though it
cannot pass from his mind into any other expression or words then those in
which he finds it. When Phoedria -- in the Eunuch had a command from his
Mistress to be absent two days; and encouraging himself to go through with it,
said; Tandem ego non illa caream, si opus sit, vel totum triduum? Parmeno to
mock the softness of his Master, lifting up his hands and eyes, cries out as it
were in admiration; H^^i! universum triduum! the elegancy of which universum,
though it cannot be rendered in our language, yet leaves an impression of the
wit upon our souls: but this happens seldom in him, in Pla^^tus oftener; who is
infinitely too bold in his Metaphors and ^^oyning words; out of which many
times his wit is nothing, which questionless was one reason why Horace falls
upon him so severely in those Verses: Sed Proavi nostri Plautinos and numeros,
and
Laudavere sales, nimium patienter utrumque
Ne dicam stolide.


For Horace himself was cautious to obtrude a new word upon his Readers, and
makes custom and common use the best measure of receiving it into our writings.
Multa renascentur quae nunc cecidere, cadentq,
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet usus,
Quem penes, arbitrium est, and jus, and norma loquendi.


The not observing this Rule is that which the world has blamed in our Satyrist
Cleveland; to express a thing hard and unnaturally, is his new way of
Elocution: It Is true, no Poet but may sometimes use a Catachresis; Virgil does
it; Mistaque ridenti Colocasia fundet Acantho.

In his Eclogue of Pollio, and in his 7th Aen^^id. -- Mirantur and undae,
Miratur nemus, insuetum fulgentia long,
Scuta virum fluvio, pictasque innare carinas.


And Ovid once so modestly, that he asks leave to do it; Si verbo audacia detur
Haud metuam summi dixisse Palatia coeli.


Calling the Court of Jupiter by the name of Augustus his Palace, though in
another place he is more bold, where he says, Et longas visent Capitolia
pompas. But to do this always, and never be able to write a line without it,
though it may be admired by some few Pedants, will not pass upon those who know
that wit is best conveyed to us in the most easy language; and is most to be
admired when a great thought comes dressed in words so commonly received that it
is understood by the meanest apprehensions, as the best meat is the most easily
digested: but we cannot read a verse of Cleveland's without making a face at
it, as if every word were a Pill to swallow: he gives us many times a hard Nut
to break our Teeth, without a Kernel for our pains. So that there is this
difference betwixt his Satyrs and Doctor Donns, That the one gives us deep
thoughts in common language, though rough cadence; the other gives us common
thoughts in abstruse words: it is true, in some places his wit is independent of
his words, as in that of the Rebel Scot: Had Cain been Scot God would have
changed his doom;
Not forced him wander, but confined him home.


Si sic, omnia dixisset! This is wit in all languages: it is like Mercury, never
to be lost or killed; and so that other; For Beauty like White-powder makes no
noise,
And yet the silent Hypocrite destroys.


You see the last line is highly Metaphorical, but it is so soft and gentle,
that it does not shock us as we read it.

But, to return from whence I have digress'd, to the consideration of the
Ancients Writing and their Wit, (of which by this time you will grant us in
some measure to be fit judges,) Though I see many excellent thoughts in Seneca,
yet he, of them who had a Genius most proper for the Stage, was Ovid; he had
away of writing so fit to stir up a pleasing admiration and concernment, which
are the objects of a Tragedy, and to show the various movements of a Soul
combating betwixt two different Passions, that, had he lived in our age, or in
his own could have writ with our advantages, no man but must have yielded to
him; and therefore I am confident the Medea is none of his: for, though I
esteem it for the gravity and sentiousness of it, which he himself concludes to
be suitable to a Tragedy, Omne genus scripti gravitate Tragaedia vincit, yet it
moves not my soul enough to judge that he, who in the Epique way wrote things
so near the Drama, as the Story of Myrrha, of Caunus and Biblis, and the rest,
should stir up no more concernment where he most endeavored it. The
Masterpiece of Sencca I hold to be that Scene in the Troades, where Ulysses is
seeking for Astyanax to kill him; There you see the tenderness of a Mother, so
represented in Andromache, that it raises compassion to a high degree in the
Reader, and bears the nearest resemblance of any thing in their Tragedies to
the excellent Scenes of Passion in Shakespeare, or in Fletcher: for Love-Scenes
you will find few among them, their Tragique Poets dealt not with that soft
passion, but with Lust, Cruelty, Revenge, Ambition, and those bloody actions
they produced; which were more capable of raising horror then compassion in an
audience: leaving Love untoucht, whose gentleness would have tempered them,
which is the most frequent of all the passions, and which being the private
concernment of every person, is soothed by viewing its own image in a public
entertainment.

Among their Comedies, we find a Scene or two of tenderness, and that where you
would least expect it, in Plautus; but to speak generally, their Lovers say
little, when they see each other, but anima mea, vita mea; (...), as the women
in Iuvenal's time used to cry out in the fury of their kindness: then indeed to
speak sense were an offense. Any sudden gust of passion (as an ecstasy of love
in an unexpected meeting) cannot better be expressed than in a word and a sigh,
breaking one another. Nature is dumb on such occasions, and to make her speak,
would be to represent her unlike her self. But there are a thousand other
concernments of Lovers, as jealousies, complaints, contrivances and the like,
where not to open their minds at large to each other, were to be wanting to
their own love, and to the expectation of the Audience* who watch the movements
of their minds, as much as the changes of their fortunes. For the imaging of
the first is properly the work of a Poet, the latter he borrows of the
Historian.

Eugenius was proceeding in that part of his Discourse, when Crites interrupted
him. I see, said he, Eugenius and I are never like to have this Question
decided betwixt us; for he maintains the Moderns have acquired a new perfection
in writing, I can only grant they have altered the mode of it. Homer described
his Heroes men of great appetites, lovers of beef broild upon the coals, and
good fellows; contrary to the practice of the French Romances, whose Heroes
neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep, for love. Virgil makes Aeneas a bold Avower
of his own virtues. Sum pius Aeneas fama super aethera notus; which in the
civility of our Poets is the Character of a Fanfaron or Hector: for with us the
Knight takes occasion to walk out, or sleep, to avoid the vanity of telling his
own Story, which the trusty Squire is ever to perform for him. So in their Love
Scenes, of which Eugenius spoke last, the Ancients were more hearty, we more
talkative: they writ love as it was then the mode to make it, and I will grant
thus much to Eugenius, that perhaps one of their Poets, had he lived in our
Age. Si foret hoc nostrum fato delapsus in avum ( as Horace says of Lucilius)
he had altered many things; not that they were not as natural before, but that
he might accommodate himself to the Age he lived in: yet in the mean time we
are not to conclude any thing rashly against those great men; but preserve to
them the dignity of Masters, and give that honor to their memories, (Quos
libitina sacravit;) part of which we expect may be paid to us in future times.

This moderation of Crites, as it was pleasing to all the company, so it put an
end to that dispute; which, Eugenius, who seemed to have the better of the
Argument, would urge no farther: but Lisideius after he had acknowledged
himself of Eugenius his opinion concerning the Ancients; yet told him he had
forborne, till his Discourse were ended, to ask him why he preferred the English
Plays above those of other Nations? and whether we ought not to submit our
Stage to the exactness of o^^r next Neighbors?

Though, said Eugenius, I am at all times ready to defend the honor of my
Country against the French, and to maintain, we are as well able to vanquish
them with our Pens as our Ancestors have been with their swords; yet, if you
please, added he, looking upon Neander, I will commit this cause to my friend's
management; his opinion of our Plays is the same with mine: and besides, there
is no reason, that Crites and I, who have now left the Stage, should, re-enter
so suddenly upon it; which is against the Laws of Comedy.

If the Question had been stated, replied Lysideius, who had writ best, the
French or English forty years ago, I should have been of your opinion, and
adjudg'd the honor to our own Nation; but since that time, (said he, (turning
toward Neander) we have been so long together bad Englishmen, that we had not
leisure to be good Poets; Beaumont Fletcher, and Johnson (who were only
capable of bringing us to that degree of perfection which we have) were just
then leaving the world; as if in an Age of so much horror, wit and those milder
studies of humanity, had no farther business among us. But the Muses, who ever
follow Peace, went to plant in another Country; it was then that the great
(ardinal of Richlieu began to take them into his protection; and that, by his
encouragement, Corneil and some other Frenchmen reformed their Theater, (which
before was as much below ours as it now surpasses it and the rest of Europe;)
but because Crites, in his Discourse for the Ancients, has prevented me, by
touching upon many Rules of the Stage, which the Moderns have borrowed from
them; I shall only, in short, demand of you, whether you are not convinced
that of all Nations the French have best observed them? In the unity of time
you find them so scrupulous, that it yet remains a dispute among their Poets,
whether the artificial day of twelve hours more or less, be not meant by
Aristotle, rather than the natural one of twenty four; and consequently whether
all Plays ought not to be reduced into that compass? This I can testify, that
in all their Drama's writ within these last 20 years and upwards, I have not
observed any that have extended the time to thirty hours: in the unity of place
they are full as scrupulous, for many of their Critics limit it to that very
spot of ground where the Play is supposed to begin; none of them exceed the
compass of the same Town or City.

The unity of Action in all their Plays is yet more conspicuous, for they do
not burden them with under-plots, as the English do; which is the reason why
many Scenes of our Tragi-comedies carry on a design that is nothing of kin to
the main Plot; and that we see two distinct webbs in a Play; like those in ill
wrought stuffs; and two actions, that is, two Plays carried on together, to the
confounding of the Audience; who, before they are warm in their concernments
for one part, are diverted to another; and by that means espouse the interest
of neither. From hence likewise it arises that the one half of our Actors are
not known to the other. They keep their distances as if they were Mountagues
and Capulets, and seldom begin an acquaintance till the last Scene of the Fifth
Act, when they are all to meet upon the Stage. There is no Theater in the world
has any thing so absurd as the English Tragi-comedie, it is a Drama of our own
invention, and the fashion of it is enough to proclaim it so; here a course of
mirth, there another of sadness and passion; a third of honor, and fourth a
Duel: Thus in two hours and a half we run through all the fits of Bedlam The
French affords you as much variety on the same day, but they do it not so
unseasonably, or mal a propos as we: Our Poets present you the Pl^^y and the
farce together; and our Stages still retain somewhat of the Original civility
of the Red-Bull; Atque ursum and pugiles media inter carmina poscunt.

The end of Tragedies or serious Plays, s^^yes Aristotle, is to beget
admiration, compassion, or concernment; but are not mirth and compassion things
incompatible? and is it not evident that the Poet must of necessity destroy the
former by intermingling of the latter? that is, he must ruin the sole end and
object of his Tragedy to introduce somewhat that is forced in, and is not of
the body of it: Would you not think that Physician mad, who having prescribed a
Purge, should immediately order you to take restringents upon it?

But to leave our Plays, and return to theirs, I have noted one great
advantage they have had in the Plotting of their Tragedies; that is, they are
always grounded upon some known History: according to that of Horace, Ex noto
fictum carmen sequar; and in that they have so imitated the Ancients that they
have surpassed them. For the Ancients, as was observed before, took for the
foundation of their Plays some Poetical Fiction, such as under that
consideration could move but little concernment in the Audience, because they
already knew the event of it. But the French goes farther; Atque ita mentitur;
sic veris falsae remiscet,
Primo ne medium, medio ne discrepet imum:


He so interweaves Truth with probable Fiction, that he puts a pleasing Fallacy
upon us; mends the intrigues of Fate, and dispenses with the severity of
History, to reward that virtue which has been rendered to us there unfortunate.
Sometimes the story has left the success so doubtful, that the Writer is free,
by the privilege of a Poet, to take that which of two or more relations will
best suit with his design: As for example, the death of Cyrus, whom Justin and
some others report to have perished in the Scythian war, but Xenophon affirms
to have died in his bed of extreme old age. Nay more, when the event is past
dispute, even then we are willing to be deceived, and the Poet, if he contrives
it with appearance of truth; has all the audience of his Party; at least during
the time his Play is acting: so naturally we are kind to virtue, when our own
interest is not in question, that we take it up as the general concernment of
Mankind. On the other side, if you consider the Historical Plays of
Shakespeare, they are rather so many Chronicles of Kings, or the business many
times of thirty or forty years, crampt into a representation of two hours and a
half, which is not to imitate or paint Nature, but rather to draw her in
miniature, to take her in little; to look upon her through the wrong end of a
Perspective, and receive her Images not only much less, but infinitely more
imperfect then the life: this, instead of making a Play delightful, renders it
ridiculous. Quodcunque ostendis mihi sic, incredulus odi.

For the Spirit of man cannot be satisfied but with truth, or at least
verisimility; and a Poem is to contain, if not (...), yet (...), as one of the
Greek Poets has expressed it.

Another thing in which the French differ from us and from the Spaniards, is,
that they do not embarass, or cumber themselves with too much Plot: they lonely
represent so much of a Story as will constitute one whole and great action
sufficient for a Play; we, who undertake more, do but multiply adventures;
which, not being produced from one another, as effects from causes, but barely
following, constitute many actions in the Drama, and consequently make it many
Plays.

But by pursuing close one argument, which is not cloyed with many turns, the
French have gained more liberty for verse, in which they write: they have
leisure to dwell upon a subject which deserves it; and to represent the
passions (which we have acknowledged to be the P^^ets work) without being
hurried from one thing to another, as we are in the Plays of Calderon, which
we have seen lately upon our Theaters, under the name of Spanish Plotts. I have
taken notice but of one Tragedy of ours, whose Plot has that uniformity and
unity of design in it which I have commended in the French* and that is Rollo,
or rather, under the name of Rollo, The Story of Bassianus and Geta in
Herodian, there indeed the Plot is neither large nor intricate, but just enough
to fill the minds of the Audience, not to cloy them. Besides, you see it
founded upon the truth of History, only the time of the action is not
reduceable to the strictness of the Rules; and you see in some places a little
farce mingled, which is below the dignity of the other parts; and in this all
our Poets are extremely peccant, even Ben. Johnson himself in Sejanus and
Catiline has given us this Oleo of a Play; this unnatural mixture of Comedy and
Tragedy, which to me sounds just as ridiculously as the History of David with
the merry humors of (...) In S^^janus you may take notice of the Scene betwixt
Livia and the physician, which is a pleasant Satyr upon the artificial helps
of beauty: In Catiline you may see the Parliament of Women; the little envies
of them to one another; and all that passes betwixt Curio and Fulvia: Scenes
admirable in their kind, but of an ill mingle with the rest.

But I return again to the French Writers; who, as I have said, do not burden
themselves too much with Plot, which has been reproached to them by an
ingenious person of our Nation as a fault, for he says they commonly make but
one person considerable in a Play; they dwell upon him, and his concernments,
while the rest of the persons are only subservient to set him off. If he
intends this by it, that there is one person in the Play who is of greater
dignity then the rest, he must tax, not only theirs, but those of the
Ancients, and which he would be loath to do, the best of ours; for it is
impossible but that one person must be more conspicuous in it then any other,
and consequently the greatest share in the action must devolve on him. We see
it so in the management of all affairs; even in the most equal Aristocracy, the
balance cannot be so justly poys'd, but some one will be superior to the
rest; either in parts, fortune, interest, or the consideration of some glorious
exploit; which will reduce the greatest part of business into his hands.

But, if he would have us to imagine that in exalting of one character the rest
of them are neglected, and that all of them have not some share or other in the
action of the Play, I desire him to produce any of Corneilles Tragedies,
wherein every person (like so many servants in a well governed Family) has not
some employment, and who is not necessary to the carrying on of the Plot, or at
least to your understanding it.

There are indeed some protatick persons in the Ancients, whom they make use of
in their Plays, either to hear, or give the Relation: but the French avoid
this with great address, making their narrations only to, or by such who are
some way interested in the main design. And now I am speaking of Relations, I
cannot take a fitter opportunity to add this (...) favor of the French, that
they often use them with better judgment and more a propos then the English do.
Not that I commend narrations in general, but there are two sorts of them, one
of those things which are antecedent to the Play, and are related to make the
conduct of it more clear to us, but, it is a fault to choose such subjects for
the Stage which will enforce us upon that Rock; because we see they are seldom
listened to by the Audience, and that is many times the ruin of the Play: for,
being once let pass without attention, the Audience can never recover
themselves to understand the Plot; and indeed it is somewhat unreasonable that
they should be put to so much trouble, as, that to comprehend what passes in
their sight, they must have recourse to what was done, perhaps, ten or twenty
years ago.

But there is another sort of Relations, that is, of things happening in the
Action of the Play, and supposed to be done behind the Scenes: and this is many
times both convenient and beautiful: for, by it, the French avoid the tumult,
which we are subject to in England, by representing Duells, Battles, and the
like; which renders our Stage too like the Theaters, where they fight Prizes.
For what is more ridiculous then to represent an Army with a Drum and five men
behind it; all which, the Hero of the other side is to drive in before him, or
to see a Duel fought, and one slain with two or three thrusts of the foyles,
which we know are so blunted, that we might give a man an hour to kill another
in good earnest with them.

I have observed that in all our Tragedies, the Audience cannot forbear
laughing when the Actors are to die; it is the most Comic part of the whole
Play. All passions may be lively represented on the Stage, if to the
well-writing of them the Actor supplies a good commanded voice, and limbs that
move easily, and without stifness; but there are many actions which can never
be imitated to a just height: dying especially is a thing which none but a
Roman Gladiator could naturally perform upon the Stage when he did not imitate
or represent, but naturally do it; and therefore it is better to omit the
representation of it.

The words of a good Writer which describe it lively, will make a deeper
impression of belief in us then all the Actor can persuade us to, when he seems
to fall dead before us; as a Poet in the description of a beautiful Garden, or
a Meadow, will please our imagination more then the place it self can please
our sight. Wh^^n we see death represented we are convinced it is but Fiction;
but when we hear it related, our eyes (the strongest witnesses) are wanting,
which might have undeceived us; and we are all willing to favor the slight
when the Poet does not too grossly impose upon us. They therefore who imagine
these relations would make no concernment in the Audience, are deceived, by
confounding them with the other, which are of things antecedent to the Play;
those are made often in cold blood (as I may say) to the audience; but these
are warmed with our concernments, which are before awakened in the Play. What
the Philosophers say of motion, that when it is once begun it continues of it
self, and will do so to Eternity without some stop put to it, is clearly true
on this occasion; the soul being already moved with the Characters and Fortunes
of those imaginary persons, continues going of its own accord, and we are no
more weary to hear what becomes of them when they are not on the Stage, then we
are to listen to the news of an absent Mistress. But it is objected, That if
one part of the Play may be related, then why not all? I answer, Some parts of
the action are more fit to be represented, some to be related. Corneille says
judiciously, that the Poet is not obliged to expose to view all particular
actions which conduce to the principal: he ought to select such of them to be
seen which will appear with the greatest beauty, either by the magnificence of
the show, or the vehemence of passions which they produce, or some other charm
which they have in them, and let the rest arrive to the audience by narration.
It Is a great mistake in us to believe the French present no part of the action
upon the Stage: every alteration or crossing of a design, every new sprung
passion, and turn of it, is a part of the action, and much the noblest, except
we conceive nothing to be action till they come to blows; as if the painting of
the Heroes mind were not more properly the Poets work then the strength of his
body. Nor does this any thing contradict the opinion of Horace, where he tells
us, Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus. --


For he says immediately after, -- Non tamen intus
Digna geri promise in (...), Multaque* tolles
Ex oculis, quae mox narret facundia pr^^sens.


Among which many he recounts some. Ne^^ pueros coram populo Medea trucidet,
Aut in avem Progne mutetur, Cadmus i^^ anguem, etc.


That is, those actions which by reason of their cruelty will cause aversion in
us, or by reason of their impossib^^ty unbelief, ought either wholly to be
avoided by a Poet, or only delivered by narration. To which, we may have leave
to add such as to avoid (...), (as was before hinted) or to reduce the Plot
into a more reasonable compass of time, or for defect of Beauty in them, are
rather to be related then presented to the eye. Examples of all these kinds are
frequent, not only among all the Ancients, but in the best* received of our
English Poets. We find Be^^. Johnson using them in his Magnetic Lady, where
one comes out from Dinner, and relates the quarrels and disorders of it to save
the undecent app^^aring of them on the Stage, and to abreviate the Story: and
thi^^ in express imitation of Terence, who had done the same before him in his
Eunuch, where Pythias makes the like relation of what had happened within at
the Soldiers entertainment. The relations likewise of Sejanus'^^ death, and
the prodigies before it are remakable; the one of which was hid from sight to
avoid the ^^orrou^^ and tumult of the representation; the other to shun the
introducing of things impossible to be believed. In that excellent Play the
King and no King, Fletcher goes yet farther; for the whole unravelling of the
Plot is done by narration in the fifth Act, after the manner of the Ancients;
and it moves great concernment in the Audience, though it be only a relation
of what was done many years before the Play. I could multiply other instances,
but these are sufficient to prove that there is no error in choosing a subject
which requires this sort of narrations; in the ill managing of them, there may.

But I find I have been too long in this discourse since the French have many
other excellencies not common to us, as that you never see any of their Plays
end with a conversion, or simple change of will, which is the ordinary way our
Poets use to end theirs. It shows little art in the conclusion of a Dramatick
Poem, when they who have hindered the felicity during the four Acts, desist
from it in the fifth without some powerful cause to take them off, and though I
deny not but such reasons may be found, yet it is a path that is cautiously to
be ^^rod, and the Poet is to be sure he convinces the Audience that the motive
is strong enough. As for example, the conversion of the Usurer in the Scornful
Lady, seems to me a little forced; for being an Usurer, which implies a lover
of Money to the highest degree of covetousness, (and such the Poet has
represented him) the account he gives for the sudden change is, that he has
been dup'd by the wild young fellow, which in reason might render him more
wary another time, and make him punish himself with harder fare and co^^rser
clothes to get it up again: but that he should look upon it as a judgment, and
so repent, we may expect to hear of in a Sermon, but I should never endure it
in a Play.

I pass by this; neither will I insist upon the care they take, that no person
after his first entrance shall ever appear, but the business which brings him
upon the Stage shall be evident* which, if observed, must needs render all the
events in the play more natural* for there you see the probability of every
accident, in the cause that produced it; and that which appears chance in the
Play, will seem so reasonable to you, that you will there find it almost
necessary; so that in the exits of their Actors you have a clear account of
their purpose and design in the next entrance. (though, if the Scene be well
wrought, the event will commonly deceive you) for there is nothing so absurd,
says Corneille, as for an Actor to leave the Stage, only because he has no
more to say.

I should now speak of the beauty of their Rhyme, and the just reason I have to
prefer that way of writing in Trag dies before ours in Blanck-verse; but
because it is partly received by us, and therefore not altogether peculiar to
them, I will say no more of it in relation to their Plays. For our own I doubt
not but it will exceedingly beautify them, and I can see but one reason why it
should not generally obtain, that is, because our Poets write so ill in it.
This indeed may prove a more prevailing argument then all others which are used
to destroy it, and therefore I am only troubled when great and judicious
Poets, and those who are acknowledged such, have writ or spoke against it; as
for others they are to be answered by that one sentence of an ancient Author.

Sed ut primo ad consequendos eos quos priores ducimus accendimur, ita ubi aut
praeteriri, aut aequari eos posse desperavimus, studium cum spe senescit: quod,
scilicet, assequi non potest, sequi desinit; praeteritoq, eo in quo eminere non
possumus, aliquid in quo nitamur conquirimus.

Lisideius concluded in this manner; and Neander after a little pause thus
answered him.

I shall grant Lisideius, without much dispute, a great part of what he has
urged against us, for I acknowledge the French contrive their Plots more
regularly, observe the Laws of Comedy, and decorum of the Stage (to speak
generally) with more exactness then the English. Farther I deny not but he has
taxed us justly in some irregularities of ours which he has mentioned; yet,
after all, I am of opinion that neither our faults nor their virtues are
considerable enough to place them above us.

For the lively imitation of Nature being in the definition of a Play, those
which best fulfill that law ought to be esteemed superior to the others. It Is
true, those beauties of the French-poesie are such as will raise perfection
higher where it is, but are not sufficient to give it where it is not: they are
indeed the Beauties of a Statue, but not of a Man, because not animated with
the Soul of Poesy, which is imitation of humor and passions: and this
Lisideius himself, or any other, however biased to their Party, cannot but
acknowledge, if he will either compare the humors of our Comedies, or the
Characters of our serious Plays with theirs. He that will look upon theirs
which have been written till these last ten years or thereabouts, will find it
an hard matter to pick out two or three passable humors amongst them.
Corneille himself, their Arch-Poet, what has he produced except the Lier, and
you know how it was cried up in France; but when it came upon the English
Stage, though well translated, and that part of Dorant acted to so much
advantage by Mr. Heart, as I am confident it never received in its own Country,
the most favorable to it would not put in competition with many of Fletchers
or Ben. Iohnsons. In the rest of Corneilles Comedies you have little humor; he
tells you himself his way is first to show two Lovers in good intelligence with
each other; in the working up of the Play to embroyle them by some mistake, and
in the latter end to clear it up.

But of late years de Molier^^, the younger Corneille, Quinault, and some
others, have been imitating of afar off the quick turns and graces of the
English Stage. They have mixed their serious Plays with mirth, like our
Tragicomedies since the death of Cardinal Richlieu, which Lisideius and many
others not observing, have commended that in them for a virtue which they
themselves no longer practice. Most of their new Plays are like some of ours,
derived from the Spanish Novells. There is scarce one of them without a vail,
and a trusty Diego, who drolls much afer the rate of the Adventures. But their
humors, if I may grace them with that name, are so thin sown that never above
one of them comes up in any Play: I dare take upon me to find more variety of
them in some one Play of Ben. Iohnsons then in all theirs together: as he who
has seen the Alchymist, the silent Woman, or Bartholmew- Fair, cannot but
acknowledge with me.

I grant the French have performed what was possible on the groundwork of the
Spanish Plays; what was pleasant before they have made regular; but there is
not above one good Play to be writ upon all those Plots; they are too much
alike to please often, which we need not the experience of our own Stage to
justify. As for their new way of mingling mirth with serious Plot I do not
with Lysideius condemn the thing, though I cannot approve their manner of doing
it. He tells us we cannot so speedily recollect our selves after a Scene of
great passion and concernment as to pass to another of mirth and humor, and to
enjoy it with any relish: but why should he imagine the soul of man more heavy
then his Senses? Does not the eye pass from an unpleasant object to a pleasant
in a much shorter time then is required to this? and does not the
unpleasantness of the first commend the beauty of the latter? The old Rule of
Logic might have convinced him, that contraries when placed near, set off each
other. A continued gravity keeps the spirit too much bent; we must refresh it
sometimes, as we bait upon a journey, that we may go on with greater ease. A
Scene of mirth mixed with. Tragedy has the same effect upon us which our music
has betwixt the Acts, and that we find a relief to us from the best Plots and
language of the Stage, if the discourses have been long. I must therefore have
stronger arguments ere I am convinced, that compassion and mirth in the same
subject destroy each other; and in the mean time cannot but conclude, to the
honor of our Nation, that we have invented, increased and perfected a more
pleasant way of writing for the Stage then was ever known to the Ancients or
Moderns of any Nation, which is Tragicomedie.

And this leads me to wonder why Lisideius and many others should cry up the
barrenness of the French Plots above the variety and copiousness of the
English. Their Plots are single, they carry on one design which is pushed
forward by all the Actors, every Scene in the Play contributing and moving
toward it: Ours, besides the main design, have under plots or by-concernments,
of less considerable Persons, and Intrigues, which are carried on with the
motion of the main Plot: just as they say the Orb of the fixed Stars, and those
of the Planets, though they have motions of their own, are whirled about by the
motion of the primum mobile, in which they are contained* that similitude
expresses much of the English Stage: for if contrary motions may be found in
Nature to agree; if a Planet can go East and West at the same time; one way by
virtue of his own motion, the other by the force of the first mover; it will
not be difficult to imagine how the under Plot, which is only different, not
contrary to the great design, may naturally be conducted along with it.

Eugenius has already shown us, from the confession of the French Poets, that
the Unity of Action is sufficiently preserved if all the imperfect actions of
the Play are conducing to the main design: but when those petty intrigues of a
Play are so ill ordered that they have no coherence with the other, I must
grant Lisideius has reason to tax that want of due connection; for Coordination
in a Play is as dangerous and unnatural as in a State. In the mean time he must
acknowledge our variety, if well ordered, will afford a greater pleasure to the
audience.

As for his other argument, that by pursuing one single Theme they gain an
advantage to express and work up the passions, I wish any example he could
bring from them would make it good: for I confess their verses are to me the
coldest I have ever read: Neither indeed is it possible for them, in the way
they take, so to express passion, as that the effects of it should appear in
the concernment of an Audience: their Speeches being so many declamations,
which tire us with the length; so that instead of persuading us to grieve for
their imaginary Heroes, we are concerned for our own trouble, as we are in the
tedious visits of bad company; we are in pain till they are gone. When the
French Stage came to be reformed by Cardinal Richelieu, those long Harangues
were introduced, to comply with the gravity of a Churchman. Look upon the Cinna
and the Pompey, they are not so properly to be called Plays, as long
discourses of reason of State: and Polieucte in matters of Religion is as
solemn as the long stops upon our Organs. Since that time it is grown into a
custom, and their Actors speak by the Hourglass, as our Parsons do* nay, they
account it the grace of their parts: and think themselves disparaged by the
Poet, if they may not twice or thrice in a Play entertain the Audience with a
Speech of an hundred or two hundred lines. I deny not but this may su^^e well
enough with the French; for as we, who are a more sullen people, come to be
diverted at our Plays; they who are of an ayery and gay temper come thither to
make themselves more serious: And this I conceive to be one reason why Comedy
is more pleasing to us, and Tragedies to them. But to speak generally, it
cannot be denied that short Speeches and Replies are more apt to move the
passions, and beget concernment in us then the other: for it is unnatural for
any one in a gust of passion to speak long together, or for another in the same
condition, to suffer him, without interruption. Grief and Passion are like
floods raised in little Brooks by a sudden rain; they are quickly up, and if
the concernment be powered unexpectedly in upon us, it overflows us: But a long
sober shower gives them leisure to run out as they came in, without troubling
the ordinary current. As for Comedy, Repartee is one of its chiefest graces;
the greatest pleasure of the Audience is a chase of wit kept up on both sides,
and swiftly managed. And this our forefathers, if not we, have had in Fletchers
Plays, to a much higher degree of perfection then the French Poets can arrive
at.

There is another part of Lisideius his Discourse, in which he has rather
excused our neighbors then commended them; that is, for aiming only to make
one person considerable in their Plays. It Is very true what he has urged, that
one character in all Plays, even without the Poets care, will have advantage
of all the others; and that the design of the whole Drama will chiefly depend
on it. But this hinders not that there may be more shining characters in the
Play: many persons of a second magnitude, nay, some so very near, so almost
equal to the first, that greatness may be opposed to greatness, and all the
persons be made considerable, not only by their quality, but their action.
It Is evident that the more the persons are, the greater will be the variety of
the Plot. If then the parts are managed so regularly that the beauty of the
whole be kept entire, and that the variety become not a perplexed and confused
mass of accidents, you will find it infinitely pleasing to be led in a
labyrinth of design, where you see some of your way before you, yet discern not
the end till you arrive at it. And that all this is practicable, I can produce
for examples many of our English Plays: as the Maids Tragedy, the Alchymist,
the Silent Woman; I was going to have named the Fox, but that the unity of
design seems not exactly observed in it; for there appears two actions in the
Play; the first naturally ending with the fourth Act; the second forced from it
in the fifth: which yet is the less to be condemned in him, because the
disguise of Volpone, though it suited not with his character as a crafty or
covetous person, agreed well enough with that of a voluptuary: and by it the
Poet gained the end he aimed at, the punishment of Vice, and the reward of
Virtue, which that disguise produced. So that to judge equally of it, it was an
excellent fifth Act, but not so naturally proceeding from the former.

But to leave this, and pass to the latter part of Lisideius his discourse,
which concerns relations, I must acknowledge with him, that the French have
reason when they hide that part of the action which would occasion too much
tumult upon the Stage, and choose rather to have it made known by narration to
the Audience. Farther I think it very convenient, for the reasons he has given,
that all incredible actions were removed; but, whither custom has so
insinuated it self into our Countrymen, or nature has so formed them to
fierceness, I know not; but they will scarcely suffer combats and other objects
of horror to be taken from them. And indeed, the indecency of tumults is all
which can be objected against fighting* For why may not our imagination as well
suffer it self to be deluded with the probability of it, as with any other
thing in the Play? For my part, I can with as great ease persuade my self that
the blows which are struck are given in good earnest, as I can, that they who
strike them are Kings or Princes, or those persons which they represent. For
objects of incredibility I would be satisfied from Lisideius, whether we have
any so removed from all appearance of truth as are those of Corneilles
Andromede? A Play which has been frequented the most of any he has writ? If the
Perseus, or the Son of an Heathen God, the Pegasus and the Monster were not
capable to choke a strong belief, let him blame any representation of ours
hereafter. Those indeed were objects of delight; yet the reason is the same as
to the probability: for he makes it not a Balletteor Masque, but a Play, which
is to resemble truth. But for death, that it ought not to be represented, I
have besides the Arguments alleged by Lisideius, the authority of Ben*
Johnson, who has fo^^born it in his Tragedies; for both the death of Sejanus
and Catilin^^ are related: though in the latter I cannot but observe one
irregularity of that great Poet: he has removed the Scene in the same Act, from
Rome to Catiline's Army, and from thence again to Rome; and besides, has
allowed a very inconsiderable time, after Catilines Speech, for the striking of
the battle, and the return of Petreius, who is to relate the event of it to the
Senate: which I should not animadvert upon him, who was otherwise a painful
observer of (...), or the decorum of the Stage, if he had not used extreme
severity in his judgment upon the incomparable Shakespeare for the same fault.
To conclude on this subject of Relations, if we are to be blamed for showing
too much of the action, the French are as faulty for discovering too little of
it: a mean betwixt both should be observed by every judicious Writer, so as the
audience may neither be left unsatisfied by not seeing what is beautiful, or
shocked by beholding what is either incredible or undecent. I hope I have
already proved in this discourse, that though we are not altogether so punctual
as the French, in observing the laws of Comedy; yet our errors are so few,
and little, and those things wherein we excel them so considerable, that we
ought of right to be preferred before them. But what will Lisideius say if they
themselves acknowledge they are too strictly ti'd up by those laws, for
breaking which he has blamed the English? I will allege Corneille's words, as
I find them in the end of his Discourse of the three Unities; Il est facile aux
speculatifs d'estre severes, etc. It Is easy for speculative persons to judge
severely; but if they would produce to public view ten or twelve pieces of
this nature, they would perhaps give more latitude to the Rules then I have
done, when by experience they had known how much we are bound up and
constrained by them, and how many beauties of the Stage they banished from it.
To illustrate a little what he has said, by their ^^ervile observations of the
unities of time and place, and integrity of Scenes, they have brought upon
themselves that dearth of Plot, and narrowness of Imagination, which may be
observed in all their Plays. How many beautiful accidents might naturally
happen in two or three days, which cannot arrive with any probability in the
compass of 24 hours? There is time to be allowed also for maturity of design,
which amongst great and prudent persons, such as are often represented in
Tragedy, cannot, with any likelihood of truth, be brought to pass at so short a
warning. Farther, by tying themselves strictly to the unity of place, and
unbroken Scenes, they are forced many times to omit some beauties which cannot
be shown where the Act began; but might, if the Scene were interrupted, and the
Stage cleared for the persons to enter in another place; and therefore the
French Poets are often forced upon absurdities: for if the Act begins in a
chamber all the persons in the Play must have some business or other to come
thither, or else they are not to be shown that Act, and sometimes their
characters are very unfitting to appear there; As, suppose it were the Kings
Bedchamber, yet the meanest man in the Tragedy must come and dispatch his
business there rather then in the Lobby or Courtyard (which is fitter for him)
for fear the Stage should be cleared, and the Scenes broken. Many times they
fall by it into a greater inconvenience; for they keep their Scenes unbroken,
and yet change the place; as in one of their newest Plays, where the Act
begins in the Street. There a Gentleman is to meet his Friend; he sees him with
his man, coming out from his Fathers house; they talk together, and the first
goes out: the second, who is a Lover, has made an appointment with his
Mistress; she appears at the window, and then we are to imagine the Scene lies
under it. This Gentleman is called away, and leaves his servant with his
Mistress: presently her Father is heard from within; the young Lady is afraid
the Servingman should be discovered, and thrusts him in through a door which is
supposed to be her Closet. After this, the Father enters to the Daughter, and
now the Scene is in a House: for he is seeking from one room to another for
this poor Philipin, or French Diego, who is heard from within, drolling and
breaking many a miserable conceit upon his sad condition. In this ridiculous
manner the Play goes on, the Stage being never empty all the while: so that the
Street, the Window, the two Houses, and the Closet, are made to walk about, and
the Persons to stand still. Now what I beseech you is more easy than to write
a regular French Play, or more difficult then to write an irregular English
one, like those of Fletcher, or of Shakespeare.

If they content themselves as Corn^^ille did, with some flat design, which,
like an ill Riddle, is found out e're it be half proposed; such Plots we can
make every way regular as easily as they: but when e're they endeavor to rise
up to any quick turns and counterturns of Plot, as some of them have attempted,
since Corneilles Plays have been less in vogue, you see they write as
irregularly as we, though they cover it more speciously. Hence the reason is
perspicuous, why no French Plays, when translated, have, or ever can succeed
upon the English Stage. For, if you consider the Plots, our own are fuller of
variety, if the writing ours are more quick and fuller of spirit: and therefore
it is a strange mistake in those who decry the way of writing Plays in Verse,
as if the English therein imitated the French. We have borrowed nothing from
them; our Plots are weaved in English Loomes: we endeavor therein to follow
the variety and greatness of characters which are derived to us from
Shakespeare and Fletcher: the copiousness and well-knitting of the intrigues we
have from Johnson, and for the Verse it self we have English Presidents of
elder date then any of Corneilles's Plays: (not to name our old Comedies
before Shakespeare, which were all writ in verse of six feet, or Alexandrin's,
such as the French now use) I can show in Shakespeare, many Scenes of rhyme
together, and the like in Ben. Iohnsons Tragedi^^s: In Catiline and Sejanus
sometimes thirty or forty lines; I mean besides the Chorus, or the Monologues,
which by the way, showed Ben. no enemy to this way of writing, especially if
you look upon his sad Shepherd which goes sometimes upon rhyme, sometimes upon
blanck Verse, like an Horse who eases himself upon Trot and Amble. You find him
likewise commending Fletcher's Pastoral of the Faithful Shepherdess; which is
for the most part Rhyme, though not refined to that purity to which it has
since been brought: And these examples are enough to clear us from a servile
imitation of the French.

But to return from whence I have digress'd, I dare boldly affirm these two
things of the English Drama: First, That we have many Plays of ours as regular
as any of theirs; and which, besides, have more variety of Plot and Characters:
And secondly, that in most of the irregular Plays of Shakespeare or Fletcher
(for Ben. Iohnson's are for the most part regular) there is a more masculine
fancy and gre^^ter spirit in all the writing, then there is in any of the
French. I could produce even in Shakespeare's and Fletcher's Works, some Plays
which are almost exactly formed; as the Merry Wives of Windsor, and the
Scornful Lady: but because (generally speaking) Shakespeare, who writ first,
did not perfectly observe the Laws of Comedy, and Fletcher, who came nearer to
perfection, yet through carelessness made many faults; I will take the pattern
of a perfect Play from Ben. Johnson, who was a careful and learned observer of
the Dramatique Laws, and from all his Comedies I shall select The Silent
Woman; of which I will make a short Examen, according to those Rules which the
French observe.

As Neander was beginning to examine the Silent Woman, Eugenius, looking
earnestly upon him; I beseech you Neander, said he, gratify the company and me
in particular so far, as before you speak of the Play, to give us a Character
of the Author; and tell us franckly your opinion, whether you do not think all
Writers, both French and English, ought to give place to him?

I fear, replied Neander, That in obeying your commands I shall draw a little
envy upon my self. Besides, in performing them, it will be first necessary to
speak somewhat of Shakespeare and Fletcher, his Rivalls in Poesy; and one of
them, in my opinion, at least his equal, perhaps his superior.

To begin then with Shakespeare; he was the man who of all Moder^^, and perhaps
Ancient Poets, had the largest and most comprehensive soul. All the Images of
Nature were still present to him, and he drew them not laboriously, but
luckily: when he describes any thing, you more than see it, you feel it too.
Those who accuse him to have wanted learning, give him the greater
commendation: he was naturally learned; he needed not the spectacles of Books
to read Nature; he looked inwards, and found her there* I cannot say he is
every where alike; were he so, I should do him injury to compare him with the
greatest of Mankind. He is many times^^ flat, insipid; his Comic wit
degenerating into clenches, his serious swelling into Bombast. But he is
always great, when some great occasion is presented to him: no man can say he
ever had a fit subject for his wit, and did not then raise himself as high
above the rest of Poets, Quantum lent a solent, inter viberna cupressi.

The consideration of this made Mr. Hales of Eaton say, That there was no
subject of which any Poet ever writ, but he would produce it much better
treated of in Shakespeare; and however others are now generally preferred before
him, yet the Age wherein he lived, which had contemporaries with him, Fletcher
and Johnson never equaled them to him in their esteem: And in the last Kings
Court, when Ben's reputation was at highest, Sir John Suckling, and with him
the greater part of the Courtiers, set our Shakespeare far above him.

Beaumont and Fletcher of whom I am next to speak, had with the advantage of
Shakespeare's wit, which was their precedent, great natural gifts, improved by
study. Beaumont especially being so accurate a judge of Plays, that Been.
Johnson while he lived, submitted all his Writings to his Censure, and it is
thought, used his judgment in correcting, if not contriving all his Plots.
What value he had for him, appears by the Verses he writ to him; and therefore
I need speak no farther of it. The first Play which brought Fletcher and him in
esteem was their Philaster: for before that, they had written two or three very
unsuccessfully: as the like is reported of Ben. Johnson, before he writ Every
Man in his Humor. Their Plots were generally more regular then Shakespeare's,
especially those which were made before Beaumont's death; and they understood
and imitated the conversation of Gentlemen much better; whose wild
debaucheries, and quickness of wit in reparties, no Poet can ever paint as they
have done. This Humor of which Ben. Johnson derived from particular persons,
they made it not their business to describe: they represented all the passions
very lively, but above all, Love. I am apt to believe the English Language in
them arrived to its highest perfection; what words have since been taken in,
are rather superfluous then necessary. Their Plays are now the most pleasant
and frequent entertainments of the Stage; two of theirs being acted through the
year for one of Shakespheare's or Iohnsons: the reason is, because there is a
certain gayety in their Comedies, and Pathos in their more serious Plays,
which suits generally with all men's humors. Shakespeares language is likewise
a little obsolete, and Ben. Iohnson's wit comes short of theirs.

As for Johnson, to whose Character I am now arrived, if we look upon him while
he was himself, (for his last Plays were but his dotages) I think him the most
learned and judicious Writer which any Theater ever had. He was a most severe
Judge of himself as well as others. One cannot say he wanted wit, but rather
that he was frugal of it. In his works you find little to retrench or alter.
Wit and Language, and Humor also in some measure we had before him; but
something of Art was wanting to the Drama till he came. He managed his strength
to more advantage then any who preceded him. You seldom find him making Love
in any of his Scenes, or endeavoring to move the Passions; his genius was too
sullen and saturnine to do it gracefully, especially when he knew he came after
those who had performed both to such an height. Humor was his proper Sphere,
and in that he delighted most to represent Mechanic people. He was deeply
conversant in the Ancients, both Greek and Latin, and he borrowed boldly from
them: there is scarce a Poet or Historian among the Roman Authors of those
times whom he has not translated in Sejanus and Catiline. But he has done his
Robberies so openly, that one may see he fears not to be taxed by any Law. He
invades Authors like a Monarch, and what would be theft in other Poets, is
only victory in him. With the spoils of these Writers he so represents old
Rome to us, in its Rites, Ceremonies and Customs, that if one of their Poets
had written either of his Tragedies, we had seen less of it then in him. If
there was any fault in his Language, 'twas that he weaved it too closely and
laboriously in his serious Plays: perhaps too, he did a little to much
Romanize our Tongue, leaving the words which he translated almost as much
Latin as he found them: wherein though he learnedly followed the Idiom of
their language, he did not enough comply with ours. If I would compare him with
Shakespeare, I must acknowledge him the more correct Poet, but Shakespeare the
greater wit. Shakespeare was the Homer, or Father of our Dramatick Poets;
Johnson was the Virgil, the pattern of elaborate writing; I admire him, but I
love Shakespeare. To conclude of him, as he has given us the most correct
Plays, so in the precepts which he has laid down in his Discoveries, we have
as many and profitable Rules for perfecting the Stage as any wherewith the
French can furnish us.

Having thus spoken of the Author, I proceed to the examination of his Comedy,
The Silent Woman.

Examen of the Silent Woman.
To begin first with the length of the Action, it is so far from exceeding the
compass of a Natural day, that it takes not up an Artificial one. It Is all
included in the limits of three hours and an half, which is no more than is
required for the presentment on the Stage. A beauty perhaps not much observed;
if it had, we should not have looked upon the Spanish Translation of five hours
with so much wonder. The Scene of it is laid in London; the latitude of place
is almost as little as you can imagine: for it lies all within the compass of
two Houses, and after the first Act, in one. The continuity of Scenes is
observed more than in any of our Plays, excepting his own Fox and Alchymist.
They are not broken above twice or thrice at most in the whole Comedy, and in
the two best of Corneille's Plays, the Cid and Cinna, they are interrupted
once apiece. The action of the Play is entirely one; the end or aim of which is
the settling Moroses's Estate on Dauphine. The Intrigue of it is the greatest
and most noble of any pure unmixed Comedy in any Language: you see in it many
persons of various characters and humors, and all delightful: As first,
Morose, or an old Man, to whom all noise but his own talking is offensive. Some
who would be thought Critics, say this humor of his is forced: but to remove
that objection, we may consider him first to be naturally of a delicate
hearing, as many are to whom all sharp sounds are unpleasant; and secondly, we
may attribute much of it to the peevishness of his Age, or the wayward
authority of an old man in his own house, where he may make himself obeyed; and
this the Poet seems to allude to in his name Morose. Besides this, I am assured
from diverse persons, that Been. Johnson was actually acquainted with such a
man, one altogether as ridiculous as he is here represented. Others say it is
not enough to find one man of such an humor; it must be common to more, and
the more common the more natural. To prove this, they instance in the best of
Comical Characters, Falstaff: There are many men resembling him; Old, Fat,
Merry, Cowardly, Drunken, Amorous, Vain, and Lying: But to convince these
people, I need but tell them, that humor is the ridiculous extravagance of
conversation, wherein one man differs from all others. If then it be common, or
communicated to many, how differs it from other men's? or what indeed causes it
to be ridiculous so much as the singularity of it? As for Falstaff, he is not
properly one humor, but a Miscellany of Humors or Images, drawn from so many
several men; that wherein he is singular in his wit, or those things he says,
praeter expectatum, unexpected by the Audience; his quick evasions when you
imagine him surpised, which as they are extremely diverting of themselves, so
receive a great addition from his person; for the very sight of such an
unwieldy old debauched fellow is a Comedy alone. And here having a place so
proper for it I cannot but enlarge somewhat upon this subject of humor into
which I am fallen. The Ancients had little of it in their Comedies; for the
(...), of the old Comedy, of which Aristophanes was chief, was not so much to
imitate a man, as to make the people laugh at some odd conceit, which had
commonly somewhat of unnatural or obscene in it. Thus when you see Socrates
brought upon the Stage, you are not to imagine him made ridiculous by the
imitation of his actions, but rather by making him perform something very
unlike himself: something so childish and absurd, as by comparing it with the
gravity of the true Socrates, makes a ridiculous object for the Spectators. In
their new Comedy which succeeded, the Poets sought indeed to express the (...),
as in their Tragedies the (...) of Mankind. But this (...) contained only the
general Characters of men and manners; as old men, Lovers, Servingmen,
Courtizans, Parasites, and such other persons as we see in their Comedies; all
which they made alike: that is, one old man or Father; one Lover, one Courtizan
so like another, as if the first of them had begot the rest of every sort: Ex
homine hunc natum dicas. The same custom they observed likewise in their
Tragedies. As for the French, though they have the word humeur among them, yet
they have small use of it in their Comedies, or Farces; they being but ill
imitations of the ridiculum, or that which stirred up laughter in the old
Comedy. But among the English it is otherwise: where by humor is meant some
extravagant habit, passion, or affection; particular (as I said before) to some
one person: by the oddness of which, he is immediately distinguished from the
rest of men; which being lively and naturally represented, most frequently
begets that malicious pleasure in the Audience which is testified by laughter:
as all things which are deviations from common customs are ever the aptest to
produce it: though by the way this laughter is only accidental, as the person
represented is Fantastic or Bizarre, but pleasure is essential to it, as the
imitation of what is natural. The description of these humors, drawn from the
knowledge and observation of particular persons, was the peculiar genius and
talent of Ben. Johnson; To whose Play I now return.

Besides Morose, there are at least 9 or 10 different Characters and humors in
the Silent Woman, all which persons have several concernments of their own, yet
are all used by the Poet, to the conducting of the main design to perfection. I
shall not waste time in commending the writing of this Play, but I will give
you my opinion, that there is more wit and acuteness of Fancy in it then in any
of Ben. Iohnson's. Besides, that he has here described the conversation of
Gentlemen in the persons of True-Wit, and his Friends, with more gayety, air
and freedom, then in the rest of his Comedies. For the contrivance of the Plot
it is extreme elaborate, and yet withal easy; for the (...), or untying of it,
it is so admirable, that when it is done, no one of the Audience would think the
Poet could have missed it; and yet it was conceald so much before the last
Scene, that any other way would sooner have entered into your thoughts. But I
dare not take upon me to commend the Fabric of it, because it is altogether so
full of Art, that I must unravel every Scene in it to commend it as I ought.
And this excellent contrivance is still the more to be admired, because it is
Comedy where the persons are only of common rank, and their business private,
not elevated by passions or high concernments as in serious Plays. Here every
one is a proper Judge of all he sees; nothing is represented but that with
which he daily converse^^: so that by consequence all faults lie open to
discovery, and few are pardonable. It Is this which Horace has judiciously
observed: Creditur ex medio quia res arcessit habere
Sudoris minimum, sed habet Comedia tanto
Plus oneris, quanto veniae minus. --


But our Poet, who was not ignorant of these difficulties, h^^d prevailed
himself of all advantages; as he who designs a large leap takes his rise from
the highest ground. One of these advantages is that which Corneille has laid
down as the greatest which can arrive to any Poem, and which he himself could
never compass above thrice in all his Plays, viz. the making choice of some
signal and long expected day, whereon the action of the Play is to depend. This
day was that designed by Dauphine for the settling of his Uncles Estate upon
him; which to compass he contrives to marry him: that the marriage had been
plotted by him long beforehand is made evident by what he tells Truwit in the
second Act, that in one moment he had destroyed what he had been raising many
months.

There is another artifice of the Poet, which I cannot here omit, because by
the frequent practice of it in his Comedies, he has left it to us almost as a
Rule, that is, when he has any Character or humor wherein he would show a Coup
de Maistre, or his highest skill; he recommends it to your observation by a
pleasant description of it before the person first appears. Thus, in
Bartholomew Fair he gives you the Pictures of Numps and Cokes, and in this
those of Daw, Lafoole, Morose, and the Cellegiate Ladies* all which you hear
described before you see them. So that before they come upon the Stage you have
a longing expectation of them, which prepares you to receive them favorably;
and when they are there, even from their first appearance you are so far
acquainted with them, that nothing of their humor is lost to you.

I will observe yet one thing further of this admirable Plot; the business of
it rises in every Act. The second is greater then the first, the third then the
second, and so forward to the fifth. There too you see, till the very last
Scene, new difficulties arising to obstruct the action of the Play; and when
the Audience is brought into despair that the business can naturally be
effected, then, and not before, the discovery is made. But that the Poet might
entertain you with more variety all this whille, he reserves some new
Characters to show you, which he opens not till the second and third Act. In
the second, Morose, Daw, the Barber and Otter; in the third the Collegiat
Ladies: All which he moves afterward in by-walk, or under-Plots, as diversions
to the main design, least it should grow tedious, though they are still
naturally joined with it, and somewhere or other sub-servient to it. Thus, like
a skilful Chest-player, by little and little he draws out his men, and makes
his pawns of use to his greater persons.

If this Comedy, and some others of his, were translated into French Prose
(which would now be no wonder to them, since Moliere has lately given them
Plays out of Verse which have not displeased them) I believe the controversy
would soon be decided betwixt the two Nations, even making them the Judges. But
we need not call our Hero's to our aid; Be it spoken to the honor of the
English, our Nation can never want in any Age such who are able to dispute the
Empire of Wit with any people in the Universe. And though the fury of a Civil
War, and Power, for twenty years together, abandoned to a barbarous race of
men, Enemies of all good Learning, had buried the Muses under the ruins of
Monarchy; yet with the restoration of our happiness, we see revived Poesy
lifting up its head, and already shaking off the rubbish which lay so heavy on
it. We have seen since His Majesty's return, many Dramatick Poems which yield
not to those of any foreign Nation, and which deserve all Laurels but the
English. I will set aside Flattery and Envy: it cannot be denied but we have
had some little blemish either in the Plot or writing of all those Plays which
have been made within these seven years: (and perhaps there is no Nation in the
world so quick to discern them, or so difficult to pardon them, as ours:) yet
if we can persuade our selves to use the candor of that Poet, who (though the
most severe of Critics) has left us this caution by which to moderate our
censures; -- Vbi plura nitent in carmine non ego paucis offendar maculis.

If in consideration of their many and great beauties, we can wink at some
slight, and little imperfections; if we, I say, can be thus equ^^l to our
selves, I ask no favor from the French. And if I do not venture upon any
particular judgment of our late Plays, it is out of the consideration which an
Ancient Writer gives me; Vivorum, ut magna admiratio ita censura difficilis:
betwixt the extremes of admiration and malice, it is hard to judge uprightly of
the living. Only I think it may be permitted me to say, that as it is no
lessening to us to yield to some Plays, and those not many of our own Nation
in the last Age, so can it be no addition to pronounce of our present Poets
that they have far surpassed all the Ancients, and the Modern Writers of other
Countries.

This, my Lord, was the substance of what was then spoke on that occasion; and
Lisideius, I think was going to reply, when he was prevented thus by Crites: I
am confident, said he, the most material things that can be said, have been
already urged on either side; if they have not, I must beg of Lisideius that he
will defer his answer till another time: for I confess I have a joint quarrel
to you both, because you have concluded, without any reason given for it, that
Rhyme is proper for the Stage. I will not dispute ^^ow ancient it has been
among us to write this way; perhaps our Ancestors knew no better till
Shakespeare's time. I will grant it was not altogether le^^t by him, and that
Fletcher and Ben. Johnson used it frequently in their Pastorals, and sometimes
in other Plays. Farther, I will not argue whether we received it originally
from our own Countrymen, or from the French; for that is an inquiry of as
little benefit, as theirs who in the midst of the great Plague were not so
sollicitous to provide against it, as to know whether we had it from the
malignity of our own air, or by transportation from Holland. I have therefore
only to affirm, that it is not allowable in serious Plays; for Comedies I
find you already concluding with me. To prove this, I might satisfy my self to
tell you, how much in vain it is for you to strive against the stream of the
peoples inclination; the greatest part of which are preposses'd so much with
those excellent Plays of Shakespeare, Fletcher, and Ben. Johnson, (which have
been written our of Rhyme) that except you could bring them such as were
written better in it, and those too by persons of equal reputation with them,
it will be impossible for you to gain your cause with them, who will still be
judges. This it is to which in fine all your reasons must submit. The unanimous
consent of an Audience is so powerful, That even Julius Caesar (as Macrobius
reports of him) when he was perpetual Dictator, was not able to balance it on
the other side. But when Laberius, a Roman Knight, at his request contended in
the Mime with another Poet, he was forced to cry out, Etiam favente me victus
es Liberi. But I will not on this occasion, take the advantage of the greater
number, but only urge such reasons against Rhyme, as I find in the Writings of
those who have argued for the other way. First then I am of opinion, that Rhyme
is unnatural in a Play, because Dialogue there is presented as the effect of
sudden thought. For a Play is the imitation of Nature; and since no man,
without premeditation speaks in Rhyme, neither ought he to do it on the Stage;
this hinders not but the Fancy may be there elevated to an higher pitch of
thought then it is in ordinary discourse: for there is a probability that men
of excellent and quick parts may speak noble things ex tempore: but those
thoughts are never fettered, with the numbers or sound of Verse without study,
and therefore it cannot be but unnatural to present the most free way of
speaking, in that which is the most constrained. For this Reason, says
Aristotle, It Is best to write Tragedy in that kind of Verse which is the least
such, or which is nearest Prose: and this amongst the Ancients was the
Iambique, and with us is blank verse, or the measure of verse, kept exactly
without rhyme. These numbers therefore are fittest for a Play; the others for a
paper of Verses, or a Poem. Blank verse being as much below them as rhyme is
improper for the Drama. And if it be objected that neither are blank verses
made ex tempore, yet as nearest Nature, they are still to be preferred. But
there are two particular excep^^ons which many besides my self have had to
verse; by which it will appear yet more plainly, how improper it is in Plays.
And the first of them is grounded upon that very reason for which some have
commended Rhyme: they say the quickness of repartees in argumentative Scenes
receives an ornament from verse. Now what is more unreasonable then to imagine
that a man should not only light upon the Wit, but the Rhyme too upon the
sudden? This nicking of him who spoke before both in sound and measure, is so
great an happiness, that you must at least suppose the persons of your Play to
be born Poets, Arcades omnes and cantare pares and respondere parati* they must
have arrived to the degree of quicquid co^^abar dicere: to make Verses almost
whether they will or no: if they are any thing below this, it will look rather
like the design of two then the answer of one: it will appe^^r that your Actors
hold intelligence together, that they perform their tricks like
Fortune Tellers, by confederacy. The hand of Art will be too visible in it
against that maxim of all Professions; Ars est celar^^ artem* That it is the
greatest perfection of Art to keep it self undiscovered. Nor will it serve you
to object, that however you manage it, it is still known to be a Play; and
consequently the Dialogue of two persons understood to be the labor of one
Poet. For a Play is still an imitation of Nature; we know we are to be
deceived, and we desire to be so; but no man ever was deceived but with a
probability of truth, for who will suffer a gross lie to be fastened on him?
Thus we sufficiently understand that the Scenes which represent Cities and
Countries to us, are not really such, but only painted on boards and Canvass:
But shall that excuse the ill Painture or designment of them; Nay rather ought
they not to be labored with so much the more diligence and exactness to help
the imagination? since the mind of man doe^^ naturally tend to, and seek after
Truth; and therefore the nearer any thing comes to the imitation of it, the
more it pleases.

Thus, you see, your Rhyme is incapable of expressing the greatest thoughts
naturally, and the lowest it cannot with any grace: for what is more
unbefitting the Majesty of Verse, then to call a Servant, or bid a door be shut
in Rhyme? And yet this miserable necessity you are forced upon. But Verse, you
say, circumscribes a quick and luxuriant fancy, which would extend it self too
far on every subject, did not the labor which is required to well turned and
polished Rhyme, set bounds to it. Yet this Argument, if granted, would only
prove that we may write better in Verse, but not more naturally. Neither is it
able to evince that; for he who wants judgment to confine his fancy in blank
Verse, may want it as much in Rhyme; and he who has it will avoid errors in
both kinds. Latin verse was as great a confinement to the imagination of those
Poets, as Rhyme to ours: and yet you find Ovid saying too much on every
subject. Nescivit (says Seneca) quod been cessit r^^linquere: of which he
gives you one famous instance in his Description of the Deluge. Omnia pontus
erat, deerant quoque Litora Ponto.

Now all was Sea, Nor had that Sea a shore. Thus Ovid's fancy was not limited
by verse, and Virgil needed not verse to have bounded his.

In our own language we see B^^n. Iohnshon confining himself to what ought to
be said, even in the liberty of blank Verse; and yet Corneille, the most
judicious of the French Poets, is still varying the same sense an hundred
ways, and dwelling eternally upon the same subject, though confined by Rhyme.
Some other exceptions I have to Verse, but being these I have named are for the
most part already public; I conceive it reasonable they should first be
answered.

It concerns me less then any, said Neander, (seeing he had ended) to reply to
this Discourse; because when I should have proved that Verse may be natural in
Plays, yet I should always be ready to confess, that those which I have
written in this kind come short of that perfection which is required. Yet since
you are pleased I should undertake this Province, I will do it, though with all
imaginable respect and deference both to that person from whom you have
borrowed your strongest Arguments, and to whose judgment when I have said all,
I finally submit. But before I proceed to answer your objections, I must first
remember you, that I exclude all Comedy from my defense; and next that I deny
not but blank verse may be also used, and content my self only to assert, that
in serious Plays where the subject and characters are great, and the Plot
unmixed with mirth, which might allay or divert these conce^^nments which are
produced Rhyme is there as natural, and more effectual then blank Verse.

And now having laid down this as a foundation, to begin with Crites, I must
crave leave to tell him, that some of his Arguments against rhyme reach no
farther then from the faults or defects of ill rhyme, to conclude against the
use of it in general. May not I conclude against blank verse by the same
reason? If the words of some Poets who write in it, are either ill chose, or
ill placed (which makes not only rhyme, but all kind of verse in any language
unnatural;) Shall I, for their vicious affectation condemn those excellent
lines of Fletcher, which are written in that kind? Is there any thing in rhyme
more constrained than this line in blank verse? I Heaven invoke, and strong
resistance make, where you see both the clauses are placed unnaturally; that
is, contrary to the common way of speaking, and that without the excuse of a
rhyme to cause it: yet you would think me very ridiculous, if I should accuse
the stubbornness of blank Verse for this, and not rather the stifness of the
Poet. Therefore, Crites, you must either prove that words, though well chosen,
and duly placed, yet render not Rhyme natural in it self; or, that however
natural and easy the rhyme may be, yet it is not proper for a Play. If you
insist upon the former part, I would ask you what other conditions are required
to make Rhyme natural in it self, besides an election of apt words, and a right
disposing of them? For the due choice of your words expresses your sense
naturally, and the due placing them adapts the rhyme to it. If you object that
one verse may be made for the sake of another, though both the words and rhyme
be apt; I answer it cannot possibly so fall out; for either there is a
dependence of sense betwixt the first line and the second, or there is none: if
there be that connection, then in the natural position of the words, the latter
line must of necessity flow from the former: if there be no dependence, yet
still the due ordering of words makes the last line as natural in it self as
the other: so that the necessity of a rhyme never forces any but bad or lazy
Writers to say what they would not otherwise. It Is true, there is both care and
Art required to write in Verse; A good Poet never concludes upon the first
line, till he has sought out such a rhyme as may fit the sense, already
prepared to heighten the second: many times the close of the sense falls into
the middle of the next verse, or farther of, and he may often prevail himself
of the same advantages in English which Virgil had in Latin. he may break off
in the Hemystich, and begin another line: indeed, the not observing these two
last things, makes Plays which are writ in verse so tedious: for though, most
^^ommonly, the sense is to be confined to the Couplet, yet nothing that do*
perpetuo tenore fluere, run in the same channel, can please always. It Is like
the murmuring of a stream, which not varying in the fall, causes at first
attention, at last drowsiness. Variety of cadences is the best rule, the
greatest help to the Actors, and refreshment to the Audience.

If then Verse may be made natural in it self, how becomes it improper to a
Play? You say the Stage is the representation of Nature, and no man in ordinary
conversation speaks in rhyme. But you foresaw when you said this, that it might
be answered; neither does any man speak in blank verse, or in measure without
rhyme. Therefore you concluded, that which is nearest Nature is still to be
preferred. But you took no notice that rhyme might be made as natural as blank
verse, by the well placing of the words, etc. all the difference between them
when they are both correct, is the ^^ound in one, which the other wants; and if
so, the sweetness of it, and all the advantage resulting from it, which are
handled in the Preface to the Rival Ladies, will yet stand good. As for that
place of Aristotle, where he says Plays should be writ in that kind of Verse
which is nearest Prose; it makes little for you, blank verse being properly but
measured Prose. Now measure alone in any modern Language, does not constitute
verse; those of the Ancients in Greek and Latin, consisted in quantity of
words, and a determinate number of feet. But when, by the inundation of the
Goths and Vandals into Italy new Languages were brought in, and barbarous^^y
mingled with the Latin (of which the Italian, Spanish, French, and ours, (made
out of them and the Teutonick) are Dialects:) a new way of Poesy was
practiced; new, I say in those Countries, for in all probability it was that of
the Conquerours in their own Nations. This new way consisted in measure or
number of feet and rhyme. The sweetness of Rhyme, and observation of Accent,
supplying the place of quantity in words, which could neither exactly be
observed by those Barbarians who knew not the Rules of it, neither was it
suitable to their tongues as it had been to the Greek and Latin. No man is
tied in modern Poesy to observe any farther rule in the feet of his verse, but
that they be dissylables; whether Spondee, Trochee, or Iambique, it matters
not; only he is obliged to rhyme: Neither do the Spanish, French, Italian or
Germans acknowledge at all, or very rarely any such kind of Poesy as blank
verse amongst them. Therefore at most it is but a Poetic Prose, a Sermo
pedestris, and as such most fit for Comedies, where I acknowledge Rhyme to be
improper. Farther, as to that quotation of Aristotle, our Couplet Verses may be
rendered as near Prose as blank verse it self, by using those advantages I
lately named, as breaks in a Hemistick, or running the sense into another line,
thereby making Art and Order appear as loose and free as Nature: or not tying
our selves to Couplets strictly, we may use the benefit of the Pindarique way,
practiced in the Siege of Rhodes; where the numbers vary and the rhyme is
disposed careles^^y, and far from often chymeing. Neither is that other
advantage of the Ancients to be despised, of changing the kind of verse when
they please with the change of the Scene, or some new entrance; for they
confine not themselves always to Iambiques, but extend their liberty to all
Lyrique numbers, and sometimes, even to Hexameter. But I need not go so far to
prove that Rhyme, as it succeeds to all other offices of Greek and Latin
Verse, so especially to this of Plays, since the ^^ustome of all Nations at
this day confirms it* All the French, Italian and Spanish Tragedies are
generally writ in it, and sure the Universal consent of the most civilized
parts of the world, ought in this, as it does in other customs, include the
rest.

But perhaps you may tell me I have proposed such a way to make rhyme natural,
and consequently proper to Plays, as is unpracticable, and that I shall scarce
find six or eight lines together in any Play, where the words are so placed and
chosen as is required to make it natural. I answer, no Poet need constrain
himself at all times to it. It is enough he makes it his general Rule; for I
deny not but sometimes there may be a greatness in placing the words otherwise;
and sometimes they may sound better, sometimes also the variety it self is
excuse enough. But if, for the most part, the words be placed as they are in
the negligence of Prose, it is sufficient to denominate the way practicable;
for we esteem that to be such, which in the Trial oftener succeeds then misses.
And thus far you may find the practice made good in many Plays; where you do
not, remember still, that if you cannot find six natural Rhymes together, it
will be as hard for you to produce as many lines in blank Verse, even among the
greatest of our Poets, against which I cannot make some reasonable exception.

And this, Sir, calls to my remembrance the beginning of your discourse, where
you told us we should never find the Audience favorable to this kind of
writing, till we could produce as good Pl^^yes in Rhyme, as Ben. Johnson*
Fletcher, and Shakespeare, had writ out of it. But it is to raise envy to the
living, to compare them with the dead. They are honored, and almost adored by
us, as they deserve; neither do I know any so presumptuous of themselves as to
contend with them. Yet give me leave to say thus much, without injury to their
Ashes, that not only we shall never equal them, but they could never equal
themselves, were they to rise and write again. We acknowledge them our Fathers
in wit, but they have ruined their Estates themselves before they came to their
childrens hands. There is scarce an Humor, a Character, or any kind of Plot,
which they have not blown upon: all comes sullied or wasted to us: and were
they to entertain this Age, they could not make so plenteous treatments out of
such decayed Fortunes. This therefore will be a good Argument to us either not
to write at all, or to attempt some other way. There is no bays to be expected
in their Walks; Tentanda via est qu^^ me quoque possum tollere humo.

This way of writing in Verse, they have only left free to us; our age is
arrived to a perfection in it, which they never knew; and which (if we may
guess by what of theirs we have seen in Verse (as the Faithful Shepherdess, and
Sad Shepherd:) it is probable they never could have reached. For the Genius of
every Age is different; and though ours excel in this, I deny not but that to
imitate Nature in that perfection which they did in Prose, is a greater
commendation then to write in verse exactly. As for what you have added, that
the people are not generally inclined to like this way; if it were true, it
would be no wonder, that betwixt the shaking off an old habit, and the
introducing of a new, there should be difficulty. Do we not see them stick to
Hopkins and Sternholds Psalms, and forsake those of David, I mean Sandys his
Translation of them? If by the people you understand the multitude, the (...)
'^^is no matter what they think; they are sometimes in the right, sometimes in
the wong; their judgment is a mere Lottery. Est ubi plebs recte putat, est ubi
peccat. Horace says it of the vulgar, judging Poesy. But if you mean the
mixed audience of the populace, and the Noblesse, I dare confidently affirm
that a great part of the latter sort are already favorable to verse; and that
no serious Plays written since the Kings return have been more kindly received
by them, then the Seige of Rhodes, the Mustapha, the Indian Queen, and Indian
Emperor.

But I come now to the inference of your first Argument. You said the Dialogue
of Plays is presented as the effect of sudden thought, but no man speaks
suddenly, or ex tempore in Rhyme: And you inferred from thence, that Rhyme,
which you acknowledge to be proper to Epique Poesy cannot equally be proper to
Dramatick, unless we could suppose all men born so much more then Poets, that
verse should be made in them, not by them.

It has been formerly urged by you, and confessed by me, that since no man
spoke any kind of verse ex tempore, that which was nearest Nature was to be
preferred. I answer you therefore, by distinguishing betwixt what is nearest to
the nature of Comedy, which is the imitation of common persons and ordinary
speaking, and what is nearest the nature of a serious Play: this last is indeed
the representation of Nature, but it is Nature wrought up to an higher pitch.
The Plot, the Characters, the Wit, the Passions, the Descriptions, are all
exalted above the level of common converse, as high as the imagination of the
Poet can carry them, with proportion to verisimility. Tragedy we know is wont
to image to us the minds and fortunes of noble persons, and to portray these
exactly, Heroic Rhyme is nearest Nature, as being the noblest kind of modern
verse. Indignatur enim privatis, and prope socco.
Dignis carminibus narrari coena Thy^^stae. ( Says Horace.)


And in another place, Effutir^^ leveis indigna tragaedia versus.

Blank Verse is acknowledged to be too low for a Poem, nay more, for a paper of
verses; but if too low for an ordinary Sonnet, how much more for Tragedy, which
is by Aristotle in the dispute betwixt the Epique Poesy and the Dramatick; for
many reasons he there alleges ranck'd above it.

But setting this defense aside, your Argument is almost as strong against the
use of Rhyme in Poems as in Plays; for the Epique way is every where
interlac'd with Dialogue, or discoursive Scenes; and therefore you must either
grant Rhyme to be improper there, which is contrary to your assertion, or admit
it into Plays by the same title which you have given it to Poems. For though
Tragedy be justly preferred above the other, yet there is a great affinity
between them as may easily be discovered in that definition of a Play which
Lisideius g^^ve us. The Genus of them is the same, a just and lively Image of
humane nature, in its Actions, Passions, and traverses of Fortune: so is the
end, namely for the delight and benefit of Mankind. The Characters and Persons
are still the same, viz. the greatest of both ^^orts, only the manner of
acquainting us with those Actions, Passions and Fortunes is different. Tragedy
performs it viva voce, or by action, in Dialogue, wherein it excels the Epique
Poem which does it chiefly by narration, and therefore is not so lively an
Image of Humane Nature. However, the agreement betwixt them is such, that if
Rhyme be proper for one, it must be for the other. Verse it is true is not the
effect of sudden thought; but this hinders not that sudden thought may be
represented in verse, since those thoughts are such as must be higher then
Nature can raise them without premeditation, especially to a continuance of
them even out of verse, and consequently you cannot imagine them to have been
sudden either in the Poet, or the Actors. A Play, as I have said to be like
Nature, is to be set above it; as Statues which are placed on high are made
greater then the life, that they may descend to the sight in their just
proportion.

Perhaps I have insisted too long upon this objection; but the clearing of it
will make my stay shorter on the rest. You tell us Crites, that rhyme appears
most unnatural in repartees, or short replies: when he who answers, (it being
presumed he knew not what the other would say, yet) makes up that part of the
verse which was left incomplete, and supplies both the sound and measure of it.
This you say looks rather like the confederacy of two, then the answer of one.

This, I confess, is an objection which is in every ones mouth who loves not
rhyme: but suppose, I beseech you, the repartee were made only in blank verse,
might not part of the same argument be turned against you? for the measure is
as often supplied there as it is in Rhyme. The latter half of the Hemystich as
commonly made up, or a second line subjoined as a reply to the former* which
any one leaf in Iohnson's Plays will sufficiently clear to you. You will often
find in the Greek Tragedians, and in Seneca, that when a Scene grows up into
the warmth of repartees (which is the close fighting of it) the latter part of
the Trimeter is supplied by him who answers; and yet it was never observed as a
fault in them by any of the Ancient or Modern Critics. The case is the same in
our verse as it was in theirs; Rhyme to us being in lieu of quantity to them.
But if no latitude is to be allowed a Poet, you take from him not only his
license of quidlibet audendi, but you tie him up in a straighter compass then
you would a Philosopher. This is indeed Musas colere severiores; You would have
him follow Nature, but he must follow her on foot: you have dismounted him from
his Pegasus. But you tell us this supplying the last half of a verse, or
adjoining a whole second to the former, looks more like the design of two then
the answer of one. Suppose we acknowledge it: how comes this confederacy to be
more displeasing to you then in a Dance which is well contrived? You see there
the united design of many persons to make up one Figure: after they have
separated themselves in many petty divisions, they rejoyn one by one into a
gross: the confederacy is plain amongst them; for chance could never produce
any thing so beautiful, and yet there is nothing in it that shocks your fight.
I acknowledge the hand of Art appears in repartee, as of necessity it must in
all kind of verse. But there is also the quick and poynant brevity of it (which
is an high imitation of Nature in those sudden gusts of passion) to mingle with
it: and this joined with the cadency and sweetness of the Rhyme, leaves nothing
in the soul of the hearer to desire. It Is an Art which appears; but it appears
only like the shadowings of Painture, which being to cause the rounding of it,
cannot be absent, but while that is considered they are lost: so while we
attend to the other beauties of the matter, the care and labor of the Rhyme is
carried from us, or at least drowned in its own sweetness, as Bees are
sometimes buried in their Honey. When a Poet has found the repartee, the last
perfection he can add to it, is to put it into verse. However good the thought
may be; however apt the words in which it is couched, yet he finds himself at a
little unrest while Rhyme is wanting: he cannot leave it till that comes
naturally, and then is at ease, and sits down contented.

From Replies, which are the most elevated thoughts of Verse, you pass to the
most mean ones: those which are common with the lowest of household
conversation. In these, you say, the Majesty of Verse suffers. You instance in
the calling of a servant, or commanding a door to be shut in rhyme. This,
Crites, is a good observation of yours, but no argument: for it proves no more
but that such thoughts should be waved, as often as may be, by the address of
the Poet. But suppose they are necessary in the places where he uses them, yet
there is no need to put them into rhyme. He may place them in the beginning of
a Verse, and break it off, as unfit, when so debased for any other use: or
granting the worst, that they require more room then the Hemystich will allow;
yet still there is a ch^^ice to be made of the best words, and least vulgar
(provided they be apt) to exp^^ess such thoughts. Many have blamed Rhyme in
general, for this fault, when the Poet, with a little care, might have
redressed it. But they do it with no more justice, then if English Poesy
should be made ridiculous for the sake of the Water Poet's Rhymes. Our language
is noble, full and significant; and I know not why he who is Master of it may
not cloth ordinary things in it as decently as the Latin; if he use the same
diligence in his choice of words. Delectus verborum Origo est Eloquentiae.

It was the saying of Iusius Caesar, one so curious in his, that none of them
can be changed but for a worse. One would think unlock the door was a thing as
vulgar as could be spoken; and yet Seneca could make it sound high and lofty in
his Latin. -- Reserate clusos Regii posts Laris.

But I turn from this exception, both because it happens not above twice or
thrice in any Play that those vulgar thoughts are used; and then too (were
there no other Apology to be made, yet) the necessity of them (which is alike
in all kind of writing) may excuse them. Besides that the great eagerness and
praecipitation with which they are spoken makes us rather mind the substance
then the dress; that for which they are spoken, rather then what is spoke. For
they are always the effect of some hasty concernment, and something of
consequence depends upon them.

Thus, Crites, I have endeavored to answer your objections; it remains only
that I should vindicate an Argument for Verse, which you have gone about to
overthrow. It had formerly been said, that the easiness of blank verse, renders
the Poet too luxuriant* but that the labor of Rhyme bounds and circumscribes
an over-fruitful fancy, The sense there being commonly confined to the couplet,
and the words so ordered that the Rhyme naturally follows them, not they the
Rhyme. To this you answered, that it was no Argument to the question in hand,
for the dispute was not which way a man may write best; but which is most
proper for the subject on which he writes.

First, give me leave, Sir, to remember you that the Argument against which you
raised this objection, was only secondary: it was built upon this Hypothesis,
that to write in verse was proper for serious Plays. Which supposition being
granted (as it was briefly made out in that discourse, by showing how verse
might be made natural) it asserted, that this way of writing was an help to the
Poets judgment, by putting bounds to a wild overflowing Fancy. I think
therefore it will not be hard for me to make good what it was to prove: But you
add, that were this let pass, yet he who wants judgment in the liberty of his
fancy, may as well show the defect of it when he is confined to verse: for he
who has judgment will avoid errors, and he who has it not, will commit them in
all kinds of writing.

This Argument, as you have taken it from a most acute person, so I co^^fess it
carries much weight in it. But by using the word Judgment here indefinitely,
you seem to have put a fallacy upon us: I grant he who has Judgment, that is,
so profound, so strong, so infallible a judgment, that he needs no helps to
keep it always poised and upright, will commit no faults either in rhyme or
out of it. And on the other extreme, he who has a judgment so weak and crazed
that no helps can correct or amend it, shall write s^^urvily out of Rhyme, and
worse in it. But the first of these judgments is no where to be found, and the
latter is not fit to write at all. To speak therefore of judgment as it is in
the best Poets; they who have the greatest proportion of it, want other helps
than from it within. As for example* you would be loath to say, that he who was
endued with a sound judgment had no need of History, Geography, or Moral
Philosophy, to write correctly. Judgment is indeed the Master-workman in a
Play: but he requires many subordinate hands, many tools to his assistance. And
Verse I affirm to be one of these: It Is a Rule and line by which he keeps his
building compact and even, which otherwise lawless imagination would raise
either irregularly or loosly. At least if the Poet commits errors with this
help, he would make greater and more without it: it is (in short) a slow and
painful, but the surest kind of working. Ovid whom you accuse for luxuriancy
in Verse, had perhaps been farther guilty of it had he writ in Prose. And for
your instance of Ben. Johnson, who you say, writ exactly without the help of
Rhyme; you are to remember it is only an aid to a luxuriant Fancy, which his
was not: As he did not want imagination, so none ever said he had much to
spare. Neither was verse then refined so much to be an help to that Age as it^^
to ours. Thus then the second thoughts being usually the best, as receiving the
maturest digestion from judgment, and the last and most mature product of those
thoughts being artful and labored verse, it may well be inferred, that verse
is a great help to a luxuriant Fancy, and this is what that Argument which you
opposed was to evince.

Neander was pursuing this Discourse so eagerly, that Eugenius had called to
him twice or thrice ere he took notice that the Barge stood still, and that
they were at the foot of Somerset- Stairs, where they had appointed it to land.
The company were all sorry to separate so soon, though a great part of the
evening was already spent; and stood a while looking back upon the water, which
the Moon-beams played upon, and made it appear like floating quicksilver: at
last they went up through a crowd of French peo^^le who were merrily dancing in
the open air, and nothing concerned for the noise of Guns which had alarmed
the Town that afternoon. Walking thence together to the Piazze they parted
there; Eugenius and Ly^^idei^^s to some pleasant appointment they had made, and
Crites and Neander to their several Lodgings.

FINIS.

