THE ROYAL OAK, OR, AN Historical Description OF The Royal Progress,
wonderful Travels Miraculous Escapes, and Strange Accidents of his Sacred
Majesty CHARLES the II. Third Monarch of Great Britain. Wherein is observable,
and worth Public view,

I, His Majesty's strange and wonderful escape from Worcester fight, the
disrobing himself of his Princely Ornaments, the casting away his Chain of
Gold, and the cutting of his precious Hair and curled Locks, by the Lord Wilmot
for a Disguise.

II. The pursuing of his Royal Person by Oliver Cromwell, and his Bloodhounds,
and the manner how he escaped, making a hollow Oak His Royal Palace, within
four miles of Woolverhampton.

III. The memorable Travels of Mris Jane Lane and his Majesty, His riding
before her to make an escape, and his going in a Livery Cloak by the name of
William, servant to Mr. Lastel.

IIII. The Discourse betwixt his Majesty and the Cook-maid at the three Crowns
in Bristol:Her several Questions, where he was Born, and what Trade he was.
With the Kings answer, and the remarkable passages that happened in the
Kitchen upon the Maids employing the King to wind up the Jack.

V. The strange and wonderful escape of Mris Lane into France, from a Troop of
horse sent by Oliver to seiz on her, and plunder her House.

The Fourth Edition amplified and enlarged,

By John Danverd a Loyal Subject and Servant to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for J. J. 1660.

The Royal Oak, etc.
AFthe the great and fatal fight at Worcester, between his Majesty's forces
and the Cromwellion Rebels, the field being lost, not for want of courage, by
the Kings party, but by those numerous supplys, who served only like the
Turkish Asapi, to blunt the Royal Swords, so that their wearied Arms no longer
able to hold out, were forced to retreat, and at length (notwithstanding the
generous example of his Majesty, who performed things worth wonder) to a
disorderly fight; yet it is worthy of observation, that upon Cromwells advance
near the City, his Majesty in person and in the head of the Horse, drew out
against him, and that with so much valor and courage, that Cromwells own
Lifeguard, and the best of his old Soldiers, (who were thought almost
invincible) were forct to retire, till seconded by Fleetwood, Disbrow, Lambert,
and others, who over-powred the Kings forces, being above five to one, and so
loath was his Majesty to decline the field, that upon his earnest endeavors to
have his horse and foot rally, twice had he his Horse shot under him, and at
length was forced to shift for himself, and to provide for his own safety, and
so with some Nobles and servants, not without a great deal of difficulty,
forced to quit the field, and by the most frequented Roads that they could
possibly find out, rid to the Farmhouse of a noble Gentleman on the Borders of
Staffordshire, where they no sooner arrived but his Majesty disrobed himself of
his Princely ornaments and accouterments, and particularly of a chain of Gold,
or Spanner-string, worth 300l. sterling, the present of a Scottish Lad, which
he bestowed upon a servant of his there present: which done, for his farther
disguise, he proceeding to the cttuing off his hair, and the Cot affording
neither shears nor Sciffars to perform it, 't was by the Lord Wilmot cut off
with a knif. And now every one is commanded to shift for himself, and this poor
Prince left alone to the sole protection of the Almighty, he choosing none but
one friend to accompany him, with whom he wandered into a Wood, within four
miles (say some) of Woolverhampton, where finding a hollow Oak, he was now
content to make it his Palace, for here he fot some days concealed himself,
his Friend still toward night going out to provide him so^e refreshment during
this his solitary confinement. In the mean time the Lord Wilmot who was
commanded with the rest to seek his fortune, was by chance pursued by some
Soldiers, but meeting with a Country fellow formerly a Soldier in the Old
Kings Army, he was by him secured, though somewhat strangely, for he carries
him into a Malt-house belonging to Mrs. Jane Lane, and having no othet
convenient place to hide him in, clapped him under the Kilne, though there were
then some fire in it, and the Malt so oaking on the top. In the mean time, the
Soldiers then in pursuit of him, entered the house, and having made about three
quarters of an hours search every where else, but not at all suspecting the
Kilne, where they saw the fire burning, they departed, and the Lord Wilmot was
taken out of the Kilne almost ready to faint with the extremity of the heat.
The Countreyfellow having thus secured this Lord, acquaints Mrs. Lane with what
he had done, and she extteamly glad of it, gets him to her house, wherhin
conference she enquires of the Kings safety. The Lord Wilmot gives her the
former relation of his great miseries and Distress, which forces tears from the
tenderhearted Gentlewoman, she earnestly entreats him to take some course for
the finding out of his Majesty, and conducting him to her house, she being
resolved to venture het life, had she ten thousand, for the saying of his Royal
Majesty. The Lord Wilmot glad of so happy an opportunity to serve his Majesty,
and so great a probability of securing him, the next n^ght finds him out, and
conducts him from the Royal Oak to the house of Mrs. Jane Lane, where after a
large condoling of his hard fortune, consultation was had for a convenience for
his escape beyond sea, and at length it was concluded, that Bristol would be
the most convenient place to take shipping, That his Majesty should ride before
Nrs. Lane by the name of William servant to Nr. Lastel her father in law, who
was to go with them; and thus it was immediately given out, that Mr. Lastel and
Nrs. Lane were to take a Journey in the West, to visit some friends, and
shortly after they set forward. In this Journey there happened many accidents
worthy commemoration: and first, the Kings Majesty riding now as a servant to
one of the faithfullest of his Subjects, in a Livery cloak, though not without
that respect that durst be given to him; complains to Ms. Lane that the cloak
wearied him, whereupon she desires Mr. Lastels to carry it; and long they had
not rid so, but they met upon the Road her Brother in Law, who amongst others
questions demanded of her, if her Father must carry her man's cloak; to which
she readily answered, that it was so big that it often endange^ed the throwing
her off the horse, and that she had therefore desired him to carry it. The next
and most important accident of all was, tha coming to a town where they were to
pass through, there was a Troop of horse there to be quartered drawn up, which
caused some fear, but at length with resolution they passed on, and the Captain
taking them for honest travelers, made h^s Troop open to the right and left,
and so permitted them to pass. Another accident there happened, which one may
say was almost comical in this Tragedy, Ms. Lane coming into the Inn, leaves
his Majesty under the name of Willi. her servant in the Kitchen, with whom the
maid enters into discourse, she asks him where he was born, and what trade he
was, he answers at Brumingham, and a Naylors son, and after a great deal of
other discourse, the Jack being down, the maid desires him to wind it up, which
he willingly undertakes, but goes the wrong way about it, and prejudices it; at
which the maid grew angry asking him where he wat bred and telling him he was
the ve^yest clownish booby that ever she saw in all her life; which railing of
hers made his Majesty, notwithstanding his present misery, go out of the Room
smiling.

Mrs. Lane notwithstanding his Majesty went as her servant, yet had a greater
respect for him before others, pretended him her Tenant's son; but on the Road
she would always ask what he would have to dinner or supper, and what piece of
that he liked, which she would always be sure to get made ready, and give him,
he still sitting at the lower end of the table.

But to come to the end of their journey, being arrived at Bristol they lodged
at the house of a Noble gentleman there, and kinsman to Mr. Lastles: the King
finding it to be a house of great resort, feins himself sick of an Ague, and so
keeps his Chamber all the day, coming down only at nights; but one night coming
down and being somewhat cold craves a glass of Wine of the Butler, who carries
him into the Butlery; this Butler having before served his Majesty's Father in
the Wars, looking earnestly upon him, suspected him to be the King, so easily
will Majesty appear though ve l'd in the utmost disguises, and thereupon
pulling off his hat, told him very ceremoniously. That he might command what
Wine he pleased; of which the King took no notice, but drinking off his Wine
went out; yet the Butler could not satisfy his suspicion, but went up to Mr.
Lastels, and demanded of him how long he had had that servant, whreupon Mr.
Lastels was very angry at his boldness, in daring to ask him such a question,
but the Butler still persisted, and whispering told him that he believed it was
the King, whereupon Mr. Lastels seeing he was discovered, sends immediately for
his Majesty, whom he acquaints with the Butlets discovery of him with whom the
King was somewhat angry, in regard he did not first acquaint himself with his
supition, it not being impossible, but that Mr. Lastels might not have know him
to be the King; but upon pardon asked by the Butler, it was granted by the
King, and he afterward proved very instrumental in his Majesty's conveyance
through the Country.

But here at Bristol the chief design they had in hand failed them; for though
there were a little Barque lay there, judged most convenient for the business,
yet the Master would for no reward transport a single person, though he was so
honest as only to deny it and made no further search or inquiry concerning the
person, which might perhaps have tended to a discovery.

This design here failing, his Majesty desired to be brought some miles
Westward to the house of a worthy Gentlen an whom he knew to be a trusty
friend, where coming he finds the gentleman in the field with his servants,
having discovered himself to him, he was by him con^eyed to a convenient stand
till right, (having first taken leave of his true friends who had thus far
conducted him, with the danger of their Lives and Estates,) from whence he was
in the dusk conveyed into the house, and there carefully concealed for a week,
till such time as preparation could be made in some Western Port of a passage
for him; but coming afterward there where it was provided, chancing to dine
with a Parliament-Collonel, then there, he thought it the safer to loose the
benefit of that passage, then adventure to imbarque himself singly, which might
breed suspicion, and perhaps have been the means after so many deliverances to
have betrayed him into the hands of his enemies.

This passage then likewise failing him, he returned back to the place from
whence he come, and concealed himself three weeks longer, till in the end he
being resolved on, he by the assistance of Mr Ph. was conveyed through the moll
by-ways they could imagine to a gentlewomans house in Sussex, where he lay some
few days, till a person of true worth and honor made provision of a faithful
master, who who with a small Vessel wafted him to a small Creek in Normandy, to
the great content of the Kings sacred Majesty, and all his loyal Subjects, and
to the honor of the master, with the due reward, as in time may appear.

Perhaps the Reader may think it tedious, that I have given so large a relation
of his Majesty's from that fight at Worcester, but it was a work so full of
wonder and providence, and so many false relations there are abroad, that I
could do no less then recount all those miseries and hardships which this poor
Prince endured for the sakes of us his Subjects, and more would he willingly
have endured even death it self, to the redeeming of us from the tyranny and
oppression which we then groaned under.

But let him that shall look upon the several passages of his life, read them
over and over, consider the several difficulties he passed, the many dangers he
was in to be betrayed, the Country being up round about, the sum of money
set upon him to be paid those that betrayed him, which many hundreds out of
covetoesnesse made it their business to search for him, and they will confess
ingeniously, that God was never so merciful to any people as to us, in
delivering his Sacred Majesty out of the hands of his enemies, who breathed out
nothing but his death and destruction, that we may yet have hope to be a happy
Nation.

Within few days after this his Majesty's great and miraculous deliverance,
Some ill-affected persons gave notice to the usurping Tyrant Oliver Cromwell of
the escape of his Majesty by the privacy of Mris Jane Lane, he not knowing how
to satisfy his bloody intentions otherwise, gave command that a Troop of Hoise
should go and seize on her, in the mean time she having notice given by a
friend of hers at White Hall, immediately disguised her self, and through much
difficulty passed to Bristol, and so escaped into France. No sooner was she
gone, but the Troop of horse came a cording to the command of Oliver) plundered
net House, but to the great grief of that Arch Rebel the prey was gone before.

FINIS.

