Murder will out: OR, A clear and full Discovery that the Earl of ESSEX did
not Felloniously Murder himself, but was barbarously murdered by others: Both
by undeniable Circumstances, and positive Proofs.

By Coll. Danvers.

Reader,
THOU have here a Discovery of one of the most inhumane and barbarous Murders
that any Age or Story can parallel, especially if you consider the Person who,
the Place where, the manner how he was Murdered, and the Consequences of them
all.

1. The Person, it was the Earl of Essex, one of the greatest men in the three
Nations, the Son of the great Capell, who laid down his Life for the late King,
and who himself had sustained so many honorable and great Offices and
Employments in these Nations, filling up no less than a Vice-King-Ship, for
many years in the Neighbor Nation, and as he was great in eminent Loyalty,
excellent Qualifications, large Patrimony, and honorable Allies, so no less a
sincere Lover of his King and Country, and a zealous Assertor of the Protestant
Religion, and Interest against the cursed Machinations of the Popish Party,
which was therefore become his Crime, and rendered him so obnoxious.

2. The Place where he was Butchered, which was no other than in his Majesty's
Royal Prison and Palace, where (by design as it appears) he was brought the
better to fall a Sacrifice to his Enemies. Being first lodged in the
Lieutenants House, then removed to his Slaughterhouse Capt. Hawleys, and there
killed the day after.) Where being now the Kings Prisoner, and out of his own
defense, and for whom the King and Kingdom were respondent, as Sir Fran. Bacon
observes in Sir Tho. Overberries Case, in the E. of Somersets Trial, was a
thing that greatly aggravated the Fact, for certainly, says he, Sir Tho O. was
the first Man that was murdered in the Tower of London, save the Murder of
the two young Princes, by the appointment of Richard the 3. this being it seems
the second, with this further Aggravation, that it was done at the very instant
the K. himself was there in Person.

3. The manner how, viz. The Popish Conspirators (his mortal Enemies) having
thus gotten him within their reach, do by hired Cutthroat Villains and
Traitors, most barbarously and Treacherously surprise, assault, and bloodily
assassinate this great Worthy in his own Chamber; cutting his Throat, almost to
the cutting off of his Neck, and afterward by other Ruffians (and that against
the K. express Command) inhumanly drag, shamefully strip him, and basely expose
his naked Body to public view. And as tho this was not sufficient to satiate
their malice and Blood-thirstiness, thus to murder his Person, they proceed
(to the out-doing of Cain himself) to murder his Reputation, by charging their
horrid Guilt upon himself; making him the Fellonious Self-murtherer: And
pursuing to the utmost Revenge, Slaughter and Cruelty, any that should dare to
speak the Truth, or contradict the same.

4. And as for the dismal Consequences, (some whereof have direfully appeared)
which being unpossible to express, is left to every ones Consideration.

But he who makes Inquifition for Blood, who sees in secret, and brings to
light the hidden Works of Darkness, has by his Providence, greatly detected
the same, both as to Persons and things: Some Account whereof you have for your
satisfaction, in the following compendiou^ (...).

The Proofs both Circumstantial and Positive, that the E* of E* did not
Felloniously Murder himself, but was Barbarously Murdered by others.
1. THat he did not Murder himself you have evinced. 2. From the Improbalities
that he should do it. 3. From the Impossibilities that he could so do it.

2. That he was Murdered by others you have made good. 1. By undeniable
Circumstances. 2. By Positive Proofs offered.

1. That the E. of E. did not Murder himself, as the Inquest declares: appears.

1. From the Improbabilities that he should so do;

1. Because of that excellent sedate and well composed Natural temper he was
well known to be of, and free from such Melancholy and Frensical fits, which
might incline and expose him to such a mischief, what ever maliciously and
falsely had been said to the contrary.

2. Because of that grace and fear of God, he was so eminently endowed with,
which would secure him from such impiety.

3. Because of that abhorrency by Principle which he was well known to have of
such unnatural practices (whereof he could not speak without great emotion of
Spirit) what ever the better to color the Murder, and fix it upon him, had
heen most villanously reported, and spread abroad, to the contrary.

4. Because of the careful Provision he made for his own preservation, after he
came into the Tower fearing the worse, 1. By sending for his own Silver Vessel
to dress his Meat in by his own People. 2. By that store of all sorts of Wine,
he had ordered to be laid in for his own drinking. 3. By the direction he had
given to his Servant, to take Notes of my Lord Russels Trial, that very day for
his own use, all ample indications he designed self preservation; not self
destruction.

5. Because, as his Conscience was clear from any Treasonable Guilt, (whatever
to the contrary has most wickedly been suggested) so was he free from either
Legal Witnesses, or Conviction, there being no Bill of Indictment found against
him, as against others the day before, which might sufficiently secure him from
needless fears, or any such desperate course, tho had his zeal and affection to
his King, Country, and Religion, (whom he might apprehend to have been in
danger) transported him to any irregularity, his Fathers, as well as his own,
extraordinary merits, from the Crown; might well be supposed (from so grateful
and compassionate a Prince) would plead his Pardon, and free him from such
desperation.

6. Because of that entire Love and Friendship he bore to his most dear Friend
the Lord (...) which both in Honor, and Conscience* would forbid and deter
from such an Action, which must so necessarlly tend to the certain ruin and
destruction of his best Friend, and which fell out accordingly from the
sinister construction they made thereof.

7. Because of the previous notice given thereof in diverse places, which to be
sure he would never have done, had he designed any such thing.

2. From the Impossibilities that he could so do as the Inquest declares.

1. Because it was impossible that he at one cut (as the Verdict says) could
cut 4 Inches in depth, and 8 in length, because none can manage his hand, to
guide a Razor so to do at once, viz. From the left-side of the Neck-bone, to
the right.

2. Because it is impossible that with that French Razor, which was but 4
Inches and a half long, and without a Tongue (necessitating to take 2 Inches
and a half at least in his Hand) that he could with 2 Inches of such an
Instrument cut 4 or 5 Inches in depth and 8 or 9 in length.

3. Because it is impossible in Nature that when he had cut the left Jugular
and Windpipe to the Neck-bone (which let out so much of the Blood and Vitals)
that he could have either life or strength, to proceed to cut the other also,
as all skilful Chyrurgeons and Anatomists can demonstrate.

4. Because it was utterly impossible, that after he had locked himself into the
Closet, he could so cut his Throat as it was, and then open the Closet Door,
and fling the Bloody Razor out of the Chamber Window, at such a distance from
the Closet, and then get the Razor up again, and keep it in his hand (as some)
or fling it by him (as others) and all this after he was Dead, for he instantly
dyed says the Inquest, and none but himself in the Room say their Witnesses,
therefore it was impossible he could with that Razor so Murder himself. And
that the Bloody Razor was flung out of the Chamber Window, is made good by no
less then 10 Witnesses.

Thus have you some Grounds and Reasons (from the improbability and
impossibility of the thing) to clear his Innocence from the Horrid Fact, so
impudently charged upon him, and consequently the guilt of others, and which
may be sufficient to all wise Men, to detect the Murder, and enforce a review,
if no other Evidence could be produced: ten fold less, has done it, in other
Cases, it being so difficult many times to get light, and trace such Secret
hidden works of darkness, as Sir Fran. Bacon elegantly in Sir Tho. O. case
tells us, That wise men must take upon them in these Secret Caset, Solomon's
Spirit, that when there could be no Witnesses, Collected the Act by the
Affection, viz. When he used the Stratagem about dividing the Child, but this
you will find is not our case, providence having given us a larger provision as
you will further hear.

Secondly that he was Barbarcusly Murdered by others appears. 1. By the
undeniable Circumstances arising 1. From the previous Reports. 2. From the
corrupt and partial Proceedings of the Coroner and his Inquest. 3. From the
Conspirators Villainous ends. And 4. From the wicked Methods used to stifle it.

1. By the undeniable Circumstances arising,

1. From the many previous Reports which they had spread of his self Murder (a
Method the Papists have therefore taken (but the Policy thereof never
understood.) viz. When the stobbed H. the Fourth of France, burnt London,
assassinated Sir E. B. G. and murdered Hawly the Warder) of which, diverse
undeniable Proofs have been, and are ready to be produced, of such Reports, not
only in London, but 50. 60. 80. 90. 100. Miles off; in some places a day, in
some two days, in others (at a great distance) the very Day he was murdered:
And as most remarkable (as God would have it) all agreeing in the very manner
thereof, viz. Cutting his Throat in the Tower, At Andover, 60. Miles off, they
had the Report of his Cutting his Throat in the Tower the 11th. of July. which
was the first day of his Imprisonment there (for by reason of his late
Commitment, the Night before he lay at the French Lord Fevershams in
White Hall) which sufficiently discovers what they designed before hand, for if
this Report came from London, it must be before he was a Prisoner, at least in
the Tower, and two days before the thing was done.

2. From the irregular, corrupt, partial and unjust Proceedings of the Coronor
and his Inquest.

1. That one Farnham, said to be a Deputy Coroner, which the Law knows nothing
of, and to be sure a Legal Coroner he was not, Sir Thomas Stringer, the Steward
of the Tower, being the proper Officer, and accountable for that great Trust,
but this is the Tool who must be brought forth to do the Job.

2. That none of the Relations were summoned to attend the Inquest, which by
known Usage ought to have been.

3. That contrary to the known Custom and Usage, not only of our own, but other
Nations, as well as the Kings special and express Command, the Body was removed
from the Place and Posture it was said first to be found in, stripped, and
Clothes taken away, and Body and Rooms washed from the Blood, to prevent the
Notoriety of the Fact upon the View, and as said, by the new Coroners
Contrivance or Consent (which makes it the more heinous and suspicious:) For
had it remained in the Place and Posture it was said first to be found in, the
print of the bloody Foot upon the Stockings, the Cravat or Neck-cloth being cut
in four pieces in the middle, and the contrary Witnesses, who spoke both as to
Place and Posture, would have clearly discovered the Murder. The notched
Razor, and cut Hand, being most pregnant Circumstances, yet little regarded.

4. That the Jury excepted against the removing of the Body from the Posture
and Place, and demanded a View of the Clothes, which William Fisher did by
Name, yet was denied the same by the Coroner, after he had been in the next
Room with some of the Conspirators, who had called him out upon that Demand,
and who upon his return to the Jury again did declare to them (as ignorantly as
wickedly) that they were to sit upon the Body, not the Cloths

5. The partial examination of Witnesses, that though there were several in and
about the House when the Fact was done, yet only Bomeny and Russel who they
might justly suspect to be privy to it, must be the principal Witnesses they will
examine in the Case, taking little notice of Peck, Munden, Loyd, Captain Hawly
himself, or the two Women.

6. The little regard had to the notorious Contradictions in the Witnesses,
they did, or might examine, Bomeny telling them, the Razor was given him
(wherewith he cut his Throat) the 12th. of July, and Russel the 13th. Bomeny,
that Russel broke open the Door, but Russel, that he easily opened it with the
Key on the outside; Bomeny, that he could only through the Chink of the Door,
see some Blood, and some part of the Razor; but Russel, that he could through
the same Chink see the whole Body; Bomeny and Russel, that the whole Body lay
in the Closet, and none of it to be seen in the Chamber, but Peck and others,
that part of it lay in the Chamber; Bomeny and Russel, that they were absent
but a quarter of an hour from my Lord, but to others, Bomeny owns he was absent
from him two or three hours, insomuch as he was cold and stiff before he saw
him, some, that he was found lying, others kneeling.

7. That they unduly suffered themselves to be hurried into a Verdict by the
Message brought them by Captain Hamly in the Kings Name to hasten the same, as
though the Death of so great a Man, and in that place too, deserved not a
serious and due Search, especially when they saw such foul play offered them,
by removing Body and Clothes, and denying a View of the Clothes, and when none
of the Relations present, and so few of the Witnesses examined, and those in so
much Contradiction too.

8. By the unheard of drawing up the Verdict, which was done, not by the
Coroner, nor by the Jury amongst themselves, as it ought to have been, but by
one of the Conspirators themselves in the next Room, who sent it to them by
Bomeny, and which they signed accordingly.

9. By giving so wicked and false a Verdict upon their Oaths, which was this,
viz. That the Earl of Essex being the 13th. of July alone in his Chamber, did
with a Razor voluntarily and Feloniously cut his Throat, giving unto himself
one mortal Wound, cut from one Jugular to the other, and by the Aspera Arteria,
and the Windpipe, to the Vertebres of the Neck, both the Jugulars being
thoroughly divided, of which said Wound the Earl instantly died.

This was the Conspirators Diabolical Writing, which they imposed upon the
Jury, and they made their Verdict both Coroner and Inquest, by subscribing it.

It falsely says, he was alone in the Chamber, whereas by the flinging out the
bloody Razer, as well as by sufficient Testimony it will appear, that several
went up and came out at that time.

It also falsely says, he did give himself with that Razer one mortal Wound, of
such a length and such a depth, which are utter impossibilities as before.

3. From the Villainous ends the Conspirators had to effect and carry on hereby,
viz.

1. To confirm a Protestant Plot, a thing which they had long and often
labored, and as often been disappointed in, and which was so improved by the
Attorney General, as 1000 Witnesses to make it good, as also by the Lord Chief
Justice as the Finger of God, to convince all the World thereof, the sad
consequence whereof has since been so severely felt.

2. Utterly to stifle the Popish Plot, witness the Bailing the Popish Lords,
impeached and committed by Parliament, out of the Tower, and the public Prints
to redicule the same ever since.

3. To destroy the Lord Russel, and therefore done at the very instant he was
to come to his Trial, and so improved by the Lawyers to the Jury, which some of
them have owned, did more prevail with them to bring him in guilty, than any
other Proof produced against him.

4. That they might remove out of the way so great a Champion of the Protestant
Cause and Interest, who by his great Employments and Trusts in this and the
other Nation, had gained so perfect knowledge of their Popish horrid
Intreagues, the way they have taken of old, both in this and other Nations, and
whereof diverse Instances might be given, besides that of Sir E. B. Godfry,
whose Wounds bleed a fresh at the mentioning hereof.

5. That hereby they might carry on a Hellish Design against the King himself,
as though he had been privy thereto, by not only butchering him in that his
Royal Prison and Palace (where by the Law he becomes Pledge for the Safety and
forthcoming of the Prisoner) and at a time when he was there in Person, where
he had not been for diverse years before; and as though he came purposely to
order the doing thereof, and to entitle the Government to it. Which the Lord
Chief Justice does so often inculcate: If he was indeed then murdered by
others from the Kings presence there [in Brad^ns Tryal] as also by that their
horrid Presumption, in sending in the Kings Name to hasten and hurry the Jury
into that corrupt Verdict, and so daringly and contemptuously to remove the
Body contrary to the Kings express Command by a Person of Quality.

4. From the Methods which have been used to stifle the Discovery hereof, and
to deter Men from inquiring into the Matter.

1. By the Lawyers and Judges, who have declared, that whoever went about to
prove the E. of E. murdered, did no other then libel the Government, and bring
the Guilt of his Blood upon it.

2. By the strict Command given by the Officers of the Guards in the Tower the
day after the murder, to all the Soldiers, not to speak one word thereof at
their Perils.

3. By the severe prosecutions, and persecutions, of those who have appeared
herein, both as to their Estates, Persons, Lives, and Liberties.

Witness, the turning out of old Edwards from his place in the Customhouse,
wherein he had been 39 years, for only bidding his Son upon his Blessing speak
the truth in the Case; and the many severities to Mr. Bradon for declaring what
others had said about it; and the severe dealing with Mr. Hugh Speak for the
same; as also that late cruel usage of that poor Soldier in the Tower, because
he would not affirm the E. of E. murdered himself; who was first whipped with
Cords till the Skin was flayed off. 2. After that Scourged with Rods. And 3.
put upon the Wooden-horse with 6 Muskets at his Heels, Sword broken and
casher^d. But especially the destruction of Rob. Meak the Sentinal, for telling
what he heard and saw that day of the bloody Tragedy; whose Neck was therefore
broke, and flung into the Tower Ditch; who declared before hand to his Friends
how his life was threatened for the same. As also Hawly the Warder who was
served in like manner for blabbing, whose murdered body was about a Month
after it was missing, taken up near Rochester, where a great Popish Lord
declared several days before he was found, that he had there drowned himself.

4. By the endeavors which have been used to prevent the Review which by 2
Letters to 2 Noble Men, and the Letter to the Lady E. sent open by a Messenger
to Cadman the Bookseller, which he brought to Justice Henton, and he to the
Secretary; all of them purporting a discovery upon Indemnity and a Review, but
all in vain.

2. By Positive proofs, attesting the Murder, that if Indemnity may be granted
as was offered in Sir, E. B. G. case; and a fresh Legal Enquiry, as in Sir Tho.
O. Case, and others, there will then be produced positive Evidence, which will
declare who were the contrivers and Authors, who the Actors and Abetters of
this Barbarous detestable Murder, describe the Instrument with which it was
done, and which was made on purpose for the same: The rewards and preferments
to the respective Actors therein, with all the material Circumstances about it.
Which enquiry, was succesfully made in Sir Tho. O. case, after the Coroners
Inquest had found it (as said) a natural death. And by which after more then 2
years stifled by a high hand; The then Principal Minister of State, and his
associates with the Lieutenant of the Tower and others were searched into,
found Guilty, and many of them Executed for that horrid Murder, committed upon
that Innocent Gentleman in the Tower*

The Conclusion.
Now may not this dismal Tragical account (which carries so much Demonstration
in it) be well left without a Comment, or any Rhetorical strain of Wit, or
flourish of Eloquence, either to convince or satisfy the Reader of the Truth
hereof, or provoke him to the discharge of that duty incumbent upon him in his
Place or Station (which so Barbarous and unheard of Murder calls for at his
hand) the better to deliver himself and the Nation from the crying Sin of Blood
Guiltiness: And which is therefore left to the consideration and Conscience of
all that hear thereof in general. And to all the Ministers of Justice and his
fellow Peers in special, whose Oaths, Honors, and Interests, may Oblige them
to their duties herein; And who in Reason ought to feel the bleeding smart of
this Bloody Stob, not knowing which of their own turns may be next. And to his
Relations and Kindred in particular, who are more then others called forth in a
peculiar manner, to make a further and better Inquisition after his Blood, then
has yet been made, especially after this full Discovery is offered to them. As
they would vindicate his Innocence, wipe of the stain of Felony, Murder, and
Treason, from the Noble Family. Deliver themselves from the reproach of being
bribed by the forfeited Estate, to hold their Tongues, and suffer others to be
so severely handled as officious for appearing therein, under their silence;
And as they would free themselves from the Guilt of his Blood, and answer the
neglect to God and Man. Lastly to all those (of which there are many) who
either as Accessories or Actors have imbrew'd their hands in this Innocent
Blood, whether since they are secretly known it will not be their wisest and
best course (as some did in Sir Tho. O. case) to come forth and confess, and
give Glory to God, as they may hope for Mercy here, or hereafter: And not to
think to shelter themselves under Gold and Greatness; which will be a covering
(in this case) too short for the greatest themselves, because God who is the
avenger of Blood, and to whom vengeance belongs, will bring all to the House
top, and recompense them according to their deeds. There being no Darkness nor
shadow of Death, where the workers of Iniquity may hide themselves. Concluding
with Numb. 35. 30, 31, 33. You shall take no Satisfaction for the Life of a
Murderer which is Guilty of Death. Whosoever Kills any Person, the Murderer
shall be put to Death. So shall you not pollute the Land, for Blood it defiles
the Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed of the Blood that is shed therein:
But by the Blood of him that shed it.

Judge. 19. 30. There was no such deed done nor seen unto this day, etc.

FINIS.

