A Third Reply; OR A short Return to Mr. Baxters brief Answer to my Second
Reply, in his Postscript to a late Treatise of Justification.

WHEREIN His Contradictions, and Slanderous way of Writing, is further detected.

By H. D.'Anvers.

He that will injuriously speak to the World, what he should not speak, must
look to hear what he would not hear.

Mr. Bax. Treat. of Just. in Answer to Dr. Tully, p. 76. Job 21.34. In your
Answer there remains falsehood.

2 Timothy 3.8, 9. Now as Jannes and Jamberes with stood Moses, so do these men
resist the Truth, etc. But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall
be manifest unto all men.

Printed Anno 1676.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THE design of this Paper is not to gain the mastry, or to get the last word,
to vie slanders with my Antagonist or to return him railing, for railing, which
would be as vain, as ridiculous (if not impious) to attempt, especially in a
contest with such a master of words, and who has given himself the liberty to
let his Pen loose in so luxuriant a manner with whomsoever he contends.

But as you will find, to make a necessary and honest defense against a new
personal charge; to plead the just vindication of an innocent people from his
repeated slanders, by detecting the falsehood of his feigned pretenses in
justification thereof.

To discover to himself and others how little Demonstration or Conviction there
is in his Magesterial way of Dictating. And to declare my hearty concurrence to
his fair motion of putting an end to our former Contest, by a candid perusal of
our Books, to which he honestly refers the Reader, and to which I am willing to
stand or fall.

Wherein if the Truth may have any advantage, Mr. Baxter any benefit, the
disturbed World any due satisfaction, or the Church any real profit, my end is
abundantly answered, who desire in all things to approve my self a sincer
lover, and faithful servant of the Truth, whilst

H. D'Anvers.

A 3d. Reply; Or a short Return to Mr. Baxters Brief Answer to my 2d. Reply, in
his Postscript to a late Treatise of Justification, etc.
MR. Baxter having, as he says, perused my 2d. Reply, and being, as I conceive
much concerned thereat, (notwithstanding his promised silence) does, for the
better easing of his disturbed mind, and galled conscience, give a very angry
return in a curr, but costly, Postscript, which he has ordered to be annexed to
his late Treatise of Justification, in answer to Dr. Tully, (since the
publication thereof:) I say costly, because by that Artifice, though it be but
7 Pages, is not usually to be Purchased under 5 s. The which may be briefly
considered under these following Heads, comprehending the whole, viz.

First, the general Confutation he gives the Book. 2dly. His general reference
to the Books themselves. 3dly. The 2 particular Instances he insists on for his
own Vindication, and my Reproof. 4ly His quibbling reflections upon me and my
Back.

1. The general Confutation.
In the first place, you will find he is pleased in his old Reviling way (which he
cannot forbear) to confute me by wholesale (with a Bellarmine thou lie)
telling us in so many words, That he judges it useless to give the World a
particular detection of the evils (themselves) and that if he had so little to
do with his time to write ie, he supposes, few would find leisure to read it:
And therefore instead of any other confutation, we must upon his word take it
to be a bundle of mistakes, fierceness, and confidence set off with the
greatest Audacity, etc. p. 74.

And if this be not an excellent way of Information and Conviction, and a very
exemplary piece of Justice, to be thus Judge and Executioner in his own Case,
(without the least Demonstration, and that against the fullest proof and
evidence) is submitted to better Judgment. As though a Dictators Ipso Dixit,
big Hectoring words, and contemptuous ill-Language, instead of Proof, sound
Arguments, and meek Instruction, was the best way to stop the mouths of
Gainsayers, to silence Opposers, and inform the World.

2. His Reference (...) the Books.
^ut 2dly growing a little cooler, and better bethinking him^^^^, he is content
to allow the Reader some share in the Judgment, and to that end gives him leave
to peruse his Book with mine; to examine the Authors about whose words or sense
we differ, p. 74. which is indeed something like. And therefore to so fair a
Motion (since his Ingenuity leads him not to a confession of so many things so
palpably proved against him) I heartily join Issue with him: Not doubting to
meet with a more impartial Decision from a Candid Reader.

And therefore to that end I do most earnestly recommend to his diligent
search, having Mr. Baxters Book (and Mr. Barrots Quaeri^s he also mentions and
refers to) in one hand, and my Book in the other) the following Particulars
wherein the greatest difference his betwixt us, viz.

1. Whether Mr. Baxter has not fully justified my Book, he so scor^^^^, ^^^tes
against in all the parts thereof, as maintained in the first Chapter. And not
only the Doctrinal part, [his Cavils being so fu^y replied to, and removed, p
22, etc.] but the Historical part also having so fully given up the thing, he
and his Partners so shamefully wrangle about, as p. 18, etc. 2. Whether my
Witnesses against Infants Baptism are not substantially justified against all
his Cavils, and freed from his heinous charge of Forgery and Prevarication,
viz. The Donatists, Ancient Britains, Waldenses and Wickliffians, as p. 33. to
^53. 3. Whether Mr. B's notorious slanders of the Anabaptists and Vanists, are
not substantially evidenced, as p. 154, to 175. 4. Whether his shameful
broad-fac'd contradictions are not manifestly detecte^ from his own Writings,
particularly as being for and against Episcopacy, p. 175. for and against
Nonconformity, p. 222. for and against Arminianisme, p. 204. for and against
Tradition, p 207. for and against Popery, p 218, etc. 5. Whether it does not
evidently appear by undeniable demonstration, that Mr. B. is notoriously guilty
of Forgery, Prevarication, and falsifying Authorities. Particularly 1st. in
Fathering that Popish confession on the Waldenses, leaving out what should
discover the same, p. 98, etc. 2dly. Denying Bid to mention any thing of
Birinus, as I affirmed, or that the Isle of Weight was in lower Saxony, the
truth of both being so fully made appear, p. 75. 3dly. His notorious
falsifications about Beringarius, 263. 4ly. His egregious abusing Dr. Prideux,
the 2d. Lateran Council. Otto Frisingenses and Binius, about Peter Bruis and
Arnoldus Testimonies, p. 263, etc. 5ly. His most notorious abuse of Wickliff in
many particulars, p 263. etc. 6ly. His strange assertions and monstrous
contradictions about the Creed, p. 209 And 7ly. His very evil dealing about the
Revelations, p. 230. But especially about the Scriptures themselves, p. 243. 6.
Whether there is not a faithful Collection of some of his shameful
Billings-gate Language, so unbecoming either a Man or a Christian, p. 259.
Wherein if I am found tardy, I shall willingly submit to the just censure of
the faithful Examiner. If not, I hope it will be judged but reasonable, that
Mr. B. should hear the blame and shame of such Temerity and Injustice.

3. The 2 I^stances insisted on.
3dly. As to these 2 Particulars, he is pleased to pick out of the bundle, and
to give his exceptions against, notwithstanding the uselesness (as he pleased
to tell us) of enumerating Particulars, I shall punctually and particularly
reply to, and the rather because it must be supposed since he vouchsafes to
mention any, that they are of the greatest moment, and by which he would have
the rest judged he does not mention.

1. About Baptizing naked.
The first, and that upon which he lays the greatest stress, is that about
Baptizing naked,, telling us in these words p. 74. That he finds but one thing
in the Book that needs any other Answer than to peruse what is already
written, and that is about Baptizing naked. And therefore he is pleased in 2
Pages to give us several new shifts to avoid the dint of the evidence that
seems to gall his Conscience, instead of such an honest owning of his guilt,
and taking the shame that such notorious slanders, and opprobrious evil-dealing
calls for, tending, as you will find, rather to heighten and aggravate, than to
lessen or extenuate his crimes.

And which for method-sake are gathered up to you under the following Heads.
viz. First, About what he says relating to the Report it self. 2dly. The time
when. 3dly. The place where. 4ly. The evidence he yet stands by to justify
himself therein.

to naked, which is usual with the modestest of them, and in p. 137. if next to
naked the difference is not great. And then from their usual or ordinary custom
of Baptizing naked, or next to naked, which in his esteem is much as one, thus
argues, p. 136. If it be a breach of the 7th. Commandment, ^t must also ^e
owned, that the sin ^f naked ^ipping was so very usual with many, and not
disowned by the ^est, he night very well attribute it to the whole.
[Thou shall not Commit Adultery] ordinarily to Baptize naked: Then it is
intolerable wickedness, and not Gods Ordinance. But it is a breach of the 7th.
Commandment ordinarily to Baptize naked: Therefore it is intolerable
wickedeness, and not Gods Ordinance. Upon which, says Mr. Fisher, I perceive
he takes it for a truth, that we ordinarily dip naked, and thereupon disputes
against it as our usual practice. And thereupon his own Quaere-man Mr. Barrott,
(whom he commends so highly) does in his Book, writ this present year, called
Good will to Men, in p. 443. tell us, viz. What Mr Baxter has written of this
practice (viz of Dipping) in our Circumstances, p. 134, to 138 (of his plain
Scripture) deserves to be well weighed, for so far as I am able to judge he
there clearly proves, that our Dippers break the Commandment of God (viz. the
7th. Commandment here mentioned) to follow their Tradition. And pray you let
Mr. Wills resolve us, when he tells us, That the Anabaptists Doctrine leads to
Blasphemy and Immorality, and refers us to Mr. Baxter for some proof thereof,
whether he does not also intend this very passage.

So that I presume this figment, that he did not intend us all, will signify
little, except it be more fully to detect his own unfaithfulness. For first his
scope and design is to reach the whole party (herein.) 2ly. His 3 Arguments
fully take in the whole in every one of them. 3ly. The Instance it self in the
7th. Argument most expressly does it, who are so wicked, as he says, to dip
naked, or next to naked, in their usual way of Baptizing. 4ly The Argument it
self, whereby he would render us Adulterors and Violaters of the 7th.
Commandment is for our ordinary or usual Baptizing naked, or next to naked 5ly.
You see others of his own Party have been so heedless (as he calls it) as well
as our selves so to understand it. 6ly. That Mr. Fisher, who especially opposed
him for the same 3 years after, does not only deny it to be our ordinary
practice, (to Baptize naked) but that any that ever he heard did ever so
practice it in this Nation that belonged to any of the Churches, challenging
him to produce but one Instance of any Maid or Woman that in any serious wise
was so Baptized.

More Proofs, viz. That in the Year 1647, or 1648. when Anabaptistry began to
be obtruded with more successful fervency, I lived near Mr. Tombs, in a
Country where some were, and within the hearing of their practice in other
parts of the Land, and that in that beginning the common fame of Ministers and
People was, that in diverse places some Baptized naked, and some did not. And p.
283. Most Sects do in their height and heat at first, that which afterward
they surcease with shame, mentioning the Denatists, Munster Anabaptists,
Ranters, and Quakers And again, If he would persuade the World that I wrote
that of all the Anabaptists, or of most, or of any in any other Age, or that I
have since said that any continue the same practice, he would but deceive Men,
for it is nothing so. And p. 74 of Postscript. My Book was written 1649. A
little before common uncontrolled same was, that not far from us in one place
many of them were Baptized naked, etc.

So that all this being laid together, he would have us think, that this
respected only some in the first rise of the Sect, as common fame gave it a
little before he wrote his Book in 49 but in no Age or time ever since.

But how little Truth or Honesty there is in this shuffle, let the Reader judge.

For 1st. It is manifest, that Anabaptisme had not its rise about this time, as
he seems to insinuate, for not to mention the Anabaptists in H. the 8th's time,
and Queen Elizabeth's also, as expressed at large in the Treatise of Baptism. p.
306. etc. There were diverse Churches of Anabaptists in the Nation many years
before this, so that if he respected the beginning of the Sect, he is far less
competent to report common fame for so long before, than Mr. Fisher to deny it
3 years after. But 2dly. it is manifest, that the Book it self that reports it,
does not give it as a hearsay of something past, and practiced by a few but of
the known practice of their Sect at the time of the writing thereof, his words
are as before remarked, viz. My 7th. Argument is against another wickedness in
their manner of Baptizing, which is their dipping persons naked, as is very
usual, etc. viz. as they practiced at that time of the writing of his Book, by
such naked Baptizing, or next to naked, not a word of Common Fame, of some
people before that time, as now he would be thought to intend, but their known
practice at that present.

far from us in one place many of them were Baptized naked, reproproving the
clothing way as Antiscriptural. And therefore tells us, He applied to Mr.
Tombs himself, and to diverse of his Church who denied it not. And p. 75 Gives
one reason why Mr. Haggar and Fisher were not competent Judges of a matter of
Fact far from them, viz. Mr. Fisher in Kent, and Haggar in Staffordshire, and
Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Tombs in Worcestershire, and the place intended ^ear, or
not far from Kedderminster.

But whether this Fig-leaf will afford him any more cover than the former, will
easily appear.

For First, it is clear, the Book it self reporting it, does not confine it to
any such place in their Neighborhood, but detects it to be the ordinary
practice of the Anabaptists to Baptize naked, or next to naked.

And Secondly, His More Proofs tells us, the fame hereof was so universal, that
it was the common consent of that present time, and that to deny it would be to
take all sorts then living for Liars.

But Thirdly, it appears he has very much missed his Mark, and ill laid his
matters together, to make the Anabaptists in his Neighborhood (who owned Mr.
Tombs to be their Pastor and Administrator (as now he affirms) to have been
the most interessed persons, p. 75. and most principally concerned in this
matter of Fact, since at another time he confesses Mr. T. was of another
Judgment, so that if very many of them did so usually practice the naked
Dipping, it must be without their Admiministrator.

But Fourthly, to put the matter out of Doubt, his own words in his More Proofs
will rectify him, and at least discover to him, that he has an ill memory, vix.
p. 282* where he tells us, That in 47, and 48. He lived near Mr. Tombs, in a
Country where some were, and within the hearing of their practice in other
parts of the Land, and that in that their beginning the common fame of
Ministers and People was, that in diverse places some Baptized naked, and some
did not.

So that here the common fame, it seems, respected not only one place in their
Neighborhood, but diverse places throughout the Land, and therefore assigns
common consent at that time, and all sorts then Living to affirm it. And the
Original Book as before, That it was the usual and ordinary wicked practice of
the whole party at that time to dip naked, or next to naked, which was much as
one in his account



To the 1st. His More Proofs, p. 282. assirms it to be common fame and common
consent, and his Postscript common uncontrolled fame. And again in these words,
viz. And in a matter of Fact, if that fame be not credible, which is of things
late and near, and not contradicted by any one, we must surcease humane
converse.

But what this signifies let all men judge.

It is true, when I called upon him for satisfaction for this groundless
slander, he tells us 26 years after, That he had it by common fame of Ministers
and People, and by common consent at the present time, and to deny it, was to
take all sorts then living for Liars, and again common uncontrolled fame.

But is it not very strange, that if it had been such a common uncontrolled
fame at that time* that no man should mention it but Mr. B. The Anabaptists
having many bitter Enemies, who then, and before that time, wrote against them,
and was it not much that none of them should meet with that common fame, but
he; for surely, if they had, we had heard of it from other hands besides his
own.

Though as to that kind of Evidence, viz. common fame, I had thought I had
inserted enough from Mr. B's own Pen, (out of his Christian Directory) for ever
to have prevented his insisting on it any more, which tells us, It is the most
common Cloak for the most inhumane lies and Calumnies, etc. And was not that
the Testimony which made the Waldenses such Villains? Paul such an Heretic?
and put Christ to death, etc.

But to put the matter out of Doubt, the ground you will find, that first he
assigned for the matter of Fact, was not common fame, bear-say, or bare words,
(which as he heretofore owned was so uncertain a thing, yea so great a Liar)
but known experience, as his own words evidence, viz. p. 138. plain Scrip. But
in both these Cases, (viz. That of Murder and Adultery by dipping naked in cold
water) we dispute not against bare words, but experiences and known practices
for their naked Baptizing is a known thing, and the wickedness that has
followed on some, and that some have dyed of it, viz. of naked Baptizing, not a
word of common consent, or common fame. And thereupon says Sam. Fisher, Since
that I perceive he takes it for a Truth that we ordinarily dip naked, and
thereupon disputes against it as our usual practice: And then not confidently
only, but of a certain relates to the whole World, that it is no bare words,
nor any doubtful thing, but an experience, or known practice, if he can clear
himself let him do it, who also summon him in the Name of Christ Jesus to prove
it our practice ordinarily to Baptize naked, or produce but any one Witness of
any Woman or Maid, etc. And Mr. Haggar thereupon, whilst he charge us to
break the 7th. Commandment, lays him under the breach of the 9th. for falsely
accusing his Neighbor therein.



In answer whereto, we must first observe to you his fallacious quibble herein,
viz That none ever denied it to him. But what did they not deny? viz. That
though they did not themselves so practice, nor knew, nor heard of any that so
did, yet they did not deny but some might, because they did not know all
things. But how will this relieve Mr. B. It is true, this might have been
something, if it had been all that Mr. B. had charged, viz. That some, in some
place, he knew not where, might do such a thing. But his accusation was far
otherwise, viz. That the Anabaptists Baptizing naked was a known thing, and an
usual practice of very many in diverse places of the Land, and next to naked by
the modestest of them, which was much as one, and therefore brings the
wickedness of Adultery therein to bear, and reflect upon the whole party and
way, as their usual and ordinary practice, which naked Baptizing Mr. Tombs,
Haggar and Fisher do all of them so positively deny, as well they may, it being
the true purport, sense and meaning of his accusation. For otherwise let Mr. B.
consider how ridiculous and foolish it would be for an Anabaptist, hearing that
some Presbyterian in some part of the Land did play some mad Pranks, should
thereupon charge Presbytery it self therewith, and draw Arguments against the
whole party and way for the same. As Mr. B. would now be thought by this kind
of arguing to charge the Anabaptist, and their way. And that Mr. T's Answer to
him, as suggested, had no other signification than what is before hinted, take
his own words in a Letter lately writ to me in Answer to one I sent to him,
since Mr. B's Postscript came forth, (confining the naked Baptizing to
Worcestershire, or their Neighborhood thereabouts about 48, to 49.) to know
whether he ever heard of any such thing in those parts, returned to me as
follows, viz. That he never heard or knew of any that Baptized naked, in
those parts, and that if he did not deny they might be Baptized naked, (though
he does not remember that ever that Question was put to him by Mr. B. or any
body else) it was because he could not say there were none, unless he were
omniscient, some in former times having done so as Vossius tells us. And
therefore Mr. B himself in his More Proofs p. 283. can tell me, That in a
Negative 25 years after, I cannot possibly be a competent Witness, no nor if I
had written at that time; for who can say, that there was no such thing done
beyond his knowledge. Which is most certain, it being therefore the affirmers
part to prove, and which being required from Mr. B. he cannot produce. And as
for what he says, That none denied this slander to him, it is notoriously
manifest, that both Mr. Tombs the same year, Mr. Fisher and Mr. Haggar the 2
following years after, denied the same to him; for they all wrote against him
to detect his injustice therein; and for his now saying he read but 2 Leaves of
Mr. Fisher, and not all Mr. Haggars, is but miserable trifling; for if Mr. B.
write his mind in any thing, and expresses it but in an Epistle to another Book
(his usual way of dictating) or in some small Postscript or Pitance in any of
his Numerous Volumes he expects all the World should take notice of it, and if
any that write against him chance to overlook it, at their perils be it, and of
which they must expect to hear roundly. And can it be thought, that he who was
the great Hector and Champion, yea esteemed so much the Mall of the
Anabaptists, would pretend to answer their Arguments, and not read their Books,
and that in the height of the controversy, and especially wherein matter of
Fact was concerned, and that of so heinous a nature too. And can it be though
reasonable, that Mr. B. should be so shamefully injudicious to recommend
Fishers Book to the World to be considered in the Controversy, as he did, and
not read the same.

Mr. Lamb and Mr. Allen, who have both of them left us, yet exceedingly, as I
hear, blame Mr. B. for his broaching, much more for his so defending this
slander, and who cannot only testify to the seemliness of our Baptism, but
their utter ignorance of so much as the report of naked Baptizing among us.

But it is manifest in his own words, That guilt is tender and
self-love-strong, (Ep. before Dr. Tulley's Answer) and therefore no wonder to
see all these Shifts to save his reputation: But whether such evil dealing (not
to repeat the same measure meated to the Vanists, for which he has given no
satisfaction) does not bespeak an an maimed either in his Morals or Intellects,
and without repentance and due satisfaction utterly unfit to write us Bodies of
Divinity, Christian Directories, and Catholic Theologies, is left to the
judicious to determine.

Instance ^ut fal^ing his ^elarati^^
The other Instance he gives, to prove my Book is full of false Allegations, and
sit off with the greatest audacity, is (as he says) by those few Lines of his
own about their meeting at St. James's, left with the Clark grossly falsified,
p. 73. Postscript.



The Copy I had from my Bookseller.
Though when I began to Preach in this Place, I publicly professed, that the
notorious necessity of the People, who were more than the Parish Church can
hold, moved me thereto, and that we met not under any color or pretense of any
Religious Exercise ix other manner than according to the Liturgy and practice
of the Church of England, and that were I able, I would accordingly read the
same.

The Copy obtained from the Original.
Though when I began to Preach in this Place, I publicly professed, that the
notorious necessity of the People, who were more than the Parish Church can,
hold moved me thereto, and that we met not under any color or pretense of any
Religious Exercise in other manner than according to the Liturgy and practice
of the Church of England, and were I able, I would accordingly read my self.

So that you see the Sum Total of this gross falsification lies singly in these
words Read the same for Read my self, not another Syllable different, which I
humbly conceive might well have passed (if Mr. B. meant heartily and honestly)
without such a brand, having one and the same sense and signification. For it
Mr B. would not be thought as here he solemnly declares, to be a separate from
the public profession. he must give his personal assent and consent to the
Common Prayer, and accordingly read the same himself, as all Conformists do,
and by Law established ought to do. And if he does really meet under no other
color or pretense of any Religious Exercise in other manner than according to
the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, he must accordingly read the
same himself, viz. the Common Prayer, as others of the Church of England, do,
so that if he do not prevaricate, but means honestly, as his words import, it
is one and the same thing, and no gross falsification. Though how far such an
accurate, defining and distinguishing understanding, a mature exercised
discerning knowledge, (he seems so arogantly to insinuate, he has arived to, p.
78. Postscript) can by Reading accordingly himself, make it such a gross
falsification, and so different from accordingly reading the same, is worthy of
consideration And what mental equivocation and reservation may lie in these
words to relieve him at a dead lift, and to help him into a Conformists Pulpit,
I know not, he best knows himself Though it is confidently affirmed by some,
that Mr. B. has lately in Hartfordshire or Buckinghamshire, in order to obtain
the Pulpit (where he several times preached in public) read the Common Prayer,
or at least some part of it out of the Service Book. Though it is also said,
that he has obtained that public liberty, by virtue of a License he had from
the Arch-Beshop of Canterbury, but whether it be one formerly granted by him,
when the Bishop of London before the Act of Conformity, (when by the Bishop of
Worcester he was silenced in those parts) or since, is worthy inquiry, and the
rather, because in his said Postscript he is pleased to tell us, viz. F. 79.
That he is for'd to part with House and Goods, and Library, and all save his
Clothes, and possess no thing, his death being sought after the 6 Months
Imprisonment in the common Goal, and continually expected, [viz. To fly from
his place and charge, (if not to avoid the Cross of Christ, and to shun a
suffering Witness, when so lo loudly called thereto) but how agreeable to the
following Scriptures it submitted to his Conscience, viz. 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6,
etc. Acts 20.11, 12, 13. Mat. 10.38, 29. John 10.12, 13. Mat. 23.2.3, 4.] But
is not this a strange Paradox, that he should suffer at that rate for a
Nonconformist at London, and yet act the part of a Conformist to so high a
degree in the Country. The Truth of which story. if I am not misinformed, is
thus, That Mr. B. having with his friends built a new meeting Place near
Pickadille, and preaching the first time in it himself, did understand that he
was threatened with an Imprisonment by some great man (who was offended the
meeting house was erected so near him,) did to avoid the same withdraw himself
the next week into the Country, procuring by himself or friends a Country
Minister, who came to Town the week before. to preach for him in the said
meeting place the next Sabbath day, and who was in Mr. B's room and stead
seized, and for refusing of Oxford Oath committed to the Gate House for 6
monthe, where he lay about 3 months, (but lately Released by Habeas Corpus) and
the said meeting house shut up for some time; so that by Proxy he suffers
Imprisonment for a Nonconformist in London, and in person (though
complainingly banished) out-does all the Non-conformists by his public
preachings in the Country as a Conformist. Which contradictions in practice so
agreeable to those of his Doctrines before remarked to you, puts me in mind of
Bishop Halls Letter to Welliam Laud, afterward Archbishop of Canterabury, not
unworthy to be mentioned upon this occasion. Decad. Ep. 3. Ep. 5. I would I
knew where to find you, then I could tell where to take a direct aim; whereas
now I must rove and conjecture, to day you are in the Tents of the Romanists,
to morrow in ours, the next day between both, our adversaries think you ours,
we theirs: Your Conscience finds you with both, and neither. I flatter you not,
this of yours is the worst of all tempers; heat and Gold have their uses,
lukewarmness is good for nothing but to trouble the Stomach. How long will you
bault? Resolve one way, and know at last what you do hold, what you should cast
off, either your Wings or your Teeth, and loathing this Bat-like Nature be
either a Bird or a Beast. Alas! how full are you of contradictions? How often do
you fight with your self? Which I desire Mr. B. may apply, I presume others
will as a suitable parallel, not only respecting his double dealing about
Nonconformity, but even Popery it self also. But let so much suffice as to the
2 Instances, by which all the rest I have said of Mr. B. is so much in his
esteem to be judged.

4ly. As to his Rhetorical Reviling in those his quibbling reflections upon me
and my Book in 9 Particulars, which take up 4 of the last 7 Pages, are left to
the judicious Reader to determine, to whom those Characters (he is so liberal
of) do most properly belong, to me or himself, I being not so competent a Judge
in my own Case, viz. The disputing contender, One that sets off the grossest
mistakes with the greatest confidence, a fierce striver against Truth, an
ignorant militant, casting fire about like Sampsons Foxes, a dividing hurtful
Zealot, ^ talking man that can say something, Let it also be judged ^o which if
us Solomon's Character (Prove. 21.24.) does most properly belong.
for and against any thing, etc. Only I beg leave to make a little Observation
upon that mentioned by him, p. 78. wherein he acquaints us in what a forgiving
frame he is, and particularly his disposition to forgive me, in detecting in
that way his Popery and Crimes, his changes and passages about the Wars,
self-contradictions and Repentances, not describing or denominating my
citations about them, lest he did that which savoured not of forgiveness. To
which I say, if he thereby intends it for my faithful plain dealing, though
mixed sometimes with some sharpness, especially in some repetitions from Dr.
Pierce and Dr. Stubbs (his needs calling for it to cure his pride, as Dr. P.
observes to him) I then accept it, though I think his thanks had been more
proper in the Case. But if it must be supposed for some injurious ill dealing
with him, thereby it is, as I conceive, a calumniating, by way of insinuation,
a recriminating instead of confessing, a giving the lie to (instead of
answering and disproving) his Reprovers. And wherein he does not only beg
instead of clear his own integrity so fully impeached, by such ample
demonstration in all the Particulars mentioned, but also under pretense of
Brotherly Charity, and a kiss of Love stabs his Brethren under the 5th Rib.
Though such pretended forgiveness seems to me as ridiculous, as if a man ask
satisfaction of another for some slanderous defamation* or injurious personal
Assualt, (as dragging by the Hair of the Head about the Streets) and he calmly
for his satisfaction tells him he forgives him, and that we all stand in need
of Divine forhiveness.

The Conclusion.
TO Conclude, I desire, since Mr. B. has pleased so confidently to affirm, That
only that thing about Naked dipping (in all my Book) needs any new answer from
him, That he will seriously consider these 2 things, (which I presume others
may) viz.

1. Whether the Answer he has now given thereto, may rationally free him from
a public Calumniator and false Accuser? And if not? Whether then such Crimes
do not loudly call for due Humiliation, public Acknowledgment, and
Recantation? with promise to look better to his Spirit and Pen, for time to
come? And no more to improve his accurate distinguishing faculty fluent
invention, and ready Pen; thus to bring forth new shifts, to palliate or
justify old crimes, and contemptiously to reproach and villifie those that in
faithfulness call him to duty therein.

2. Whether that, since it may be possible, he may so grossly mistake himself in
that thing he lays the greatest stress upon; he may not as much fail in the
rest he so slights and under-values: And may not from thence see cause also, to
call in question his great confidence in those Hetrodox Points, he has lately
so voluminously tormented the World, and grieved and offended his Brethren with.

All which is humbly submitted to the Judicious Reader, and Mr. Baxters
Conscience in the sight of God; with these two following words, viz.

1. An Aphorism of his own, lately sent by him to the Learned Dr. Tully, and
worthy his own remembrance all his Days, viz. He that cannot endure the sight
of his own Excrements, must not dish them up to another Man's Table, lest they
be sent him back again, Treat. of Just. p. 77. So agreeable to the following
Scriptures though expressed, as you will find, in far better Language, and very
worthy your observation upon this occasion, viz. Prove. 26. 27. Psalm. 7.15, 16.
Eccles. 10.8, 9. Mat. 7.2.

The other, That known Adage of a wiser Man than himself, viz. Open rebuke is
better than secret love. And he that rebukes a Man afterward, shall find more
favor than he that flattereth with the Tongue, Prove. 27.5.28.23. Which must be
understood from a Wise I^^^n, who will therefore love his reprover better,
whilst the Scorner, he tells us, will hate him the more for such faithfulness,
Prove. 9.8, 9. But however; to provoke to that much neglected duty (to which
cuarage and wisdom is so much required, Prove. 25.12.) tells us, That to them
that so rebuke, shall be delight, and a good Blessing shall come upon them,
Prove. 24.25.

ERRATA.
In the Marginal Note P. 4. r. That if the sin, for That the sin.

FINIS.

