A LETTER FROM Monsieur de CROSS, (Who was an Ambassador at the Treaty of
Nimeguen, and a Resident in England, in K. Chapter the Second's Reign.)

Which may serve for an Answer to the Impostures of Sir W m Temple, heretofore
Ambassador from England at the Hague, and at Nimeguen; Till such time as a more
ample and particular Relation be made of the Business in hand.

Together with some REMARKS Upon his MEMOIRS, To make appear how grossly he is
mistaken in the greatest part of the most important matters he relates
concerning what passed from the Year 1672, until the Year 1679.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1693.

A LETTER from Mons. de Cross, etc.
My Lord,
I Have been informed of the Calumnies that Sir W. T. has caused to be Printed
against me. I know very well that Sir W. is of great Worth, and deserves well;
and that he has been a long time employed, and that too upon important
occasions; but I am as certain, that he had but a small share in the Secrecy of
the late King Charles's Designs in the greatest part of the Affairs, for which
he was employed, from 72, till 79, which is the main Subject of his Work.

This Consideration alone might not perhaps have given me the curiosity, or at
least, any great earnestness to read his Memoirs; and I might have very well
judged that I could draw from them no sufficient light and insight for the
discovery of so many Intrigues.

Nay besides, I might have doubted whether or no these Memoirs might not have
been his own Panegyric upon himself, and the diminution and undervaluing of
the real Worth and Glory of several Persons of Quality, and distinguished by
their Merit; whose Fortune and Reputation Sir W. T. has so much envied: for I
am particularly acquainted with Sir W's Pride. He looks upon himself to have
the greatest Reach, to be the wisest and ablest Politician of his Time; and a
man may perceive abundance of Satirical Reflections scattered here and there in
his Work against most illustrious Persons, and that he has stuffed his Memoirs
with his own Praise, and the fond overweening Opinion he has of himself.

Without doubt this is quite different from that Sincerity and Modesty which
reigns throughout the Memoirs of Villeroy, in the Negotiations and Transactions
of Jeanin, in the Letters of Card. Dossat, those mighty and truly eminent
Persons, esteemed as such by the greatest Princes of their Age; and even still
are to this day, by the ablest Politicians, with much more Justice and Glory
than Sir W's Bookseller styles him, One of the Greatest Men of this Age. It
had been Sir W's duty to have regulated himself according to their most
excellent Pattern.

I shall at present only quote one Passage, which I accidentally light on at
the first opening his Book, whereby one may easily guess at the greatness of
his presumption; in a shorttime, My Lord, I shall give you occasion to observe
many others. The Negotiations, says he, that I managed and transacted at the
Hague, at Brussels, at Aix la Chapelle, which saved Flanders from the French
Clutches, in 68. made People believe I had some Credit and Reputation amongst
the Spaniards, as well as in Holland.

'Twas a Piece of strange Ingratitude of the Hollanders and Spaniards, as well
as of his own dear Countrymen, so much concerned for the preservation of
Flanders, not to rear him a Statue, which, he says, some-where else, Mr.
Godolphin had promised him. Could Sir. W. T. have done any thing to deserve it
more; or was there any thing more worthy of Triumph than to have preserved
Flanders, a Country so important to the Spaniard, and the only Bulwark of
Holland and England? But Sir W. was apt to believe he could not find any one
who was better able to hammer out his own Glory than himself; and he flattered
himself with the Opinion that he should erect himself as many Statues, as there
are places in his Memoirs, crowded with intolerable and ridiculous Vainglory.

It was not the Negotiations, my Lord, that Sir W. tells us he managed at the
Hague, Brussels, and at Aix la Chappelle, which saved Flanders from the hands
of the French, in 1668. The French published that they were beholding to the
most Christian Kings Moderation for that Peace; who was willing to put a stop
to the progress and course of his victorious Arms. But the truth of it is, they
most justly ascribed all the Merit, and all the Glory of the Peace, and of the
Triple League, to the generous resolution and stedfastness of the
States General. They made use, upon this occasion, of a Minister of State far
beyond Sir W. in Prudence, Experience, and Capacity, one, who was in the
Opinion even of his Enemies, the most able Manager of Affairs of his Age.

I shall not undertake, my Lord, in this place, strictly to examine Sir W.
Temple's Memoirs: I will do it shortly if God spare me with Life; nay, and I
promise you a Volume of Remarks, at least, as large as his Book.

If, like him, I had the Vanity to procure the printing of Memoirs, during my
lifetime, I could now have a fair pretense so to do, and without all question
I should publish more just and solid ones than his are. Not, that I have the
presumption to judge my self more capable to do it; but, in several places he
relates some things falsely, whereof I am much better informed. The only Hero of
my piece shall be Truth, without Complaisance or Flattery; without Passion, no
not so much as against him: So that I shall do him the satisfaction and
kindness to instruct him better, even touching diverse Matters, which he
performed and executed, without knowing so much as the reason why he was made
to act so.

It is not likewise, because I have been one of the Council of the King his
Master; yet I have had the Happiness, during some Years, to partake in the
Confidence of a Minister of State, who was in several important, weighty
Occasions, as it were the Primum Mobile of that Conduct and Management that
surprised all the World. You know, my Lord, what Credit he had, and of what
nature his Intelligences were. Sir W. may well imagine that I did not ill
improve this able Ministers Confidence, when Sir W. tells us, That I had wholly
devoted my self to him.

Men are not ignorant likewise, that oftentimes I have had some access to the
King's Ministers of State, and even near to the King himself,; it did more
especially appear, in the business for which I took my Journey to Nimeguen; and
it would be a great shame that a Man more cunning and subtle than them all,
according to the King's own Testimony, as Sir W. relates it, should not have
had (considering so much freedom of access and easiness) the address and
cunning to dive into the most hidden Springs of Deliberations and Resolutions,
wherein the Swede and my Master had so great an Interest.

Be therefore assured, my Lord, that after my Death, nay perhaps, whilst I am
alive, if need require, and if I be obliged thereto, there will appear some
Memoirs, which will divulge some Matters the truth whereof is still so
carefully concealed, Sir W. does ingeniously confess that hither to he was
ignorant of them; He, who has so much quickness of Penetration, and seems to
make us believe that he was the King his Master's Confident.

You your self, my Lord, have often urged me to acquaint you with such
important Secrets, and of such great Consequence; and although I could not
possibly refuse, upon the account of that honor you do me to afford me any
share in your Favors, to let you have a glympse of one part of what passed in
one of the most important Negotiations of that time; yet you had so much
Generosity as not to take the advantage of it you might have done, to the
infallible ruin, as was believed, of a Minister whom you take for one of your
greatest Enemies; yet on this occasion one could not well lay any thing to his
charge, besides his blind obedience to the Will of his Master.

The Truth of it is, I am not obliged to have the same Considerations that with
held me at that time, but yet I preserve a profound respect for the Memory of
the late King, and also a great respect for some Persons, who are even at this
time of the day so much concerned, that I should hold my tongue, if it were not
for that reason, it would be a very easy matter for me, to make appear without
any more ado, how basely Sir W. is mistaken in what he delivers concerning
diverse Negotiations of England; and especially concerning my Journey to
Nimeguen.

My Design is not at all, my Lord, to write you a Letter full of Invectives
against Sir W. I shall not descend to the Particulars of his Behavior, and
shall tell you no more of them at present, than what is needful to let your
self and every body else judge that I have means in my hand to be revenged for
the Injury he has done me.

They will be without doubt more just Invectives, than those that he fills his
Book withal. He set upon me first. He writes out of a Spirit of Revenge, with a
great deal of Heat and Passion, and like a Man that believed himself touched
and wronged to the purpose. As for my part, my Lord, I protest I write to you
in cold Blood, I do so much scorn the Injury that Sir W. affects to do me, that
I should but laugh at it, if my silence was not able to persuade you, and those
persons whose esteem of me does do me so much honor, that I have but small
care of my reputation.

Sir W. has shined a long time, it is true; but yet he has borrowed all his
Splendor first of all from the protection of a Lord, whom he betrayed at last,
of whom he speaks too insolently in his Memoirs, and with abundance of
Ingratitude; and then again he advanced himself by the protection of certain
other persons to whom he was devoted, to the prejudice of his bounden Duty: He
did so well insinuate himself (that I may make use of the Terms he makes use of
in speaking of me) into the Favors and into the Confidence of those, near to
whom it was necessary for him to have access, that he might have been in a
capacity to render considerable Services to the King his Master, and to his
Country, if so be he had made better use of this advantage; but he kept it just
after the same manner as he had got it; that is to say, that he often came
short of exact Faithfulness and Loyalty, which a Minister of S tate is obliged
to maintain inviolably even in the least Matters, that does plainly appear in
his Memoirs.

The late King of England perceived it, and was so far convinced of it, that he
never made use of him in the last Commissions he committed to his charge, to
the States General; but only out of Consideration of the Acquaintance he had
there, who made people conjecture that Sir W. might have some Credit amongst
the Spaniards, as well as in Holland, as he himself assures us he had.

Neither was he employed, but only upon some Occasions, wherein one would not
employ a Man who was a Favorite of the Prince, or for whom he had any value,
or in whom he might confide; it is a Truth owned and confessed by Sir W. himself
in his Memoirs; and a Man may judge of it by the so opposite false steps, that
he complains, they caused him to make, and by all the things that were done
contrary to the Measures that he had taken, just as if the Court had had a mind
to expose him.

Besides, the King slighted him after the Peace at Nimeguen, and laid him
aside, making very little use of him; it was not, what he would make us
believe, his love for his own ease, and his Indispositions of body, that made
him decline his Employments. Never did Man desire more to have an hand in
Affairs; he was removed by reason of the King's secret dissatisfaction at his
Services, by that Conduct and Management, which in executing the King's Orders,
when they were contrary to his Opinion, and disliking to his Friends, smelt
very much like perfidiousness and Treachery, as may principally appear in
whatsoever he did for to evade and frustrate the King's Orders, contained in
the dispatch I left with him at the Hague, to Nimeguen, for the conclusion of
the Peace, by Order of his Majesty.

It is concerning this business that has made so great a noise for which Sir W.
takes occasion to reproach me, that I am going to relate you some Particulars
in the Reflections, that I am obliged to make upon what he says concerning my
self. Do not expect, my Lord, that I should teach you here the true Cause of so
extraordinary a Resolution which so much surprised Sir W. with which Pensioner
Fagel was so much astonished, and which in Sirs W's opinion did entirely change
the Fate of Christendom.

I should please him very much, if I should discover so important a Secret, in
which many persons in the late and present Reigns have been concerned. I do not
doubt but Sir W. extremely desires it; he knows very well the greater knowledge
of these Practices would perhaps raise a great deal of trouble in the
Parliament to some people, whose Ruin he desires at the bottom of his Heart,
being little concerned for the reputation of the late King, and envious of the
esteem of those that protected him, and who have bestowed so many favors upou
him.

As for my self at this Conjuncture, in which K. William endeavors the repose
of Christendom, and the Happiness of England with so much Zeal and Glory, I
will not stir up the envy and hatred which has too much appeared in England;
and, which may perhaps be a great Obstacle to that Union which is so necessary
to the happy Execution of the Undertakings of this great Monarch.

There arrived, said Sir W. at that time from England, one whose name was de
Cross. I shall not stop, my Lord, upon this Term of Contempt, One called; it is
a very malicious Expression, in respect of my self; the late King of England
himself did me the Honor to treat me in Passports, in his Letters, in his
Commissions which he charged me with: It is very impudent and rude to speak so
of a Man, who is of a good Family, who has had the honor of being employed for
almost twenty years, and whom a great Prince and a King have not disdained to
use as Councellor of State.

He was (continues Sir W.) a French Monk who had lately quitted his Frock for a
Petticoat. Here is a reproach which ill becomes an Ambassador of a Monarch, who
is Defender of the Faith, and of the Protestant Religion; of one who declared
so openly at Nimeguen, that he would have nothing to do with the Pope's Nuncio.
I do not know, my Lord, that it is a disgrace to be a Monk; and much less, to
have been one formerly: There are indeed amongst them, as well asamongst the
rest of Mankind, some miserable Wretches, of a mean Birth, and of a disorderly
and infamous Life; People of no use, without Honor, and without Reputation:
Sir W. T. thought, without doubt, that I was of that Number; but there are
likewise several very famous for the Sanctity of their Lives, of an
extraordinary Merit, and of the greatest Quality, Sons of Princes and Kings,
and Kings themselves, and Popes: But if this sort of Life is not now, as
formerly it was, so certain a Character of a good and honest Man, does Sir W.
think he can dishonor me, in reproaching me for leaving a Profession which
himself thinks so contemptible, for a Petticoat?

It will not be material in this place to say how I was engaged therein in my
tender years. There is nothing more usual in France, Spain and Italy, where
ancient Houses do sacrifice a good part of their Families in Monasteries; it is
a Maxim, to say the truth, most cruel and horrid.

Neither will I relate how, and after what manner I came out of it; however, it
was not for a Petticoat. I have remained several years without so much as
having any inclination to it; and it has been apparent that I have had much
a-do, and was very much unresolved as to this Choice.

There was too great advantage to throw off my Frock for the Petticoat that I
have taken, not to do it. It is a Petticoat of a Scotch Stuff, and which has
been a greater Ornament, and done the Crown of England more good than Sir W.
himself; if he do not know it, the History of England and Scotland in these
late Times may inform him. I shall enlarge no further, that I may not engage my
self to publish the Misfortunes and Disorders of Sir W's Family; which, I
suppose would not be like a Gentleman. I have no reason that I know of, to
complain, neither of his Lady, nor his Son, nor of his Daughters.

Besides, had I even cast off the Monk's Habit for a Petticoat, I should have
done no more than a great many worthy deferving Persons have done; yea, some of
the Pope's Nuncio's, Cardinals, Bishops, Kings and Princesses too, who have
quitted the Veil for the Breeches, whose Posterity, I make no question is
highly esteemed and reverenced by Sir W.

I did so well insinuate my self, says Sir W. into the Court of Sweden, that I
obtained. from thence a Commission to be a kind of an Agent in England. That is
very dirty. I have had the management of Affairs and the Quality of Envoy, when
Sir W. had no more than that of an Agent or Resident at Brussels. I was Envoy
at the Court of England before ever I was in Sweden, or before ever I had any
acquaintance there.

I went the first time to Sweden just at that time the late King of England
sent me into Sweden and Denmark, about the beginning of the Year 1676. The
Pretense was for to demand the free passage of Letters; which the King of
Denmark refused, for hastening the Congress of Nimeguen, in procuring the
expedition of Passports, requisite to the Ministers of State who were to
compose the Assembly; and also to urge the Departure of the Ambassadors
belonging to those two Northern Crowns. But now the true Cause was quite
another Matter, and of greater consequence; not for the King of England, but
indeed for another Potentate. -- That shall be made appear some time or other
in my Memoirs.

Had I been a kind of a Swedish Agent, I should not have defended my self in
that Point; I should have held it as a great piece of Honor, since it could
not choose but be very glorious and splendid, to have the Affairs of so great a
King, in such important Conjunctures as those were, committed to ones charge
and care; but at the very time Sir W. speaks of, I was dignified with the
Quality of Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke of Holstein Gottorv, acknowledged
and received at the Court of England for such.

Sir W. knows that very well, there was sent him diverse Memoirs to Nimeguen
whilst the Mediation lasted, which I had delivered in at London, concerning the
re-setling my Master; but the Interest and Concerns of this Prince were so
indifferent to him, that I was fain to beg of my Lord Treasurer to recommend
them more particularly to Sir Leoline Jenkyns.

Moreover, you may see Sir W. T. mentions in his Memoirs all the Potentates
that had any interest in the Peace of Nimeguen, except the Duke of Holstein
Gottorp, notwithstanding he had two Ministers at the Congress, and although
France had stipulated for his re-establishment in the second Article or
Condition of the Peace, such who shall peruse the Memoirs of Sir W. might be
apt to think that the Duke of Holstein was reckoned as no body in the World,
and that he had no part at all in what passed in Christendoom, from the
commencing of the War in 1672, until the conclusion of the Peace 1679* But
Thanks be to God Sir W. is not the Steward of Glory and Immortality.

Sir W. therefore must have often read my Name and Character in the Letters,
and Orders of the Court, and cannot have forgot that he came to render me a
Visit at my Lodgings, at such time as he, by the King's Order, was to confer
with me upon what account Monsieur Olivencrantz might be obliged to pass from
Nimeguen into England: That Swedish Ambassador lodged at that time in my house.

It Is true indeed, as the Interests of my Master were inseparable from those of
Sweden, I found my self engaged to be very much concerned in the Interests of
that Crown in whatsoever might depend on my care: There was an Envoy
extraordinary from Sweden at London; and yet for all that, the Swedish
Ambassadors did me the Honor to maintain a very regular Correspondence by
Letters with me: The King of England was also graciously pleased to hear me in
what concerned the Affairs of the Swede, although I was no otherwise authorized
for it. Monsieur Olivencrantz, his Voyage to London was contrived first of all
by the King and my self, without the least meddling or intervention of any one
of his Ministers; and then again in the Negotiation, whereof my Voyage to
Nimeguen was a Consequence, the Restitution of Sweden was especially insisted
upon.

All this made many Men believe, that I was entrusted with the Management of
the Affairs of this Crown; and Monsieur Van Beuninguen believed it so to be, in
the Letter he writ to the Lords States General, which has since been printed;
where he speaks with so much uncertainty concerning the Voyage I was about to
make to Nimeguen, and about this Negotiation, that it was evident it was a very
great Secret.

Since his being at London, says Sir W. speaking of me, he has wholly devoted
himself to Monsieur Barillon, the French Ambassador, under pretense to act for
the Interests of Sweden. Monsieur Barillon was not at that time in London, when
I was sent thither, he came not thither till a long time after; I found
Monsieur le Marquis de Ruvigni there, whom Monsieur Courtin succeeded; and
after that Monsieur Barillon came to take the place of Monsieur Courtin.

I never devoted my self to this Ambassador, and I never had any Correspondence
or was in League with him prejudicial to my Duty. Nay, it happened the King of
England one day, having a design more especially to take into Consideration the
Swedish Interests, Monsieur de Barillon diverted him from it; whether for fear
lest a particular Peace should be clapped up between the Northern Crowns, or
else out of Jealousy, that he might leave the Glory of the Restitution of this
Crown to the King his Master; and depriving it of all other relief, might keep
it in the mean time in a greater dependence.

I was so much put to it, and fell out with Mr. Ba^illon so much thereupon,
that I did not so much as ^peak to him in 3 or 4 months; nay, one day as the
King was at Dinner I cast in his teeth what had past ^n the presence of
Monsieur Wachmeister, Envoy-Ex^raordinary from the King of Sweden. I do not
question but Monsieur Wachmeister remembers it well enough; he is no less
worthy to be believed, than he ^s brave and undaunted.

And now after this manner I became all one with ^he Ambassador of France. But
yet I must confess that at such time as he stickled for my Master's In^erest
and that of the Swede, I was entirely devoted ^o him, thinking my self most
happy that I was ^nabled to pay my most humble Services to such a ^reat
Monarch, whose Subject I have the honor to ^e, without failing in my Loyalty
and Allegiance, ^hichlought to pay him before all others whatsoever Whereupon,
my Lord, I shall tell you one thing, in which Monsieur de Revigni, at present
Lord Gallo^ay, cannot but agree with me, no, nor Monsieur ^livencrantz neither.
The departure of this Am^assador for England, occasioned shrewd suspicions both
at Nimeguen and London to the French Ambassadors. Monsieur Barillon was much
alarmed at it, especially when he saw that Monsieur Olivencrantz lodged at my
House, and when he knew that I had offered a Project, upon which I had the
Honor sometimes to be in debate with my Lord Treasurer, Monsieur Barillon put
all in practice to sift him to the bottom; nevertheless all the offers of this
French Ambassador proved ineffectual, and wrought thing upon this Man; who, if
a man would give credit to Sir W. T. was entirely devoted to Mons. Barillon,
and yet Mons. Barillon found him not to be corrupted or bribed.

One would think, my Lord, that Sir W* T. has a mind to make Men believe, that
I was only sent into Holland to carry him a Dispatch from the Court; for he is
always harping upon this String, when he mentions my Voyage: Yet please to take
notice, my Lord, That he confesses that it was I, who procured this Dispatch.

What means the King then, when he says, That I had been too cunning for them
all? There is not so much Prudence and great Abilities required in a Courier;
it is sufficient that he be expeditious. But this Message must needs have been
Honorable, to employ an Envoy extraordinary of one of the greatest Princes of
the Empire, except it be what Sir W. has been pleased to say, That I was so
much devoted to the King; yea, and to Monsieur Barillon too, and so little
tender of my Master's Dignity, that I would comply with any Offices.

If I were a Courier or Messenger, Monsieur T. has at least done me a good
Office, in representing me to be, what I would not have the Confidence to
believe my self; namely, that I was an able Messenger, a Courier of the
Cabinet, and very deep in the King's Trust and Confidence. For before ever
Monsieur T. spoke of this Dispatch, which as he says, the Court sent him, to be
kept as a mighty Secret, Pensioner Fagel, says he, knew all the Contents, and
was quite stunned at it. D^ Cross had industriously informed the Deputies of the
Town, (I Copy from Monsieur T.) and had told them that the two Kings were
entirely agreed an the Conditions of Peace; that he had carried Orders to
Monsieur T. to go to Nimeguen, and that at his Arrival there he would find the
Letters of my Lord Sunderland, the English Ambassador, at Paris, with all the
Articles as they are concluded between the two Crowns.

Here is, I acknowledge, a very expert Messenger, very knowing in the Secret,
and very forward in the work, in 4 or 5 hours time, that I had been at the
Hague. Monsieur T. will be much more stunned than Monsieur Fagel was, when he
shall know hereafter what past at the Hague, in that little time that I was
there, not having discovered what it really was, neither then, nor since. It
was most certainly, something of greater importance than to tell the Deputies
of the Towns the Contents of the Dispatch, with which I was entrusted. And
Monsieur T. will see clearly one day, how far this only incident did change the
Fate of Christendom.

I pretend not, adds Monsieur T. to determine by whose means, and how du Cross,
obtained this Dispatch. And a little lower* All that I could learn at Court,
about this matter, was, that his Orders were made up one morning, in an hours
time, at the Duchess of Portsmouths apartment, by the interven^i n of Monsieur
Barillon.

It Is pity, that an English Ambassador, that all the King his Master's Council
(if one can believe it) that a Man, who if he had pleased himself, might have
been several times Secretary of State, should be so little informed, I will not
say during his absence, while he remained at the Hague, and at Nimeguin, but
even since his return into England, of what past there, and chiefly in that
very affair, wherein Monsieur T. was more exercised than in any other Business
that he ever undertook.

But how he could be know it, since neither the Duke of York. nor my Lord
Treasurer, not hardly the King himself (if we may believe Monsieur T.) knew any
thing of it; And that these Orders were made in one morning, in an hours time,
at the Duchess of Portsmouths Apartment, by the Interception of Monsieur
Barillon.

Observe now, if you please, my Lord, the Malice of Monsieur T. in Relation to
Monsieur Williamson* on whom he would give in this place, the Character of
Perfidy, as he has done in diverse other parts of his Memoirs. Monsieur T.
ought to have had at least, some respect for the King, whose Orders Monsieur
Williamson did Execute.

I never talked of it* says Monsieur T. to the Secretary of State Williamson, as
if he would say that he was sufficiently persuaded that Monsieur Williamson was
a Man altogether for France, and that he was entirely devoted* as well as my
self, to Monsieur Barillon, and that he was the Author of this Dispatch.

Is it not clear that Monsieur T. would make us imagine that Monsieur the
Chevalier Williamson, Secretary of State, the French Ambassador, and the
Duchess of Portsmouth promised these Orders. As for me, though I had the
Dispatch given me, yet he does not accuse me openly in this place of bearing
any other part in this Affair, than only as a Messenger entrusted with the
Conveyance. And not only so, but I never went to the Duchess of Portsmouths
Lodgings, she having an irreconcilable aversion for me, and I for her.

Can there be a greater absurdity than this? To endeavor to persuade his
Readers that the most important affair of that time on which depended (says
Monsieur T.) The Fate of Christendom was concluded and made up, in one hours
time, in the apartment of the Duchess of Portsmouth, by the Intervention of
Monsieur Barillon.

Monsieur T. is accustomed so little to spare the King's Reputation, that he
fears not on this occasion, to prostitute it, in a strange manner. He does not
only charge him with partiality and connivance, in suffering Valentiennes,
Cambray, St. Omer, and several other places in Flanders* to be taken, without
Murmur or Opposition; But the King of England obliged as much as could be, in
the Quality of a Mediator, and more through the Interest of his Kingdoms to
procure the Repose of Christendom, yet corrupted by the French Ambassadors,
and by the Charms of a Mistress, Sacrifices all Europe, and his own Estate, to
a Power that is naturally an Enemy to England. And this without Ceremony, in an
hours time, without the advice of his Council, and hides himself in the
Apartment of a Woman, as if he was sensible that he went about an action the
most unworthy of the Majesty of a Prince, and the most opposite to the Felicity
of his People that could be. For what other Construction can any one make of
what Monsieur T. says, and can any man conclude, otherwise when he reads this
worthy passage in his Memoirs?

Certain it is, that this Dispatch was made up by Monsieur Williamson, and by
the Kings Order. And since the King was pleased to avoid opening his mind
hereon to Monsi^ur T. giving him no other answer, but that I had been more
cunning than all of 'em; Monsieur T. might possibly Address himself to Monsieur
Williamson, who, it may be, might tell him, by whose means, and how Du Cross
had obtained this Dispatch.

It Is plain that Monsieur T. despairs of penetrating into this Affair; that he
knows not where about he is when he speaks of it; and that he only seeks to
blacken the Reputation of the King and his Ministers. If the Peace of Aix la
chapelle is his Favorite, because he has the Vanity to believe it to be
entirely his own work; it is easy seen that the Peace of Nimiguen is his
Aversion, because he is ashamed to have had so small a Part in it as he had,
and that the most glorious part of his Life is not to be sound in that
Negotiation.

I would have this Complaisance for Monsieur T. though he treats me so ill; I
would, at least, in some part, draw him out of this great incertainty, on the
subject of the Dispatch which I brought him.

He is deceived, when he imputes this Resolution to the Intrigues and
Persuasions of France. It was neither managed, nor taken, nor dispatched, at the
Duchess of Portsmouth's; nor was it by the means or intervention of Monsieur
Barillon. The Ambassador had no part in it, but on the very Instant when the
affair was concluding. He was not so much as present at the Expedition, as he
had not been at any time at the Deliberations. The Marquess of Ruvigny, the
Son, carried the first News to the King, his Master, the same day that I parted
for Nimeguen. Monsieur Williamson knew well what was contained in the Dispatch
to Monsieur T. in which there was nothing very mysterious. But he was never
privy to the secret of the Negotiation* and though he was present when I took my
leave of the King in Secretary Coventry's Office, yet he was then ignorant of
the true subject of my Voyage, and perhaps he never knew it.

The King was not at all precipitate, and the affair was not concluded and
dispatched in an hours time. It was treated on, and deliberately considered near
Three weeks. There was time given to the Ambassadors of Swedeland to resolve
themselves, and make their Answer. The King's design was doubtless aimed for
the good of Europe, and the public tranquillity* but in truth, he had not in
his Eye, nor did he certainly believe that happy Fate of Christendom, for
which Monsieur T. labors so earnestly in consort with some particular Persons,
Enemies to the State, Seditious, and Disturbers of the Public Repose.

But the King said pleasantly, adds Monsieur T. that the Rogue (Coquin) du
Cross had outwitted them all. If Monsieur T. had not made the King say this,
and had said it himself, I might have applied to him, with as much Justice as
any man in the World, these Verses which I have read somewhere,

Coquin, he calls me, with mighty disdain.

Doubtless, I should answer Monsieur T. thus,

Seek your Coquins elsewhere, you're one your self. But the Person of Kings is
sacred. Besides, Can that be an abuse, which is spoken pleasantly, without the
least design perhaps of offending. For Coquin is a word which the Late King of
England often used, when he spoke of People for whom he had notwithstanding
Respect and Consideration. It Is true, he used the word also very familiarly,
when he was angry, but at such times he spoke with indignation, and not
pleasantly.

The Parliament presented an Address to the King (as Monsieur T. reports) in
which they represented the Progress of the French Arms, and desired him to stop
it before it became more dangerous to England, and the other Neighboring
Countries. Den Bernard de Salinas (continues Monsieur T.) said to certain
Members of the Commons, that this Address had so exasperated the King, that he
said those who were the Authors of it were a Company of Coquins.

I remembered at my Arrival in England, in 1675. before I was to go into France
in Quality of an Envoy, whither I acknowledge his most Christian Majesty would
not permit me to come, either because they had informed him that I had embraced
the Protestant Religion, or it may be because the King of France would not
receive his own Subjects, in the Quality of Ministers of other Princes. It
happened, I say, that the King of England (to whom also I had a Commission) bid
the Marquess of Ruvigni, one Evening, bring me to his Cabinet, and himself come
in with me.

The King enquired of me, at the first, what news I could tell him of the
Condition of the Swedes Army in Pomerania, through which I past, and expressed
much concern that the Constable Wrangle, not minding to pass forward into the
Empire (as Monsieur T. says) had thereby different pretenses, had attacked the
Elector of Branderburg as vigorously and with as much success as he could. I
told the King the reason, which concerns not my present subject to report here.

Afterward, I having informed the King of the State of Germany, the King
believing that I was to pass into France, spoke to me in these very words.
Monsieur, tell the King, my Brother, that it is much against my mind that I
have made Peace with these Coquins, the Hollanders, Monsieur the Marquess of
Ruvigny, who stands here, knows it well.

Sometime before the making of this Peace, the King talking with Monsieur de
Shrenborn Envoy from Mayence, told him also, in Relation to the Hollanders, In
a little time, Monsieur, I will bring these Coquins to Reason. Monsieur de
Barillon writ to the Count d' Auaux, the French Ambassador at the Hague,
certain Discourses which the King had concerning the Hollanders. The Count d'
Auaux made use of this to increase the just Suspicions of the Esttates. He
carried the Letters of Monsieur Barillon, to Monsieur Fagel. Whereupon, the
States made a terrible Complaint, and the King of England said on this Occasion
to the Duke of Lauderdale, that Monsieur Barillon, and the Count d' Avaux were
Coquins.

Had the King called me Coquin, seriously, I ought not to think it any very
strange thing; since he has treated in the same manner the most powerful and
wisest Republic of the World, to whom he had so great Obligations; two
Ambassadors of his most Christian Majesty, of extraordinary merit, and as
honest Men as France ever had; and also the greatest Lords of his own Kingdom
who were Authors of the Address which the Commons presented him.

There is also this difference, that the King, speaking of those Lords, those
Ambassadors, and the Hollanders, he called them Coquins in anger, but when he
spoke of me, he said it pleasantly (according to Monsieur T.) and that I was a
cunning Coquin, more cunning than the Duke of York, my Lord Treasurer, the
Secretary of State Williamson, and even the King himself.

Either I am much deceived, or all the Ministers of the Consederates that were
then at London, would have been all Coquins at this rate, and Monsieur Temple
himself, and would have deceived those who abused and deceived them. For
besides, there is more credit methinks on such like Occasions, to be a cunning
Rogue, and to pass for a more able Man than the most able Ministers of State,
than to be the laughing stock, and the Fool of a Monk and a sort of Agent; Sir
William Temple, and some others, were truly so on this occasion.

But I would acquaint Sir W. Temple of what he has not perhaps heard of, as he
has done the like to me, I do not invent it to revenge my self, and ^f I would
make use of falsehoods, I might make recourse to more heinous Affronts; the
truth of my Remarks upon his Memoirs, shall be my full satisfaction. What I
shall relate may be found in my Letters upon that account to the Prince my
Master, and his Ministers: I took no particular care to divulge it immediately
to Mounsieur Barillon, to whom I was so much devoted; were he alive he might
witness that as well as the Aversion the King of England always bore to Sir W.
Temple; and the little Esteem he had of him at bottom. Upon my return from
Nimeguen to London, I went immediately to Court, as soon as I came there I meet
Prince Rupert, who asked me with a stern Countenance if the Peace was
Concluded, I answered him in the Affirmative, upon which he cried out and said,
O Dissimulation. After having had the Honor to give his Majesty an account of
what was past, I told him of the ill humor I perceived Sir W. T. to be in, and
what I knew of his neglect of his Majesty's Orders; The King seemed very angry
with Sir W's. Proceedings, and said, he was a very impertinent R -- to find
fault with my Commands.

But if the late K. of England, did not approve of my Conduct in the affairs of
Nimeguen, which in effect he declared at first in Public not to be pleased
with, in which he played his part to admiration: If against his will, I had
truly informed the several Deputies at the Hague, how that the two Kings of
England and France were entirely agreed upon Conditions of Peace; (...) this
accident changed the Destiny of Christendom* and what endeavors soever the
English Court had made, there were no ways to repair the Breach. If I was a
Fool, a piece of an Agent, o^ a Knave, How comes it that the King suffered me
to stay in England near a year? nay, as long as my Master thought fit. Why was
the King so civil to me? Why did he recompense me for my Voyage from Nimeguen?
Upon what account did the King bestow several other Favors upon me? How comes
it, that I having made a great Entertainment and Fireworks, to show my joy for
the Re-establishment of the Duke my Master to his Teritories, that the whole
Court should do me that Honor as to be present thereat?

It was not my quality of Envoy Extraordinary of the Duke de Gottorp, that
hindered the King to express some kind of resentment against me, and thereupon
to bid me avoid the Kingdom. I do well remember the King was just npon the
point of making Mounsieur Van Beuningen Ambassador to the States General, to
withdraw and get him out of the Land, because he had got the word Connivance,
to be foisted into a Memorial he presented to the King, for the recalling of
the English Forces, which bore Arms in France.

Don Barnard de Salinas was the Spanish Envoy; the King made much of him, yea
and loved him for the particular care he had in Flanders of the education of
the E. of Plym. one of the Ks. Sons, He did nothing but report up and down,
that the King gave the Authors of the Address, presented to his Majesty, by the
House of Commons no better name than Rogues. The King had his liberty to reject
this Address, as indeed he did, and no ways apprehended the Consequences of it
at that time; yet for all that, he banished Don Bern. de Salinas, not in the
least considering his Character, nor the Kindness wherewith he had always
honored this Minister; Yea and be Banished him too, without any respect to the
King of Spain.

But, for me who had abused and deceived the D. of York, My Lord Treasurer, ay,
and the K. himself, who had overthrown all those fair and vast Projects, which
the Confederates had contrived at London and Nimega^n^* and Sir W. T. at the
Hague, which had disclosed the Kings dispatches, a master piece of S^^r^^ry who
was the cause of quite changing the (...) of Christendom: for me, I say,
against whom the (...) Orange had written, and caused to be written so many
thundering Letters, against whom all the Ministers of the Confederates called
for Vengeance; against whom Sir W. T. levelled more of his endeavors to
destroy me than the Court did to repair this Breach, and patch up the business,
it lets me alone, it does not make the least complaint to the Duke my Master;
the K. does me a great many favors, and laughs in his Sleeve at the Surprise,
at the Sorrow, and Complaints of the Confederates, and Sir W. T.

After all that, can any body reasonably believe that the K. of England might
have looked upon me as a Rogue: And when he told Sir W. T. after a droleing
manner that I was a Rogue and had o^: (...) th^^ all, may it not be probable,
that he had a mind to jeer him, and to make him sensible that he was taken but
for Fool? I^ was very like so to he.

I have not gone about, My Lord, to say i^ this place what I might say, to wipe
of all those scandalous impressions that Sir W. T. has such a desire to fasten
upon me; I suppose I have given your Lordship sufficiently to understand, that
what he has been pleased to say upon this Theme of me, proceeds from
inveterate Spite and Malice.

But, what way is there to get clear of one of the most Haughty, and most
Revengeful of men, who in his Memoires falls foul upon the reputation even of
the greatest Minister, who casts aspersions on the Duke of Lauderdale, that
most Zealous, and most Faithful Minister, that ever the King was Master of; on
My Lord Arlington whom Sir W. is bound to respect as his Master, who was his
Benefactor, that raised him from his sordid obscurity, and as it were from the
Dunghill, to bring him into play, This ingreatful person forsook him, that he
might catch at the shadow and appearance of mending his Fortune; he would not
have stuck to ruin My Lord Arlington, by base indirect means: This is no hard
matter to make out, even by Sir W. T. his own Memoirs, but yet I am acquainted
with some particulars upon this Subject that make my hair stand an end, nay,
and I have not only learnt them from My Lord Arlingtons own mouth, but also
from a noted Minister of those times.

What a piece of impudence to call in question and tax the Principal Ministers,
and the soberest Magistrates of Holland, viz. Monsieur de ^everning, Monsieur
Valknier and others, generally esteemed by every body. To arraign them, I say,
some for A varice, others for Partiality, I had almost said for betraying their
Trust. But above all, to give such disad antagious representations of the E. of
Rochester, and of Sir Leoline Jenkyns; that, it would have been all one if he
had said, that Sir Leoline, was a man of the other World, a plain downright
Idiot, void of insight and Experience: And that Law. Hyde, now E. of Rochester,
was a Lord altogether unacquainted with, and no ways fit for the employment the
King gave him at Nimeguen; neverthetheless, Sir Leoline was made Secretary of
State, and no notice at all taken of Sir W.

As for Laurence Hyde, Sir W. speaks first of him, as if he were a Youth, that
should have been sent to the University, I plainly perceive, says he, that the
chief design of that Commission was to introduce Mr. Hyde into this sort of
employment, and to let him understand the manner how the men behave themselves
in the same, then he adds, He excused himself out of modesty, to have any thing
to do with any Conference, and Compiling Dispatches. Was it out of the respect
he owed to Sir W. T. or for want of Capacity, that My Lord showed so much
modesty, that he would neither make Dispatches, nor meddle with Conferences,
what, he who had been engaged already, as he was afterward in very important
Affairs; who had been Ambassador in the principal Courts of Europe, who was
chosen as Chief of the Embasie at Nimegnen, one who in all respects, is so far
above Sir W. T. for all these great qualities; yet My Lord* affords Sir W. just
as much difference, as a petty Scholar does a famous Pedant. And to reward him,
Sir* W. T. would make him pass in the world, for an Ambassador that was but at
best his Scholar.

I make account to tell you, what Sir* W. dare not acknowledge. Mr. Hyde, being
more subtle, and of greater* Abilities than Sir W* and of that quality too,
that was not to be exposed, would not intermeddle in a Mediation, which was
like to suffer so gross Indignities, as the Mediation of England suffered at
the Treaty of Nimeguen. One time or other I shall publish those Indignities in
my Memoires, together with the weakness, and tameness wherewith they were
content to suffer them.

But now, if Sir W. T. has not spared such Illustrious persons as these: No,
not so much as My Lord Treasurer, at present Marquis of Caermarthen, laying
something to his charge, whom also he does not do that right and Justice, which
is due to so great a Minister of State, one of the greatest Wits of the Age,
for business; a person so Loyal to the King his Master, that he sacrificed
himself for his sake; and after all, so full of zeal for his Country, that he
has bethought himself of all expedients, and has not feared to expose himself
to peril and utter undoing, that he might deliver it from the mischiefs that
throaten it; If Sir Will. has not spared the Kings person, whose Dignity and
Reputation he so often sacrifices, can I hope to escape his foul mouthed
Language.

Peradventure he had better have done something else, and something wiser;
great Confident of Princes and Ks. the sole preserver of Flanders, as he is,
than to have entered the l^st with a Monk, with a kind of an Agent, and with a
cunning Knave. But his desire of revenge has prevailed, he believes himself
cruelly wronged* and he is in the right on it, for that at the Hague and at
Nimeguen, which he was confident would be the Theater of his Glory, they made
him act a disgraceful ridiculous part. He imagines I am partly the cause of it,
either because that my Voyage to Nimeguen might have been the effect of my
Negotiation, which he might have gathered by the Kings answer, or, because I
might have done nothing in Holland, but administer cause of Suspicions and
Umbrages, that hastened on the Peace, in spite of his Teeth, and Reverst the
Treaty he had but lately concluded at the Hague.

My Lord, If I be not mistaken, here is another occasion of Sir W. T. being
vexed at me. There was a Treaty a foot between England and Spain, for which
purpose Sir W. was employed without any other design in reference to England,
but to abase the Parliament, and no other on the Spaniards side, but only to
add a little more reputation to their Affairs. Now the Parliament got nothing
by it, and the greatest advantage accrued to the Spaniard, who upon this
occasion made him really believe it, and so took him for a Cully. A sad
acknowledgment for having alone saved Flanders for Spain! I ridiculed this
Treaty, I made observations thereon, that were published in Holland, and men
judged that the observations were well grounded: After that, and after the
business of Nimeguen, I was not to expec^ any Encomiums from so unjust a person
as Sir W. T. but still he might have writ more like a Gentleman, and have
spoken of me without ever loosing the respect which he owed to my Master,
without doing so great an injury in my person, both to my Name, and Family out
of a merry humor, for in whatsoever past, I performed the duty of a Minister,
both zealous and most faithful; Nay, and I did nothing but even by concurrance
and good likeing of the King of England.

I beseech you, My Lord, conserve for me the honor of your gracious favor,
and be fully persuaded, that I shall be all my life long, with much respect.

Your most humble, etc.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT, Concerning the Foregoing Letter.
IT is now, some Months ago since the Foreign Journals gave us to understand,
that Monsieur de Cross, the Ingenious Author of the foregoing Treatise, was
meditating an Answer to Sir William Temple's Memoirs. As nothing more sensibly
touches us, than to have our Reputation wounded by those Persons whom we never
injured. We are not to admire that our Author who thought himself unjustly
attacked in these Memoirs, took the first opportunity to justify his
proceedings to the World: and if he sometimes falls out into severe or indecent
Language, it is to be remembered that he was not the first Agressor, but that
his Adversary taught him the way. How well M. de Cross has acquitted himself in
this Affair, I will by no means take upon me to determine. Let the Reader,
without prejudice or partiality, confider what both Parties say, and then let
him judge for himself.

When these Memoirs first appeared in public, I remember the Critics in Town
were much divided in their Sentiments about them; some found fault with the
Style, as too Iuscious and affected; others censured the Digressions, as
Foreign to the Business in hand, and particularly the Story of Prince Maurice's
Parrot, that (to use Sir William's own Expression, p. 58.) spoke, and asked,
and answered common Questions, ^ike a reasonable Creature. Lastly, ^he Graver
sort of People were scandalized to see several Persons eminent both for their
Station and Quality, and some of them still Living, treated with so much
Freedom, and with so little Ceremony; adding, that the Author every where
appeared too full of himself, which I find is the very Character, which the
French Relator of the Negotiation at Nimeguen, has been pleased to bestow upon
him.

Indeed, as for the Language of the Memoirs, a Man needs but turn over half a
dozen Pages to be convinced that the first Objection is just and reasonable.
Every Leaf almost stands charged with Gallicisms, more or less; and indeed it is
odd enough to see a Man of Sir William Temples's Constitution, who all along
declares such an invincible Aversion to the French Nation, so fondly doting
upon their Expressions, even where he had no necessity to use them. But at the
same time, I confess, I am of opinion, that his Digressions are not so faulty,
it being not amiss in a just History, but especially in Memoirs, to relieve a
serious Scene, now and then, with something that is diverting and agreeable. As
for the last Objection, I have nothing to say to it at present, since it is not
improbable but that the following Book of Monsieur de Cross may prevail with
him to attempt his own Justification.

FINIS.

